Industrial plants that refine bauxite to alumina using the high temperature process have always held the belief that anatase was detrimental to the extraction of boehmite while rutile was not. This study shows that this effect is real and that it is observable at temperatures as low as 90 °C. The extraction of gibbsite is shown to be unaffected which leads us to believe that the kinetics of both the Ti-bearing mineral and the Al-bearing mineral is important in this phenomenon. In addition, it is shown that not only is the presence of anatase an issue in boehmite extraction but so too is the presence of sodium titanate. Rutile was found to have the least impact of the three mineral phases.The Bayer process of refining bauxite ore to alumina (Al In the high temperature process the presence of titanium minerals can have significant impacts. These include the negative impacts of scale formation, titanium in the alumina product, and inhibition of boehmite extraction ( The formation of titanates is also currently an area of interest as precursors to the formation of Ti-containing inorganic nanotubes ( In relation to a Bayer system, a previous study ( North American liquor terminology is used throughout this paper. Free caustic (FC) content of a liquor is defined as g/L of sodium hydroxide, caustic ( Gibbsite, C33, was obtained from Alcoa World Alumina. Boehmite was produced via the hydrothermal dehydration of gibbsite method ( The anatase, sodium titanate and rutile have been previously characterised, the details of which can be found in The equilibrium solubility of gibbsite is greater than boehmite at 90 °C. For a caustic strength of 250 g/L (4.72 M NaOH), a target Caustic solutions were prepared by dissolving sodium hydroxide pellets (188.7 g) and sodium carbonate powder (30 g) with deionised water and bringing to volume in a volumetric flask (1 L). The resulting caustic concentration ( When Al was required (for titanium mineral dissolution), aluminium wire was slowly dissolved into the hot caustic solution with care to the desired level before filtration and cooling. Caustic liquors were checked for their The dissolution of boehmite and gibbsite was performed using a thermostated bottle roller (Thornton Engineering, Perth). The synthetic caustic liquor (200 mL, A caustic solution (200 mL, An orbital action rotating water bath (model TWBS-20 from Thermoline Scientific) was used to equilibrate 30 mL liquor ( The results from ICP were Na and either Ti or Al values in mg/L. The Na values were used to calculate the Firstly, in order to determine an impact on dissolution, a baseline must be obtained. To this end several runs using gibbsite or boehmite were performed at different target  It is clear from Although, boehmite dissolution was expected to be lower than gibbsite at this temperature, it is also much slower as confirmed by the low After 4 h, at a target When gibbsite dissolves in the presence of one of the titanium mineral solids the curve shown in Clearly, the presence of titanium mineral solids at this target The case is quite different for boehmite ( In this case, the addition of anatase results in the boehmite dissolution rate being ~ We assume, due to the low values of these ratios, that the molar ratios of Ti/Al are not a significant parameter in the dissolution process. When the liquor is pre-saturated with the relevant solids (anatase, rutile or sodium titanate) for 24 h the solubility of gibbsite remains unaltered (data not shown). When the liquor is pre-saturated with the solids and this liquor used for the dissolution of boehmite, the dissolution is reduced but by the same amount, regardless of the original solids used to pre-saturate the liquor ( In this case all the data show a ~ As previously noted, the results presented here confirm the anecdotal evidence from alumina plants that operate at high temperature with boehmite; that is, that anatase affects the dissolution of boehmite in Bayer liquors ( Let us hypothesise that the mechanism by which boehmite dissolution is inhibited is by way of re-precipitation onto a surface, blocking further dissolution as suggested by The observation that titanium mineral solids can inhibit the dissolution of boehmite is interesting. It would be expected that the solids will only dissolve to their equilibrium value and a supersaturated solution cannot result. However, the solubility is actually changing as the aluminate concentration increases with increasing boehmite (or gibbsite) dissolution. Sodium titanate has its highest solubility in pure caustic ( There is also the matter of these titanium mineral solids inhibiting boehmite but not gibbsite dissolution. If re-precipitation of a solid phase from solution were driven solely by the titanate concentration in solution (which is directly related to the FC) then as the gibbsite dissolved this would lead to a greater drop in free caustic than the small dissolution of boehmite and this should lead to greater re-precipitation of a solid phase on gibbsite — inhibiting its further dissolution. This is not observed. Thus, other factors must also be at play. One possibility is; if the degree of supersaturation is not above the metastable limit, then the surface present can have a significant impact. This is because, in this regime, heterogeneous primary nucleation is possible and this is dependant on the affinity of the substrate to the crystallizing unit ( It is also interesting to note that the effect of the Ti-containing solids is greatest on the slowest of the Al-dissolving species. It suggests that in addition to the amount of titanium mineral dissolved, other non-equilibrium effects are also important. At 10 min, about 50% of the gibbsite solids have dissolved while only 0.3% of the boehmite (even under optimal conditions) solids have dissolved at this stage. Thus, the re-precipitation may be driven by kinetic as well as thermodynamic effects. This would correlate with preliminary data obtained at 250 °C. At this temperature all of the solids show a decreased impact on boehmite dissolution compared to 90 °C ( When the liquor is not pre-saturated and dissolution of boehmite occurs in the presence of one of the titanium mineral solids, we would expect that the trend in inhibition should be anatase the dissolution values for rutile found previously are too high, or the presence of rutile somehow impacts less on the boehmite dissolution process. The possibility of i) is actually low, given that as stated previously there is a great deal of literature showing that regardless of whether anatase and rutile is used as the Ti source, sodium titanates are formed ( It must be noted that data from Firstly, all solids dissolve quickly to an initial level ranging from ~ The presence of anatase, sodium titanate and rutile is shown to impact on the dissolution of boehmite, confirming a long held belief by plant operators that Ti-minerals can limit boehmite ‘extraction’. This was not the case for gibbsite dissolution suggesting that the kinetics of dissolution for the Al-species is an important factor in determining whether the ore will be impacted on by the titanium containing minerals. It is also possible that boehmite promotes sodium titanate precipitation onto itself. Anatase was found to impact boehmite dissolution the most, with sodium titanate having an intermediate effect and rutile impacting the least. Pre-saturation of the liquors with the Ti-containing phases had no impact on gibbsite (confirming the previous result) and an intermediate effect on boehmite dissolution. The results tend to suggest that boehmite is inhibited by way of an impervious surface layer formed by dissolved titanate species, the most likely form of which is a sodium titanate. From the present results sodium titanate would be expected to inhibit boehmite dissolution as well as anatase. However, sodium titanate is unlikely to be present in ores and as such is not expected to significantly contribute to plant operations. The phase with the least impact on boehmite dissolution was rutile, although at 90 °C it was shown to have a non-zero effect. Analysis at 24 h showed that rutile and anatase dissolve similar Ti concentrations into solution at 90 °C and this suggests that the kinetics of dissolution of the Ti-containing mineral is also important. This was confirmed by timed runs showing that rutile dissolution does not significantly change until > The authors gratefully acknowledge the support of the Parker CRC for Integrated Hydrometallurgy Solutions (established and supported under the Australian Government's Co-operative Research Centres Program).