Underground storage of hydrocarbons in unlined rock caverns (URC) has advantages over above-ground storage in terms of safety, environmental protection and economy. However seepage of products can cause many environmental and economical problems. Water curtain system is used as a part of hydrodynamic method to control seepage. Water curtains system is composed of a network of underground galleries and horizontal boreholes drilled from these galleries to establish groundwater pressure artificially. Iranian crude oil unlined storage caverns are to be excavated in Asmari limestone formation. This study aimed to clarify the effects of effective parameters on water curtains performance in the establishment of water pressure. To aim this purpose 2k factorial statistical experimental design and numerical modeling using FLAC3D has been employed to evaluate the performance of artificial water curtain systems under various conditions include equivalent permeability and effective porosity of Asmari limestone, borehole pressure, borehole spacing and elevation, groundwater level and operation time of boreholes before the storage operation. The results showed that borehole pressure, permeability, borehole elevation and porosity have most significant effect in order of magnitude respectively. Regression model for 2k factorial design was presented as well.Storage of crude oil and other hydrocarbons in underground unlined rock caverns (URC) to have long-term and stable reservoir is a well-proven technique, with successful implementation worldwide. Underground storage of hydrocarbons is not only more secure, safe and economical than above-ground storage, but also has several environmental and operational advantages ( This paper aimed to clarify the effects of effective parameters on water curtains performance in the establishment of water pressure using FLAC3D and 2 Asmari formation which has been called as Asmari limestone, lithologicaly consists of limestone, dolomitic limestone, dolomite and marly limestone ( Numerical modeling has been used to investigate a variety of problems in geotechnics, petroleum and environmental engineering. If extensive data are available, then comprehensive predictions of different parameters can be made by numerical analyses. If not, the model can still be used to perform parametric studies, providing insight into the possible range of responses of a system, given the likely ranges for the various parameters. This understanding of the key parameters can then help set priorities for site investigation and material testing, which in turn will produce data that are used in design ( FLAC3D (Fast Lagrangian Analysis of Continua in 3 Dimensions) is a three-dimensional numerical modeling program that uses finite difference for engineering mechanics computation. FLAC3D models the flow of fluid through a permeable solid, such as soil and rock. The formulation of coupled deformation-diffusion processes in FLAC3D is done within the framework of the quasi-static Biot theory and can be applied to problems involving single-phase Darcy flow in a porous medium. Various types of fluids, including gas and water, can be represented with this model. The flow modeling may be done by itself (non-coupled, flow only), independent of the usual mechanical calculation of FLAC, or it may be done in parallel with the mechanical modeling (coupled), so as to capture the effects of fluid/solid interaction (e.g., consolidation). The variables involved in the description of fluid flow through porous media are the pore pressure, saturation and the three components of the specific discharge vector. These variables are related through the fluid mass-balance equation, Darcy’s law for fluid transport, a constitutive equation specifying the fluid response to changes in pore pressure, saturation, volumetric strains and temperature and an equation of state relating pore pressure to saturation in the unsaturated range. Pore pressure and temperature influences are involved in the mechanical constitutive laws to complete the thermal-fluid flow-mechanical coupling. Assuming the volumetric strain and temperature rates are known, substitution of the mass balance equation into the fluid constitutive relation, using Darcy’s law, yields a differential equation in terms of pore pressure and saturation that may be solved for particular geometries, properties, boundary and initial conditions ( The differential equations describing the fluid-thermal-mechanical response of a porous material, and corresponding to FLAC3D’s numerical implementation are the following. The fluid transport is described by Darcy’s law. For a homogeneous, isotropic solid and constant fluid density, this law is given in the form ( For small deformations, the fluid mass balance may be expressed as where q The constitutive response for the porous solid has the form ( The relation between strain rate and velocity gradient is ( Initial conditions in FLAC3D correspond to known pressure and saturation. Those two values must be consistent with the FLAC3D formulation: pore pressure must be zero if saturation is less than one, and vice versa. Four types of boundary conditions are considered in FLAC3D, corresponding to ( Given pore pressure. Given component of the specific discharge normal to the boundary. Leaky boundaries. Impermeable boundaries. In FLAC3D, boundaries are impermeable by default and saturation cannot be imposed as a boundary condition. Fluid-flow boundary conditions can be applied to individual, or ranges of, grid points, zone faces or zones via the apply command. For example apply pp command can be used for either external or internal boundaries to give a specified pore pressure to a boundary. Several researchers have applied numerical methods for simulation of fluids and water flow in porous and fractured media. Factorial designs allow the simultaneous study of the effects that several factors may have on the optimization of a particular process. It determines which factors have the important effects on the response as well as how the effect of one factor varies with the level of the other factors. The effects are the differential quantities expressing how a response changes as the levels of one or more factors are changed. Also, factorial designs allow measuring the interaction between each different group of factors. The interactions are the driving force in many optimizations of the processes. Without the use of factorial experiments, some important interactions may remain undetected, and the overall optimization may not be attained. One of the simplest types of factorial designs used in experimental work is one having two levels (2 In this investigation, seven factors were chosen as independent variables in numerical modeling of water curtain performance using FLAC3D, namely: equivalent permeability of limestone (A), effective porosity (B), borehole spacing (C), borehole pressure (D), borehole elevation (E), groundwater level above the cavern crown (F) and water curtain operation time before storage operation (G). Other variables such as borehole diameter and water density and fluid modulus are fixed at 64 Where here 2.06  The results of All the variables (main effects) are effective in artificial ground water pressure production by water curtain in the selected range. Permeability, borehole pressure, borehole elevation and operation time have positive effect which means increasing them results in increasing artificial groundwater pressure from water curtain. Porosity, borehole spacing and groundwater level have negative effect which means increasing them results in decreasing artificial groundwater pressure from water curtain. Borehole pressure, permeability, borehole elevation and porosity have the most effect on water curtain performance respectively. Operation time, borehole spacing and groundwater level have least effect on water curtain performance respectively. Only two way interactions between porosity and borehole spacing, permeability and borehole spacing, porosity and operation time and borehole spacing and operation time are insignificant and negligible. Negative two way interaction means, each one should increase with decreasing the other one and vise versa. Most two way interactions are between permeability and borehole pressure, porosity and borehole pressure, and permeability and borehole elevation respectively. Most meaningful and significant three way interaction is between permeability, porosity and borehole spacing. Other three or more meaningful and significant interactions are shown in The regression model for main factors and significant two way interactions is as follows:  β β The residuals (e For example for run number 57 in Adding three or more significant interaction to Eq. In this paper effects of effective parameters on water curtain performance in artificial groundwater pressure establishment have been investigated in various conditions (equivalent permeability and effective porosity of Asmari limestone, borehole pressure, spacing and elevation, groundwater level and operation time of boreholes before the storage operation) using numerical modeling by FLAC3D and 2 The authors are grateful to