Recent advances in synthesis, characterization, and theoretical modeling of polymer interfaces and emulsions are presented in this book that is divided into 14 independent chapters. In chapter 1, the structural ordering in polymer solutions is investigated for star polymers, star-copolymers and core-shell polymer solutions. In chapter 2, the influence of surface structure on polymer surface behavior is examined for functional polymers, polymer blends, block copolymers and graft copolymers. The conformation and surface properties of the polymers are related to characteristics of the side chains including functionality, composition, and length. A comprehensive review of recent advances in preparations and applications of polymeric microspheres in the last decade is presented in chapter 3. Various techniques are presented for the preparation of polymer microspheres including emulsion, emulsifier free emulsion, miniemulsion, microemulsion, suspension, dispersion, precipitation, seeded, and swelling techniques. This chapter contains numerous illustrations of a dazzling array of microsphere morphologies. Special preparative methods are also given for organic–inorganic composite microspheres. Industrial applications of microspheres are also discussed. Chapter 4 is dedicated to latex particles and the origin, detection and consequences of heterogeneity. These studies have lead to a better understanding of latex colloid stability, film and self assembly structure formation. The electrokinetic behavior of polymer colloids is covered in chapter 5. Important techniques for characterizing electrophoretic mobility are discussed including: electrophoresis, streaming potential, electro-osmosis, diffusiophoresis, dielectric dispersion, electroacoustic phenomenon, and electroviscous effects. Anomalous behavior of polymer colloids is explained by a number of qualitative and quantitative theories based on shear plane expansion, preferential ion adsorption, osmotic swelling, crossing the ζ potential minimum, and anomalous surface conductivity. In chapter 6, the interaction of inorganic colloids and polymer latex particles to form heterocoagulates is discussed. Novel composites have been created including spherical hollow shell supraparticles, ball aggregates, and composite supraparticles. In chapter 7, the thermodynamic and kinetic aspects of bridging flocculation are reviewed. Experiments using the surface forces apparatus have recently provided insights into the polymer volume fractions of tail, loop and train configurations. Depletion forces and patch-wise flocculation are discussed. The kinetic aspects of bridging flocculation are reviewed in context of recent experiments using dynamic light scattering techniques. Complexation of metal ions with dissolved polymers in aqueous solutions are evaluated in chapter 8. Modeling of polyelectrolytes using a two-phase theory is compared with earlier approaches based on the Poisson–Boltzmann equation and Manning’s counterion-condensation theory. Acid dissociation equilibrium analysis of linear polyelectrolytes are examined in detail and the effects of added salt and degree of neutralization. Chapter 9 reviews the adsorption of quaternary ammonium compounds at polymer surfaces. Factors affecting adsorption are investigated including acquired anionic functional groups, surfactant chain length, and number of side chains. Coadsorption of cationic–anionic surfactants was found to exhibit synergetic behavior. The adsorption onto poly(tetrafluoroethylene) from aqueous solutions is discussed in chapter 10. The presence of carboxylic acid charged groups remaining in PTFE from the synthesis reaction is determined to have an important effect on adsorption behavior. The use of contact angle measurements and adsorption isotherms is applied to various systems for adsorption of solvents, solutes, anionic surfactants, cationic surfactants, nonionic surfactants and copolymers. In chapter 11, the adsorption of polymer mixtures onto solids is presented. Polymer aggregation in the semi-dilute and concentrated regions is used to model adsorption behavior. The thermodynamic interaction of the polymer–solvent is found to be influential on aggregation and adsorption. The adsorption dynamics and structure of the adsorbed polymer layer are also investigated. The adsorption of polymers at the oxide surface in aqueous systems is covered in chapter 12. The role of the oxide surface charge and effects of pH and ionic strength on adsorption are studied. Experiments with various polymer-oxide systems are summarized including the adsorption of homopolymers, copolymers, polymer mixtures, surfactant–polymer systems, and ionic-polymer surfactants. Chapter 13 presents a variety of ways to prepare oxide coated cellulose fibers that have many uses in industrial applications. The role of acid-base interactions in interfacial forces is discussed in chapter 14. Acid–base properties of polymer surfaces from wetting measurements are determined using the GvOC (Good-van Oss-Chaudry) theory and discrepancies between experiments and theory are resolved. This book is highly recommended as an excellent source of current information in polymer science with over 1000 references and numerous illustrations, photographs, micrographs, figures, tables and equations that compliment the well written text. The experimental results are presented in a meaningful way along with relevant theoretical aspects. While this book covers a wide scope of material, the common theme of polymer interfaces unites the independent chapters. Researchers in industry and graduate school from a wide range of disciplines including chemical engineering, biomedical science, electronics, surface chemistry, mineral engineering, and material science will benefit from this book.