The effect of substituents on the kinetics of flotation of a copper–nickel ore from Canada by N-arylhydroxamic acids was studied. Seven N-arylhydroxamic acids were synthesized and tested to float a nickel ore containing pentlandite (4–5%) chalcopyrite (4–5%) and pyrrhotite (30–35%). The time–recovery plots were fitted using the modified first order rate equation for flotation kinetics, namely, R
                     
                        t
                     
                     =
                     R∞ e−k(t
                     
                     
                        
                        +
                        
                        φ)
                     . N-phenylacetyl-N-(2,6-dimethylphenyl)hydroxylamine (PANXHA) was found to have the highest first order rate constant for the kinetics of flotation of pentlandite and this was higher than that for potassium amyl xanthate (PAX). Amongst the seven N-arylhydroxamic acids, PANXHA was also found to have the highest selectivity index for pentlandite. Modified rate constants were linearly related to calculated dissociation constants (pK
                     
                        a
                     ) of the N-arylhydroxamic acids used in the study.Alkyl hydroxamic acids are generally used to float oxide minerals and oxidized minerals such as malachite and chrysocolla ( Copper–nickel ore from INCO mines, Sudbury, Ontario, Canada, was used in the experiments. The approximate mass composition of the ore was pentlandite 4–5%, chalcopyrite 4–5% and pyrrhotite 30–35%. The ore was ground in a polyurethane lined rod mill with size-graded stainless steel rods. Though mills may not use a polyurethane lined mill, it was used in the present study to avoid any extraneous iron getting into the flotation system. The rod mill discharge was 150 µm Seven arylhydroxamic acids (see Flotation tests were carried out at pH 9 in a 3.2-L cell using a Denver laboratory flotation machine at a solids concentration of 35%. Make-up water at pH 9 was added occasionally to maintain a constant pulp level. A stock solution (0.1%) of methyl isobutyl carbinol (MIBC) was employed as frother. Increments of froth were collected after 0.5, 1, 1.5, 2, 3, 5, 8, 12 and 16 min so that there were nine data points in each of the time-cumulative recovery plots and these curves reach the saturation level, i.e., the cumulative recovery becomes constant with respect to time. The flotation samples (floats and tails) were acid digested using HNO It was deemed essential to compare the results of the current study with that of using potassium amylxanthate (PAX). Hence, similar kinetics experiments were carried out using potassium amylxanthate (PAX: 40 g/t; 5 g/t during grinding and 35 g/t during conditioning) with lime (400 g/t during grinding) as pyrrhotite depressant, and the pH was maintained at 9.5 during conditioning. The experiments using PAX were conducted based on the procedure suggested by Inco Limited, Mississauga, Canada ( The flotation data was fitted to the modified first order rate expression, Eq. Maximum copper recovery ( The  The modified rate constants were used to define a new quantity, Modified rate constants and selectivity indices were used to compare the selectivity of the collectors used in the study. Selectivity indices for pentlandite and chalcopyrite with respect to pyrrhotite (Po) and the non-sulphidic gangue minerals (Gn) were calculated for each collector ( One of the important factors that could affect the first order flotation rate constant  This research was funded by the