Electrolytic manganese dioxide (EMD) was prepared from manganese cake, which is an oxide material and byproduct obtained during processing of manganese nodules. Manganese cake dissolution was carried out in sulfuric acid media using waste newspaper as a reductant. In the two-stage purification of leach liquor iron was initially removed by pH adjustment using lime slurry followed by sulfide precipitation using sodium sulfide. Effects of current density, Mn(II) and sulfuric acid concentrations were studied during the electrodeposition of EMD from purified solution. The EMD obtained was characterized by XRD, SEM and its discharge capacity was determined. The XRD pattern demonstrated that EMD was a mixture of γ- and ε-variety. The EMD produced from manganese cake showed a discharge capacity of 290mAh/g, which is industrially acceptable.Electrolytic manganese dioxide (EMD) is used as a cathode mixture material for dry-cell batteries such as alkaline batteries, zinc–carbon batteries, rechargeable alkaline batteries etc. Natural manganese dioxide (NMD) can be used in Leclanche cells, but in alkaline, lithium and other “modern” batteries, synthetic manganese dioxide with improved qualities is required. Out of the different forms of manganese dioxides, γ-MnO Many investigations have been carried out to develop processes for economical recovery of manganese from low grade manganese ores and other secondary sources. Various direct reductive leaching processes have been investigated for processing manganese ores using different reducing agents such as ferrous iron, sulfur dioxide, hydrogen peroxide etc. ( Manganese nodules, abundantly available on the ocean floor are a potential source for manganese. At present, primary interests in deep-sea nodules are nickel, copper and cobalt values. CSIR-IMMT has developed and pilot-tested a hydrometallurgical process to recover Cu, Ni and Co from manganese nodules ( In the present study an attempt has been made to develop a simple, effective and viable process for converting a process by-product into a useful product. No systematic work has been reported so far on the production of EMD from Mn-bearing by-product through a hydrometallurgical route. Novelty of the process lies in that one of the reagents (waste newspaper) used during leaching is also a waste product. In this investigation results on leaching, leach liquor purification and electrolytic deposition of MnO Manganese cake contains manganese as the major element along with other minor elements as impurities such as Cu, Ni, Co, Zn, and Fe etc. The composition of Mn cake (air dried sample) is Mn 57.15%, Fe 0.58%, Ni 0.12%, Cu 0.18%, Co 0.044% and Zn 0.21%. Waste newspaper cuttings were used as a reducing agent during leaching. The ultimate analysis of waste newspaper, done in TrueSpec CHN Analyser (LECO Corporation, USA) was determined as: 37.1% fixed carbon, 12.7% moisture, 7.4% ash and 42.8% volatile matter. All other reagents used for the experimental work were of analytical reagent grade. Leaching experiments were carried out at the 100 First stage purification of leach liquor for iron removal was carried out by adding 20% lime slurry with constant stirring and simultaneous monitoring of pH. After attaining the target pH value the solution was filtered and was analyzed for metal content. For the second stage purification the pH adjusted solution was further treated with 2.5 times stoichiometric (of Cu, Ni, Co and Zn content) amount of Na The electrolysis was carried out at 90 For the discharge/charge study cathode made out of a mixture of 1 The major structural components of waste paper are cellulose, hemicellulose and lignin which make it a good source of sugar ( The main purpose of the leaching step was to generate a feed solution for the electrochemical deposition. Hence, attempts were not made in the present study to optimize the leaching conditions, but instead the standard leaching conditions mentioned in It is observed from The electrodeposition of manganese dioxide can be represented by the following steps ( Anode: Cathode: Overall: Electrodeposition of EMD was carried out at 90 It is observed from The chemical composition of the EMD was determined by digesting 0.5 The XRD patterns of the sample were obtained using a Phillips Powder Diffractometer (Model PAN ANALYTICAL PW 1830) in the range of 5–40° (2θ) at a scanning rate of 2°/min with molybdenum target. The XRD pattern of the synthesized EMD contains four diffraction peaks with 2θ values of 16.3, 19.7, 29.7 and 31 as shown in The surface morphology of EMD sample was studied using a HITACHI S 3400 Scanning Electron Microscope. The SEM image ( The discharge/charge reactions for EMD cells in aqueous KOH electrolyte are as follows ( Cathode: Anode: Overall: The proton–electron pair formed during the discharge diffuses away from the EMD surface to the interior of the material. The proton–electron pair diffusion rate is a function of the structural, chemical, physical and electrochemical properties of the EMD ( The theoretical discharge capacity of EMD is 308 It has been reported by many investigators that doped EMD shows good discharge property, but comparatively few studies have been reported on the discharge capacity of un-doped EMD. The discharge capacity of EMD produced in the present study has been compared with some values reported in the literature ( The integration of EMD preparation from Mn-cake produced from manganese nodule is schematically shown by a flow sheet as depicted in Manganese oxide containing waste material such as manganese cake, a byproduct from Mn-nodule processing operation can be effectively utilized for production of EMD through H The authors are thankful to