Objectives
                  To compare the effect of conventional complete dentures fabricated using two different impression methods on masticatory performance and factors relating to masticatory performance in a randomized controlled trial.
               
                  Methods
                  A crossover randomized controlled trial was performed with edentulous patients requiring maxillomandibular complete dentures. Mandibular complete dentures were fabricated using two different methods. The conventional method (C) used a custom tray border molded with an impression compound and a silicone. The simplified method (S) used a stock tray and an alginate. Participants were randomly divided into the two groups. In the C–S group, the conventional method was used first, followed by the simplified method; the order was reversed in the SC group. Adjustments were performed four times. The wash out period was 1 month. Masticatory performance as assessed by the mixing of a color-changeable chewing gum (mixing ability). Maximum occlusal force, occlusal contact area, and perceived chewing ability were assessed for each group.
               
                  Results
                  Twenty-seven patients underwent randomization and 24 participants completed the trial. With regard to occlusal contact area, the conventional method showed significantly larger occlusal contact area than the simplified method. No significant differences were observed between the two methods regarding mixing ability, maximum occlusal force, and perceived chewing ability.
               
                  Conclusions
                  This study showed that complete dentures fabricated with the conventional method had a significantly larger occlusal contact area than those made using the simplified method.
               
                  Clinical Significance
                  Complete dentures fabricated with the conventional method, comprising a preliminary impression using alginate in a stock tray followed by a final impression using silicone impression material in a border molded custom tray, resulted in fewer post-insertion adjustments than the simplified method, potentially contributing to earlier stability of new dentures.The prevalence of edentulism among the elderly aged ≥ 65 years is decreasing across much of the industrialized world, including Japan, but increasing in developing countries [ Masticatory performance in edentulous individuals is poor compared with that in those with complete dentition [ Complete denture fabrication includes several stages. Among these stages, many practitioners have been reported to simplify the impression procedure [ A few reports based on randomized controlled trials have assessed the effect of conventional impression methods for complete denture fabrication on masticatory performance. Kawai et al. [ We designed a randomized crossover controlled clinical trial to compare a simplified method, only using a single alginate impression, and the conventional method, involving a final impression with a silicone impression in border-molded custom trays, for complete denture fabrication. In a previous study, we reported the effect of the conventional method on patient satisfaction as the primary analysis [ This study was a single blind randomized controlled crossover clinical trial. The detailed information of this study’s protocol has been reported in a previous publication [ Participants comprised patients who were edentulous in both arches, currently using dentures, and requiring a new pair of complete dentures. They were recruited via telephone after having travelled to the Dental Hospital of TMDU. Inclusion criteria were as follows: ability to independently travel to the prosthodontics clinic of TMDU Hospital Faculty, adequate understanding of written and spoken Japanese, and the ability to understand and respond to a questionnaire. Exclusion criteria comprised: dementia, not currently using dentures, and existing psychiatric conditions. All participants provided informed consent, signed a letter of consent, and underwent a preliminary examination. This examination was a panoramic radiographic survey. The clinical steps for both methods have been described in a previous report [ After the impressions were made, all procedures for both the methods were the same: making maxillomandibular relation records, mounting in an average-value articulator (Gysi Simplex OU-H3, COMATSU, Saitama, Japan), denture fittings, and the delivery of the dentures. After denture delivery, adjustments, including modification of the denture base, elimination of pressure spots in the denture base, and occlusal adjustments, were conducted four times every week from the initial delivery. After adjustments, assessments were performed. The number of adjustments was determined to be four in this study [ Study outcomes included mixing ability, maximum occlusal force, occlusal contact area, and perceived chewing ability. An independent researcher applied the following outcomes assessments 1 month after the denture delivery in both the first and second phases. A color-changeable chewing gum (Masticatory Performance Evaluating Gum Xylitol; Lotte Co., Ltd., Tokyo, Japan) was used as the test item. Participants were instructed to chew the gum 60 times freely, at a rhythm of chewing once per second. The chewed gum was flattened to a thickness of 1.5 mm in polyethylene films by compression between two glass plates, and then Occlusal contact area was measured using pressure-sensitive films and a pre-calibrated scanning device (Dental Prescale/Occluzer, GC Corp., Tokyo, Japan). Before the measurement, participants were seated comfortably on a dental chair with the Frank-fort horizontal plane parallel to the floor. They were then asked to bite the film for 3 s with maximum bite force. Only one measurement was taken. Occlusal contact area and maximum occlusal force were obtained with scanning and analyzed by the scanning device [ Twenty food items were assessed for the participants’ perceived ability to bite and chew food using a four-point rating scale [ Sample size estimation was described in a previous report [ Participant baseline characteristics were compared between the two groups. The differences were analyzed according to age using an independent sample two-sided t-test, according to sex by using the Chi-square test, and according to ACP classification system using the Mann-Whitney test. Differences in mixing ability test, maximum occlusal force, occlusal contact area, and perceived chewing ability between the simplified method and the conventional method were analyzed using the Wilcoxon signed-rank test. Analyses were performed using the statistical software JMP ver. 13 (SAS Institute, NC, USA) at a significance level of 0.05. Participants were recruited from August 2013, and the trial was completed in October 2014. Twenty-seven patients who met the criteria underwent randomization.  To the best of our knowledge, no previous study has compared masticatory function and other factors related to masticatory function between complete denture fabrication impression methods. This is the first study to assess the difference in masticatory performance measured by mixing ability, occlusal contact area, maximum occlusal force, and perceived chewing ability, between the conventional and simplified impression methods for complete denture fabrication. In the present study, the null hypothesis concerning occlusal contact area was rejected because a significantly larger occlusal contact area was observed by using the conventional method compared with the simplified method. The reason might be that a more appropriate impression by the conventional method could lead to more accurate subsequent procedures in each stage such as jaw relation recording and occlusal adjustment. This is because the wax occlusal rims with the autopolymerizing resin bases made from impressions in the conventional method might provide good stability and make it easy to make maxillomandibular relation records. This would consequently provide new dentures of which jaw relation is improved with easier post-insertion adjustments than the simplified method [ Due to new neuromuscular adjustments within the masticatory system, patients adapt to the new occlusion over the first few weeks after insertion of new dentures and adaptation is a continuous process. Therefore, occlusal contact points increase with time [ In the present study, Dental Prescale pressure-sensitive films, mounted and measured in a central position, were implemented for measurement of maximum occlusal force, which avoided inaccurate measurements caused by denture slipping that can occur with unilateral biting or bilateral biting away from center position. There was no significant difference in maximum occlusal force between the two methods. The mucosal settling, effecting contact to the denture bearing tissues might contribute to the changes in occlusal force [ A previous study by Cunha et al. reported no difference in masticatory performance measured by a type of comminution test using capsules coating fuchsine beads [ Similarly, there was no significant difference in perceived chewing ability measured by the food intake questionnaire between the two methods, which agreed with the results of a previous study that used a questionnaire with a 100 mm visual analogue scale [ This study had some limitations. First, most denture wearers considered their self-assessed masticatory ability to be better that their objective masticatory performance due to optimistic bias [ Under the limitations of this study, there was no significant difference in mixing ability measured by a color-changeable chewing gum, maximum occlusal force, or perceived chewing ability between the conventional method and simplified method. However, complete dentures fabricated by the conventional method provided a larger contact area than the simplified method early after delivery of new dentures, potentially contributing to earlier stability of new dentures. This has great significance for both patients and dentists due to the shorter adaptation period of new dentures and reduced number of post-insertion denture adjustments. The authors declare there is no Conflict of Interests in this work. This work was supported by