The influence of two additives, BC-2 and TT, on the oxygen overpotential and corrosion rate of Pb–Co3O4, Pb–Ca–Sn and Pb–Sb anodes was investigated. At 25 °C, both additives depolarise oxygen evolution on the Pb–Co3O4 anode but not on Pb–Ca–Sn or Pb–Sb anodes. The additive TT results in the formation of a smaller amount of PbO2 on the anode compared with that formed in basic electrolyte (BE) or in the presence of BC-2. A slightly larger amount of PbO2 is formed on Pb–Ca–Sn or on Pb–Sb anode in the presence of BC-2 or TT. In the presence of BC-2 or TT, the amount of PbO2 formed on Pb–Co3O4 anode is approximately half that on Pb–Ca–Sn and Pb–Sb anodes. At 45 °C, the effect of TT on the Pb–Ca–Sn anode varies during prolonged polarisation. BC-2 depolarises oxygen evolution on Pb–Ca–Sn anodes and contributes to the formation of a larger amount of PbO2 on the anode, whereas for Pb–Co3O4, this reaction is polarised as compared to Pb–Ca–Sn. At 45 °C, as well at 25 °C, the amount of PbO2 formed on Pb–Co3O4 is approximately half that formed on the Pb–Ca–Sn anode. The corrosion rate of the Pb–Co3O4 anode is lower than the Pb–Ca–Sn anode under these conditions. Both additives modify the structure of the anodic layer on Pb–Co3O4, Pb–Ca–Sn or on Pb–Sb anode.It is well known that the addition of small amounts of organic compounds (usually surface active substances) in electrodeposition baths improves significantly the quality of the metallic deposits. However, literature data concerning the effect of additives on the anodic behaviour, and especially on the corrosion rate of anodes for copper electrowinning, are rather scarce. It has been found that two organic additives, BC-2 or TT, exert a slight polarising effect on the process of PbO This paper represents further investigation on the influence of these additives on the oxygen overpotential and the corrosion rate of a Pb–Co The composition of the basic electrolyte (BE) tested was 30 g l The required concentration of the organic additives in the electrolyte was obtained by addition of the appropriate amount of their aqueous solutions. Three types of anode were investigated: a cast Pb–Sb (Sb 5.85%) alloy, a hot rolled Pb–Ca–Sn (Ca 0.081%, Sn 0.74%, Al 0.01%) alloy and a Pb substrate with a Pb–Co The techniques used for the evaluation of the additives are described in Part I of this paper  The CV curves of Pb–Co   Comparison of the reflective curves of Pb–Co  At 45 °C, BC-2 depolarises oxygen evolution on Pb–Ca–Sn and, as with TT, leads to the formation of a larger amount of PbO Comparison of the cyclic voltammetry curves of Pb–Ca–Sn X-ray diffraction of the anodic film formed on the anodes during polarisation at 25 °C In the case of Pb–Co The structure of the anodic layer formed on the Pb–Co From At 25 °C, both additives depolarise oxygen evolution on the Pb–Co At 45 °C, the influence of the additive TT on the anodic behaviour of the Pb–Ca–Sn anode varies during polarisation. BC-2 depolarises oxygen evolution on the Pb–Ca–Sn anode and contributes to the formation of a larger amount of PbO Both additives alter the structure of the anodic layer on all anodes similarly. At 25 °C, TT exerts a negligible effect on the corrosion rate of Pb–Ca–Sn and Pb–Co