This study examines the surface alteration and flotation behaviour of synthetic moncheite and pentlandite, both in mixture with pyroxene, in the presence of process water containing various ionic concentrations. Ionic strength was also investigated using sodium chloride to modify the water ion concentration. It is proposed that ions found in process waters as well as dissolution products from the minerals present passivate the mineral surfaces and inhibit collector adsorption which affects the floatability of moncheite, pentlandite and pyroxene. A comparison is drawn between the PGE, BMS and gangue minerals.
                  ToF-SIMS analyses were used to characterise the mineral surface as well as the extent of surface alteration. Microflotation was used to determine the hydrophobicity of the synthetic minerals.
                  The results have shown that there seems to be a synergistic effect between an ionic strength of ⩾0.1 and ion concentration in process water. However, the ions in the process water play a more significant role compared to ionic strength in terms of mineral surface alteration and floatability of the mineral mixtures evaluated. The dissolution products from the valuable minerals affected the flotation response of pyroxene.It is well established that the quality of process water has a significant influence on flotation recovery and selectivity, especially when the water is recycled, and the concentration of the ions increases ( During the study described in this paper, synthetic water, containing key ions typically found in process water, was prepared in order to determine the effect of varying the concentration of cations and anions on the floatability and selectivity of moncheite-pyroxene mixtures and pentlandite-pyroxene in the presence and absence of SIBX at pH 9. Ionic strength was also varied using ions which have a minimal effect on flotation to de-couple ionic strength from the cations and anions present in solution. Microflotation and ToF-SIMS (Time of Flight Secondary Ion Mass Spectrometry) were used as tools in determining the effect of surface alteration on the flotation response. The objective of the study is to obtain a fundamental understanding of the floatability of moncheite -pyroxene and pentlandite -pyroxene mixtures by measuring the effect of parameters such as collector adsorption, ionic activation, and the distribution of ions on the mineral surfaces and relating these to the microflotation behaviour of the samples. Natural pyroxene, synthetic moncheite [PtPd(BiTe) Moncheite was prepared by weighing stoichiometric amounts of the pure material (platinum and palladium sponge and bismuth and tellurium powder) into a silica tube which was evacuated overnight, sealed and thermally treated. The thermal treatment involved heating the ampoule to 1150 Mineral samples were stored under argon in a freezer and freshly ground in an agate mortar just prior to each experiment. The products were screened to obtain size fractions of +25–53 Purified sodium isobutyl xanthate (SIBX) powder was obtained from SENMIN and used as the collector at a dosage of 5.00E-05 During the study, deionised water (DI) and synthetic process water, which contains similar amounts of key ions typically found in process water used on PGM concentrators, was used for the microflotation tests, XPS and ToF-SIMS analyses. Variations in the concentration of the cations and anions (synthetic water, 5× synthetic water and 10× synthetic water) were also evaluated ( Surface analysis of the minerals was carried out using a PHI TRIFT IV ToF-SIMS instrument operating in the static SIMS regime. A pulsed primary ion beam bombards the sample surface, causing the emission of atomic and molecular secondary ions. A small percentage of the secondary ions are charged and can therefore be extracted by an electric field into a mass spectrometer. The mass spectra are recorded by measuring the time difference between pulsing the primary ion gun and the arrival of secondary ions on a fast dual microchannelplate detector at the spectrometer, by means of a multistop time-to-digital converter. ToF-SIMS analysis was carried out on stirred trial products (samples were conditioned in the desired solution at pH 9 for 1 minute prior to reagent addition; a 2 Throughout the study a 30 A microflotation cell (volume 250 The figures in this section show data for either moncheite/pentlandite or pyroxene on their own but the interpretation should always consider that the testwork was carried out as moncheite–pyroxene and pentlandite-pyroxene mixtures and not as single minerals. Therefore dissolution products from either moncheite/pentlandite or pyroxene may contribute to the surface alteration of the minerals in the system and affect floatability. ToF-SIMS analysis is a well-established technique in determining the occurrence of atomic/molecular species on the surface of mineral samples. It must be noted that the ToF-SIMS values are relative and not absolute.      The surface results obtained for both moncheite and pyroxene did not necessarily correspond to higher recoveries obtained during the microflotation testwork (Section  The ionic strength testwork (shown in the rectangle) has shown a significant increase in calcium ion adsorption on pentlandite surfaces in the presence of sodium chloride (  The results in   The results show that for pentlandite there is xanthate adsorption when compared to the corresponding no reagent trials ( The ionic strength testwork (shown in the rectangle) has shown a significant increase in xanthate ion adsorption for pentlandite in the presence of sodium chloride especially at the 25 The results for xanthate adsorption onto pyroxene surfaces, although not significant, show a trend of increased adsorption as the cation and anion concentrations in solution increases with higher values obtained for the NaCl trials ( Microflotation testwork was performed with the aim of linking the trends observed from the surface analysis experiments to floatability. To evaluate the contribution of entrainment and natural floatability, flotation tests were conducted without any reagent addition. The objective of these trials is to determine the effect of varying the concentration of cations and anions on the floatability and selectivity of moncheite-pyroxene and pentlandite-pyroxene mixtures in the presence and absence of SIBX at pH 9. Deionised water, synthetic water, 5× synthetic water and 10× synthetic water were evaluated during the testwork. The 5× synthetic water concentration was chosen as it is similar to the amount of ions observed in the Rustenburg waters and the 10× synthetic water was chosen to possibly determine threshold values of the ions present with respect to flotation recovery.   The microflotation data has shown that in the absence of reagents the highest pentlandite recovery (∼26%) was obtained in deionised water ( Pyroxene recovery (  The microflotation data shows that higher moncheite (∼79%) and pyroxene (∼50%) recoveries were obtained at the higher ionic strength (25 In the presence of xanthate, moncheite recoveries of >99% and pyroxene recoveries of ∼50% were obtained. When these results are compared to the 2.5  The microflotation data shows similar pentlandite (∼43%) and pyroxene (∼12%) recoveries in the absence of reagents irrespective of the ionic strength. These recoveries are much higher than those obtained for the synthetic water concentration trials. In the presence of xanthate, pentlandite recoveries of ∼74% were obtained, which is similar to the results obtained for the 10× synthetic water trial. However, the pyroxene recovery was significantly enhanced irrespective of the ionic strength when compared to the cation and anion concentration trials. This indicates that ionic strength plays a role in the flotation recovery of pentlandite and pyroxene. The study has focused on exploring the extent to which ions found in process waters as well as dissolution products from the minerals present passivate the mineral surfaces and influence flotation of pentlandite, moncheite and pyroxene in moncheite-pyroxene and pentlandite–pyroxene mixtures. When comparing the results obtained on the moncheite-pyroxene mixture in the absence of xanthate for deionised water, synthetic water and NaCl solution trials it is clear that once again the presence of the key ions typically found in process water reduces the moncheite and pyroxene recovery. However, at the 10× synthetic ion water concentration, there is some indication that the ionic strength starts to counteract the effect of the ions in the process water thereby improving the moncheite recovery to the same level as that achieved in deionised water. When xanthate is added to the moncheite-pyroxene mixture the recovery of moncheite increases to similar levels irrespective of the ion concentration in the water. The ToF-SIMS results showed similar adsorption of calcium ions on the moncheite surface, which suggests that as the ion concentration in the water increases the amount of Ca ions absorbed onto the moncheite mineral surface remained the same thus indicating threshold values for those ions evaluated in this study. These ions, however, at the threshold values did not affect the recovery of moncheite in the presence of xanthate, which indicates that xanthate counteracts the effects of the ions present in the process water. The surface analysis results have also shown that iron ions have adsorbed onto the moncheite surface. When comparing the results obtained on the pentlandite-pyroxene mixture in the absence of xanthate for deionised water, synthetic water and NaCl solution trials it is clear that the presence of the key ions typically found in process water reduces the pentlandite and pyroxene recovery. In the case of this study, ToF-SIMS results have shown the adsorption of calcium ions onto the pentlandite surface. Calcium in particular is readily adsorbed onto the mineral surfaces and increases as the ion concentration increases; a maximum adsorption is reached at a calcium concentration of around 400 In the presence of xanthate, the surface concentrations of calcium ions did not seem to hinder the pentlandite recovery, especially at the ionic strength of 0.1. In point of fact, the recovery of pentlandite increases as the ion concentration in the water increases. Another possible mechanism for the improved pentlandite recovery may be due to a decrease in the formation/adsorption of hydrophilic compounds such as metal oxides and hydroxides on the sulphide mineral surface. It seems that xanthate acts a surface modifier by cleaning the pentlandite mineral surface, in particular of magnesium and silicon ions. In terms of pyroxene, a different pyroxene flotation behaviour was observed depending on the other mineral in the mixture. Xanthates are the most commonly used sulphydryl collectors in beneficiation of PGE and sulphide minerals. It is assumed that SIBX is mostly present in solution in the anionic form (SIBX Regarding pyroxene recovery from the moncheite-pyroxene mixture, the pyroxene recoveries were enhanced more significantly in the presence of xanthate when compared to those obtained for the pentlandite pyroxene mixture. This is particularly noticeable at the 10× synthetic water concentration. Using Tof-SIMS analysis, xanthate and dixanthogen were observed on the pyroxene mineral surfaces, particularly at the 10× synthetic water concentration. This finding clearly demonstrates a more detrimental effect of moncheite dissolution products on flotation selectivity when compared to pentlandite dissolution products discussed below. In terms of the pyroxene-pentlandite mixture in the absence of xanthate, very low pyroxene recoveries were obtained in deionised water as well as synthetic water regardless of the ionic strength. Pyroxene in the mixture with moncheite behaved in a similar manner when compared to the pentlandite-pyroxene mixture except for synthetic water with ionic strength of 0.1. In this case, a higher pyroxene recovery was observed. It is suggested that pyroxene surface activation by tellurium and bismuth ions, which are probably more hydrophobic than pentlandite dissolution products (nickel and iron ions), in combination with a higher ionic strength effects as described above increased the floatability of pyroxene at the ionic strength of 0.1. In the presence of xanthate, the pyroxene recoveries to the concentrate were increased when compared to those obtained in the absence of xanthate. This could be attributed to inadvertent activation of pyroxene surfaces by pentlandite dissolution products, such as nickel ions, rather than to the direct xanthate effect. This is supported by ToF-SIMS data which has shown the presence of Ni ions on pyroxene surfaces. The present study has compared the floatability and surface characteristics of moncheite–pyroxene and pentlandite–pyroxene mineral mixtures using various concentrations of key ions typically found in process water. The results, in the absence of reagents, have shown for both systems that the additional cation and anion concentrations compared to those found in deionised water reduced the moncheite, pentlandite and pyroxene recovery compared to the recovery achieved in deionised water. When xanthate is added to the system then the recovery of moncheite and pentlandite is significantly enhanced when compared to the results obtained in the absence of reagents. The pyroxene recovery also increased in the presence of xanthate, particularly at the higher ionic strength solutions (5× and 10× synthetic water trials). This could be attributed to the inadvertent activation of the pyroxene mineral surface especially in the presence of moncheite and pentlandite dissolution products, viz. Pd, Bi, Te, Fe and Ni. Ionic strength was evaluated using sodium chloride as the electrolyte in order to de-couple ionic strength from the cations and anions present in solution. The results show that selectivity between moncheite and pyroxene as well as between pentlandite and pyroxene is significantly reduced in the presence of sodium chloride, especially in the presence of xanthate. The data for moncheite and pentlandite suggests that ionic strength (NaCl trials) plays a role but only at concentrations of ⩾0.1. In addition the results show that xanthate seems to counteract both the effects of ionic strength and cation and anion concentrations in process water. It can be concluded that there seems to be a synergistic effect between ionic strength and ion concentration in process water. The ions in the process water seem to play a more significant role compared to ionic strength in mineral surface alteration and floatability. In addition, the dissolution products from the valuable minerals affected the flotation response of pyroxene. The authors would like to thank Anglo American Platinum management for support during the study and for permission to publish this paper.