Arrayed ultrasonic transducers using the piezoelectric thin film (PZT) are fabricated with multilayer diaphragm structures. Due to the different thermal and elastic characteristics of each constitutive layer, residual stress is generated during high temperature deposition processes, and the resultant composite membrane is consequently bowing. We present the influences of residual stress on the resonant frequency (f
                     r) and sensitivities of each sensor structure. Two type sensor devices are fabricated, and the f
                     rs of those are practically estimated. For the simulation of structural f
                     r variations, the sensor structures having ideal and bended membrane are modeled, and the finite element analysis are carried out using ANSYS 7.1. The bended structures are represented almost same f
                     r with practically measured ones, which is substantially higher than that of ideal ones meaning that the frequency deviations are mainly originated from the membrane deformations. The stiffness variations originated from the stress generations have important effects on the quality factors of vibrations, while those have not so large influences on the f
                     r determinations. Sensitivities of each sensor structure are increased with increasing the membrane deflection intensities. These results are discussed relating to the stress generations and mechanical behaviors of composite membrane structures.Ultrasonic transducers using the piezoelectric PZT film and MEMS technologies have been widely researched for the distance recognition, biomedical-imaging, automotive sensing fields. Recently, due to the low cost, easy integration with electronic circuitry, wide frequency response, high sensitivity, etc., silicon based multilayer diaphragm structures have been employed on the ultrasonic transducers. We have been investigated the ultrasonic imaging system for the three-dimensional recognition, constructed with integrated phased array sensing elements Fabrication of multi-layered ultrasonic sensor chip is carried out with 4-mask process. Silicon-on-insulator (SOI) wafer (Si 2.0 Resonant frequencies ( From the membrane vibrations originated by the acoustic pressure, electric output signals and those FFT results of each structure are obtained (see When a system vibrates in a natural mode, the mode shapes of plates having various edge conditions give the logical functions with which to formulate shapes for determining the natural frequencies. Rayleigh and Ritz A finite element solution (ANSYS 7.1) has been used for the simulation of resonant frequencies of each sensor structure. Two types of sensor structures are modeled as ideally designed structures and bended ones as shown in The corresponding mode shapes of ideal model consequently obtained from first to third mode are shown in On the other hand, stiffness variations by the stress generations have important influences on the membrane vibrations The relations between stress, stiffness and membrane deflection effects on the resonant frequencies are considered. Firstly, the influence of stiffness variations can be expressed as the relations of stress and modulus, which have been usually used in the estimation of Young's modulus of thin film. The load–deflection method is a well-known method for the measurement of the elastic properties of thin films. Schneider et al. On the other hand, the initial membrane deflections have the effect of total thickness increase The frequency shift is substantial on the resultant Sensitivities are also influenced from the stress generations and membrane deformations. Sensitivities of the fabricated sensor chips are practically measured, and those results are listed in In the membrane vibration behaviors, tensile force On the other hand, the influences of piezoelectric property variations originated from the film thickness changes are also considerable. Thus, since the film thickness difference between the specimens is not so large, the influences on sensitivities are negligible. However, in our previous report, a sensor structure having two times thicker PZT film (≈1.5 We demonstrated the thermal stress generation effects on the resonant frequency and sensitivities of multilayer sensor structures. Membrane deflection and stiffness variations originated from the residual stress lead to the Sensitivities are also proportional to the membrane deflections. OE specimen represents the highest sensitivity as 97.9