Atmospheric leaching of a sphalerite concentrate in sulphate and chloride media was performed and the effect of several variables, such as solid/liquid ratio and oxidant (Fe(III)) concentration were investigated. The behaviour of minor elements, such as Cu, In, As, Sb, Bi, Sn and Pb, was also studied under different conditions. The results showed that using a solid/liquid ratio of 5% (w/v) it was possible to leach 95% of zinc after 2h, with a solution of 0.5M H2SO4 and Fe2(SO4)3 at 80°C. The minor elements As, Sb and Bi were also completely leached whereas copper leaching was favoured by the use of chloride medium. The oxidation of Fe(II) during the leaching tests was studied and an improvement of 20% zinc extraction was observed in an oxygenated system. Cross-current leach tests using two/three stages and a solid/liquid ratio of 10% (w/v) were performed to achieve 90% of zinc extraction. The electron microprobe analysis of the leaching residues showed no change on the sphalerite composition after the leaching, which indicates that the leaching of sphalerite involves the break down of the sulphide structure.Zinc plays an important role in our society. Many applications for this metal can be described such as the production of brass, for the manufacture of jewellery, domestic utensils and coins, which are the earliest uses. Nowadays applications include uses in chemical, paint, construction and agriculture industries. It is mainly extracted from sphalerite (ZnS), which is commonly associated with other sulphide minerals, such as chalcopyrite (CuFeS Both pyrometallurgical and hydrometallurgical techniques are currently employed to recover zinc from zinc ores. The conventional method involves the roast-leach-electrowinning process. The roasting step produces sulphur dioxide and, as the policy on discharge of SO Atmospheric leaching or high pressure leaching as an alternative to the conventional method have been proposed, and the success of such methods are evident by some large-scale applications ( Ferric ion, which is one of the most important oxidants used in leaching processes, in either sulphate or chloride media, can be used to leach zinc sulphide, according to the reaction ( The reaction consumes ferric ions leading to a decrease in reduction potential and leaching rate. Therefore, it is advisable to carry out the oxidation of the ferrous ion formed through Oxygen is also used as an oxidizing agent for ferrous ion in industrial direct leaching processes such as in Kokkola zinc plant, Finland, and Odda zinc plant, Norway ( Although pure sulphur dioxide is a well known reducing agent, the combination of sulphur dioxide and an excess of oxygen, in the presence of certain transition metals, has been described as a stronger oxidant than oxygen alone ( Hydrogen peroxide is also used as an oxidizing agent for iron. In fact, the reduction potential of the pair H However, the use of H The objective of the present study was to optimize the leaching conditions of zinc and other valuable metals such as copper and indium contained in a particular zinc sulphide concentrate produced by Somincor from the Portuguese Neves–Corvo ore. The production of this concentrate depends on the zinc price in the international markets and the value paid for zinc concentrates by the companies operating pyrometallurgical plants; the latter is significantly reduced when they present a high content in penalizing elements like arsenic, antimony, bismuth, tin and lead. Therefore the understanding of the behaviour of the minor elements (valuable or penalizing elements) during the leaching is very important to validate the hydrometallurgical route as the treatment process for this type of concentrate. For this purpose, the effect of several variables such as reaction time, solid/liquid ratio, temperature, ferric ion concentration, addition of oxygen and acid on the leaching efficiency in sulphate medium was investigated. The use of a chloride medium, as an alternative to the sulphate medium, was also tested. All the chemicals were Analytical Grade and all solutions were prepared with deionised water. Measurements of the pH and of the redox potential were carried out with a pH/ The granulometric analysis of the concentrate samples was carried out by laser scattering using the granulometer Malvern Mastersizer 2000. The concentrate was examined by optical microscopy and electron microprobe analysis (EMPA) ( From The EMPA analysis of this sphalerite concentrate also revealed that arsenic and cobalt are mainly present in pyrite and all the analysed chalcopyrite grains contained Ge (53 The chemical composition of this zinc concentrate determined by chemical digestion using a microwave digestor (CEM 2000) is presented in The granulometric analysis showed that 99% of the particles have a diameter below 70 The X-ray diffraction analysis (D8 Bruker AXS theta-2theta) allowed the identification of its main mineral phases: ZnS, FeS Leaching tests were carried out in a five-necked round bottom reactor (1 The solid residues obtained in the leaching tests were washed, dried and stored in plastic bags under vacuum. These solids were again used whenever tests requiring a second stage were carried out. The experiments concerning iron oxidation were also carried out in the same experimental set-up. In this case, 800 For some of the leaching tests, the oxidation of iron was carried out in situ. In this case, a known flow of air, O The experimental conditions used in the preliminary leaching experiments to select the main variables to be studied in detail are presented in The influence of the temperature on the leaching results is presented in In view of these results, the solid/liquid ratio, the ferric sulphate concentration and the reaction time were the variables selected to develop a factorial design plan of experiments.  It is also apparent from The influence of the pulp density on the leaching results was investigated in order to optimize the consumption of the leaching reagents for an effective recovery of the metals. In fact, as the percentage of solid is reduced, the amount of ferric sulphate available to leach the solids increases and so faster kinetics for lower solid/liquid ratios is expected. As illustrated in It is worth noting that the analysis of the minor elements in these leaching solutions using FIAS may be affected by a significant error due to the high dilutions that had to be carried out and therefore, small differences in the extraction values may be eventually neglected. From The extraction of arsenic, bismuth and tin decreased with the increase of solid/liquid ratio, whereas the extraction of antimony was not affected by this variable.  As illustrated in As shown in The different leaching behaviour of the three main minerals (ZnS, CuFeS Factorial design of experiments is especially important in the beginning of an experimental study and they allow minimum experimental effort and enable detection of factor interactions. A full factorial two-level design is described as 2 In this study, the solid/liquid ratio values were: 5% and 10% and the ferric sulphate concentration values were: 0.25 and 0.5 As illustrated in The experimental data was also analysed using the Principal Components Analysis (PCA) with Matlab version 6.5 (MathWorks, Natick, MA) and the PLS Toolbox version 3.0 (Eigenvector Research Inc., USA) for Matlab. Principal Components Analysis (PCA) allows performing the qualitative analysis of data (  From In spite of the small differences, it is possible to conclude that the use of high ferric concentrations appears to influence more the extraction values for Both methods described above, FD and PCA, are in agreement in what concerns the effect of the two factors studied (solid/liquid and iron concentration) on zinc extraction. PCA analysis revealed to be a simpler way to identify in the same plot, the correlations between the variables (solid/liquid ratio, ferric sulphate concentration and the leaching time) and the response of the system (Zn extraction), whereas the correlation and importance of features variables is decided from plots of the loadings that provides the projection of the features on the PC. The pair of values of the variables that will led to higher values of zinc extraction are: s/l The comparison between the extraction of zinc, copper and silver in sulphate and chloride media is presented in To determine the most favourable conditions to carry out the oxidation of iron, some tests were performed with synthetic solutions containing only ferrous sulphate and sulphuric acid without the addition of the zinc concentrate. The oxidation of ferrous ions was promoted by the addition of air and H The results show that at atmospheric pressure, H  The experiments without the oxidation of Fe(II) and with the addition of air presented similar results because, after 60 The benefits of iron oxidation were also visible for copper as presented in The residue obtained in the leaching experiment carried out with the addition of oxygen (450 Although the SO As presented above, to leach around 95% of the zinc contained in the Neves–Corvo zinc concentrate in just one stage, it was necessary to use a solid/liquid ratio of 5% and carry out the leaching at 80 From  The results obtained in this work show that, without the addition of external oxidants, it was possible to leach almost all the zinc and indium, and around 20% of copper from the Neves–Corvo concentrate in one single stage using 0.5 The solid/liquid ratio, temperature and the concentration of Fe(III) have a great effect on zinc extraction, whereas the leaching results are nearly independent from the stirring speed and the sulphuric acid concentration in the range studied. The factorial design and Principal Components Analyses allowed concluding that zinc extraction increases with the increase of ferric ion concentration and time. On the contrary, the solid/liquid ratio has a strong and negative effect on zinc extraction. Ferric ion concentration also interacts negatively with the solid/liquid ratio but this interaction is more important for higher reaction times. On the other hand, PCA analysis allowed to conclude that it is better to have both variables at their lowest values than at their maximum values and the pair of values that led to higher values of zinc extraction are: s/l The minor elements contained in the concentrate such as arsenic, antimony and bismuth, were also completely leached under the experimental conditions described above, whereas lead was not leached in sulphuric medium. Copper and silver leaching was favoured by the use of chloride medium, where it was possible to leach in one stage, 60% of the copper and silver using 0.5 Zinc extraction was considerably enhanced when the oxidation of the ferrous iron to the ferric state was performed during the leaching reaction. It was demonstrated that hydrogen peroxide, as well as oxygen, may be used to perform this oxidation reaction efficiently. The electron microprobe analyses showed the same composition of the sphalerite particles before and after leaching. This indicates that sphalerite leaching involves the break down of the mineral structure with the simultaneous liberation of its components. It is clear that it would be extremely difficult to attain the complete dissolution of the interesting metals contained in the concentrate at atmospheric pressure using high pulp density. Thus, for high solid/liquid ratios, autoclave leaching experiments should be considered. The authors would like to acknowledge to Somincor for the support and for supplying the samples of the zinc sulphide concentrate. Financial support for this study by “ The authors would also like to thank to Professor M. Teresa Duarte and Eng. Vânia André for their help in the characterisation of the concentrate by X-ray diffraction analysis, to Dr. Álvaro Pinto for his helpful discussion concerning the mineralogical analyses, to Eng. Pedro Felizardo for his help in doing the PCA analysis and Dr. Ana Ferreira and Eng. José Carvajal for their help in the experimental work. This section explains the mathematical treatment to calculate the leaching rates. The following equations were applied: Where where