We present the design, construction, characterization, and analysis of a prototype process for a novel electrochemical platform of candidate negative emissions technologies (NETs), termed indirect ocean capture. The IOC technologies remove carbon dioxide gas from the atmosphere by leveraging both air-ocean gas exchange and the pH sensitivity of the ocean’s carbonate buffer system. The system characterized in this paper enables two configurations that capture CO2 either as a pure gas or as a solid mineral. Both configurations use the acid and base produced by the membrane electrodialysis of ocean water. The first configuration, termed the ‘acid process’, acidifies ocean water or brine to shift the carbonate buffer system towards dissolved CO2 gas, which is vacuum stripped from the acidified brine. The second configuration, termed the ‘base process’, adds base to the brine to shift the carbonate buffer system towards carbonate ions, which precipitates as CaCO3. A closed loop cycle is achieved by returning this decarbonized and alkalinized brine to the ocean for additional CO2 absorption from the air. Our evaluation of this prototype scale system focused on the parameters that have the most influence on the ultimate cost of the extracted CO2. In a concurrent techno-economic study, the most cost-sensitive parameters were shown to be the efficiencies of the anion and cation exchange membranes, the number and orientation of CO2 extraction membranes, and the volume of base required for CaCO3 precipitation. The measured parameters provide target values for commercial deployment. The experiments in this study were used to inform the concurrent techno-economic study that quantifies in detail the projected cost of avoided CO2 achievable with this process.Most climate models suggest that limiting warming to 2 Many NETs have been proposed and tested in recent years ( Toward this aim, in this article we describe the construction and assessment of a prototype IOC system based on a previously published lab-scale system. In the article immediately following this one, entitled The IOC process is shown in In the acid process, a slipstream of treated ocean water is passed through a three-compartment bipolar membrane electrodialysis (BPMED) system ( This study presents the design, experimental characterization, analysis of the closed-loop acid process efficiency, identification of the most cost-sensitive parameters, and recommendations for future optimizations of the IOC prototype system. The data from this study was fed into a techno-economic model described in the 100 A custom built three-compartment bi-polar electrodialysis (ED) stack was constructed by Ameridia, Division of Eurodia Industrie. Membranes from two suppliers were compared to determine optimal ED configuration and operational parameters. ASTOM membranes, supplied by Ameridia, were: Neosepta bipolar membranes (BPM), Neosepta CMB cation exchange membranes (CEM 1), and Neosepta ACM anion exchange membranes (AEM1). Membranes supplied by Asahi-Glass were the Selemion AAV anion exchange membranes (AEM2). To degas the brine or ocean water before acidification (in the acid process), SuperPhobic membrane contactors purchased from Membrana were used. For CO We characterized the performance of two different IOC process flows and quantified the efficiency of their sub-processes. The acid process extracts carbon as CO In both the acid and the base process, the first step uses a process known as three-compartment BPMED to produce an acid (HCl) and a base (NaOH) solution. A BPMED unit was used to produce dilute (1–6 A process flow diagram of the designed BPMED (Fig. S2) and the detailed procedure for sealing, leak testing, priming, and cleaning the BMPED system are given in the SI. Upon performance optimization, the ED stack was filled with acid, base, brine, and electrolyte solutions. Each of the solutions was made to flow through the system at a rate of 2.1 Electrical demand was a significant cost to the entire system ( The current efficiency was calculated by comparing the experimentally determined change in the number of moles of acid or base solution created by electrodialysis, to the theoretical maximum number of moles of acid or base solution that could be formed by the number of electrons (measured in mA) applied to the BPMED stack. As described in Eq. Electric current data, used to calculate Q The acid and base current efficiency of two different AEMs was compared. This was achieved by arranging the membranes in two different configurations: 1) BPM-  Brine is pumped out of the 1000 A slipstream of degassed and acidified brine is removed from the process, demineralized, and used in ED as the source of NaCl (aq) to produce HCl and NaOH. This brine volume accounts for less than 1% of the total brine used in the system. Acidified brine is used because the low pH improves the ED current efficiency, while demineralized pure NaCl prevents scale formation (mineral precipitation) in the BPMED system. Since we found that the capital costs were very high in large part due to the membrane contactors, we chose to characterize the gas removal properties as a function of flow rate (effectively parallel/series), pressure, DIC concentration, and number in series. The total available DIC for extraction as CO Total Carbon (Pritchard et al.) and Total Inorganic Carbon (IC) measurements were performed with a GE Sievers InnovOx Laboratory Total Organic Carbon Analyzer (TOC Analyzer). The Total Organic Carbon (Stocker) was calibrated for both standard TOC measurements and TC measurements following rigorous standard procedures that are detailed in the SI. In sum, baselines for TOC and TC/IC measurements were made for all measured solutions including analyzed solutions (brine, ocean water) and flushing solutions (perchlorate, HCl, and DI). The TC was expected to be approximately equal to the IC and expected to vary greatly from <1 The base process is similar to the acid process, but with the reverse order of acid and base addition to the brine. The base process can be represented by the schematic in Two comparative precipitations were carried out – one at high pH in which large volumes of concentrated NaOH were added directly to ocean water, and a second experiment in which small volumes of concentrated NaOH were added in controlled doses to maintain a pH between 9.3 and 9.6. To maximize the amount of total precipitation (Mg(OH) To maximize the fraction of CaCO In both high and moderate pH precipitation, the solution was separated from the precipitate by decanting the solution from the precipitate. Additional precipitate was extracted from this solution through vacuum membrane filtration. The total separated precipitate was dried at 105 The precipitate was sputtered with Pd/Au and imaged using SEM. The crystal structure of the CaCO The efficiency with which the electrodialysis system produces acid, and the efficiency with which the membrane contactor system extracts CO The energy requirements for each component of the acid and base systems are detailed in The required membrane area for the best acid and base cases is shown in The current efficiency of two membrane configurations were compared with each other: 1) AEM1-CEM1 and 2) AEM2-CEM1. The CEMs were the same for both configurations. These configurations are listed as AEM1-CEM1 and AEM2-CEM1 when discussing the acid production efficiency (anion dominated membrane interaction) and as CEM1-AEM1 and CEM1-AEM2 when discussing the base production efficiency (cation dominated membrane interaction). In each configuration, we measured the efficiency of the AEM membranes to produce acid and the CEM membranes to produce base, as a function of the acid concentration (0.22  The DIC concentrations of brine throughout the acid process were determined by TC/IC measurements and corroborated by extracted CO with the appropriate correction subtracted from the denominator to account for the CO CO Controlling the pH of the solution allowed the selective precipitation of CaCO The chemical composition of the precipitate formed at pH It is projected that the greatest individual costs to this negative emissions technology are electricity, electrodialysis (ED), and membrane contactors for the extraction of CO For the acid process, our cost model indicates that membrane contactors are a significant cost driver, and sensitivity to DIC concentration is observed because a lower DIC concentration requires more membrane contactor area per mole of CO In either process, absent a salable byproduct of either the CaCO Electrodialysis and electricity consumption are closed inter-related: (a) it is projected that the cost of CO It should be noted that in the absence of partnership with RO or power plant cooling, the dominant electricity consumption originates from the pumping and pretreatment of ocean water. In the case that a stand-alone plant was required, significant systems engineering would be needed to reduce this energetic expense. The primary result obtained from electrodialysis experiments is that the current efficiency of the ED process decreases with increasing acid and base concentrations in contact with the AEM and CEM membranes. This trend was shown to be consistent for acid and base current efficiency in all acid conditions and all but two base conditions ( Furthermore, the seemingly counterintuitive dependence of NaOH production efficiency on the AEM type is explained by the increased co-ion transport of H The general trend of decreasing base current efficiency of the CEM1 (cation exchange membranes) for increasing base concentration, shown in the bottom panel of From The impacts of changes to the AEM are clear from This analysis quantifies important metric benchmarks that must be met to enable real-world application. The total CO Overall, many factors are responsible for the limited CO However, the diminishing extraction efficiency of subsequent membranes indicates that by using more membranes the extraction efficiency for brine eventually becomes equivalent to that for seawater, enabling only twice as much CO The difference in CO The large difference in chemical composition of the two precipitates is due to the difference in precipitation dynamics between Mg(OH) It should be noted that on a global scale of ocean de-carbonation, environmental mineral balance will be a concern as we are replacing Ca Prototype assessment of the acid and base IOC systems, respectively, has provided critical information on the expected efficiency of this process, and provided experimental data for a concurrent real-world techno-economic analysis ( CO Lab-scale assessment of the base process indicated this to be an economically promising alternative to the acid process, due to its lack of expensive membrane contactors for CO It is also important to ask what the impacts may be on the ocean ecosystem if these concepts are implemented at the few Gton(CO In summary, we have characterized the performance and identified key trade-offs in the systems design for indirect ocean capture systems. These results have been used to inform a concurrent techno-economic analysis of indirect ocean capture that appears in this same issue ( The views expressed herein are those of the authors, and do not represent those of a particular governmental agency or private company. We thank Norine Chang for SEM measurements, Kyoung Jin Lee and Cory Lancaster for system development and operation, many members of the PARC technical staff for lab assistance, and Luc Botte for advice and guidance on the electrodialysis system. All authors acknowledge support from Supplementary data associated with this article can be found, in the online version, at The following are Supplementary data to this article: