Similar feedstock consisting of poplar stems and tops was fed to a commercial drum chipper, before and after a 12-month storage period. The chipper was fed alternately with poplar stems and tops, in order to determine the effect of piece size, tree part and storage period on machine performance. At the end of the storage period, both stems and tops were still almost as wet as at the beginning, and they showed visible signs of decay. Before storage, net chipping productivity was 72m3
                     h−1 with stems and 30m3
                     h−1 with tops. After storage, net chipping productivity dropped to 56 and 21m3
                     h−1, respectively for stems and tops. Power and torque requirements were also reduced. Chip quality degraded with storage, as particle size distribution veered towards a larger incidence of the smallest fractions. In particular, fines (particles<3.15mm) increased four-fold, reaching the proportion of 11% and 23% in weight for stems and tops, respectively. In general, storage effects were stronger for tops than for stems. Specific fuel consumption was not affected by tree part, storage or their combination.Increased global competition for fossil fuel and the need to mitigate climate change have made renewable energy a main priority However, diachronic supply and demand create a need for a fuel buffer to secure a steady energy output at all times Wood fuels are generally comminuted before use, and they can be stored before or after comminution. Immediate comminution improves fuel handling quality and simplifies logistics Storage before comminution still remains among the most effective techniques for minimizing biomass degradation, regardless of tree species Drying does alter the original properties of wood, and therefore uncomminuted storage may have an effect on the comminution process itself. When drying, wood gets harder and may as a result be more difficult to comminute. This effect may combine with other alterations of wood quality, which are often difficult to predict. Alterations incurred during storage may affect chipper performance and chip quality, eventually reflecting on product cost and value. These effects must be considered carefully when balancing options, and especially when deciding between immediate comminution and delayed comminution. That is crucial to optimizing wood fuel supply chains, in order to reduce the cost of collection, processing and transportation The goal of this study was to determine the effect of storage on chipping efficiency, when dealing with SRF poplar. In particular, this study gauged the eventual differences occurring with power use, productivity, fuel consumption and product quality (e.g. moisture content and particle-size distribution). The experiment was conducted using a Pezzolato PTH 700/660 ( The tests were conducted at the CRA ING experimental farm in Monterotondo, Rome. Before the experiment, 60 trees were harvested from the same SRF plantation established at the farm with hybrid poplar ( The study consisted of four treatments, obtained from the intersection of two tree parts (stem or top) with two periods (before or after storage). Repetitions consisted in the chipping of one piece, either stem or top. The experimental design included 30 repetitions per treatment, for a total of 120. Repetitions were sequenced in blocks of 10, due to field management constraints. Therefore, 10 fresh tops would be fed to the chipper in a sequence, before switching to a new sequence of 10 fresh stems. Blocks were sent to the chipper in random sequence, and the small number of pieces in each block made it unlikely that such grouping would bias the experiment through the effect of knife wear. The volume of each stem and top was determined right before chipping, with a caliper and a measure tape. Stem volume was calculated on the diameter at both ends (Smalian's formula), whereas top volume was calculated based on the diameter at mid-length (Huber's formula) The rotational speed and torque of the power-take-off shaft were measured with a transducer, at a rated accuracy of 3 Fuel consumption was determined after each repetition, by refilling the tractor tank from a can and weighing the can with a precision scale, before and after refilling. Fuel consumption was also determined for the idling chipper, in order to determine a base fuel consumption level. Effective time consumption was determined at the end of the study, using the power graphs Three one-kilogram chip samples were collected from each 10-piece block and used for determining chip size distribution. The five following chip length classes were separated: > 45 Data were analyzed with the Minitab statistics software. In particular, the software was used for estimating a general linear model (GLM), especially suited to the factorial experiment just described. Analysis of variance (Anova) tables were calculated, and the sum of squares was distributed between main effects and interactions. Data were transformed before the analysis, if their distribution did not satisfy the normality assumption. Non-parametric techniques were used if transformation did not succeed in bringing data distribution back to a normal bell-shaped curve. The average piece volume of the stems and tops chipped before storage was 0.64 Chipping stems required 2.5 times more power and torque than chipping tops. That matched the stem to top volume ratio, which was also 2.5. Neither ratios varied after storage. However, storage resulted in a 20% decrease of both mean torque and power, which was experienced equally for both stems and tops. Variations were lower for peak torque and peak power. Peak torque and peak power increased between 60% and 80% of the baseline values when chipping fresh stems, instead of fresh tops. The increase in peak torque and peak power when passing from tops to stems reached 90% after storage. More importantly, storage resulted in a 18% decrease of the peak torque and a 15% decrease of the peak power, when chipping stems. With tops, storage caused an even larger reduction of peak torque and power, in the order of 22% and 27% respectively. Peak torque and power were about 20 to 30% higher than mean torque and power when chipping stems, and this difference tended to increase after storage. In contrast, peak figures were 60 to 80% higher than mean ones when chipping tops, and the difference tended to decrease after storage. Chipping stems took about 75% the available power, when the operation was conducted before storage. After storage, the use of available power dropped to 60%. Chipping tops required 30% to 25% of the available power, respectively before and after storage. Before storage, net chipping productivity was 72 Specific fuel consumption varied from 0.6 to 0.7 Chip size was larger for tops than for stems, and decreased with storage ( The moisture content difference between fresh stems and fresh tops is not surprising. Fresh hardwood stems normally have a higher moisture content than fresh hardwood tops, as a result of the water transpiration gradient within the tree The lower torque and power requirements recorded after storage are partly related to the smaller piece size of the stems and tops chipped after storage, compared with the piece sizes handled before storage. Bigger pieces require more torque and power to chip, compared to smaller pieces Readers must also be aware that the purpose of the experiment made it necessary to chip only one piece at the time, which is not representative of current practice and explains the very low utilization of available power, especially when chipping tops. That also explains the dramatic productivity drop recorded with tops. Under current practice, more tops are chipped in the same bout, with the purpose of maximizing power use and productivity Since we fed only one piece at a time, the results of our study are valid for comparative purposes only, and not as a productivity or utilization benchmark. The study aimed at disclosing the effect of storage, tree part and piece size on chipper performance, and therefore each piece had to be treated in isolation. These effects are indeed strong, and sound practice generally aims at offsetting them — in this specific case, simply by feeding more tops at one time. Logically, an experiment that aims at pinpointing specific effects, cannot adopt a practice devised to offset them. Single-piece feeding emphasizes the effect of piece size on chipper productivity, which is well known and has been reported in previous studies In any case, the experiment suggests that decay was much more severe for tops, than for stems. That is suggested by several elements, such as: the increases in the variability of power and torque requirements recorded after storage, which were larger for tops than for stems; the much larger incidence of fines in the chips produced from stored tops, compared to that found in chips produced from stored stems. A larger surface-to-volume ratio and a higher content of live tissue may explain the increased vulnerability of tops, compared with stems. There are several ways to explain why fuel consumption did not react to any of the tested variables, including storage. The easiest one is by assuming that any reductions in productivity were offset by similar reductions of power and torque requirements. Such an assumption is supported by the fact that productivity and power/torque requirements decreased in the same proportions, between 20 and 30%. On the other hand, one may postulate that the fuel measurement method used in this study was not accurate enough to detect eventual differences, especially when used on relatively small work bouts. Therefore, any inferences made about fuel consumption effects must be considered as suggestive, not conclusive. The results obtained in this study are valid for visibly decayed wood only, and they depend on the poor storage properties of poplar wood and on the long duration of the storage period. A shorter storage and/or a different species may produce completely different results, because the wood may dry, get harder and experience little or no decay. In that case, one may expect completely different effects, especially for what concerns power and torque requirements, which may grow rather than drop. However, any such assumptions will need to be tested with further studies. Long-term storage of uncomminuted poplar wood may result in a significant reduction of both machine productivity and product quality. After prolonged storage, the same raw material will yield smaller chips than it did before storage, producing an excessively large amount of fines. Chips produced after storage may not meet the quality specifications set by current international standards, despite the higher tolerance of these standards compared with the old ones. Therefore, uncomminuted storage may not offer substantial benefits over the storage of chips, if the storage period exceeds few months and the wood species is not durable enough, as in the case of poplar. When dealing with non-durable species, storage cannot be extended for too long, regardless of product type — i.e. uncomminuted wood or chips. Further studies should address the effect of storage on more durable species, or on the same species over a shorter time. In that case, the wood might get drier and harder, and the chipper might be faced with different challenges than observed in this study.