Intensive pig farming is a relevant economic activity in Mediterranean areas, which generates large amounts of pig slurry (PS) as a by-product. Pig slurry represents a valuable resource for low-fertility Mediterranean soils, capable of supplying organic matter and plant nutrients, particularly N. The cumulative and residual effects of PS on winter barley (Hordeum vulgare L.) yield and N use efficiency were investigated in a seven-year field experiment under semiarid Mediterranean conditions. Treatments included five rates of PS ranging from 30 to 150m3
                     ha−1 applied either every year or only once at the beginning of the experiment, an annual mineral N fertilization (traditional in the study area), and a control with no fertilization. Plant-available N content in soils after harvest increased with the annual application of PS with respect to the mineral fertilization and the control treatment, especially in dry years. Yearly variations in water availability also shaped the response of barley to PS fertilization. In general, the annual application of PS affected positively grain yield and biomass production. Residual effects were evident for the second and third barley crop. Cumulative N uptake by the barley crop increased with increasing the rate of PS (up to 120tha−1), while N use efficiency decreased, which suggested an increasing risk of leaching and contamination of ground water. As a whole, our data indicate that the annual application of 30m3
                     ha−1 of PS (equivalent to an average of 67kgNha−1) may result in barley yields similar to those obtained with the traditional mineral fertilization, while safely adhering to European regulations for the use of N in agriculture. The application of PS at rates higher than 60m3
                     ha−1 may result in better yields, but also in significantly lower N use efficiency and a higher potential environmental impact.Intensive pig farming has developed significantly in Spain in the last decades. According to current data ( The application of PS to agricultural soils has the benefit of providing organic matter (OM) and plant nutrients, especially N ( Plant-available N in soils fertilized with mineral and organic fertilizers can differ markedly ( A number of studies in the literature have evaluated the effects of PS on crops ( In this work, a seven-year field experiment was used with the aim of evaluating the response of winter barley ( A field plot experiment was conducted on rain-fed winter barley (var. Reinette) over seven seasons from 1997–1998 to 2003–2004 in the experimental farm “La Higueruela” of the Spanish National Research Council (CSIC), located in Santa Olalla, Toledo province, Spain. The site is characterized by a continental semiarid climate with an annual rainfall of 487 At the beginning of the first season (mid-October, 1997), plots (10 The soil of the experiment was classified as Typic Haploxeralf ( The pig slurry was collected every year from a pig-breeding farm which employed a closed-cycle production system. The slurry in the storage pit was stirred the day of application and pumped to a tanker equipped with a splash plate. The PS was applied by surface spreading and immediately incorporated by disking into the top 15 Every year in late June (from 1998 to 2004), soon after grain maturity was reached, the above-ground barley biomass (AGB) of six 0.5-m-long rows, equivalent to an area of 0.45 Soon after harvest, soil samples were prepared by mixing ten surface (0–15 Nitrogen uptake by the barley crop was estimated as the sum of grain plus straw N uptake, which is considered to be a good indicator of the total plant N uptake ( Cumulative N use efficiency (NUE) for each treatment ( Agronomic efficiency (AE) was calculated as Finally, to compare the N availability from the PS amendment with that from the mineral fertilization, we calculated the apparent mineral-fertilizer-N equivalents (MFE) according to Statistical calculations were performed with the SPSS 18.0 software for Windows (Statistical Product and Service Solutions Inc., Chicago, IL). Data from dependent measures (available N, grain yield, AGB, grain N content, N uptake, NUE, AE, and MFE) were subjected to one-way ANOVA within each year. Cumulative and residual PS treatments were analyzed independently and compared to C and MF treatments. The Tukey's Honestly Significant Difference (HSD) test at the 0.05 probability level was used for mean separation. In general, plant-available N contents in the top layer (0–15 Barley grain yield and AGB as affected by the different treatments are shown in In 1999, the single applications of PS did not cause significant residual effects on grain yield with respect to the C treatment. In 2000 (i.e., third crop after the PS application), however, positive residual effects were observed for rates equal or higher than 60 In general, the trends observed for AGB as affected by PS additions were similar to those observed for grain yields. From 1998 to 2000, no annual PS treatment was significantly different from MF. In 2001, only PS90 exhibited higher AGB than MF. In the last three years, PS120 and PS150 resulted in higher AGB than C and MF. With respect to C, some significant positive effects of the single applications of PS were observed on the AGB harvested in 1999 and 2000. Cumulative grain yield and AGB production after the seven years of experiment are shown in In general, N content of grain and N uptake by the plants were similar or higher for the annual PS treatments than for MF and C, and tended to increase with increasing the rate of PS ( Highly significant positive linear relationships between the cumulative N uptake by the barley crops harvested since 1998 until 2004 and the cumulative N applied were found for MF and especially for the PS treatments ( The NUE values of MF increased from 67% in 1998 to about 90% in 1999 and 2000, and then decreased steadily to 40% in 2004 ( The values of AE for the MF treatment increased markedly from 1998 to 2000, and then gradually decreased ( In general, the MFE values tended to increase with increasing rate of PS annually applied up to 120 Continuous cropping caused plant-available N to decrease over the years in the C and MF soils, but not in the soils amended annually with high rates of PS. Differences between the PS and the MF and C treatments in N accumulation in soil increased with increasing the PS rate and appeared to be more evident in dry seasons, probably due to water-limited processes of N losses by leaching and N uptake by the crop ( In general, barley response in terms of grain yield, biomass production, and grain N content was positively affected by the annual application of PS. In agreement with In general agreement with previous results ( The crop response to PS was found to be affected by the temperature and precipitation distribution during the crop season. When temperature and precipitation distribution was adequate for crop development, differences in crop response between PS treatments and C and MF treatments were not as evident as in years with unfavorable conditions. When water supply is adequate at the end of the winter, high levels of N can over-stimulate biomass production and favor cereal tillering ( In 2003, C, MF, and the residual PS treatments exhibited high weed (mainly The results obtained indicated that cumulative N applied with the mineral fertilizer and PS at rates of 30 and 60 In our study, the mineral N content measured in the soils amended annually with high PS rates after seven barley crops was relatively low. This suggests that relatively large amounts of the mineral N applied with PS not taken up by the crops were immobilized by soil microorganisms and/or lost by volatilization and leaching processes. Annual application of high rates of PS was found to stimulate soil OM mineralization processes in the experiment examined in this study ( Consistently with the results obtained in this work, In conclusion, our data indicate that the annual application of 30 We thank Laura Barrios for helping with statistical analyses. This work was supported by the Department of Agriculture and Environment of the Comunidad Autónoma de Castilla-La Mancha. D. Hernández is a researcher of the CSIC JAE-DOC program, co-funded by the