Patients with complete avulsion of the palate may require extensive surgical and prosthodontic rehabilitation. The prosthesis should replace not only missing teeth but also lost soft tissues and bone, including the hard palate, residual alveolar ridges, and in some situations, the soft palate. This clinical report describes the prosthetic rehabilitation, after appropriate surgical options had been exhausted, of a patient with bilateral traumatic avulsion of the maxilla. (J Prosthet Dent 2002;88:362-6.)Fractures of the middle third of the facial skeleton extend downward from the frontal bone to the level of the maxillary teeth or, if the patient is edentulous, to the maxillary alveolus. Patients with acquired maxillary defects usually can be restored to close to normal function and appearance; they differ from patients with congenital maxillary defects only in the abrupt alteration in the physiological processes associated with surgical/traumatic resection of the maxilla. The palate is composed of the maxillary and palatine bony plates. Anteriorly, the median nasal process (premaxilla) carries the incisor teeth, whereas laterally the maxillary alveolar process can be observed with the remaining maxillary teeth. The soft palate attaches to the posterior rim of the hard palate. Superior to the palate is the nasal cavity medially and the maxillary sinuses laterally. Posterolaterally, the pterygoid plates and the pterygomaxillary spaces are found. Lack of a hard palate may result in speech and masticatory difficulties for the patient. The tongue is unable to make contact with a solid surface during these functions, and patients exhibit hypernasal, often unintelligible speech that may become a source of frustration for them. Similarly, the tongue cannot compress a bolus of food against the palate before the patient swallows, making eating and drinking impossible. If there is an orosinus or oronasal communication present, patients may experience nasal regurgitation of food and fluids, Restoration of a dentition with bilateral loss of the maxilla involves numerous difficulties for the prosthodontist. The prosthesis should replace not only the missing teeth but also lost soft tissues and bone, including the hard palate, alveolar ridges, and in some situations, the soft palate. A bony base to support the prosthesis is lacking, whereas the lost residual alveolar ridges, palatal vault, posterior palatal seal area, and buccal and labial sulci compromise retention. Added complications are that the remaining palatal tissues are often scarred, tense, and sensitive, whereas scar tissue in the lips and cheeks may contract and exert strong dislodging forces. This clinical report describes the challenges encountered in the prosthetic rehabilitation of a patient with bilateral traumatic avulsion of the maxilla. The treatment approach is outlined. Modifications of the basic technique have been adapted and used for similar treatments. The prosthesis used to restore the bony maxilla was basically a covering plate; there was very little movement of the tissues bordering the defect. In contrast, obturators fabricated for patients with soft palate defects must function in concert with peripheral tissues, displaying considerable movement; rarely are speech and deglutition restored to normal. In 1980, a 15-year-old girl was involved in a go-cart accident that resulted in bilateral loss of the maxilla at a Le Fort I level, Intraoral examination revealed the absence of the palatal vault, maxillary teeth, and residual alveolar ridges. The roof of the patient's mouth was lined with a skin graft and had openings into the maxillary sinus (approximately 0.5 × 1.0 cm in diameter) on either side (Fig. 1). Because of the missing palate, the patient was unable to speak clearly and had difficulty swallowing. In addition, the maxillary lip had lost support and was depressed into the defect area. The mandible was overclosed, resulting in a nose-to-chin deformity. The right side of the patient's face was paralyzed as a result of severing of the facial nerve at the time of the accident. This had caused her right eye to turn inward, with resulting diplopia. The right eyelids could not be closed voluntarily and the eye was red, dry, and irritated. The right side of the patient's mandibular lip also was incompetent, allowing saliva to drool from the corner of her mouth. The patient was despondent over her inability to communicate, emotionally disturbed by her appearance, and anxious to have her dentition restored and the nasogastric feeding tube removed. To assist with nutrition, she was provided with a large syringe and instructed to attempt to inject liquid food toward the back of her mouth. This method proved satisfactory, and the feeding tube was removed. Prosthetic rehabilitation was delayed for 8 weeks after trauma to allow the tissues to heal. In the interim, the patient was referred to an ophthalmic surgeon for investigation of the rotated eye and a physiotherapist for stimulation exercises on the right side of her face. During this time, the skin-grafted tissue in the palate healed and became firm enough for use as a denture support area. Many difficulties were encountered in attempts to restore the dentition, including lack of a firm, immobile bony basal seat for denture support; no ridges or remaining teeth to help retain a prosthesis; no indication of the level of the original palate; no remaining residual alveolar ridges to indicate lateral orientation for tooth placement; loss of the preexisting jaw relationship; scar tissue on the superior aspect of the oronasal defect and in the buccal and labial regions that could dislodge a prosthesis; and facial paralysis that permitted the unopposed muscles on the unaffected side to exert an abnormal pull on the paralyzed side, which compounded the aforementioned difficulties. After the maxillary orosinus communications were packed with cotton wool to prevent impression material from entering the maxillary sinuses, an initial impression of the palate was recorded in modeling plastic impression compound (Kerr, Romulus, Mich.). This impression was used to fabricate a thin acrylic resin obturator record base. On delivery, retention and stability were poor, and so the obturator record base was lined with a functional impression material (Visco-gel; Dentsply DeTrey, Wetbridge, Surrey, United Kingdom) that was allowed to extend approximately 6 mm into the 2 small oronasal openings (Fig. 2). Because none of the usual biometric guides (such as arch form and position, residual alveolar ridges, incisive papilla, rugae, and maxillary tuberosities) were present to help determine tooth positioning, Warm modeling plastic impression compound was placed over the posterior ridge areas, and the patient was asked to performed mouth movements such as sucking and swallowing. The molded rims were used to record the occlusal plane, occlusal vertical dimension, and centric relation (Fig. 4). In an attempt to improve retention and comfort, the first prosthesis was completed with a heat-polymerized silicone resilient lining material on the fitting surface (Molloplast-B; Molloplast Regneri GmbH and Co, Karlsruhel, Germany). This lining irritated the skin-grafted tissues and resulted in abrasion with candidal superinfection. The soft liner was replaced with hard acrylic resin, which the patient found more comfortable and easier to clean (Fig. 5). The patient adapted well to her prosthesis and perceived that her speech had returned to near normal. She reported good masticatory ability, although she modified her diet to exclude foods that were difficult to chew or that adhered to the denture teeth. The patient noted that small amounts of foods invariably collected under the prosthesis and entered the oronasal communications. This led her to avoid spicy foods, because they caused severe irritation of the sinus mucosa. Because the prosthesis was opposed by natural dentition, the acrylic resin posterior teeth became worn relatively quickly. Gold occlusal surfaces were placed on the denture teeth in an attempt to prevent this problem. The patient was not happy with the resulting esthetics, so the gold was removed, and a decision was made to replace the posterior teeth when needed. The patient's facial paralysis improved slightly over the subsequent months. Her eyelids regained movement, but the globe did not correct itself and had to be surgically realigned. The lower third of the patient's face remained permanently paralyzed (Fig. 6, In the treatment reported, where the original level of the palate had been obliterated, palatograms were an invaluable aid in establishing the new palatal level and vault shape. Similarly, when the artificial teeth were arranged, normal biometric guides were absent, Hard acrylic resin may create a problem with nasal tissues through irritation of the fragile mucosa lining the turbinates and sinuses. Lining the prosthesis with a soft silicone material has been suggested. Oroantral communications can be a source of discomfort because of food and fluids entering the sinus cavities, thereby predisposing patients to sinusitis and middle ear infections. Whenever possible, oronasal communications should be considered for surgical closure. Because they provided the only means of retention for the prosthesis described in this report, the oronasal communications were purposely kept patent by the acrylic resin extensions of the denture. This form of retention, though unconventional, can be effective and should be considered for similarly impaired patients when conventional forms of retention, including osseointegrated implants, are not a treatment option. When surgical reconstruction of the maxilla is delayed, contraindicated, declined by the patient, or not possible, prosthetic obturation remains the treatment of choice. This clinical report described the prosthetic rehabilitation of a patient with bilateral traumatic avulsion of the maxilla. The patient adapted well to her prosthesis and reported improvements in both speech and mastication with its use. 