A method for the preparation of peanut-shaped nanoribbon bundle superstructures of malachite (Cu2(OH)2CO3) has been developed. The preparation involved thermal decomposition of urea and homogenous precipitation of copper acetate in the absence of any external inorganic additives or structure-directing organic templates. Copper oxide with similar morphology could be easily formed by a simple thermal treatment of the peanut-shaped malachite bundles in air. This study provides a new strategy for the preparation of inorganic materials with bioinspired morphology.The synthesis of inorganic crystals or hybrid inorganic/organic materials with specific size and morphology has been a focus of recent interest. These new materials have potential applications in various fields such as catalysis, medicine, electronics, ceramics, pigments, and cosmetics Hierarchical morphologies ranging over nano- to macroscale length are essentially responsible for the appearance of biominerals produced by living systems Malachite is a natural mineral commonly used in jewelry. It is also used as a precursor to prepare specific nanostructured CuO which is an important industrial catalyst for selective catalytic reduction of NO The peanut-shaped malachite was obtained as follows: In a 100 XRD patterns were recorded using a Bruker D8 Advance XRD diffractometer equipped with a Göbel mirror, using Cu-Kα radiation. Scanning electron microscopy (SEM) measurements were performed using a LEO 1450VP SEM operating at 20 Transmission electron microscopy (TEM) study was carried out on a Philips CM-120 electron microscopy instrument. The samples for TEM were prepared by dispersing the final powders in ethanol; the dispersion was then dropped on carbon–copper grids. It is well known that the decomposition of urea at 80°C will produce carbonate anions and hydroxide anions which form precipitates with copper ions When copper nitrate, instead of copper acetate, was used as the copper source, peanut-shaped bundle superstructures with similar morphology could still be obtained ( Previously, peanut-like hematite (a-Fe The biomimetic growth and self-assembly of needle-shaped fluorapatite prisms lead to peanut-shaped aggregates in collagen/gelatin matrixes. The formation of the self-assembled fluorapatite aggregates may be induced by intrinsic electric fields Thermal decomposition of the malachite sample in air leads to the formation of peanut-shaped copper oxide ( In this study, peanut-shaped malachite nanoribbon bundle superstructures were obtained through a simple homogeneous precipitation reaction. Copper oxide with similar morphology can be formed by the thermal decomposition of malachite materials. This study demonstrates that it is not absolutely necessary to use a template or directing agent for morphosynthesis of unusual inorganic superstructures. The work described in this paper was partially supported by a grant from the Research Grants Council of the Hong Kong Special Administrative Region, China (Project No. CUHK 4027/02P).