Understanding of the interactions between iron oxides and flotation reagents is important both for flotation and agglomeration of iron ore. Model systems comprising synthetic iron oxides and pure chemical reagents are commonly applied in experimental work in order to obtain high quality data and to ease the interpretation of the empirical data. Whether the results obtained using model systems are valid for iron ore minerals and commercial reagents is a question seldom addressed in the literature. It is shown in this work that previously reported results obtained from a model system, concerning adsorption of a carboxylate surfactant and sodium metasilicate onto synthetic magnetite nanoparticles, as obtained by in situ ATR-FTIR spectroscopy and contact angle measurements, are applicable to adsorption of flotation reagents on magnetite concentrate. Additionally, the problem of restoring magnetite wetting after flotation is addressed since good wetting of a magnetite concentrate is required to produce iron ore pellets by wet agglomeration. The results from the present work indicate that the wettability of both synthetic magnetite coated with surfactant and magnetite concentrate after flotation can be improved by adsorbing a hydrophilizing agent such as silicate or polyacrylate.Interfacial phenomena such as adsorption at the solid/liquid interface and wetting are important for several mineral processing operations including desliming, flocculation, flotation and agglomeration. Since most of the minerals are not transparent for infrared radiation, ATR elements coated with thin films of mineral particles are commonly applied in the adsorption studies by ATR-FTIR spectroscopy ( In our previous work ( The interactions between iron oxides and flotation reagents are important, not only for the performance in flotation of apatite from magnetite, but also for the subsequent agglomeration of magnetite concentrate to produce iron ore pellets. Reduced wetting of the magnetite concentrate due to adsorption of a flotation collector results in lower pellet strength ( The scope of the present work was to characterise the interfacial properties of natural magnetite particles cleaned by magnetic separation and flotation and to compare with the properties of the synthetic magnetite nanoparticles used in our previous experimental work, especially to test whether the conclusions drawn regarding adsorption behaviour and wettability of synthetic magnetite are valid for mineral particles. Whereas this aspect is seldom addressed in the literature, the difference in interfacial properties of synthetic and natural materials is an important issue to consider when substituting synthetic particles for their mineral analogue in experimental work. Magnetite nanocrystals were synthesized and purified according to the procedure described previously ( Magnetite pellet concentrate after flotation and magnetic separation from the pelletizing plant in Kiruna, Sweden was provided by LKAB. The concentrate had been stored at ambient conditions for more than 2 Flotation collector Atrac 1563 (Akzo Nobel) and dispersant/depressant water glass were provided by LKAB, Sweden. Water glass is an aqueous solution of sodium silicate, in this case with a SiO Flotation collector Atrac 1563 has a complex chemical composition: 50–100% ethoxylated tall oil ester of maleic acid, and 1–5% maleic anhydride (Akzo Nobel material safety data sheet). Since exact composition and chemical structure of Atrac 1563 were not specified by the supplier, dodecyloxyethoxyethoxyethoxyethyl maleate (Sigma–Aldrich) was used as a model flotation collector to ease the interpretation of the spectroscopic data. Calcium chloride (CaCl Dispex A40 and Dispex N40 (ammonium and sodium polyacrylate, respectively, BASF) with the average molecular weight of 4000 were used for surface modification of magnetite after surfactant adsorption. All aqueous solutions were prepared using distilled water. Distilled water for the spectroscopic and contact angle experiments was degassed under vacuum to minimise the amount of dissolved gases. The pH of the working solutions was adjusted using aqueous solutions of sodium hydroxide (NaOH, pro analysi, Merck) and hydrochloric acid (HCl, 37%, pro analysi, Merck). XRD patterns of both synthetic and natural magnetite particles were collected with a Siemens D5000 diffractometer running in Bragg–Brentano geometry using Cu Kα radiation. The morphology of synthetic and natural magnetite particles without any coating was investigated with an FEI Magellan 400 field emission extreme high resolution scanning electron microscope (XHR-SEM) using an accelerating voltage of 1 Chemical analysis of the natural magnetite particles in the size range from 0.22 to 8 Specific surface area of synthetic magnetite particles was estimated using the BET method from nitrogen adsorption data recorded at liquid nitrogen temperature using a Micrometrics ASAP 2010 gas adsorption analyser. Degassing was performed by evacuating the sample at 130 The zeta-potential of both synthetic and natural magnetite at different pH was determined by electrophoresis using a ZetaCompact instrument equipped with a charge-coupled device (CCD) tracking camera. The electrophoretic mobility data was further processed by the Zeta4 software applying the Smoluchowski equation. The zeta-potential was calculated as an average of three replicates. The natural magnetite sample for the zeta-potential measurements was collected in the form of a slurry after flotation at the LKAB concentration plant in Kiruna, Sweden. Due to the particle size limitations of the measuring technique, the zeta-potential was measured using the particles with a size of 0.2–8 Process water used in the zeta-potential measurements on the synthetic magnetite was obtained from the filtration step at the LKAB concentration plant in Kiruna, Sweden. The process water was filtered through a cellulose filter (Millipore, 0.22 The static sessile drop method was used to determine the contact angle of the synthetic magnetite nanoparticles. A thin film of synthetic magnetite was produced on a substrate by spreading 0.5 The advancing contact angle of the natural magnetite particles was determined by the Washburn method using a Krüss K100 force tensiometer. Liquid sorption by the magnetite powder was recorded as a function of immersion time and Krüss LabDesk 3.1 software was used to calculate the advancing contact angle applying the Washburn equation. First, the capillary constant of the Washburn equation was estimated for each sample using To investigate the effect of different reagents on the wettability of the natural magnetite particles, batch adsorption was performed using suspensions containing 10 To investigate the effect of calcium ions and water glass on collector adsorption onto the natural magnetite particles, magnetite powder was preconditioned for 1 To investigate the effect of sodium polyacrylate and water glass on the wettability of flotated magnetite concentrate, as-received magnetite concentrate was treated with these reagents for 1 Infrared spectra were recorded using a Bruker IFS 66v/S spectrometer equipped with a deuterated triglycine sulphate (DTGS) detector and a liquid nitrogen cooled mercury–cadmium–telluride (MCT) detector. Magnetite coated ZnSe ATR crystals (Crystran Ltd.) in the form of a trapeze with 45° cut edges and dimensions of 50 The incidence angle of the infrared beam was set to 45°. Both single beam background and sample spectra were obtained by averaging 500 scans at a resolution of 4 XRD patterns presented in  The specific surface area of synthetic magnetite determined from nitrogen adsorption data was about 90 Regarding the contact angle of synthetic and natural magnetite particles, different measuring techniques had to be used due to the difference in the particles’ size. The static sessile drop method is suitable for measuring the contact angle of colloid particles (like synthetic magnetite nanoparticles used in this work), providing that a closely packed layer of particles can be formed ( The contact angle of natural mineral powders is commonly estimated by the Washburn method. In this method, packing of particles is also important since it may affect the penetration rate of the wetting liquid and thus the measured value of the contact angle For the natural magnetite particles used in this work, the contact angle was estimated to be 50–60°, which is similar to previously reported values. A contact angle of 72–75° (  However, the zeta potential of the 0.22–8 To test the first hypothesis, the zeta-potential was measured on the synthetic magnetite particles dispersed in the process water from the LKAB concentrating plant in Kiruna, Sweden (open diamonds in The curves for the iron ore concentrate after flotation and the synthetic magnetite in the process water are fairly similar and characterised by a weakly negative zeta-potential almost in the whole pH range with an increase in the zeta-potential at highly alkaline pH. These results suggest that the dissolved species present in the process water can have a significant effect on the zeta-potential of magnetite, in concert with the results reported previously ( The decrease of the zeta-potential of the magnetite particles in the process water at pH To determine whether the natural magnetite particles used in the zeta-potential measurements contained any mineral impurities, the particles of the 0.22–8 Careful analysis of the ATR-FTIR spectra of model compounds and commercial flotation reagents can provide important information about their chemical structure and adsorption mechanisms.  In aqueous solutions at pH 8.5, the carboxylic acid groups in Atrac 1563 and the maleic acid ester become deprotonated forming a negatively charged carboxylate ion as indicated by the presence of the symmetric ( For the adsorption of maleic acid on hematite, two co-existing surface complexes were reported ( Additionally, ester carbonyls present in the collectors could contribute to their adsorption on the magnetite surface, as discussed elsewhere ( Thereby, despite the difference in the structure of the head groups, similar adsorption mechanism was observed for both collectors justifying the usage of the maleic acid ester as a model compound for studies of the adsorption behaviour of commercial collectors such as Atrac 1563.  At this pH, the most pronounced band in the infrared spectrum is located at 1020 Although the time of adsorption was higher for sodium metasilicate, greater absorption intensity is observed for water glass due to a larger amount of magnetite used in the adsorption experiment with water glass. According to previous results ( The effect of calcium ions and sodium metasilicate on the adsorption of the model collector on synthetic magnetite was investigated in our previous work ( This conclusion was confirmed by contact angle measurements (see Further, it was investigated whether the conclusions regarding the effect of calcium and silicate on collector adsorption onto synthetic magnetite were applicable to natural magnetite particles. Adsorption of Atrac 1563 and water glass on magnetite concentrate was performed in the presence and absence of calcium ions and the contact angle of the concentrate was measured by the Washburn method, see In the absence of calcium ions, the contact angle did not change upon collector adsorption indicating that no or very little adsorption took place on magnetite concentrate pre-treated with water glass. However, collector adsorption in the presence of calcium ions resulted in an increased contact angle of magnetite concentrate, despite the pre-treatment with water glass, due to the activation of the magnetite surface for collector adsorption by calcium ions, in accordance with conclusions drawn from spectroscopy data and reported previously ( In order to improve the wettability of the flotated magnetite concentrate prior to agglomeration, the effect of two hydrophilizing agents on the contact angle of synthetic magnetite coated with the model collector or Atrac 1563 was investigated. When a magnetite film treated with a collector was subjected to conditioning with 4 Conditioning with ammonium polyacrylate was performed by adding the polymer to a solution already containing calcium chloride, sodium metasilicate and a collector (either Atrac 1563 or the model collector) implying that the desorption of the collector due to the change of concentration could not take place. As a result of the treatment, the contact angle of the magnetite film decreased from 44 To verify that silicate and polyacrylate could be used for improving magnetite wettability after flotation, adsorption of these compounds was performed on flotated magnetite concentrate at pH 9 and the contact angle of the magnetite concentrate was measured using the Washburn method.  A contact angle of 57 Treatment with water glass clearly decreased the contact angle of the magnetite concentrate, and the hydrophilizing effect improved with increased concentration of water glass. At the highest water glass dosage (3 Sodium polyacrylate was adsorbed on the magnetite concentrate in the presence of calcium ions (4 To test the latter hypothesis, polymer adsorption on magnetite was performed at different concentrations of calcium ions keeping the concentration of the polymer constant at 0.04 When 4 An increased adsorption of polyacrylic acid on aluminium oxide in the presence of calcium ions was reported ( It is important to mention here that the decrease in the contact angle in The fact that polyacrylate improves the wettability of magnetite more efficiently in the presence of calcium ions makes it suitable for application in processes having a process water rich in calcium ions. Thereby, polyacrylate could be a good candidate for improving the wettability of magnetite after reverse flotation from calcareous gangue minerals. In spite of differences in surface properties and morphology of synthetic and natural magnetite particles, similar tendencies were observed for adsorption of calcium ions, soluble silicates, anionic carboxylate surfactants, and polyacrylate polymers on these materials, as illustrated by contact angle measurements. It was confirmed that the wettability of magnetite was reduced by collector adsorption when calcium ions were present in the system, despite pre-conditioning with water glass. Wettability of the flotated magnetite concentrate could be significantly improved by prolonged treatment with water glass or rather short conditioning with sodium polyacrylate, in agreement with the results obtained for the synthetic magnetite nanoparticles. Better wetting of the concentrate would facilitate wet agglomeration and could possibly increase the strength of iron ore pellets produced. This is a contribution by the Centre of Advanced Mining and Metallurgy (CAMM) at Luleå University of Technology, Sweden. The authors acknowledge the financial support from the Hjalmar Lundbohm Research Centre (HLRC). The Knut and Alice Wallenberg Foundation is acknowledged for financial support of the Magellan SEM instrument.