In this study, rubber compounds were produced in varying proportions of carboxylated acrylonitrile butadiene rubber (XNBR) and natural rubber (NR) and the parameters such as cure characteristics, wear behavior against various surfaces at different normal loads, and frictional works were tested. The tensile strength and dynamic co-efficient of friction of sample containing 80wt.% of XNBR was high compared to other samples by 2% and 10% respectively. The results of XNBR and NR vulcanizates under normal pressure ranging from 43 to 118kPa were reported. Based on these results the relationship between normal load and dynamic co-efficient of friction has been proposed. It was also observed that sample containing 80wt.% of XNBR exhibits lesser volume loss than compared to other samples.The simplest form of wear, which is particularly important in the friction of rigid materials, is abrasive wear and this had also been observed previously Carboxyl groups have also been introduced into rubbers in order that reactions characteristic of the carboxylic functional group might be employed to crosslink the polymer chains or attach them to other molecules or surfaces Also, NR is known to exhibit numerous outstanding properties, reinforcing fillers are necessarily added into NR in most cases in order to gain the appropriate properties for specific applications. A wide variety of particulate fillers are used in the rubber industry for various purposes, of which the most important are reinforcement, reduction in material costs and improvements in processing The mechanism of wear provides a link between the abrasion resistance of rubber and its mechanical properties, which will predict the life of a product in service, and also to develop the method of testing abrasion. The wear of rubber is a complex phenomenon depending on a combination of processes such as Mechanical, Mechano-Chemical and Thermo-Chemical. Schallamach During abrasion, ridge formation takes place on the rubber surface, which is indicative of the mechanism of wear In the present investigation, three set of rubber compounds in varying compositions of XNBR and NR in addition with filler particles were prepared. These rubber compounds were examined in a specially fabricated experimental set-up for testing the wear resistance properties under varying loads and speeds. The parameters such as influence of normal load, frictional work, cure characteristics of the rubber vulcanizates and the mechanism of wear of these tread compounds under different rocks were reported. The XNBR used was Nipol N-34 grade, of Nippon Zeon Co. Ltd., Japan. Its specific gravity is 0.98, Mooney viscosity at 100 Natural rubber (NR – RMA1X) was supplied by the Rubber Board, Kottayam, Kerala. Zinc oxide, stearic acid and anti oxidant (HQ) was supplied by Bayer (India) Ltd. Standard rubber grade aromatic oil (Elasto-710), carbon black (FEF-550), N-cyclohexyl-2-benzothiazyl sulfonamide (CBS) was purchased from the local market. The cure characteristics of the rubber compound were studied with the help of a Monsanto Oscillating Disc Rheometer (ODR – 100s), which complies with ASTM D2084-07 at 150 Vulcanized slabs were prepared by compression molding, and the dumbbell shaped specimens were punched out from a molded sheet by using ASTM Die C. The tests were done by means of a universal tensile testing machine (Hounsfield H10KS) under ambient condition (25 Five samples were tested for each set of conditions, at the same elongation rate. The values of the tensile strength, modulus at 200% elongation and elongation at break were averaged. The relative error was below 5%. The Shore A hardness was measured followed by ASTM D2240-05. The compounding formulation for the carboxylated nitrile rubber and natural rubber blends with its various ingredients were mixed in a two roll mill at a friction ratio of 1:2 following standard mixing sequence. Du-Pont abrasion test was done by the Du-Pont Craydon type of abrasion tester for determining the abrasion resistance of compounds of vulcanized rubber recommended by the Indian Standards Institution vide IS:3400 (Part-III) – 1965. The full arrangement of the experimental set-up, preparation of rubber and rock specimen were already discussed in our earlier literature Total weight of 300 Wear studies were carried out on circular rubber discs of XNBR–NR at different normal loads using different types of rock as abrader. The abrasion was carried out at 246 The tested specimens were cut for micro graphic examination. The nature of abraded surfaces was studied using a scanning electron microscope (JSM-5800 of JEOL Co.; acceleration voltage: 20 Compounding formulations as shown in The maximum optimum cure time ( Also, some other physical properties of the prepared rubber blends have been investigated and are depicted in From the data it was found that MC-2, MC-3, have lower tensile strength and percentage of elongation at break compared to MC-1. This can be explained as for MC-2 and MC-3 contains lesser amount of XNBR which causes main chain degradation, and lowers the percentage of elongation and hence tensile strength. Another factor, which may be responsible to decrease the tensile strength, is the presence of greater amount of cross-linked gel in those rubbers compared to other vulcanizates, these are not dispersed in the continuous matrix of the rubber. The mechanical property of rubber vulcanizates markedly depended on the number of conjugate double bonds and it is found for the sample ‘MC-1’. These observations suggest that 80 The tear resistance of elastomers is mainly dependent on the processes by which stress dissipation near the tip of the growing crack takes place. Several processes such as slippage or breakage of crosslink’s or chain entanglements or arresting of the growing crack by filler particles take place during the tear failure of elastomers The module of all the XNBR vulcanizates increased with increasing concentration of XNBR. This is for one or two possible reasons: The restriction of molecular chain mobility, and an increase in the cross-link density The dynamic co-efficient of friction of rubber against Du-Pont abrader is given in Studies of wear of MC-1, MC-2 and MC-3 rubber vulcanizates against hard and soft rock surfaces have been carried out at different normal loads on the experimental set-up and shown in The results of XNBR and NR vulcanizates under normal pressure ranging from 43 to 118 The following equation describes the relationship between normal load and volume loss. It is found that the values of It is also noted that with increasing of XNBR the value of The influence of frictional work on wear is shown in The co-efficient The frictional force ( The co-efficient of friction of rubber against various rock surfaces is given in These are the some pictographs of the abraded MC-1 rubber surface by different rocks. In As the modulus of NR vulcanizates is higher, the ridge spacing against the same rock is expected to be lower. Preparation of abrasion resistant tyre treads rubber with the help of an open two-roll-mixing mill, represent a novel method for making valuated rubber products. The XNBR with addition of NR obtained from this process have very good mechanical properties. The rate of wear for MC-1 rubber vulcanizates against hard and soft rock surfaces decreases with the normal load and opposite for the MC-2 and MC-3 vulcanizates. The volume loss is related to the normal load, The dynamic co-efficient of friction ( The wear rate for MC-1 vulcanizates against hard and soft rock surface decreases with the frictional work ( The ridge spacing for 80 The authors are deeply grateful to Coal India Limited, Kolkata and I-Cube Centre, Gyeongsang National University for their kind assistance. Also, special thanks to the members of this research and key laboratory of Materials Science Centre and Central Research Facility at IIT, Kharagpur, India.