Extraction kinetics of alunite in sulfuric acid and hydrochloric acid were studied in a batch reactor. The effects of reaction temperature, acid concentration, particle size, calcination temperature, calcination time and KF/Al2O3 molar ratio on the extraction process were investigated. Experimental studies were carried out in the ranges of 35–95 °C for reaction temperature, 0.25–3.0 M for sulfuric acid, 0.5–0.6 M for hydrochloric acid, 76–182 μm for average particle size, 100–900 °C for calcination temperature, 15–60 min for calcination time and 0.15–0.90 for KF/Al2O3 molar ratio. The calcination temperature was the most important parameter affecting the extraction process followed by reaction temperature, particle size and acid concentration. Others had less effect. It was determined that the extraction process is controlled by diffusion through a product layer. The activation energies of the processes were found to be 19.1 and 18.5 kJ/mol for sulfuric acid and hydrochloric acid, respectively. The apparent rate constants were similar for both acids and found to be a function of acid concentration as C
                     0.33 and particle size r
                     −0.8.Alunite is one of the minerals of the jarosite group. It is a potassium–alum occurring generally in rhombohedral and hexagonal crystals. Its chemical formula is KAl Alumina is produced from alunite by extraction with sulfuric acid according to the following method. First, alunite is calcined at about 900 °C. Thus, the aluminium sulfate in the structure is decomposed to sulfur trioxide and alumina. From the solid residue obtained after this calcination, potassium sulfate, the only soluble component may be extracted with hot water, and the insoluble residue containing alumina and silica remains. Aluminium sulfate is produced from the insoluble residue by extraction with sulfuric acid obtained through the process of calcination. Alumina is also produced by the calcination of aluminium sulfate ( Although these studies on the usage of alunite as an alternative source of alumina have been carried out, there does not exist any study on the extraction kinetics of alunite in acids in the literature. For that reason, the aim of this study was to investigate the extraction kinetics of alunite in sulfuric acid and hydrochloric acid, and to determine the effects of reaction temperature, acid concentration, particle size, calcination temperature, calcination time and KF/Al The alunite used in the study was provided from Dostel Aluminum Sulphate Ltd. in Şaphane-Kütahya, Turkey. It was crushed, ground and sieved to give (−214+149), (−149+112), (−112+80) and (−80+71) μm size fractions using ASTM standard sieves. All the extraction experiments were carried out using −149 μm (−100 mesh) size ore except the study on the effect of particle size on aluminium extraction. The chemicals used in the extraction study and in the analysis were obtained from Merck Chemical. The chemical analysis of the alunite was determined by the classical gravimetric method, in which silicates are melted with sodium carbonate. K A 5g sample was calcined at the working temperature for the desired time in Heraeus furnace, in air atmosphere at a heating rate of 10 °C/min. All test runs were done separately. Extraction experiments were carried out in duplicate on the calcined sample using 100 mL acid solution in a batch heater-jacketed reactor of 150 mL capacity. The reactor content was stirred at 1250 rpm for 300 min and 1 mL samples of solution were taken at definite time intervals and filtered. The aluminium amount in the filtrate was determined by complexometry using EDTA solution, and hemotoxylin as indicator ( The parameters used in the experiments were chosen as reaction temperature, acid concentration, particle size, calcination temperature, calcination time and KF/Al The chemical analysis and DTA of the clay used in the experiments show that it consists of alunite ( The possible chemical reactions occurring during extraction of alunite with sulfuric acid and hydrochloric acid are as follows ( The rate of a reaction between a solid and a fluid can be expressed according to the heterogeneous reaction models. The fluid–solid heterogeneous reaction process may involve the following individual steps ( Mass transfer of reactants and products between the bulk of the fluid and the external surface of the solid particle Diffusion of reactants and products within the pores of the product layer Surface chemical reaction between the reactants in the fluid and in the solid It is considered that the step with the highest resistance is the rate-controlling step. According to the steps given above a heterogeneous reaction may be controlled by the fluid film diffusion (Step 1), the product layer diffusion (Step 2), or the surface chemical reaction (Step 3). For spherical geometry, the rate equations for these three steps can be given as follows: The rate equation of product layer diffusion controlled process for disc-shaped particles is established as follows ( The apparent rate constants in Eqs. If the acid concentration and particle size are kept constant, the rate constant becomes proportional to reaction temperature and is given as follows, assuming the validity of the Arrhenius equation: Linear regression was used to calculate To determine the effect of reaction temperature on the extraction rate and activation energy Ea; alunite was calcined at 650 °C for 60 min and 800 °C for 15 min and then extracted at 35, 55 and 95 °C with 1.5 M sulfuric acid and 3.0 M hydrochloric acid with and without KF ( The effect of acid concentration on the extraction rate of calcined alunite (−149 μm) was studied using different acid concentrations at 95 °C, with and without KF. The molality of [H The effect of the particle size on the extraction rate was carried out using average particle sizes of 76, 96, 130 and 182 μm under standard extraction conditions. When the particle size increases, the extraction rate decreases due to the increasing thickness of the product layer acting as a diffusion barrier ( To investigate the effect of calcination temperature on the extraction rate, the alunite samples were calcined at 100, 400, 500, 650, 700, 800 and 900 °C for 60 min before extraction. As seen in To observe the effect of calcination time on the extraction rate, the alunite samples were calcined at 800 °C for 15, 30 and 60 min before extraction. The aluminum extraction yield decreases with increasing calcination time ( The effect of KF/Al The extraction kinetics of alunite in sulfuric acid and hydrochloric acid were investigated under pseudo-first-order conditions with a large excess of acid. It was determined graphically and statistically that the experimental data fits the heterogeneous model for product layer diffusion control with spherical particles. The extraction rate increased with increasing acid concentration and reaction temperature, and decreasing calcination time. However, the calcination temperature was the most important parameter affecting the extraction process. It was found that the alunite must be calcined at 650 °C for 60 min to obtain optimum extraction. For both acids, the aluminium extraction yield was enhanced by the addition of KF and was optimum at 0.60 KF/Al Conditions under which the maximum aluminium extraction yield was obtained were determined as follows: reaction temperature, 95 °C; 3 M H The activation energies of the extraction process were similar for both acids (19.1 and 18.5 kJ/mol). The apparent rate constants can be expressed as a function of reaction temperature, acid concentration and particle radius as