Dissolved air flotation (DAF) is a solid–liquid separation process for the removal of fine suspended material from an aqueous suspension. The basic principle underlying DAF is Henry's law, which gives the solubility of air in water. According to Henry's law, the solubility of air in water is directly proportional to its partial pressure. A supersaturated solution of water is produced using high pressure in a saturator. The bubbles are generated by the pressure release of this water stream. These bubbles attach to suspended material present in the aqueous stream, causing them to float to the surface, where they are collected as floc. DAF can be carried out by vacuum or pressurized methods. In the vacuum flotation method the water to be treated is saturated with air at atmospheric pressure. The bubbles are produced by applying a vacuum to the flotation tank, releasing the air as fine bubbles. The vacuum flotation process has several disadvantages. These are (a) the amount of air available for flotation is limited by the vacuum achievable, (b) it is a batch process, and (c) it requires special equipment to produce and to maintain high vacuum. These disadvantages limit the application of vacuum flotation and it is only used in wastewater sludge thickening. The pressure flotation process is the most widely used DAF technique. High pressure water is saturated with air. This pressurized water forms small bubbles when injected into water at atmospheric pressure. Three types of pressurization processes can be used in DAF: full flow, partial flow and recycle flow pressurization. The entire inlet stream is pressurized in full flow pressure DAF. It is commonly used when the wastewater contains large amounts of suspended solids and the pressurization process does not affect the treatment efficiency of the system. Partial flow pressurization is used where the wastewater contains moderate to low concentrations of suspended solids. In the recycle flow pressurization system, 10–25% of the clarified effluent is recycled through a pressure vessel to the flotation tank. The flocculation process in not disturbed in the recycle flow system because of intense mixing and pressurization as clear water is pumped. A recycle flow system is cost-efficient because it pressurizes only part of the water, thus requiring less compressor power. Recycle flow pressure flotation is the best-suited system for most DAF applications. DAF is an effective alternative to sedimentation. The advantages and disadvantage of DAF relative to sedimentation are as follows:  Clarification rates are higher in DAF, resulting in smaller flocculation tank volumes. More concentrated sludge solids are produced in DAF than from sedimentation. DAF uses lower amounts of coagulants and flocculent aids. Oxygenation effects in DAF reduce odour problems. DAF provides better removal of low density particles and algae, which can plug filters.  DAF processes are more costly to operate and maintain than sedimentation processes. A schematic diagram of a DAF process for wastewater treatment is shown in DAF facilities are composed of the following four principal steps: coagulation and flocculation prior to flotation bubble generation bubble–floc collision and attachment in the mixing zone rising of the bubble–floc aggregates in a flotation tank Coagulation and flocculation are often considered as a pretreatment step in DAF processes. Favourable conditions for bubble attachment to particles requires coagulation conditions that reduce particle charge and produce hydrophobic particles. Coagulant dosages and pH conditions that satisfy these criteria depend on the coagulant type and raw water characteristics, including particle concentration, hardness, and concentration and type of natural organic matter (NOM). Unlike in sedimentation, large floc particles are not needed in DAF. Flocculation tanks are designed to produce strong flocs with particle size distributions of 10–30 Small air bubbles, 100 Measurements of bubble sizes for DAF systems indicate that bubbles maintain a steady-state size range of 10–100 There are three possible mechanisms for forming aggregates of bubbles and particles: entrapment of preformed bubbles in large floc structures (floc size much larger than bubble size scale) growth of bubbles whose nuclei formed on particles or within flocs particle collision with adhesion to preformed bubbles For DAF processes, the third mechanism is the most important. Classically, the contact angle between the adsorbed bubble and particle has been used to characterize the extent of bubble–floc adhesion. Here the contact angle must be finite and large enough that the energy of adhesion of water to the solid particle is less than the energy of cohesion of water. A larger contact angle indicates both hydrophobicity and good adhesion. The magnitude of the contact angle, however, depends on the size of the bubbles and particles. A different view of particle–bubble attachment of colloidal particles by small bubbles is that a finite contact angle need not form. In this heterocoagulation model, the stability of charged particles and bubbles is described. Attachment requires reduction in electrical charge interactions and attraction by London–vander Waals forces as particles are transported to bubble surfaces. Both the contact angle and the heterocoagulation models predict experimentally observed trends that two conditions are necessary for favourable flotation: charge neutralization of the particles and production of hydrophobic particles. Bubble attachment to particles requires hydrophobic particle surfaces or hydrophobic regions on the particles. For many particles, hydrophobicity can be increased by reducing the negative charge. Other particles, such as freshly precipitated or amorphous Al(OH) Following bubble attachment and reduction in particle density, particle–bubble agglomerates rise to the surface of the flotation tank in the separation or clarification zone. The rise velocity of the particle–bubble agglomerate may be calculated using Stokes law. The design and operation of DAF facilities has largely been based on experience and results from pilot-plant studies. In recent years, a conceptual model of DAF has been developed, based on a single collector collision theory in laminar flow conditions (SCC model). A kinetic model has also been presented, based on the population balance model of bubbles and flocs in a turbulent flow condition (PBT model). For modelling purposes, DAF processes can be divided into two zones: reaction zone (regions where the saturated recycle flow is introduced) and separation zone. For the reaction zone efficiency (d Particle (floc)–bubble interception is considered to be the most relevant kinetic mechanism for DAF efficiency, depending on the floc and bubble size ( A summary of these parameters, their dependence on the system variables and desirable operational conditions is given in Assuming laminar flow conditions, the efficiency of the separation zone, Eqn DAF is best applied to remove materials that normally settle slowly, persist in remaining in suspension or have a tendency to float. Prior to the 1960s it was mainly utilized in the area of mining and metallurgical industries. Now, DAF finds numerous applications, e.g. mineral processing, water purification, wastewater treatment, waste sludge thickening, wastewater reclamation, recycled paper de-inking, and many more. It is widely used for drinking water purification in many Scandinavian countries, South Africa, the Netherlands, the UK and others. In drinking water clarification, DAF has been applied in combination with flocculation for the removal of algae and humic substances. The first water treatment plant based on the DAF process was established in South Africa in 1969. Since then it has received worldwide attention for research and development on all aspects of DAF. The first DAF plant in the USA was set up at the Millwood water treatment plant in Westchester county (35 DAF is also used in the forest industry, foodstuff industry, meat-processing industry, seafood industry, potato processing, pulp and paper industry, petroleum industry, poultry industry, producing refined sugar from raw juices, separation of grease, oil, fibres and other low density solids, chemical processing plants, storm water cleaning, and other similar industries. There is great potential for DAF. Its use has been limited due to lack of knowledge of the process by users, designers and other regulatory agencies. The design and operation of DAF methods are currently tested on empirical data and data from costly and time-consuming pilot-plant models. More information is needed on the performance, designs and costs of the DAF process. 