In this paper, we study semi-global containment control problem for a multi-agent system in the presence of multiple leader agents. We describe the dynamics of each follower agent in multi-agent system by a general discrete-time linear system subject to both actuator position and rate saturation. By using low gain approach, we construct both a linear state feedback control law and an observer-based output feedback control law for each follower agent. Under some standard assumptions, we provide a sufficient condition to guarantee that the states of follower agents converge to the convex hull formed by the leader agents asymptotically. Finally, we illustrate the theoretical results by numerical simulation results.Consensus, as a basic approach of distributed cooperated control for multi-agent systems, has drawn significant attention over past decades In Ref. In the existing literatures, only a few results have been obtained on the containment problem for multi-agent systems subject to actuator saturation In this paper, we consider semi-global containment control problem for a group of general discrete-time linear systems in the presence of actuator position and rate saturation. For each follower agent, we propose both a linear state feedback containment control algorithm and an observe-based output feedback containment control algorithm by using low gain approach. We prove that these control algorithms together solve semi-global containment control problem, where the states of all follower agents converge to the convex hull formed by the leader agents asymptotically when the communication topology among follower agents is a connected undirected graph and each leader agent is a neighbor of at least one follower agent. The contribution of this paper are two-fold. First, this paper considers the containment control problem for a group of linear systems subject to not only actuator position saturation but also actuator rate saturation, which has not been investigated in existing results on the containment control The remainder of this paper is organized as follows. In Consider a multi-agent system consisting of     There also exist Make the following standard assumptions on the dynamics of agents. All eigenvalues of The pair (A,C) is detectable.    In this paper, we use an undirected graph The neighborhood of follower agent The communication topology among agents satisfies the following assumption. The undirected graph  Considering a multi-agent system consisting of the group of follower agents For Construct an observer-based output feedback law for each agent We first solve the following algebraic Riccati equation (ARE): Now we are ready to establish the following result on semi-global containment control for multi-agent systems  Denote Denote Consider the following Lyapunov function candidate Let Let Let We first consider the case that We next consider the case that Finally, we consider the case that In conclusion, we have shown that, for all ε ∈ (0, ε*], Construct an observer for each agent  Denote Denote Denote Let Denote Consider the Lyapunov function candidate Let Let We first consider the case that We next consider the case that On the other hand, we consider the case that In conclusion, we have shown that, for all ε ∈ (0, ε*], Consider a multi-agent system consisting of 4 follower agents and 2 leader agents, described by The communication topology among agents is shown in Choose the initial values of the agents randomly as Here, we consider two different values of ε,  In this paper, we have studied semi-global containment control problem of a group of discrete-time linear systems in the presence of actuator position and rate saturation. By using low gain approach, we have constructed both a linear state feedback control law and an observer based output feedback control law for each follower agent such that, the states of follower agents converge to the convex hull formed by the leader agents asymptotically. Numerical simulation results show that, for arbitrarily large initial conditions, semi-global containment control problem can always be solved under the proposed control law by sufficiently decreasing the value of ε.