The patella usually dislocates laterally. Less commonly, intra-articular dislocation occurs about either the vertical or horizontal axis. Patellar fractures are generally transverse with varying degrees of comminution, and less frequently vertical in the sagittal plane. We present a 9-year follow-up of a previously undescribed coronal patellar fracture associated with vertical axis dislocation of the patella. The mechanism of this severe injury is described.A 14-year-old boy fell down stairs injuring his left knee. Anteroposterior and lateral plain radiographs obtained in the emergency room were interpreted as having shown no bony injury and he was discharged with a knee bandage. He re-attended 11 Under general anaesthesia, arthroscopy was first carried out using standard portals. After the evacuation of 30 Post-operatively, he was immobilised in a cylinder cast for 6 No further follow-up was available until recently at nine years post injury. He now works as a security officer and reports minimal pain in his left knee. He walks without a limp. There is mild atrophy of the left quadriceps muscles with no associated joint effusion or tenderness. His knee moves from 0° to 115° with no extension lag. Movements of the patella in the medio-lateral plane are full and painless. Up-to-date radiographs confirm sound fracture healing with no evidence of avascular necrosis. Mild to moderate patello-femoral degeneration is present with narrowing of the joint space, upper pole osteophytosis, subchondral sclerosis and cyst formation. The patella is otherwise well located ( The AO/OTA classification categorises patellar fractures into 3 types. Type A fractures are extra-articular avulsions of either upper or lower pole of the patella while type B describes partial articular vertical fractures. Depending on the degree of comminution, the complete articular type C injuries range from the simple transverse to the stellate pattern The patella usually dislocates laterally. Fractures associated with lateral patellar dislocation are avulsion of its medial border, and osteochondral fractures of the patella and lateral femoral condyle The present study purports to describe a previously undescribed pattern of fracture-dislocation of the patella. This previously unreported injury pattern represents a variant of intra-articular patellar dislocation about the vertical axis with associated coronal fracture of the patella and vertical axis rotation of the fractured articular half. It represents a severe injury, which was not immediately recognised. At 9 All authors declare they have no conflict of interest. No funding has been received for this study.