The extraction of copper from a mixture of a Cu-Ni-Co bearing sulphidic tailing and printed circuit boards was investigated by bioleaching process followed by solvent extraction of the pregnant leach solutions. Bioleaching was conducted in both batch and continuous modes in 2- and 50-L stirred tank bioreactors using a mixed culture of iron- and sulphur-oxidizing microorganisms. The results of bioleaching in three 50-L reactors showed that 92% copper, 67% zinc and 45% aluminum were extracted in a batch mode. The process was then performed in the continuous mode in which 96.8% of copper was leached with 10 days’ residence time. Afterward, the bioleach solutions containing 2.85 g/l Cu was purified by solvent extraction with LIX 984 N extractant diluted in kerosene. The effect of some critical parameters namely extraction time, pH, stirring rate, aqueous/organic phase ratio and extractant concentration on the extraction efficiency of copper was investigated. Results showed that copper can be efficiently extracted from the bioleach solution in two stages (96% extraction). The co-extraction of zinc and nickel was increased at the higher level of pH (2.5). A new flowsheet was proposed to treat both electronic wastes and sulphidic tailings.The rapid development of technology and the short life of electrical and electronic equipments (EEEs) have resulted in production of a large amount of electronic wastes with a production rate of two to three times higher than other urban wastes [ Biohydrometallurgical extraction of valuable metals from primary (ores and concentrates) and secondary (e.g. e-wastes) has many advantages, including simplicity, lower energy consumption, lower capital and operating costs, the lowest use of chemicals and ecofriendly than conventional pyrometallurgical and hydrometallurgical processes [ Some researchers employed bioleaching process to extract valuable base metals from e-wastes using an energy source for microorganisms such as ferrous iron sulfate ( Willner et al Some sulphidic tailings and low-grade sulphide ores are not economically feasible due to their low grades of valuable metals. So, this research was conducted to investigate the simultaneous extraction of valuable metals from both e-wastes and these low-grade resources. This new strategy could feasible biological extraction of e-wastes and led to enhance the concentration of the resulted PLS. So the downstream concentration and purifications processes such as solvent extraction would be more economical. In this regard, a mixture of PCBs and the Cu-Ni-Co bearing sulphidic tailing from Golgohar iron complex (Sirjan, Iran) was used to evaluate bioleaching and solvent extraction processes. Waste Printed Circuit Boards of the personal computers (WPCBs) which were manufactured during 2000 to 2011 were collected to be used during this research. After manual removing of some aluminum and capacitor and plastic pieces, the WPCBs were crushed by a shredder (Ray Machine Company in Iran) in three steps from the original size until D Because sulphur and iron oxidizer bacteria require a source of energy and just there is a small amount of iron in the PCBs, the sulphidic tailing was added to the process. A low grade Cu-Ni-Co bearing sulphidic tailing (obtained from the desulphurization plant of Golgohar Iron Complex (Sirjan, Iran)) was used as the substrate for the growth and activity of the microorganisms. According to XRD analysed of sulphidic tailing, pyrite ( A mixed culture of iron- and sulphur- oxidizing moderately thermophilic microorganisms including Bioleaching experiments were performed in 2- (batch) and 50-L (batch and continuous) stirred tank bioreactors (STBR). The Schematic sketch of the 2-L STBR was shown in To extract copper from the pregnant leach solution (PLS) which contained 2.84 g/l Cu, 15.6 g/l Fe, 110 mg/l Al, 59 mg/l Ni and 319 mg/l Zn, solvent extraction experiments were conducted with LIX 984 N extractant diluted in kerosene. These experiments were performed in a 500-ml beaker stirred with a pitched blade impeller (5 cm diameter) at 400 rpm. After each extraction test, organic and aqueous phases were transferred by a separating funnel. The effect of some critical parameters namely extraction time, pH of the aqueous feed, agitation rate and solvent concentration on the extraction efficiency of copper were investigated. Some experiments involving different A:O were performed to define the extraction isotherm. The concentration of metal ions (e.g. Cu and Fe) was analyzed by inductively coupled plasma - optical emission spectrometry (ICP-OES) (Vista Pro-Varian). Mineralogical and chemical analyses of the solid samples were carried out by X-ray diffraction (XRD) (Asenware-AW-DX300) and x-ray fluorescence (XRF) (Bruker-S4 PIONEER), respectively. pH and ORP (oxidation reduction potential) (versus an Ag/AgCl electrode) of solutions were measured by a pH meter (Elela-pHM-2000) and an ORP meter (AZ 86505), respectively. The residual of bioleaching process also analysed with SEM (scanning electron microscopy) (Philips XI30) and EDS (Energy Dispersive X-Ray Spectrometer) (Seron AIS 2300). A new scenario was proposed to extract base metals from both electronic wastes (PCBs) and sulphidic tailings, simultaneously. It has two main stages. At the first stage, both metal bearing materials were treated by bioleaching using a mixed culture of moderate thermophiles in stirred tank bioreactors. In the second stage, after solid/liquid separation, the obtained PLS was purified by solvent extraction. Base metals could be recovered from the final purified solutions from conventional Electrowinning process. The solid residues were used to extract precious metals i.e. gold and silver. In the following subsections, the results are presented and discussed. Bioleaching experiments were conducted in 2- and 50-L STBRs at 10% (w/v) pulp density, mass ratio of 4 to 1 for sulphidic tailing to PCBs at 45 °C. During the first 10 days, pH was increased which was regulated by acid to get the initial pH of 1.5. After that, pH was decreased to the end of the experiment (without acid addition). This later decrease was attributed to the production of acid by sulphur oxidizing microorganisms (Eq. 3) and decreasing the rate of acid consuming reactions or bacterial oxidation of pyrite (a major phase in the sulphidic tailing) (Eq 5). It can also be seen that, after an initial drop at the first day, ORP was slowly increased from 307 mV to 661 mV at the end of the experiment. ORP is an indicator for the ratio of ferric iron to ferrous iron according to the Nernst’ equation. The first drop could be as a result of the reduction of ferric ions, present in the inoculation solution, to leach base metals such as copper, zinc and nickel according to Eq. 8 [ As can be seen in In order to investigate the industrial potential of the new bioleaching scenario, experiments were carried out in three 50-L STBRs at the stirring rate of 190 rpm. During the experiments, the solid content was increased step-by-step in a batch mode from 2% to 10% according to the conditions of pH and ORP ( After the bioleaching process, the solid and liquid phases were separated and the solution was introduced into the solvent extraction process to extract the copper from the impure PLS. The effect of some critical parameters including, extraction time, pH of the aqueous feed, agitation rate, solvent concentration and aqueous to organic phase ratio on the copper extraction were investigated in batch tests. In order to determine efficient time for copper extraction from the PLS, experiments were carried out in 0.5, 2, 4 and 8 min with an A/O ratio of 1, stirring rate of 400 rpm, 20% and 30% (v/v) extractant at 25 °C for the initial copper concentrations of 2.85 and 12 g/l, respectively. As can be seen in In order to investigate the effect of pH on copper extraction, experiments were carried out at initial pH levels of 1.5, 2, and 2.5. As shown in As can be expected from Eq. (9), increasing pH leads to enhance the complexation of metal-extractant. However, the high concentration of iron in the bioleaching PLS (15.6 g/l Fe mainly as ferric iron) leads to precipitate ferric iron as hydroxides. The pH of final solutions with the pHs of 1.5, 2 and 2.5 were reduced to 1.15, 1.55 and 1.92, respectively. The co-extraction of other metals such as zinc and nickel were evaluated at the investigated pH range. It was found about 19% zinc and 9% nickel were transferred to the organic phase at the pH of 2.5. These extractions occupy a part of the extractant capacity and may be a reason for decreasing copper extraction at the pH of 2.5. the selectivity for copper extraction was reduced at the pH of 2.5. Therefore, the appropriate pH for the process can be regulated at 2. On the other hand, because of pH of the bioleaching solution is around 1.5–2, and the ferric iron is at a high, the increase pH to more than 2, in addition to creating a cost for the process, there is probably a risk of iron precipitation and the co precipitate of other metals which has a negative effect on the solvent extraction process due to the formation of crud. Solvent extraction of copper with aldoximes and ketoximes such as LIX 984 N is generally a mass transfer control process. So the effect of stirring rate, at 200, 400 and 600 rpm, on the extraction of copper was investigated. According to The effect of extractant concentration on the copper extraction was investigated at 10, 20 and 30% (v/v) of LIX 984 N. Experiments were carried out in the phase ratio of 1, 400 rpm stirring rate, pH of bioleaching solution (2.84 g/l Cu at pH 1.5) and 4 min. The results in By taking logarithm for both sides of Eq. At a constant pH and copper concentration, plotting log [extractant] versus log [D], gives a line with a slope of 2 (theoretical value).  In order to determine the number of extraction stages for achieving the desired copper recovery, several extraction experiments were performed at different levels of A:O phase ratio ranging from 1:5 to 5:1, at the extractant concentration of 20% (v/v), copper concentration of 2.85 g/L, the initial pH of 1.5, and 400 rpm stirring rate at 4 min. The related McCabe-Thiele diagram was represented in Finally, a new flowsheet ( The purpose of this research was to extrac copper from a mixture of PCBs and sulphidic tailings using bioleaching and solvent extraction processes. A mixed culture of iron- and sulphur- oxidizing moderately thermophilic microorganisms including A new flowsheet ( This research was supported by the