In this work, different flotation–preoxidation–cyanidation methods are considered for treating a low-grade refractory gold ore. On the one hand, the results of selective flotation show that 22% and 31.1% of total Sb and As, respectively, remained in the final tailings and only about 28% of the total Au remained for further cyanidation processes. On the other hand, in bulk method of flotation the maximum Au recovery of 90.6% achieved after 60min of flotation at the grind size with K80 of 146micron. In addition, the bulk flotation method resulted in the concentrate with low concentrations of Sb and As elements. To improve the recovery of low-grade refractory gold ores, flotation should be followed by roasting, biological, or pressure oxidation processes so that the gold could be liberated prior to cyanidation processes. It is also found that the pressure oxidation pre-treatment of the concentrates prior to cyanidation may yield high gold recoveries of over than 83%. In these processes, recoveries are controlled by the temperature and the oxygen partial pressure in the solvent. However, by utilizing the bio-oxidation technique, the oxidation of sulfur to sulfate cannot be completed and, consequently, the gold recovery may be limited to only 72.2%.In sulfidic refractory gold ores, fine gold particles may be highly disseminated and locked up in sulfide minerals such as pyrite and arsenopyrite. All the largely unoxidized ores exhibit very low gold recoveries (typically <20%) by direct cyanidation. This suggests that the primary ore, as a whole, is highly refractory in nature and will therefore have to be processed using an appropriate refractory method. Often, the gold bearing ores are refractory due to the gold grains and concentration by flotation is necessary, either followed by roasting, bacterial leaching, or pressure leaching in a way that the gold is liberated prior to cyanidation. Two basic initial approaches are available, either treating the whole ore or processing some form of concentrate into which a high proportion of the gold has been recovered. A moderately low grade of the bulk ore and the additional processing costs involved in whole ore treatment processes are most certainly not economically viable and therefore not being considered A significant proportion of the sulfidic refractory gold appears to be hosted by the arsenical pyrite, arsenopyrite and stibnite components of the ore. These minerals are amenable to recovery by flotation. Adequate recovery of these fine-grained components might be difficult to achieve, even if the grind size is relatively fine (e.g. d80 Montethe et al. examined hydrogen peroxide in the selective flotation of gold from pyrite with potassium amyl xanthatein (PAX) which showed a high selectivity for gold from pyrite at pH l0 and higher, but with a low increase of recovery Among pre-oxidation methods, acidic pressure oxidation is considered the most effective method. Typical operating conditions include temperatures from 170 to 225 Bacterial oxidation technology can be applied to refractory sulfide ores and concentrates to break down the mineral matrix and release the precious and base metals It will be necessary to undertake a series of metallurgical scoping tests to determine the nature, composition, and gold content of potential concentrates that might be produced from the ore. Therefore, it is necessary to evaluate a series of initial bench-scale metallurgical scoping tests to determine if it is possible to recover adequate properties of the refractory gold by flotation. The concentrate (bulk or sequential) from flotation stage should be further processed using pre-oxidation methods to liberate the locked gold and recover it by cyanidation. Thus, one of the aims of this study was to evaluate selective and bulk flotation pre-concentration methods to find out which of these methods could produce better concentrates for further processing stages like cyanidation. Also, two pre-oxidation methods (pressure oxidation-bio-oxidation) in acidic media were compared and subsequent cyanide leaching of the pretreated ores was investigated. A sulfidic refractory gold ore containing 2.7 A portion of the sample was submitted for mineralogical characterization. As indicated in The mineralogical sub-samples were washed and wet-screened to recover the 106–500 The bulk of the stibnite appears to be developed within transgressive late-stage veinlets where it is commonly intergrown with orpiment and/or quartz. The bulk of the stibnite is therefore also relatively coarse grained compared to the arsenical pyrite and arsenopyrite. The bulk of the stibnite should therefore be clearly librated during comminution and, if necessary, it should be possible to separate it from the arsenical pyrite–arsenopyrite–pyrite-rich concentrate by differential flotation. 1000 Selective flotation tests were conducted to selectively prefloat a realgar-orpiment concentrate to reduce the arsenic in the concentrate for further gold recovery treatment. Firstly a stibnite concentrate and secondly a bulk sulfide (pyrite) concentrate were recovered. In the realgar-orpiment pre-float only frother was added. Subsequently, lead nitrate was added to activate the stibnite and small additions of Cytec’s dithiophosphate, 3477, were applied to recover a stibnite concentrate. Finally, portions of potassium amyl xanthate (PAX) were added to recover all remaining sulfides (primarily pyrite). Conditions of the bulk flotation as a pre-floatation method is shown in  The concentrate bulk samples (20 The bulk flotation sample (500 A bio-oxidation test was performed on the bulk sulfide flotation concentrate. Samples were reground to K80 66 The aim of the selective flotation method is to minimize the amounts of As and Sb from tailings to further processing options. As it is discussed elsewhere, a significant portion of gold (24%) was recovered in the initial stage of flotation with the simple addition of a frother Since antimony causes problems in the cyanidation process, its separation from the other sulfides is desirable Results showed that using selective flotation method, only about 28% of the total Au remained for further processing (especially cyanidation). The presence of 31.1% As in the tailing showed that the removal of As by selective flotation method is not warranted. The presence of about 22.7% of Sb in tailing is the third reason for failure of the selective floatation method in pre-treating the sulfidic gold ore which was aimed at As and Sb removal to the downstream processes. As shown in the work done by authors, Bulk flotation tests were directed at maximizing gold recovery in a bulk sulfide concentrate In all bulk testworks, recovery was between 77.3% and 90.6% and grade was between 10.4 and 15.9 Pressure oxidation tests were performed on the bulk flotation concentrate. The effects of temperature, oxygen overpressure, oxidation time and regrinding were examined. The control factors and their levels used in the pre-oxidation experiments are given in The most significant parameter with regard to gold recovery was found to be temperature as shown in Results ( As can be seen from As can be seen from The cyanidation residue from POX3 was examined mineralogically. Several occurrences of fine sulfide inclusions in silicate gangue were noted. Some liberated pyrite grains were also identified with irregular grain margins. Arsenic-rich margins was analyzed on one pyrite grain by scanning electron microscope. Several jarosite occurrences were identified including a jarosite-coated pyrite grain. The presence of jarosite may account for the high lime consumption. Some additional analyses were performed on the leach residues from POX3 and POX4 ( The bio-oxidation/cyanidation experiments were carried out according to As shown in The cyanidation residue from BIOX3 was submitted for a mineralogical examination. Minor amounts of pyrite were identified; both liberated (up to 100 In selective flotation method, it would not be possible to pre-float realgar and orpiment to remove them from downstream processing, because of the presence of fine free gold particles. 22% of antimony (Sb) remained in the final tailings and produce a stibnite concentrate which was not warranted. Presence of 31.1% As in the tailing postulated that the removal of As by using selective flotation method is not warranted. In bulk flotation method, the maximum Au recovery obtained 90.6% after 60 Pressure oxidation pretreatment of the concentrates prior to cyanidation gave high gold recoveries of over than 83%. Recoveries have been shown to be very much dependent on the temperature and pressure of oxygen. In the bio-oxidation method, the oxidation of sulfur to sulfate was only 77% complete (72.2% Au overall recovery) with these sulfide levels. As a result, the gold recovery was limited to 72.2% and compared to pressure oxidation method, the bio-oxidation experiments did not yield an acceptable value. According to the results obtained in this paper, for this type of refractory gold ore, the combination of bulk flotation-pressure oxidation route is suggested as a pre-concentration process followed by cyanidation.