WC–Al2O3 composite powder potentially could be synthesized through milling of WO3–C–2Al mixture. High temperature resulted from reduction of WO3 by Al, activates the reduction reaction of WO3 by C and brings about carbon deficiency in the system which consequently causes the formation of undesirable W2C phase. Hence, addition of excess amounts of C becomes necessary. The aim of the present study has been to find out some appropriate routes for the fabrication of WC–Al2O3 composite powder from WO3–2Al–C mixtures in such a way that the formation of W2C is prevented. Results of high energy milling showed that the mode of reaction in WO3–2Al–C mixture is MSR (mechanically induced self-propagating reaction). In this system, evolution of CO gas and high value of C loss were evidences for the need of excess C. For samples produced via suggested routes, no CO evolution was observed and the amounts of total carbon were constant. These observations showed that the proposed routes have been capable of producing WC phase without the presence of W2C. Mechanism of the reactions in each route has been discussed.Tungsten carbide (WC) and/or its composites have found a wide range of applications in the production of cutting and drilling tools as well as dies and wear resistant parts. This is related to the specific properties of this compound High temperature and prolonged time are needed for the production of WC through the current commercial method (direct reaction of elemental W and C under controlled atmosphere). This causes the product to become expensive Mechanical alloying (MA) process, used initially for the production of oxide dispersion strengthened (ODS) alloys, could be employed for the fabrication of some other materials that are difficult to produce through routine processes. MA process is simple, cheap and can be performed at ambient temperature Synthesis of nano-size WC–Al Formation of W In this research work, two different milling routes have been proposed for the fabrication of WC–Al Reaction It is believed that this reaction is the sum of the reduction of WO In the present work, the heat of aluminothermic reaction was managed by performing the milling process through the following two innovative routes. In this case, milling process is started with a mixture of WO At this stage, the milling process is interrupted for 1 In this case, the reductant (2 Specifications of the starting materials are given in Samples were milled for up to 8 Milling products were examined by an X-ray diffraction instrument (XRD, Rigaku, RINT-2200/PC System) with Cu-Kα radiation. Temperature of the outside wall of each milling pot ( Although thermodynamic calculations of non-equilibrium processes such as MA The results of thermodynamic calculations for this system are shown in Since reaction Merzhanov has stated that if the value of Δ For reaction In For example, if the process is performed in four steps ( Further milling leads to the formation of WC Since an equal portion of the aluminothermic reaction is performed in each individual step, standard free energy as well as reaction heat which is released in each step is the same. Nevertheless, as the amounts of reactants (WO With regard to thermodynamic calculations for different For any With The mode of reaction would be gradual for With the assumption that the reaction heat is low enough to prevent carbon deficiency if the reaction mode is gradual, it was decided to add the necessary Al amount in four steps.  For all studied samples, type of temperature rise, gas generation state, range of  Comprehensive change in XRD pattern of a sample milled for 7 At high temperatures arising from MSR mode reaction, W At high temperature resulted from MSR mode reaction, carbon deficiency occurs which leads to the formation of W Addition of excess amounts of C is needed to compensate the carbon loss and avoid W   Rapid changes in XRD patterns together with fast increase of Comparing XRD patterns of a previously milled sample with 1 Disappearance of tungsten peaks after 480 Since XRD patterns of samples belong to Above mentioned observations show that with gradual addition of Al to the system, WO Tungsten carbide phase becomes evident after about 120 Gradual changes of XRD patterns and Absence of gas evolution indicates that there is no carbon loss and hence no carbon deficiency in the system. This fact is verified by zero value of carbon loss (see Similar to Although tungsten carbide can be synthesized by applying mechanochemical processing of the WO In WO If aluminothermic reduction and carbide formation reactions are performed separately ( Gradual addition of necessary aluminum in a number of portions ( A good agreement exists between thermodynamic calculations and experimental results. The authors are grateful for the valuable comments of Dr. J. Kano (Institute of Multidisciplinary Research for Advanced Materials, Tohoku University, Japan).