Phenolic molding compounds (PMC), also known as Bakelite™, are the first synthetic plastics ever produced. They are still in use today in electrical, household and automotive applications. However, one major drawback of PMC is their lack of recycling option. Indeed, landfilling is still the main route of disposal, which constitutes a serious environmental burden. A new alternative recycling method is the use of comminuted PMC as filler in a thermoplastic matrix, in order to improve its mechanical and thermal properties. Several key parameters of the manufactured composite structure are the fillers size distributions, their loading percentage, and the adhesion at the filler/matrix interface. These parameters are related to mechanical properties of the composites, such as tensile strength. In this work, a polypropylene matrix is filled with 20% by weight of comminuted PMC (d50 = 24 μm) functionalized with 3% by weight of PP-g-MA to improve matrix/fillers compatibility. A FE model was developed from the mechanical behavior of each component. PP matrix and PMC fillers are individually characterized from tensile tests instrumented with photomechanics for the matrix characterization and their behaviors were modelled through a set of numerical parameters (elasto-visco-plasticity with a Gurson criterion behavior for the matrix and damage elasticity for the fillers). Numerical simulations at several strain rates were conducted on representative volume element with various microstructures. Comparison between the determinist model results and the experimental data (strength, volumetric variation) shows that this type of modelling could be a predictive tool in order to design particulate composites with optimized mechanical properties. Hence, it is an adequate way to understand micromechanisms of deformation (damage, cavitation).As most thermoset materials, phenolic molding compound (PMC) wastes generate environmental problems and very few recycling solutions have been proposed for this type of material. In a previous paper, authors consider the possibility to use PMC as fillers in a polymer matrix [ The present study aims at improving the comprehension of the micromechanics of deformation involved during a tensile test, especially the inelastic volume variation. To better understand the key role of the fillers on the material response, a predictive modeling is constructed from mechanical tests performed for each of composite phase components. The Gurson-Tvergaard-Needleman (GTN) model [ The paper is structured as follows: section Phenolic Molding Compounds known as Bakelite™ used in this study was recovered from WEEE (Waste Electrical and Electronic Equipment) casing. This resin is based on phenol and formaldehyde condensation. They were identified via Fourier Transform Infrared Spectroscopy (FTIR) analysis and manually sorted from other plastic parts. It was found in a previous research that this resin was reinforced with various fillers and additives such as calcium carbonate, silica, magnesium carbonate and wood. Bakelite densities is between 1.31 and 1.39 g/L [ PMC waste is therefore transformed into usable fillers of appropriate size by comminution. The polydispersity of PMC filler size distribution was quantified by laser diffraction Particle Sizing Technique (PSD) ( A Polypropylene 576P was kindly provided by Sabic. It is a PP homopolymer with narrow molecular weight distribution and a MFI of 19 (230 °C, 2.16 kg). A Polypropylene grafted with maleic anhydride (PP-g-MA) Orevac CA100 from Arkema was also used in this study as compatibiliser. Particulates composite were prepared by extrusion. All materials were dried at 80 °C during 24h in an air circulating oven prior to compounding. A Clextral BC21 co-rotating twin screw extruder was used. The temperature was set to 220 °C at the primary feeding port, and to 210 °C at the extrusion head. A rotation speed of 250 rpm was used. An overall extrusion rate of 5 kg/h was set for all composite. PMC fillers were fed in a port located in the middle of the barrel. PP-g-MA was dry-mixed with polypropylene before processing. The extruded material was cooled in a water bath and granulated. Compounds with 20% in weight of fillers were produced. After compounding, extruded materials were dried at 80 °C during 24h in an air circulating oven. The pellets were then injection molded with a Krauss Maffei KM50-T180CX. Dog bone samples (ISO 1A according to ISO 527-2) were injected for mechanical testing. The crystallinity was measured by differential scanning calorimetry (DSC). For pure polypropylene, a crystallinity of 48% was measured. The crystallinity of composites is around 46%. In order to improve the adhesion between the filler and the matrix, 3% by weight of PP-g-MA was added into the composite. Three different formulations (PP, PP with PMC with or without PP-g-MA), presented in Uniaxial tensile tests were conducted on a Zwick TH010 universal testing machine according to the ISO 527 standard. The crosshead speed is equal to 5 and 50 mm/min (corresponding respectively to strain rates 8.10 The nominal stress is given by the following expression (eq. The optical extensometer involves a high resolution Charge-Coupled Device (CCD) camera (Redlake Megaplus II, 1920 x 1080 contiguous and square pixels, coded in 256 grey levels), set in front of the specimen, which records images during the test ( The in-plane strains The volumetric strain is defined as (eq. From (eq. As a first result, the PP matrix behaves as a damageable viscoelastic material. Its global behavior is time dependent ( The mechanical properties of Bakelite™ were analyzed through 3-points flexural tests in Zwick TH010 equipment. A load was applied on the specimen at 2 mm min Once fillers are added to PP matrix and possibly with PP-g-MA, the global shape of the stress/strain curve is unchanged. As expected, the Young's modulus is increased by the incorporation of PMC (independently of the presence of PP-g-MA) just like the associated maximum stress (for the sample with PP-g-MA). The Poisson ratio remains unchanged (see Tensile test specimens were cryo-fractured and the central zone of the samples (perpendicular to the flow direction) was observed using a Quanta SEM instrument (FEI, USA) under an accelerating voltage of 12.5 kV. As a first observation, the global dispersion into PP/PMC and PP/PMC/g-MA composites is similar ( Tensile tests were carried out by ESEM Quanta FEG 200 on rectangular shaped samples (50*10*4 mm At the beginning of the test, a first stage, corresponding to the equipment misalignment, is observed until 25s. After that, an elastic stage occurs for which no structural variation is observed. For the PP/PMC composite, structural modifications such as decohesion at the interfaces clearly appear around the apparition of the maximum stress. At the same level of stress, the interface for the PP/PMC/gMA composite seems to be stronger, since the previous observed decohesion is replaced by a breakage inside the Bakelite™ ( The literature shows an important number of constitutive models, namely “damaged model”, able to account mechanical degradation in ductile materials. Usually, these models include new internal variables and evolution laws coupled to plasticity problems. Relevant approaches are, for example, the works of Gurson [ Gurson-type approach is based on mechanics of porous media. The damage indicator, related to the degradation of the material, is the void volume fraction (i.e. the porosity) which progressively down-scale the yield surface. In the early eighties Tvergaard and Needleman [ The volume strain, usually used to quantify the porosity, is measured by some authors with SEM, wide-angle X-ray scattering (WAXS) or small-angle X-ray scattering (SAXS) [ In this damage formulation the yield criterion uses hydrostatic pressure and porosity: the criterion of plasticity and the plastic potential, depend on a macroscopic stress Effective stress The plastic flow potential is written as (eq. The viscoplastic strain is written with a Norton law: The volumetric change can therefore be divided in two parts: Lemaitre-type approach is based on continuum damage mechanics. A macroscopic damage variable The non-linear numerical simulation has been carried out using the FE software Zebulon, which has been developed at Mines Paristech [ Material parameters were identified by using an inverse method of optimization of ZeBuLON software. The method used a minimization algorithm based on that of Levenberg Marquardt leading to a set of parameters (given in As a first result, flexural tests were used for Bakelite™ mechanical properties [ For sake of simplicity, a plane stress assumption is assumed for the numerical computations. This strong hypothesis is very far from reality; nevertheless finite elements evaluations are faster in this case and a 2D microstructure enables, in a first approach, to understand micro mechanisms of deformation. The interface between matrix and fillers is assumed to be perfect and phase properties are described through the set of parameters of An example of microstructure (generated via DIGIMAT software) is given in Numerical simulations were conducted at several speeds (5 and 50 mm/min). Comparison between numerical and experiments is given in The major advantage of numerical simulations is the access to microstructural information. For example, the average stresses in both matrix and fillers and the damage area in the Bakelite™ can be computed. This latest value corresponds to the relative surface of fillers that have reached breakage ( More interesting, a higher average porosity is observed in the PP matrix as the fillers are added and as the velocity decreases (see For these two-phase composites whose softer matrix is associated with viscoplastic behavior, the matrix accommodating capacity is annihilated at high solicitation rates. This leads to greater damage in particulate reinforcements when the interface is cohesive. The particulate reinforcement acts as a fuse, thus delaying the cavitation damage of the matrix. The mechanical properties of a polypropylene based composites have been studied in this work. Instrumented (photomechanics) experiments (uniaxial tensile tests) were carried out on PP and PP filled with 20% by weight of phenolic molding compound waste powder to highlight the damage process. PP-g-MA was added as a compatibiliser. At first, global measured values (as volume variation and load during the test) lead, for the neat PP, to a set of mechanical parameters describing the GTN model that well reproduce the global stress/strain curve. Knowing the fillers mechanical properties, PP/PMC/g-MA is considered as a two phases composite as the adhesion between matrix and fillers is supposed to be perfect. A FE code is used both to predict composites behavior and to understand the damage micromechanisms involved during any during any structuraltest. It was found that bakelite can be a good candidate to reinforce polymer. As usual fillers, it improves Young's modulus and strength. Tensile tests performed with a higher strain rates velocities lead to both delay the cavitation damage of the matrix and increase the damage level of fillers. The charges concentrate then the damage limiting the cavitation which usually leads to a premature rupture of the composite.