Anionic metal complexes are very effectively bound by biomass types containing an abundance of amine groups. Readily available chitinous materials such as acid-washed Ucides shells (AWUS) sorbed well anionic gold-cyanide (Au(CN)2
                     −), selenate (SeO4
                     2−), chromate (CrO4
                     2−) and vanadate (VO4
                     3−) at low pH. Equilibrium biosorption uptakes by AWUS were up to 0.17 mmol Au/g AWUS (pH 3.4), 0.15 mmol Se/g (pH 3.0), 0.54 mmol Cr/g (pH 2.0) and 0.79 mmol V/g (pH 2.5). An increased ionic strength (IS) suppressed the primary anion uptake as chloride ions competed for biosorbent protonated sites and higher IS reduced the activity of ions in solution. The biosorption mechanism was suspected to involve electrostatic attraction.While a large portion of current research has been oriented towards the removal of heavy metal cations from aqueous solution, the importance of anions has become a growing concern in the fields of mining, metallurgical and surface finishing industries. Such important anions as chromate (CrO Chitin-containing biomaterials have been recognized as effective biosorbents for metals In this work, crab shells were thus chosen for further biosorption studies of extended anionic metal species such as gold-cyanide (Au(CN) The objective of this research was to determine the characteristics of anionic metal species biosorption with waste crab shells. Raw crab shells: Waste crab shells ( Acid-washed Solutions of anionic metal complexes of Au, Se, Cr and V were prepared by, respectively, dissolving solid NaAu(CN) Approximately 40 mg of dry AWUS material was added into 20 ml of metal solution in 150-ml Erlenmeyer flasks. The solution was gently mixed and equilibrated for 24 h at room temperature. Uptakes of metal were determined from the difference of metal concentrations in the initial and final solutions. The pH of the solutions before and during the sorption experiments was controlled with 0.1 M NaOH or HCl. The total final equilibrium metal concentration of liquid samples was determined by the ICP-AES (Thermo Jarrell Ash, Trace Scan). Metal concentration: the total metal concentration in solution was determined with a sequential inductively coupled plasma-atomic emission spectrometer (ICP-AES, Thermo Jarrell Ash, Trace Scan). Protein in Ash was determined by a standard method Minerals were analyzed by first dissolving shell ash in the 35% nitric acid solution and then measuring the elements by ICP-AES. Pigments were extracted through ethanol or acetone, and the pigment amount was assessed based on the weight difference Moisture and volatile matter were determined by the weight difference after the shell material was dried at 101–105 °C N-acetylation degree of chitin was analyzed by the ratio of N/C on the chitin extracted from All of the examined metal uptakes were strongly affected by the solution pH. The average standard deviation of pH controlled for each data point is less than ±0.1 unit. Au adsorption isotherms from Au(CN) AWUS contained 53±4% chitin, 43±3% protein, 0.2±0.1% ash and about 4±0.3% of moisture and other matters. The extracted chitin has 78±10% N-acetylation degree indicating 78% of amino groups are amide. The conjugate acid dissociation constant (p The effect of pH on Se biosorption from selenate (SeO Cr adsorption isotherms obtained with chromate (CrO Vanadium isotherms for the solution initially containing vanadate (VO The solution chemistry of vanadate (VO At pH 3.5–4.5, vanadium is in the form of the polyvanadates (V Correspondingly, it is possible that two major factors account for the high uptake of vanadium at pH 2.5. Firstly, the colloids can develop charges on their surfaces that might attract such complexes to the binding site in the same manner as the anions at pH 3.5 and 4.5. When a polyvanadate anion is sorbed, only around 10 vanadium atoms are removed from the solution, however, when a colloidal particle is sorbed, many orders of magnitude of higher amounts of vanadium are removed from solution. Secondly, the colloidal particles are much larger than anions, and it is possible that the diameter of the particle could be larger than some of the pores in the crab shells that the particle would encounter while traveling through the polymer matrix of the shells. The shells can then act as a filter as well as a sorbent, thus removing colloidal particles from the solution by trapping them inside its porous structure. The above results revealed that the optimum pH for anionic metal complex biosorption does not only depend on the dissociation constant of fully charged protonated amino groups of crab shells but also on the solution chemistry of the metal complexes. Furthermore, the obtained best uptakes of the selected metals are not quantitatively correlative to the total protein nitrogen (1.9 mmol/g), chitin amide nitrogen (2.0 mmol/g) or chitin amine nitrogen (0.6 mmol/g) in AWUS. The main functional groups for anionic metal species binding could not be ascertained from this work. Further study of the biosorption mechanism needs to be done with spectrometric analyses such as FTIR or NMR. The effect of ionic strength (IS) on the biosorption of metal complexes was studied by adjusting the IS using 0.01–0.1 M NaCl. The results showed that the uptakes of all the anionic metal complexes studied were reduced with increasing NaCl concentration Ions such as metal cations and inorganic anion species present in aqueous solution (either in free or complex forms) often display the tendency toward preferential adsorption on ionizable functional groups by affecting the activity of electrolyte ions; by affecting the competition of the electrolyte ions and adsorbing anions for available sorption sites. Ions could be bonded on the charged surface either by forming inner-sphere complexes (covalent bonding) or outer-sphere complexes (electrostatic attraction). A strong influence of ionic strength is typical for outer-sphere complexes  AWUS sorbed well anionic gold-cyanide (Au(CN) Chromate biosorption reached its best at pH 2.0 among the tested pH values with the uptake of 0.54 mmol Cr/g biomass. AWUS exhibited higher Cr uptake as compared with the Au and Se uptake. Vanadate biosorption is better at pH 2.5, where the V uptake observed was as high as 0.79 mmol V/g. Increased ionic strength greatly suppressed the primary anionic gold-cyanide, selenate and chromate uptake, and mildly so for vanadate uptake. The biosorption mechanism of the anionic metal species is suspected to involve electrostatic attraction. Special thanks to Michael Sinclair, Andrew Low, Sebastian Chabot, Elisa Navarro-Florez and Amy Tin-Pui Lam for their invaluable contribution in the experimental work, and to Dr. R.H.S.F. Vieira for the crab-shell material.