The aim of this study was to evaluate the frictional force between orthodontic brackets and archwires. The differences in magnitude of the frictional forces generated by ceramic brackets, ceramic brackets with metal reinforced slot, and stainless steel brackets in combination with stainless steel, nickel-titanium, and beta-titanium orthodontic archwires were investigated. Brackets and wire were tested with tip angulations of 0° and 10°. Friction testing was done with the Emic DL 10000 testing machine (São José do Rio Preto, PR, Brazil), and the wires were pulled from the slot brackets with a speed of 0.5 cm/min for 2 minutes. The ligation force between the bracket and the wire was 200 g. According to the data obtained, the brackets had frictional force values that were statistically significant in this progressive order: stainless steel bracket, ceramic bracket with a metal reinforced slot, and traditional ceramic bracket with a ceramic slot. The beta-titanium wire showed the highest statistically significant frictional force value, followed by the nickel-titanium and the stainless steel archwires, in decreasing order. The frictional force values were directly proportional to the angulation increase between the bracket and the wire.Ceramic brackets were introduced in orthodontics to meet increasing esthetic demands, Friction is defined as a force that delays or resists the relative motion of 2 objects in contact, and its direction is tangential to the common interface of the 2 surfaces. Under normal conditions, the frictional force is proportional to the applied load, depending on the nature of the sliding surfaces, In fixed orthodontic therapy, teeth can be moved by using either retraction archwires, involving minimal friction, or sliding mechanics, in which friction is very considerable. Friction is a factor in sliding mechanics, such as during the retraction of the teeth into an extraction area, active torque, leveling, and alignment, when the archwire must slide through the bracket slots and tubes. Clinically, when stainless steel brackets are used on posterior teeth, in combination with ceramic brackets on anterior teeth, the difference in friction between the steel and the ceramic brackets can result in faster movement of the posterior teeth; this would cause an undesired anchorage loss Therefore, to reduce the undesirable effects of frictional force, some authors suggest developing ceramic brackets with smoother slot surfaces to decrease any possible effects of static fatigue. Thus, we intended to evaluate the frictional force of ceramic brackets, ceramic brackets with metal reinforced slots, and stainless steel brackets using stainless steel, nickel-titanium, and beta-titanium orthodontic archwires, with angulations of 0° and 10° between the bracket and the wire. In this study, 30 brackets of each type were used: stainless steel brackets (Victory Series, 3M/Unitek, Monrovia, Calif), ceramic brackets with metal reinforced slot (Clarity, 3M/Unitek), and ceramic brackets (Transcend series 6000, 3M/Unitek). All brackets were .022 × .028-in, standard edgewise canines, with no built-in torque or tip ( Ninety archwire segments, with a 019 × .025-in dimension and 4.0 cm length, of each type were tested: stainless steel (Permachrome Resilient Archwire, 3M/Unitek), nickel-titanium (Nickel-Titanium Super-Elastic Archwire, 3M/Unitek), and beta-titanium (Beta III Titanium, 3M/Unitek). The wires' displacement resistance was caused by the sliding frictional force produced by the contact between the bracket and the wire surfaces. Five samples of each kind of material were randomly selected to be mechanically tested ( The bracket-wire combinations were submitted to mechanical tests with the Emic testing instrument (São José do Rio Preto, PR, Brazil), with tip angulations of 0° and 10°. Each bracket and archwire were changed after 5 tests with both angulations. A testing apparatus ( The ligature system of the wire to the bracket was standardized, so that the pressure force between the bracket and the wire was constant and equal to 200 gram force ( The ceramic bracket showed the highest frictional force value with statistical significance ( The stainless steel archwire had the lowest frictional force values with statistical significance (  However, when a 10° angulation between bracket and wire was used, other friction components were produced. In addition to the 2 friction resistances that occur when the wire is displaced from the bottom of the bracket, new friction arises when the wire touches the bracket edges (F Many variables can affect the magnitude of the frictional force between the bracket and the wire: (1) archwire: active torque, In relation to the bracket-wire angulation, the results obtained indicated that the frictional force values were, in all combinations, directly proportional and statistically significant to the angulation increase, suggesting that this factor influences the magnitude of the friction between bracket and wire. Before the frictional resistance test, the dimensions of 21 units of each type of bracket were measured (width, height, and slot depth) with a projector profile, and the variations between brackets were evaluated. The slot depth does not seem to influence frictional resistance values; the ligation force between bracket and wire does not depend on this dimension. Although the ceramic brackets are esthetically more pleasing than the metal ones, they are bulkier and, therefore, can be uncomfortable to the patient. According to these results, in all combinations, the ceramic brackets show the highest level of friction force. They are also the largest in mesiodistal dimension and the smallest in slot height. One cause for the increase of frictional force could be that the ceramic slot is slightly shorter. Although some authors state that the frictional force does not depend on the contact area between the surfaces, Brackets and wires were submitted to electronic micrograph scanning to evaluate the surface morphology. In relation to the brackets, roughness increases in the following order: stainless steel, ceramic bracket with metal reinforced slot, and traditional ceramic, as can be seen in When orthodontic wires were submitted to electronic micrograph scanning, it was observed that the rougher surfaces, in increasing order, were stainless steel, nickel-titanium, and beta-titanium ( Some authors state that the increasing thickness of the wire produces greater frictional force values, and that rectangular wire generally shows higher values than the round wires, because there is a larger contact area between slot and wire surfaces. Before the frictional force test, the thickness and the width of the wire were measured by a digital pachymeter at 3 standard points. All the samples had the same dimensions (0.019 × 0.025 in) between the reference points. Therefore, the frictional force values were probably influenced by the surface morphology and, later, by the thickness variation, because all wires showed homogeneity in dimension and in manufacturing quality. With more flexible orthodontic wires, the frictional force magnitude could present a slight increase. Some authors justify this relationship based on the supposition that less rigid wires could cause a greater dental inclination and a larger contact area between bracket and wire. Each bracket-wire combination was submitted 5 times to the mechanical test to evaluate material wear resistance. This methodology was adopted because, in clinical conditions and during sliding mechanics, the same bracket slides on the wire, or vice versa, several times in a period determined by the treatment objectives. Some authors believe that repeated use could cause wear to the bracket or wire surface, The ligation between bracket and wire is another variable that could influence the frictional force level. Authors are unanimous in reporting that the force used through stainless steel ligature is subjective, varying according to the orthodontist, Ceramic brackets, mainly the polycrystalline ones, can be improved to decrease the frictional force by reducing the alumina particle dimensions to prevent the loosening of fragments, applying a glazed surface on the ceramic slot, inserting either a metal or a gold slot into the ceramic bracket, eliminating the flaws inherent to its size, The ceramic bracket with metal reinforced slot seems to be a promising option to lessen the clinical complications of ceramic brackets. The advantages of a stainless steel slot are to minimize the superficial friction and to help strengthen the bracket to withstand routine orthodontic torque forces. Furthermore, the bracket base also incorporates a vertical slot, designed to help create a consistent bracket failure mode during debonding. Until the use of ceramic brackets is safe and efficient, orthodontists must apply weightless and continuous forces during sliding mechanics, Because frictional force is caused by several factors, which are usually correlated and dependent, these factors can also influence and create undesirable behavior in the frictional force values. Moreover, it is difficult to compare studies, because of different methodologies; these variables can be considered as influencing factors in data registers. Intraoral variables such as saliva, plaque, acquired pellicle, corrosion, chewing, bone density, tooth number, anatomic configuration, root surface area, and occlusion were not evaluated in this study, but they can influence frictional force values. In vitro studies do not correspond to what really happens during dental movement, and, therefore, readers must be careful when evaluating the results from this research. The friction magnitude recorded is substantially different from the applied forces in clinical orthodontic movement. The values recorded should be used to compare the effects of different factors, rather than to quantify in vivo friction. Under the conditions of the experiment, it can be inferred that: The stainless steel bracket had the lowest statistically significant frictional force values ( The stainless steel archwires had the lowest statistically significant frictional force values ( The magnitude forces (gf) to displace the wires in the brackets were directly proportional and significant to the angle increase between the bracket and the wire. The values were higher in the 10° angulation between the bracket and the wire than in the 0° angulation. The ceramic bracket with metal reinforced slot had a lower frictional force value than did the traditional ceramic bracket, and it seems to be a promising alternative to solve the problem of friction. The difference in frictional force values between the ceramic bracket with metal reinforced slot and the stainless steel bracket is probably caused by the lack of a perfect adjustment and a gap between the metal slot and the ceramic bracket. Additional studies are necessary to improve the metal slot adjustment in the ceramic bracket, as well as its clinical performance, which influences the frictional resistance values. We thank 3M Unitek Corporation, Engineering Military Institute/Brazil, Metallurgical Engineering School-UFF/Brazil, and Research and Development Army Institute/Brazil for their support of this study.