Treatment of flotation slurries, waste waters containing a large amount of: solid particles, dissolved air or gas, chemicals etc. imposes centrifugal separation as one of the technically and economically acceptable solutions. There are numerous technical solutions and devices which use the centrifugal force for: separation, classification, dewatering, etc., in mineral processing, waste water treatment, etc. The separator that we hereby present, removing some of the noted deficiencies on the existing solutions, introduces improvements in the sphere of self-suction, continual discharge and product transport. It is significant that this new solution can be used for the treatment of flotation tailings containing large amounts of finest particles.
                  Displaying the innovative separator solution, the author analyses the existing theoretical separation basis and while noting certain weaknesses, forms a new approach to defining separation capacities. The theoretical and constructive innovations have been tested, using the separator prototype and displaying the acquired results.
                  The aim of the research is to acquire accurately defined data based on which not only the designer, but the user as well, would be able to choose the most suitable solution for its problem. The secondary, but not less important aim, is to respond to the requests of a potential user: “Suva Ruda”-Raška Flotation.Large amounts of mixtures: solid–liquid, solid–liquid–gaseous, and liquid–liquid, appear during and at the end of numerous technological processes in: mining, chemical, foodstuff and process industry, during the treatment of waste fluids, etc. Technological, economical and ecological requirements impose the need for extraction of useful components or for cleaning of these mixtures. Separation is one of many processes for removal of particles (solid or liquid) from multi-phase mixtures. According to the dominating force, there are four basic concepts of mechanical separation: gravity, centrifugal, impingement and filters ( The gravitational separators are used for the primary separation due to the settling velocity of the solid particles which are low, which therefore entails the need for large surfaces to settle on, long settling time, etc. Also, the final product often does not satisfy the needs of the technological approach ( The weaknesses of the gravitational separation are removed using the inertial procedures where the gravitational acceleration (g, m/s²) is interchanged with centrifugal acceleration (ω The basic advantage of centrifugal separators lies in the fact that the settling velocity, which with gravitational separators for fine (+ Impingement and filtration are the procedures used for ultra-fine separation. The weaknesses are the very small separation feed flow rate and great operative expenses. We, in this paper, display a new technical solution of the separator which will be used for the treatment of flotation slurries which contain large amounts of solid particles (− rough separation in thickeners; by applying the coagulation procedure. Particle of + The new technical solution is formed based on the following requests: The separator will be used for the secondary treatment of the slurry with solid content 100%–50 the separator should be part of the facility for the continual separation process and the transport of flotation tailing and recycled water. Additional requests: the possibility of applying the separator for the treatment of waste fluids (sewage and industrial waters) with intensive airing was set by the author with an aim to expand the sphere of application, and justify the means invested, as well as the prototype research and design. While working on the concept design and the making of the technical documentation, three prototypes have been made. Each prototype was tested in detail, and the perceived weaknesses were removed during the design and the making of the following prototype. The scope of the conducted experimental works was greater than the results given in this paper. Apart from working with flotation tailings, part of the experiment was conducted while working with waste water and waste motor oils. Results of these researches were not shown in this paper, since they are not the sphere of mineral processing. Through the patent application ( The rotor of separator consists of two parts. The lower half, of the rotor, with disk stack insert is connected to the motor via the belt drive. The insert in the rotor, with its disks, splits the working space into thinner segments in which the separation process is developing easier, i.e. achieves higher quality of finer solid particle separation. On the periphery edge, on the lower half of the rotor, are the jets used for the drainage of the separation products (tailing, sludge). The rotor drainage is controlled by opening and closing the plugs which are part of the rotor construction. The periphery edge, of the lower and upper half of rotor, and the jets, forms the impeller of the pump for tailing (slurry). The lower half is connected to the upper half of the rotor by bolts. The upper half holds the impellers of pump, for clean water, and vacuum pump. The installation of the vacuum pump, in the separator construction, is justified by the suction process facilitation, which is significant for the treatment of mixtures: solid–liquid–gaseous. The sealing, of the periphery edge of the: rotor (impeller of the slurry pump), the water pump's impeller and impeller of the vacuum pump are realized using mechanical seals. These seals are constructed so that at the same time they have the function of axial (sliding) bearings. Such technical solution, in cases of hydrodynamic swimming of the sliding rings, reduces the friction resistance. This kind of solution enables achieving of great rotation speeds, and the rotor stability is significantly improved. As a lubrication fluid, in the zone of sliding rings, water that has been acquired as separation product, is used. By introducing water in the lubrication process, the density of the slurry is controlled, prevents the pollution and reduces the separation expenses. In the field of centrifugal acceleration, The liquid fraction (water) gets caught on centripetal pump and is directed to the water pump's impeller. The easiest fraction (air) gets caught at the place closest to the rotation axis and is directed to the vacuum pump. Innovations introduced in the separator construction were as following: the periphery edge of the upper and lower half of rotor is constructed as an impeller for the pump for tailing transport; the sealing of impellers is done by mechanical seals, which are, also, axial bearings for rotator; by the water, used for lubrication and cooling in mechanical seals, we control the density of the slurry; by introducing the vacuum pump into the separator construction, suction of mixtures (solid–liquid–gaseous) is facilitated. The advantages of thus formed solutions are as following: all types of mixtures can be treated with central charging and self-suction; one engine controls the power of several sections; combining radial-axial bearings, great rotation speeds can be achieved together with excellent rotor stability. Among the weaknesses one should mention: the complex construction; expensive production and wearing of the separator elements which are in contact with the solid material. The new construction and the perceived weaknesses in the theoretical considerations, while defining the separation quality and capacity, imposed the need for reconsidering the existing theoretical basis for defining the separation capacity and quality. The acquired results of the theoretical considerations are given in this paper. The feed flow rate and the critical diameter of the particle are the two main indicators of how successful the separator construction is. A great number of researchers ( The relation between centrifugal settling velocity (c In order to estimate the separation feed flow rate in the centrifugal separator the ∑-concept ( The point of this approach is defined by the separation surface in the separator, which is equivalent to the surface of the gravitational thickener. The critical solid particle diameter (d Eqs. the speed of the mixture is equal to the rotor speed; the particle concentration is small so the settling velocity is seen as settling of unit particle in an unlimited space; the particle speed is even throughout the whole settling process; the particle movement in the gap between the disks is laminar and symmetrical. This, and the initial presumption that in the rotor 50% of the solid particles (–d The somewhat different approach to the problem, of defining the separation critical diameter, is found in ( Change of speed of particles, in a thick layer, in the direction of disks periphery is: And the particle critical diameter is: Considering the same problem, and starting with the definition for settling velocity Eq. This definition establishes a direct connection between the geometrical characteristics of the separator's rotor ( By comparing the three definitions in Eqs. The kinematic Moving practically The optimal gap size ( It is common that this gap, on industrial facilities is ( The friction coefficient (λ), for different friction pairs is given in On the exit disk edge (radius r The coefficient μ which corrects the theoretical flow, takes into consideration the material looseness (on the exit disk edge) depending on the size and the shape of the particle. This coefficient ranges from ( The prototype of the centrifugal separator used on this test facility is projected according to the project task which requests a quality treatment (reduction to the minimal solid content in water, which we return to the flotation process) of the flotation tailings in the “Suva Ruda” mine. The basic task of the test facility is ( defining the operative characteristics of: sludge, water and vacuum pump; defining feed flow rate and separation quality. According to the adopted research plan, the test facility has been formed, MM-0 Measuring the input slurry characteristics; MM-1 Determining the air content in the slurry; MM-2, MM-3, MM-4, MM-5 Measurements of the pumps operative characteristics, of the power. The slurry (flotation tailings) resulting after the treatment of lead and zinc ore is characterized by the following indicators: In order to acquire data, based on which characteristic curves could be formed, it is necessary to conduct the measurement of the following physical values: pressure, (Pa); flow (m The slurry treated in the separator is formed from material of − The air content (indissoluble) is defined on the device, MM-1, that measures the difference in fluid volumes at the atmospheric pressure and pressure of 2.5 Special attention, in this paper, has been paid in defining the working characteristics of the slurry pump, the water and vacuum pump, which are a new technical solution of the separator's construction. For defining the working curves p They are (K The flow change with the pressure change is measured using the control valve on the pressure pipeline (sludge pump and water pump). The pressure change is given on the manometer (7). The flow is defined measuring the fluid volume that flow within a time unit. This is done so, because the amount of water, flowing through the work circuit, is small considering it's a lab prototype. The measurements have been repeated several times. After data processes, which have been acquired through the measurements, The working curves p The operative characteristics of the vacuum pump, In When the separator works with the slurry, the flow measurements is done according to the volume procedure and the measurements have been repeated five times. The average flow values have been given in Graphically, these values have been shown in By analyzing the output data of the separation products, the following has been determined: for the input slurry concentration C The project task and the technological process, of the lead and zinc ore processing, doesn't define the bottom limit of the solid which can be in the return water. This experiment had difficulty in determining the limit (of the solid content) when the separation should be terminated. The basic cleaning process that takes place in one passage has been realized and the acquired results (16.96 The innovative separator solution, that we are hereby presenting, resulted from the critical view of the existing solutions, machines and devices that are used for the concentration, thickening and separation of the solid from the liquid in the mineral processing, waste water treatment, dirty oil cleaning, etc. One of the basic questions posed in this paper is: how would the introduced novelties give certain advantages, within this construction, in comparison to the existing constructions? We hereby refer to a conditional way, since the new technical solution is still in a phase of lab prototype, and any comparison to an industrial facility would be inappropriate. It is hard to find a unique criteria for a complete evaluation and ranking of the technical separator solutions and devices similar to those. According to numerous data ( We can therefore conclude: Concentrators ( Decanter centrifuges ( And the latest solutions, Centrobaric separators ( By constructing a new separator, which is suggested here, a much greater centrifugal acceleration is achieved (500–3000 Apart from constructive and technological parameters the author has paid special attention to the theoretical presumptions of defining feed flow rate and separation quality. The newly formed theoretical dependencies of the particle diameter defined in Eq. With regard to the aim, defined by the project, we are able to determine the following: The basic task, defined by the investor's requests, was to remove the largest solid content possible from the slurry (solid–liquid), so that clean water would return to the flotation cycle. The primary aim was therefore to clean the water, and to transport the resulting sludge to the tailing disposal. The solid content in the water (given through the mass concentration C During the feed flow rate of the input slurry C The remaining material is dominated by particles − After perennial work on the development of this device, and upon research and presentation of the results in this paper, we are able to emphasize two key results. The new technical solution that we are hereby presenting when compared to the existing solutions has the following advantages: the possibility of self-suction, that with the possibility of continual transport of the separation products, becomes acceptable to a great number of users; the separators in general, as well as this technical solution, have the possibility of achieving high levels of acceleration (500–30000 the facilities with these separators are of smaller dimensions, which directly influences, the amount of investments (example: the relation of thickener dimension and the separator of the same feed flow rate); the vacuum pump, which is part of the separator construction, extends the sphere of application of these separators to the treatment of mixtures: solid–liquid–gas, liquid–gas, solid–gas. This is significant for the treatment of waste waters, natural and industrial gases, etc. The model for calculating the separation capacity and quality, given in this paper, considers a great number of factors: characteristics of the treated mixture (settling velocity, viscosity, solid concentration etc.); separator construction characteristics (diameter, particle pathway length, etc.); working regime of separator (rotation speed). Introduction of such a great number of influential values into the equations Eq. In our opinion, this does not finalize work on this project. Further attention should be paid to the removal of the weakness spotted on the separator construction (mechanical seals and the device for the opening–closing of the jets), improvement of the vacuum pump construction and precise definition of its feed flow rate. Also, special attention should be paid to the separator's operation on the activities (treatment of waste waters, waste oils, etc.). The final result of these researches would be an industrial product that would be applied not only to the processing of solid minerals, but also to the processing of the oil and gas. Also, a separator of such construction could successfully be used for the treatment of waste fluids (water, oil, chemicals etc.). Whereas the sphere of application and therefore the market would greatly be expanded.  surface, m speed at a radius r, r settling velocity (gravity), m/s settling velocity (centrifugal) m/s concentration (volume fraction of solids),% concentration (mass fraction of solids),% particle size, m critical particle diameter, m gravitational acceleration, m/s factor thickness of fluid in gap (vertical), m pump head (water), m pump head (slurry), m correction factors insert length, m number of torques, rpm number of disks power (water), W power (slurry), W flow rates, m flow rate, (water) m flow rate,(slurry) m radius vector of solid particle radius vector of light and heavy product discharge, m gap thickness, m number of disk openings rotor volume, m boundary layer thickness, m dynamic water viscosity and mixture, Pas separation efficiency friction coefficient kinematic viscosity m water density, solid density, slurry density, kg/m angle speed, s disk leaning angle, (°) equivalent surface, m I give many thanks to the management boards of the “Suva Ruda” mines, as well as the Table 1-a. Slurry pump, (working fluid, water). Table 1-b. Water pump. Table 1-c. Vacuum pump (working fluid, dry air).