Biogeochemical models provide tools to describe, understand and quantify fluxes of matter through the food web or parts of it, and interactions with the atmosphere and sediments. Such models involve very many individuals of different functional groups or species and ignore differences among the individuals. The role of phytoplankton or zooplankton is reduced to state variables, which carry the summary effects for any chemical and biological transformations. Ideally, the state variables and the process rates should be well defined, observable and, within a certain range of accuracy, independently reproducible quantities. However, there are rates such as mortality, that are hard to quantify. Thus, models may contain some poorly constrained rates that are established In order to illustrate the process of model development we start with the construction of simple models that describe parts of the ecosystem. As opposed to physics, where the model equations are mathematical formulations of basic principles, the model formulations for ecosystems have to be derived from observations. Ecological principles such as the Redfield ratio ( First, we have to identify a clear goal in order to define what we wish to describe with the model. The example we are going to use in this chapter aims at the description of the seasonal cycle of phytoplankton in mid-latitudes. We wish to formulate models that help to quantify the transfer of inorganic nutrients through parts of the lower food web and to estimate changes of biomass in response to changes in external forcing. Second, we have to determine what state variables and processes must be included in the model and which mathematical formulation describes the processes. A model is characterized by the choice of state variables. The state variables are concentrations or abundance, which can be quantified by measurements. They depend usually on time and space coordinates, and their dynamics are governed by processes that are, in general, functions of space, time and other state variables specific to the system being studied. State variables consist of a numerical value and a dimension, e.g. mass per volume or number of individuals per volume. The dimension is expressed in corresponding units, such as ‘mmol We start with a sketch of a simple model of a pelagic ecosystem, which is reasonably described by the dynamics of the nutrients. Primary production driven by light generates phytoplankton biomass, which is dependent on the uptake of dissolved nutrients. A portion of the phytoplankton biomass dies and is transformed into detritus. The detritus in turn will be recycled into dissolved nutrients by mineralization processes and becomes available again for uptake by phytoplankton. This closes the cycling of material through the model food web. One of the fundamental laws which the biogeochemical models have to obey is the conservation of mass. The total mass, The use of differential equations implies that the state variables can be considered as continuous functions in time and space. Dissolved nutrients are represented as Examples for sources and sinks in natural systems are external nutrient inputs by river discharge and burial of material in sediments, respectively. The transfer term reflects the propagation of nutrients through different state variables, i.e. matter bound in the state variable with index The key problem in model building is to find adequate mathematical formulations that describe these transformations. Processes such as primary production or mineralization are complex, and their mathematical descriptions may involve substantial simplification. To illustrate the procedure, we start with the simple example of transformation processes characterized by a first-order chemical reaction, where a substrate, Adding these equations gives This expresses the conservation of mass in the absence of external sources or sinks. The integration gives The integration of This solution describes a chemical process, controlled by a constant process rate, where a substrate is completely converted into a product. The initial concentration of the product is zero and the conversion of the substrate is independent of the amount of the product. The solution is shown in Can we use such an approach to describe the phytoplankton development? Apart from the role of light, it is known that primary production depends on the availability of nutrients. We may assume that the substrate corresponds to the dissolved nutrient, The initial conditions are The result seems to be not very different from In order to circumvent this difficulty, we may try an approach where the growth rate depends explicitly on the nutrient concentration and becomes small when the nutrients are depleted. We may choose Here Estimating the involved standard integrals we obtain With The solution is shown in It is known that the rates that control primary production are not constants but depend on various factors such as light and nutrients. Thus, process rates, such as We commence with a consideration of how nutrients control the rate of phytoplankton development. Let The expression These reactions can be expressed by three-dynamical equations, which describe the changes of the concentrations, For an efficient enzyme the forward reaction will be faster than the backward process, After substitution of Comparing this with Because it is not clear whether the nutrient uptake of phytoplankton cells corresponds to such an enzyme reaction, we may prefer to assume that the growth of cells stops if the nutrients are depleted, while the growth rate is independent of the nutrient concentration at high nutrient supply. Then, we can use any reasonable mathematical expression, These function are shown in Now we can rewrite the equations in Then we find the behaviour shown in So far we have considered nutrient uptake by phytoplankton in We describe the processes by transfer terms written as Next we ‘translate’ the model structure into a set of three equations for the three state variables: The involved parameters are the maximum uptake rate for phytoplankton, There is a trivial solution, Assuming that in the course of a bloom, The dynamics of this still very simple model are illustrated in The next trophic level in the marine food web is the herbivore zooplankton which consumes phytoplankton. Thus, grazing by zooplankton is an important loss term for phytoplankton. The simplest way to include this top-down control on phytoplankton is the inclusion of the grazing effects in the phytoplankton mortality. However, the dynamical variations of zooplankton, and hence their effect on phytoplankton, can better be accounted for by means of a new state variable referring to zooplankton biomass. Phytoplankton is a limiting resource for zooplankton growth. Let where To complete the formulation of the differential In the previous section, we discussed a few aspects and process descriptions that are relevant to start ecosystem modelling. In this section, we use the findings to construct a model of a marine system. As mentioned earlier, first we have to define what we wish to describe with the model. The following discussion aims at modelling of the yearly cycle of nutrients and plankton in a simplified boxlike system that may serve as a crude first-order description of a part of a marine system, such as a sub-basin of the Baltic Sea. The model is required to simulate both phytoplankton spring blooms as well as yearly cycles of the state variables. A representation of the yearly course of chemical and biological parameters in the Baltic Sea is shown in Although the yearly cycle shown in A further important observation is that phytoplankton shows significant sinking rates, especially for diatoms. This implies that a substantial amount of the phytoplankton biomass leaves the euphotic zone and can no longer contribute to the primary production. The spring bloom is apparently more controlled by sinking than by zooplankton grazing; (see, e.g., Marginal and semi-enclosed seas, such as the Baltic, are subject to a substantial external nutrient supply from river loads and atmospheric deposition. Hence, such systems are not closed, but directly influenced by material fluxes from the corresponding drainage areas and can be subject to significant eutrophication (e.g. It is obviously reasonable to start with a simple model, which comprises integrated knowledge of the processes from observations but which also isolates the most important biology and physics to describe essential aspects of a marine ecosystem. The comparison of results obtained with simplified models and field data needs some consideration because the measurements may also reflect processes, which are neglected in the model. Thus, we cannot expect a one-to-one correspondence of model results and observations, but we can check the plausibility of the model by considering integrated quantities, such as response times and the range of variations of the state variables. Such system properties are more or less well established from many observations. In order to construct a simple model, which can describe, at least qualitatively, the observational findings in the Arkona basin of the Baltic Sea shown in The phytoplankton growth with rate The state variables and the relevant process parameters are listed in In this simple approach, the mortality rates, The uptake and grazing rates, The uptake rate The maximum uptake rate, Both Due to this mixing, the whole water column is equally filled with nutrients during winter, i.e. We choose the initial conditions The solution for For For large times, i.e. The term Our simple model is defined by the set of nonlinear ordinary differential In this section, we study the properties of the model for constant rates. The numerical values of the parameters are listed in The model is initialized with the winter values of the nutrients and the detritus concentrations, i.e. First we simulate the dynamics of the state variables for the period of 1 year. The results are shown in The nutrient concentration decreases rapidly after the onset of the bloom by about one order of magnitude; i.e. the nutrient level is about 10% of the winter value, while the detritus concentration approaches twice the winter value in late summer. At day 270, the stratification is assumed to be destroyed by wind mixing and winter convection. Then the detritus and the nutrients reach equal levels in the whole water column, while The constant rates used in the first model version are not sufficient to describe the seasonal cycle after the spring bloom. To improve the model performance, we make several plausible assumptions for the process rates, while we keep the number of state variables; i.e. we use the same bulk variables as in the previous section. As a first step in refining the model, we try to improve the sinking rates. In particular, we take the different magnitude of sedimentation of organic material in the course of the year by means of time-dependent rates into account. In the first model version, the sinking rate was 0.02 d Time-dependent sinking rates reflect different sinking properties of the main functional groups, which are diatoms, flagellates and cyanobacteria (blue-green algae). These functional groups are lumped together in the state variable, In the second step of model improvement, we try to include the effects of temperature on the process rates. Many of the relevant processes depend on temperature, which has, in temperate latitudes, a clear seasonal cycle in the upper mixed layer. In order to prescribe the temperature in the upper layer, which corresponds to the upper box of our model, we use the mean annual cycle of the near surface temperature of the Arkona Basin in the Baltic Sea. The temperature cycle is shown in This can be expressed as A similar relation, with the constant The growth rate depends on the temperature through the maximum uptake rate, Thus, not a fraction of the biomass but a fraction of the assimilated nutrient is lost through respiration. Similar modifications can be introduced in the grazing or ingestion for-mula, i.e. The egestion can be considered as a certain fraction of the ingested food, We may also allow for a variation of the zooplankton mortality by assuming higher predation during longer days, Finally, we assume a small flux of nutrients from the lower box into the surface box at a rate After the first test runs with the model, we can now perform some model experiments. First, we may look at the effect of a strong mixing event due to wind forcing, which erodes the thermocline and provides a nutrient input from below into the upper layer. We assume, for example, that wind forcing has eroded the thermocline for 10 days, say, from day 210 to 220. This implies that during this period, a substantial amount of nutrients flow at a certain rate, The results are depicted in We can also use the model to explore eutrophication scenarios. Eutrophication implies excessive nutrient supply to the ecosystem. In order to create eutrophication in the model, we may add nutrients, i.e. dissolved inorganic matter, at a constant rate, Although caution has to be exercised when comparing simulations based on a simple model with a real system, we may note that an increase of the winter values of nutrient due to increased river loads was observed in the Baltic Sea; see, e.g. An important question is how a system reacts if the eutrophication is reversed. Such an experiment can easily be done with the model. Let us allow for an external supply at a rate, The results of this simulation are shown in The first approaches towards the formulation of a marine ecosystem model in this chapter were guided by several well-known features of the chemical–biological dynamics in the Baltic Sea. The processes controlling the dynamics of the state variables are the physical biological interaction, which provides the condition for the initiation of the spring bloom, nutrient uptake, grazing, respiration, mortality, sinking and recycling. The model simulations with time-dependent rates reproduced the gross features of the yearly cycles of the state variables as shown in Clearly, these model versions are still very simple and, according to the plan of this book, only one step on our way from simple to more complex models. Apart from the very simple ‘chemical biological dynamics’, the physics is also simplified in a radical manner. Caution has to be exercised when comparing the results of a horizontally integrated model with observations that are not horizontally integrated. Averages over basins will generally deviate from local In the previous sections, we considered models that are relevant for temperate coastal seas, such as the Baltic Sea. Similar annual cycles of phytoplankton are known in the subarctic North Atlantic; (see, e.g. In summer, the algae are consumed by animals and the phytoplankton stock assumes low levels due to sinking and grazing, while the zooplankton stock increases. In fall, the grazing animals decline and may enter nonfeeding stages for the forthcoming winter. Storms in the fall start to erode the thermocline and enable nutrient pulses from below the thermocline into the upper layer. This triggers brief fall blooms until the stratification is destroyed and vertical mixing resupplies the surface layer with nutrients, which are then available to support the next spring bloom. A more detailed discussion of the annual cycle can be found, for example, in the book of There are many versions of an NPZD model of the surface layer of the ocean, and we discuss a few, often-quoted examples. We start with the strongly simplified NPZ model of This approach was motivated by the work of But for high phytoplankton concentration, the grazing increases linearly with The results of a simulation with the grazing type is shown in Another way to damp the oscillations is a change of the value of the unassimilated grazing fraction from A similar, but more sophisticated, model for the plankton dynamics in the mixed layer of the North Atlantic was proposed by This amounts to a piecewise constant change of the mixed layer depth, For some processes, only the deepening of the mixed layer has to be considered. To capture this difference, the quantity The annual cycle of the assumed mixed layer is shown in The chemical biological dynamics is represented by the following set of equations: Here we used again our notations for the state variables and parameters. The respiration rate, loss of phytoplankton to nutrients, is chosen as A crucial point is that the regeneration of the initial conditions requires sufficient mixing in winter to resupply the upper layer with nutrients. This can be done with the help of an enhanced mixing, These relatively simple approaches were utilized to study the basinwide dynamics of the phytoplankton dynamics in the North Atlantic using steady-state conditions of the climatological mixed-layer-depth data in May ( A further expansion of the model of The additional state variables imply that the number of parameters increases. In particular, because the model zooplankton can feed on phytoplankton, bacteria and detritus, choices or preferences must be defined. This issue will be considered in the next chapter.