Isosulfan blue dye is used in sentinel node mapping technique to evaluate breast cancer patients where determination of different trace elements is required. A UV-photolysis assisted mineralization of isosulfan blue is described here for the determination of trace elements (Cr, Cd, Cu, Sn and Pb) by Inductively Coupled Plasma Mass Spectrometry (ICP-MS). In the present study advanced oxidation processes such as UV, UV/H2O2, and UV/H2O2/HNO3 have been assessed and compared for the degradation and mineralization of isosulfan blue dye. The extent of mineralization was determined on the basis of total organic carbon (TOC) measurement. The adopted procedure (UV/HNO3/H2O2) provided very low TOC content (0.5%), corresponding to a mineralization efficiency of >99%. With the present procedure, the use of dynamic reaction cell (DRC) or collision cell was not required for chromium determination which suffers interference from the presence of carbon. Method detection limits were 0.0028, 0.0021, 0.016, 0.007, and 0.005μgg−1 for Cr, Cd, Cu, Sn and Pb respectively. The values obtained by the proposed method were cross-validated by those obtained by ETAAS analysis. The expanded uncertainties in the measurement at 95% confidence level (coverage factor 2) are in the range of 13.7–25.8%.Sentinel node mapping is a preferred technique to detect cancerous cells in breast cancer patients Inductively Coupled Plasma Mass Spectrometry (ICP-MS) is the most suitable technique for the determination of trace elements in biological or pharmaceutical samples Different mineralization methodologies have been employed in case of carbon rich samples that include, (i) open digestion with acid and/or ashing, and (ii) microwave assisted digestion. In open digestion, it has been recommended to use strong oxidizing acid mixtures such as (HNO A preferred approach for the mineralization of organic matrix involves treatment of the sample with ultraviolet radiation Distilled and deionised waters with a specific resistance of 18 Quartz photolysis tubes were cleaned by soaking them for at least 24 UV-photolysis was carried out in quartz test tubes fitted with PTFE stoppers in a Metrohm (Heirsau, Switzerland) 705 UV digester equipped with 500 A quadrupole ICP-MS (Thermo X series 2, Thermo Scintific, Germany) was used for the determination of the desired analytes. Isosulfan blue dye (75 Advanced oxidation processes such as UV and UV/H The spectrum of high pressure Hg vapor lamp used in the photolysis unit is rich in lines in the UV range (40–400 However, mineralization of stable aromatic dyes requires the addition of substances that facilitate the oxidation processes During the UV irradiation of nitrate ions, nitrites ions are formed, which on interaction with UV light produce further OH In the UV-mineralization processes used in the present experiment, the OH  In the described method, oxidizing free radicals have been utilized for the UV assisted oxidation of an organic matrix. However, UV irradiation can induce not only photo oxidation but also photo reduction. Low molecular-weight organic acids, used in conjunction with UV irradiation produce H As no standard reference material is available, the accuracy of the proposed method was cross-validated by comparing the result obtained from ETAAS analysis. Quantification of analytes was carried out from calibration graphs obtained from aqueous standards, which were linear ( Considering the relatively long time required for mineralization by the UV photolysis, it is desirable that the gross sample weighs no more than absolutely necessary, which is basically determined by the degree of homogeneity of the sample. Hence an optimized sample mass should be taken for analysis in order to minimize the influence of inhomogeneity on analytical variance. Kurfurst et al. Materials with homogeneity factors less than 10 are said to be very homogeneous. The homogeneity factors were between 0.9 (Sn) and 2.8 (Cu) in the analysed isosulfan blue samples, indicating the samples were highly homogeneous. In pharmaceutical analysis it is required to demonstrate the quality of the results produced for purpose by giving a measure of the confidence that can be placed on the result. For this purpose all possible sources of uncertainty have to be carefully identified. When the major contributions are detected, a good estimate of the measurement uncertainty can be made by selecting the largest and most significant contributions. The analyte concentration in the sample, expressed as μg Approximately 75 The uncertainty stated by the manufacturer for 10 To arrive at this uncertainty, counts of the sample were taken 10 times and the corresponding mean and standard deviations were found out and the relative standard uncertainty in measurement of counts of the sample at 1σ level was obtained. Calibration plot obtained using Origin 6.0 software and the respective slope and standard error were obtained for respective elements. The mean recovery values in percentage were 94 (Cd), 96 (Cu), 98 (Cr), 101 (Pb), and 98 (Sn) and hence the standard relative uncertainty of recoveries were 6, 4, 2, 1 and 2% for the respective elements. The concentration of the trace analytes was determined five times in independent solid sample aliquots taken from the same lot and the respective mean value was calculated with standard deviation ( The combined measurement uncertainty ( The present study indicates that UV-H Grateful acknowledgement is made to Dr. J. Arunachalam, Head/CCCM for his keen interest and encouragement throughout this work. We express our sincere thanks to Director, C-MET, Hyderabad for giving permission to carry out ICP-MS measurements at their facility.