Study design
                  Retrospective review of prospectively collected data.
               
                  Background
                  There is no consensus regarding the ideal treatment of thoraco-lumbar spine fractures without neurological compromise. Many surgical techniques have been described but none has proved its definite superiority. The main drawback of these procedures is directly related to the morbidity of the approach. As minimally invasive fixation combined with balloon kyphoplasty for treatment of thoraco-lumbar fractures is gaining popularity, its efficacy has yet to be established.
               
                  Purpose
                  The purpose of this study is to report operative data, clinical and radiological outcomes of patients undergoing minimally invasive management of thoraco-lumbar fracture at our institutions.
               
                  Methods
                  Forty-one patients underwent percutaneous kyphoplasty and stabilization for treatment of single-level fracture of the thoracic or lumbar spine. All patients were neurologically intact. There were 20 males and 21 females with an average age of 50 years.
               
                  Results
                  The mean follow-up was 15 months (3–90 months). The mean operative time was 102minutes (range 35–240minutes) and the mean blood loss was <100mL. VAS was significantly improved from 6.7 to 0.7 at last follow-up. Vertebral kyphosis decreased by 16° to 7.8° postoperatively (P
                     <0.001). Local kyphosis and percentage of collapse were also significantly improved from 8° to 5.6° and from 35% to 16% at last follow-up. Fifteen leaks have been identified, three of which were posterior; all remained asymptomatic. No patient worsened his or her neurological condition postoperatively.
               
                  Conclusion
                  Percutaneous stabilization plus balloon kyphoplasty seems to be a safe and effective technique to manage thoraco-lumbar fractures without neurological impairment.
               
                  Level of Evidence
                  Level IV. Retrospective study.The annual incidence rate of thoraco-lumbar fractures is 30 to 40 per 100,000 We retrospectively reviewed a series of 41 patients who underwent percutaneous kyphoplasty and stabilization for treatment of single-level fracture of the Thoraco-lumbar spine in 4 centres in France (Paris, Lille, Marseille and Strasbourg). All patients were neurologically intact. There were 20 males and 21 females with an average age of 50 years (15–88 years). The affected levels were T3 ( The patient was positioned prone on a radiolucent table, allowing AP and lateral fluoroscopic control. The reduction was enhanced by external manoeuvres and by the use of iliac and chest rolls in order to increase lumbar lordosis. Prior to draping the patient, the midline and the projection of the pedicles were identified and marked on the skin. The first step of the surgical procedure was to perform the Kyphoplasty. Under AP and lateral fluoroscopic view, we performed the cannulation of both pedicles of the fractured vertebra. The both balloons were introduced in a convergent manner and parallel to the superior endplate. The reduction initiated during installation was completed by inflation of the balloons. Once reduction achieved, the cement was gradually injected, from the front to the back of the vertebral body, in order to strengthen the anterior part of the vertebral body. This was performed under strict scopic control to detect any leakage in order to stop the filling if present. The second step performed percutaneous fixation. Pedicle screws were inserted under AP and lateral fluoroscopic control as described by Foley Operative data (operative time, blood loss) and complications were reported. During the hospitalization period, clinical evaluation was performed to detect any neurological deficit or complication. Pain was quantitatively measured using the visual analogic scale (VAS), preoperatively, before discharge, at 3 months and at last follow-up. CT scan was performed before discharge to check the positioning of the device and to assess cement leakage. AP and lateral radiographs were performed preoperatively, before discharge, at 3 months and at last follow-up. Deformation in vertebral kyphosis, local kyphosis and percentage of anterior vertebral body collapse were measured ( The mean follow-up was 15 months (range 3–90 months) and no patient was lost to follow-up. The mean operative time was 102 Pain was significantly improved. VAS dropped from 6.7 preoperatively to 2.4 at the day of discharge and 0.7 at the last follow-up. No patient worsened his neurological condition after surgery. We reported one wound infection, which required new operation without removal of the devices. Healing was obtained without sequelae. No other complication was reported. Postoperative CT scan confirmed well positioning of the devices in all cases ( To date, there is no consensus regarding the ideal treatment of thoraco-lumbar spine fractures without neurological signs. Many surgical techniques have been described but none has proved its superiority over others Fuentes et al. Kyphoplasty have some risks. Cement leakage in the canal is previously reported in the literature. Creation of a cavity during inflation of the balloons reduces the injection pressure of the cement in comparison to simple vertebroblasty, which limits the risk of leakage Pedicle screw stabilization can also induce neurological damage in case of misplacement. However, pedicle screws are inserted under strict lateral and AP fluoroscopic control, which ensures greater safety. We reported no case of screw misplacement, as confirmed by postoperative CT scan. Fuentes et al. reported a well-positioning rate of 100% while Korovessis et al. reported three cases of misplacement without clinical consequence. No other mechanical complication is reported. Moreover, no case of deep infection is reported in our study or in the previous series. This can be explained by the small size of scars and absence of dead space, usually leading to such complications. Only one patient developed a wound infection, healed after debridement of the wound and initiation of adapted antibiotic therapy, without hardware removal. Once the fracture heals, it is possible to remove the device by the same minimally invasive approach. This strategy is recommended for young patients to preserve mobility of adjacent levels. Balloon Kyphoplasty followed by percutaneous fixation seems to be a safe and effective technique to reduce and stabilize type A thoraco-lumbar fractures without neurological signs. However, further studies with longer observation are required to support the longevity of this treatment and to precise its ideal indications. F. Zairi: no conflict in relation to the published manuscript. C. Court: consultant for Medtronic, Spineguard, Spine Art. J. Tonetti: consultant for Spineart. P. Tropiano: consultant for Synthes spine. J. Beaurain: consultant for LDR. Other authors have not given their declarations of interest.