Background
                  Locking and non-locking plates has been used for distal tibia fracture osteosynthesis. Sufficient evidence to favor one implant over the other is lacking in the current literature. Our aim is to compare them in terms of fracture healing, alignment, functional outcome, complications.
               
                  Methods
                  Sixty-eight patients operated on using a percutaneous plate were retrospectively reviewed. They were divided into two groups: in group 1 (28 patients) a 4.5mm narrow conventional dynamic compression plate (DCP) was used. In group 2 (40 patients) a titanium locked compression plate (LCP) was used.
               
                  Results
                  Mean time to union was 16.2 and 15.4 weeks for group 1 and 2, respectively (p
                     =0.618). 11 patients (39.3%) in group 1 and 4 patients (10%) in group 2 showed malalignment (p
                     =0.016). AOFAS scores at follow up were 89 and 88 in groups 1 and 2, respectively. Implant removal was necessary in 9 cases (32.1%) and 4 cases (10%) in group 1 and group 2, respectively (p
                     =0.042). Three patients (10.7%) in group 1 and three patients (7.5%) in group 2 had an infection.
               
                  Conclusions
                  Both plating systems have similar results in terms of time to union, infection, and AOFAS scores. The LCP seems superior with respect to alignment and the need for implant removal.Fractures of the distal third of tibia represent about 10% of all tibial fractures and their management is controversial. They predominantly affect young patients and are mainly due to torsional forces or high-energy falls When using this technique, osteosynthesis may be carried out using a variety of anatomical locking plates Various studies have demonstrated the success of both types of plating systems Both locking and non-locking plating systems have been used at our institution to treat distal tibial fractures since 2006. Our aim in this study was to compare both forms of fixation in terms of: (1) the time required to achieve bony union, (2) alignment, (3) functional outcome and (4) complications and the need for secondary surgery. We retrospectively reviewed the clinical data and radiological images of patients in our prospective database who were diagnosed with a fracture of the distal third of the tibia and operated between July 2006 and December 2010. All patients had given informed consent for surgery. The ethics committee of our institution authorized the study and subsequent consent to participate was given by the patients. The study included all patients treated via minimally invasive percutaneous plate osteosynthesis (MIPPO). Patients were excluded if there was radiographic evidence of articular comminution and/or articular impaction (43 C3 – AO/OTA), and this left a total of 68 patients (35 male, 33 female, mean age 50 years). The two senior surgeons performed all the operations. Patients were subsequently divided into two groups according to the type of osteosynthesis used. The first group ( Both groups were similar with respect to age, gender distribution and fracture patterns according to the AO/OTA classification system ( Surgical technique: After administration of spinal anesthesia, a 3.0 At this time sutures were removed and rehabilitation was started. Partial weight bearing was allowed between 6 and 8 weeks following surgery, provided absence of pain during physical examination and radiological evidence of bone healing. Further clinical and radiological follow-up visits were performed after 2, 3, 4, 5, and 12 months. At final follow-up, at least one year after surgery, written consent to participate in the study was obtained and functional results were evaluated with the AOFAS Ankle/Hindfoot score The presence of a bone bridge in at least one cortex in either the AP and/or lateral radiographs in addition to pain-free full weight bearing was the criterion for bony union. According to the criteria of Borg et al. Malalignment, according to Hasenboehler's criteria, was defined as a deviation from the normal axis greater than 5° in both the sagittal and coronal plane, or a shortening greater than 1 The criteria for implant removal was defined as local pain and/or skin irritation related to plates and screws. To determine the significance of intergroup differences regarding alignment, implant removal and infection rate, the Fisher's exact test was used. To assess the consolidation timeframe and functional outcome scores differences, the The average time to bony consolidation was 16.2 weeks (range 10–24) in the DCP group and 15.4 weeks (range 10–32) in the LCP group. With the numbers available there was no statistically significant difference in the average time to union between the two groups ( 11 patients (39%) in the DCP group and four patients (10%) in the LCP group, healed with some grade of malalignment ( The final mean AOFAS ankle/hindfoot score was 89 points (range 58–100) in the DCP group and 88 points (range 25–100) in the LCP group. The difference between the two groups was not statistically significant ( Three patients (10.7%) in the DCP group suffered postoperative infections ( Nine patients (32.1%) in the DCP group experienced local discomfort, requiring total implant removal in seven cases ( Fractures of the distal third of the tibia account for approximately 3–10% of all tibial fractures and can be difficult to treat. Several factors must be taken into account when performing surgery such as the fracture anatomy, soft tissue damage and comorbidities like diabetes mellitus In our study, time to union was similar in both groups, being only insignificantly longer in the DCP group when compared to the LCP group (16.2 vs. 15.4 weeks; The union rates of 100% in both groups of our study compare favorably with those published in other series. Hasenboehler et al. performed a study in 32 patients treated with LCP, providing a 1-year follow-up We believe that the choice of screws for osteosynthesis is of vital importance when using locking plates. Collinge et al. used a hybrid approach: conventional screws for reduction and angular stabilization to fix the plate No cases of non-union were found in our series, despite having eight open fractures. However, there were two cases of delayed union, one in a patient with an open fracture and the other in a patient who sustained a high-energy injury with significant metaphyseal comminution. There is some controversy regarding the acceptable level of malalignment. Using Hasenboehler's criteria, we considered varus or valgus >5°, ante or recurvatum >5° and shortening greater than 1 Our results differ from those of others authors, in that we found significantly more malalignment in the DCP group compared to the LCP group The clinical consequences of slight malalignment still remain unclear. Several studies have described no pain and normal clinical function with angulation exceeding 10° Functional evaluation at a mean of 45 months follow-up measured with the AOFAS score revealed no difference between the DCP and LCP groups (88 vs. 89). This could be explained in part by the generally good functional results obtained with minimally invasive techniques. For functional rehabilitation, the type of implant may not be as important as the technique used to fix it in place. However, a prospective randomized study should be conducted to address this hypothesis. The overall scores compare favorably with that from previous studies Postoperative infection was seen in 6 of 68 patients (8.8%). This rate is higher than that reported previously for tibial fractures using a percutaneous technique, although the number of cases requiring surgical revision was the same Patient discomfort relating to the plate has been described for both DCP and LCP There are several limitations to our study. First, as this is a retrospective study, definite conclusions cannot be drawn. There was no randomization and no specific matching of groups. Consequently, a selection bias might have been introduced by the senior surgeons’ preferences with regard to the type of implant to be used. Second, each group had a relatively small number of patients, making statistical analysis difficult. Nevertheless, most of the published studies have lower patient numbers and less follow-up than ours Based on our results, we suggest that both locking (LCP) and non-locking (DCP) plating systems are suitable for stabilizing distal tibial fractures without intra-articular comminution using a percutaneous technique. We found no statistically significant differences regarding the time to union or functional outcome using the AOFAS score. However, in our study, the use of locking plates resulted in a significantly lower incidence of malalignment and less need of implant removal. Further research is required to determine if and what degree of malalignment has detrimental consequences for the adjacent joints. No conflicts of interest or funding source are involved in this study.