The authors reject calls for reregulation. An alternative is to solicit offers for long-term contracts that specify fixed and generating prices for each plant. The contracts would specify the number of times a generator could be asked to shut down, as well as the availability and reliability of the unit. Units whose offers are accepted would be paid their fixed offer if they complied with the terms of the contract and their generation offer for each MWh they were asked to supply.In Part I, “Deregulation/Restructuring: Reregulation Will Not Fix the Problems” (Oct. ’07) we reviewed the challenges facing the restructured U.S. electricity industry, and discussed how the temptation of returning to regulation would neither address these challenges nor solve any problems. We described the history of electricity regulation, from the initial highly competitive market to the demand for regulation, and the spectacular growth of the industry under the regulatory structure. After the early 1970s, the flaws of regulation became more important and evident, culminating in the 1990s in the market structures still with us today. We evaluated the performance of restructured markets and found, except for mandated rate reductions, no data indicating that consumers had benefited from the change. As the mandated rate reductions have expired, large rate increases have followed, angering residential, commercial, and industrial customers. Montana and Virginia have reversed deregulation, returning to some form of regulation. Many other states are discussing a return to regulation. We are not ready to write off deregulation as a bad idea. First, returning to regulation would also mean re-introducing the problems with regulation that originally led to calls for deregulation. Correcting these flaws would be difficult. More importantly, the problem of valuing assets as they return to the rate base would be extraordinarily contentious. If the current market values of the assets are used, ratepayers will essentially be locked into high electric rates for decades. If the assets are valued at less than market prices, there will be expensive litigation with an uncertain outcome. We are thus left with the question of where to go from here. In this article we propose changes in the current market design that would make the restructured markets competitive and deliver many of the benefits of deregulation. The central issues in designing a competitive market for electricity are: Are current electricity markets competitive? Can hourly auction markets be made competitive (so that no generator can influence price)? Who should ensure that the mix of fuels and technology reduces risk? Who should bear the risks under various sources of uncertainty: Future demand level (excess demand or supply), Future fuel prices, Future environmental regulations (especially to reduce greenhouse gases), Future labor costs (wages, strikes, etc.), Acts of nature (hurricanes, etc.), and Terrorism (human-induced losses)? To what extent can (should) electricity decisions be isolated from politics? How to resolve conflicting and overlapping regulation? Regulators would continually find that they had to apply an additional patch, such as a capacity market, to keep the system operating. We now discuss each of these issues in turn. Economists define a competitive market to be one where no participant (seller or buyer) can influence the price. Participants are free to offer whatever price they choose, but they would sell nothing if they offer a price higher than the market price and would be foolish to offer a price lower than the market price. This ideal may never be realized in practice, but some markets are good approximations to being competitive while others are not. Competitive markets have the additional virtues of forcing producers to continue reducing costs in order to stay competitive; they force buyers to face the additional costs of a unit to be purchased. If regulators try to force a non-competitive market to act competitive, the result may display few of the virtues of a regulated market. For example, if regulators force price to be too low, owners may stop producing or stop investing in new facilities. As a result, regulators would continually find that they had to apply an additional patch, such as a capacity market, to keep the system operating. PJM, NYISO, ISONE, MISO, and the other restructured markets are not remotely close to being competitive by the above definition. They may produce prices that are generally close to competitive levels, but these are the result of a highly administered market rather than an economically competitive market. A market monitor watches the offer prices closely and also assesses whether generators are being withheld from the market. The monitor can order a generator to provide power at marginal cost and can order a generator to justify why a unit is not in service. Economic theory details the many benefits of competitive markets. Markets that are “workably” competitive can also provide benefits, but are supervised by the antitrust authorities. To see if the RTOs are “workably” competitive, we would look at the number of times the monitors intervene or, more generally, the extent to which suppliers constrain their behavior because of their fear of the market monitor. Using this criterion, we conclude that PJM is neither competitive nor workably competitive. PJM's 2005 State of the Market Report notes that, on average, less than 0.5 percent of the supply offers have been offer-capped or mitigated in each of the past few years. The point is that the virtues that economic theory say will come from competitive markets should not be expected to result from the current restructured electricity markets. Current markets produce benefits, but not those coming from competitive markets. Electricity has three important attributes. First, very-large-scale storage is essentially too expensive. Second, if there is a significant supply shortage, there is likely to be a blackout. Third, significant network externalities mean that a supply-demand imbalance in one area of the grid can cause service interruptions that cascade to other parts of the grid. Thus, there are difficulties if supply and demand don’t always match. This means that at a period of high demand, large generators are “pivotal” in the sense that if any large generator withholds supply, demand will exceed supply and there could be a blackout. Using the market monitor criterion, we conclude that PJM is neither competitive nor workably competitive. One way to avoid this situation is by having sufficient additional generation capacity that no generator is pivotal. Unfortunately, experiments at Carnegie Mellon The experiments suggest changing the market design to have buyers participate. Rather than the RTO buying power to meet a specified target, the RTO could get demand schedules from customers and allow customers to offer demand reductions to find a market clearing price and quantity. Alternatively, the buyers and sellers could engage in bilateral negotiations to set individual contracts. The experiments suggest that bringing customers into the process would mitigate much of the market power of generators. Large customers could participate directly while small customers could be represented by an aggregator. PJM allows load aggregators to offer demand response into the system now, but there is little volume, either because aggregators have not seen the opportunity or there are other difficulties. The PJM market has only 15 percent of supply sold in the hourly market with 85 percent sold through bilateral contracts. Whether having the vast majority of power sold outside the hourly market promotes competition depends on what sets the price in bilateral contracts. Market participants have told us that the principal influence on price in the bilateral market is the market clearing price in the auction market. Would a generator be willing to sign a bilateral contract for $30/MWh when the hourly market price has been $60/MWh? A supplier is unlikely to accept a bilateral contract at a price less than the auction market, accounting for risk preferences, since the supplier could sell the electricity in that market. Even existing bilateral contracts are likely to be renegotiated if their prices are far from the average hourly price. That means that even having 95 percent of transactions in the bilateral market is not going to result in competition, unless the spot auction markets are competitive. The point is that having an hourly auction market of the sort currently run by the RTOs where demand is fixed and unresponsive to price will not facilitate competition, even if only a small proportion of power is traded in the hourly market. Designing an electricity market that will be competitive is far from easy or straightforward. In a regulated system, a utility was motivated to consider the portfolio of fuels and technologies for generation in order to maintain reliability and hold down future costs (to avoid a rate case). In the restructured system, no generation owner is responsible for reliability or resource adequacy, although the RTO is responsible for reaching aggregated resource adequacy targets. No institution has responsibility for ensuring that the portfolio of fuels and technologies for generation will provide reliable, minimum-cost generation. In the restructured system, new generation and transmission is added one unit at a time by individual companies whose incentives have little or nothing to do with the long-term costs and reliability of aggregate supply. There is no explicit consideration of the portfolio aspects of the decisions. In some egregious cases, such as Seabrook, management was faulted and not allowed to recover full costs. The RTO or state PUCs must assume responsibility for assuring that new investments are compatible with a fuel-technology portfolio that has a reasonable risk-cost tradeoff. We don’t minimize the difficulties of making good decisions, but emphasize that these decisions have always been made by vertically integrated utilities and state regulators; almost any decision is likely to be better, for example, than the vast investments in natural gas generators starting in 1999. Under rate-of-return regulation (RORR), rate payers bore essentially all of the risks. State regulators could delay rate increases but, absent a finding that the utility did not act with reasonable care, the utility was entitled to earn its rate of return. In practice, the PUC often delayed rate increases or lowered reimbursement because rates had given too high a rate of return in the past or for other reasons. In some egregious cases, such as the Seabrook nuclear plant construction, management was faulted and not allowed to recover full costs. More generally, rate payers have had to cover the costs even when regulators made the mistakes, as in approving too much capacity expansion, setting up a market design for deregulation that encouraged market manipulation, or freezing rates so that large rate increases were needed when the freeze ended. Deregulation was designed to shift the risks of generation from rate payers to stockholders. Deciding who should bear a particular risk turns on three elements: 1. who has the best relevant information, 2. who can most easily take actions that lower the cost of an unanticipated event, and 3. who has the least risk aversion. The first element leads to better decisions, the second element lowers the costs for an unexpected outcome, and the third lowers the premium that must be paid to assume the risk. After deciding who should bear the risk, it is important that whoever is managing the risk should have a stake in the outcome. One way of doing that is to have the manager's profit rise or fall, depending on how well the risk was managed. For example, at one extreme, the generation contract could specify a fixed price for the life of the plant with no provision for adjusting the price as fuel price changes. This puts all of the risk on the generator. The other extreme would be to pass all of the changes in fuel price through into the electricity price. Neither extreme is likely to produce low-cost electricity. Putting all the risk on the generator for 30 years is likely to lead to a high risk premium. At the other extreme, passing all the change in costs through removes any reason for the generator to seek lower-priced fuel. Getting lower-priced electricity requires sharing the risk so that both the customer and the generator bear part. Since neither the generator nor the customer has much ability to forecast fuel prices over the next 30 years, it is reasonable to put most of the uncertainty on the customer, while still having enough risk on the generator to motivate a search for the lowest price. For fuel, the customer might be responsible for 90 percent of the uncertainty and the generator for 10 percent. This will be explained in more detail below. Shifting the loss to stockholders turns the loss function on its head. Generators are reluctant to build capacity. Demand has increased in nearly every year since electricity was marketed. However, it can take 10 years to build a new baseload plant and so a utility must build for future demand that is not predictable with confidence; when demand increases less than expected, the utility can be left with excess capacity. Under RORR, the utility was responsible for satisfying demand and regulators insisted that it have large reserve margins; thus, utilities had little or no penalties for having too much capacity. This asymmetric loss function led to building a large “reserve” of generation and transmission capacity. Shifting the loss to stockholders turns the loss function on its head. Generators are no longer responsible if there is insufficient generation and they bear the costs if there is too much capacity, since the excess capacity is not used. Thus, generators are reluctant to build capacity until they are certain they can get an attractive return on their investment and the RTO, which is responsible for getting sufficient capacity, is increasingly worried about insufficient capacity and blackouts. This market design would be expected to lead to little or no excess capacity and an increase in power shortages. Each state's PUC and the load-serving entities (LSEs) have as much or more information than any other institution about future demand levels. Both the PUC and LSEs are likely to be less risk-averse than investors for an individual generator. The LSE is likely to be able to act most quickly if the demand forecast turns out to be too high or too low. For these reasons, some combination of the PUC and LSEs should continue to forecast future demand. However, it is the LSE owners who bear most of the cost if the forecast is wrong; they should make a profit for a good forecast. Capacity markets that look ahead only six months, one year, or even five years will have little effect on building new baseload capacity. Only if the capacity payment were so high that the investors recovered their full fixed costs during the period of the capacity auction would investors feel confident in building a new plant. Another problem with the capacity market is paying the market clearing price to each generating unit. Paying a single price to all generators will pay almost all too much in order to give sufficient compensation to the most needy. Our recommendation is to have the LSE be willing to extend capacity contracts to the life of the plant and require the plant to offer both fixed and variable prices, as outlined below. Fuel prices, particularly for natural gas, have been highly volatile and are likely to be volatile in the future. After the 1973–74 oil embargo, most regulators allowed fuel costs to be passed through automatically with no regulatory action. If there had been long regulatory delays in adjusting electricity rates for fuel price changes, many utilities would have had a hard time paying their expenses. Passing through fuel prices gives the wrong incentive in two ways. First, the generator has no incentive to find lower-cost suppliers or bargain for better contract terms. Indeed, it is likely to choose a higher-cost supplier who promises better service or who otherwise relieves the generator of worries or non-fuel costs. Second, the generator need not think of fuel price volatility in selecting the fuel type for a new plant. Natural gas prices have been much more volatile than coal prices. This need not worry a generator, since the fuel prices will be passed through. We suggest that generators bear some small portion of the changes in fuel prices, say 10 percent, so that they are motivated to search for cheaper fuel. A 10 percent cost share would also induce the generators to give some attention to future price volatility in selecting a fuel for a new generator. What we are proposing is a form of performance-based regulation. Vermont's public service board recently approved a similar arrangement for Green Mountain Power. Environmental discharges of pollutants, air, water, and solid waste, have been subject to increasingly stringent regulation over time. Pulverized-coal plants have had to bear the most costly environmental retrofits while nuclear plants have had to bear few environmental costs, with natural gas in between. Under RORR, the environmental retrofits, additional operating costs, and costs of discharge permits are all legitimate expenses to be recovered from rate payers. Continuing to pass these costs through to ratepayers provides the same two wrong incentives as for fuel price increases: first, the company is not motivated to find the cheapest way of meeting the pollution standards and second, the company need not think about future regulations in choosing a fuel and technology. For example, mercury emissions are unlikely to be the last toxic emissions from coal plants to be regulated. Since coal contains virtually the whole periodic table of elements, a pulverized-coal plant is likely to face future environmental retrofits. In contrast, a coal gasification plant would find it easier and cheaper to control additional toxic discharges. The most likely major discharge to be controlled will be carbon dioxide. A pulverized-coal plant will bear the greatest penalty, with natural gas bearing a smaller penalty, and nuclear having little or no penalty. A coal plant could be designed for future retrofit to separate and sequester the CO Below, we suggest that the generator bear a portion of the retrofit costs in order to provide an incentive to find the least costly retrofit and be motivated to select a technology that will require less future retrofitting. Under RORR, operating expenses, including labor costs, are passed through to ratepayers. This pass-through erodes the generator's incentive to hold down costs. When faced with a strike, the generator will be penalized for a work stoppage that leads to a blackout, while it bears little or none of the costs of granting the pay raise and averting the strike. Again, we propose sharing the labor costs risks between the ratepayers and the generators. However, we would ask the generator to pay a larger share, 25–50 percent. The owner of the generator and transmission lines is in the best position to decide how to protect its investment, given the risks of natural disasters. There should be some cost sharing to motivate the owner to give attention to the correct choice of materials and construction, and of protection of the infrastructure. We suggest a 10 percent copay. The choice of materials and design influences the attractiveness of the target and the amount of damage that can be done. Even though the owner of the generator and transmission lines has no real knowledge of the extent of terrorist threats, there should be a small copay to provide incentives for concern about the design and materials. The owner might have to pay 5 percent of the loss from a terrorist event. The importance of electricity to all aspects of the economy and lifestyle mean that society and elected representatives will insist on having some voice in construction, choice of technology, and pricing of electricity. State legislatures and Congress intervened in the current market to change the market design from RORR to its current structure. They have repeatedly intervened again when the market design displayed problems, there seemed to be market manipulation, or rates were rising quickly. Problems with the current market design suggest seeking legislative and regulatory help in changing the market design. However, we remind everyone that seeking legislative or regulatory help in changing the current market design puts the issue into the political arena. The result will not be a market design optimized to produce competitive benefits, but rather a design that has been influenced by pressure groups, special interests, and politicians and regulators with their own agendas. The result may not even represent an improvement over the current system. The electricity system is too important to delegate to technical experts. It affects consumers, companies, economic development, and regional development. Each special interest group will fight to craft a design that benefits them, not society generally. The resulting design could easily be hijacked by special interests and be detrimental to the public interest, as occurred in California. At present, a “deregulated” utility is regulated by its state PUC, the RTO, FERC, and the ERO. FERC has authority over the RTO and ERO, but the PUC is supreme in intrastate decisions such as setting electricity rates. The RTO can request that someone build a generator or a transmission line, but it cannot order it; the PUC sets rates to customers and so controls reimbursement for the investment. Congress did not resolve these conflicts in legislation ordering FERC to press for deregulation. There is a constitutional issue as to whether Congress can usurp state power over intrastate electricity issues. The conflicts among the regulatory agencies are likely to become more acute in the future. While FERC can resolve the issues under its control, it cannot order the PUCs to act. Recent offers for long-term contracts in eastern PJM have been at rates of about $100/MWh. Several reforms could be accomplished quickly, at little expense, and without fundamental change to the current RTO structure to make the current auction markets more competitive. If these changes were effective, they could obviate the need for more radical changes. These short-term reforms are needed now. The RTO could take four steps to reduce the offer prices. We suggest the following. Rather than having the RTO assume that the demand for electricity in each hour is completely independent of price, encourage customers to submit downward sloping demand schedules and offers to curtail load for some price. Experiments suggest that customers could wrestle some of the market power from generators by replacing the RTO. Sweeney We expect that the offers will be at prices that owners expect to see in the hourly auctions. Aside from a bit of risk aversion, why would a generator sell for less than the price it expects to receive in the hourly auction? It would be socially efficient to offer consumers up to the expected market clearing price for demand-side reductions. Connecticut could offer them less, but it makes no sense to forego a demand reduction that would save power at $60/MWh if the market clearing price is $65/MWh. Thus, we turn to a more radical proposal for altering the auction process (see Section III below). Monitor the auction markets closely both at times of peak demand and other times to ensure that generators are being offered at marginal cost. PJM data suggest that market monitoring is not as stringent at hours of moderate demand as at times of peak demand. PJM's 2005 State of the Market Report shows that more units are offer-capped during the peak summer months than at other times of the year. Average price-cost markups in PJM are among the lowest in the summer months and at their highest in the winter. This change is, at best, a short-term patch, since reducing current prices to variable cost would mean that many generators would not be able to recover their fixed costs. Giving incentives to generators to keep their plants operating and to invest in new capacity requires an additional payment, such as a capacity payment. We caution that relying so heavily on the market monitor would generate hostility, litigation, and might lead to generators leaving PJM if alternative transmission were available at a sufficiently low cost. Most customers pay a fixed price for electricity rather than pay the current generation cost of electricity. This is not a new problem, but it has become a more important problem because generators are paid the market clearing price. Customers see a price that reflects the average annual cost of a kWh. At the hottest hour of the year, the market clearing price might be $1,000/MWh; at some times the market clearing price is zero. We doubt that customers would want to purchase as many kWh at $1.05/kWh as they would at $0.05/kWh (assuming transmission and delivery charges of 5 The history of charging a fixed price no matter what the generation cost has led to sharp demand peaks. For example, in PJM, 15 percent of the capacity is used only 1.1 percent of the hours. Under RORR, each plant was paid its unit cost. The average costs of the peaking plants were high, since they were used only a few hours each year, while the unit costs of the baseload plants were low. The weighted average cost of generating power over a year was less than in the restructured system, where all generation is paid each hour's market clearing price. This means that the inexpensive baseload plants are paid the generation costs of the peakers during any hour when the peakers are used. In PJM, gas- or oil-fired plants set the market clearing price in some parts of the system during all or part of 85 percent of hours, leading to much higher payments to most generators. Fixing the problem requires eliminating the highest levels of demand. For example, if the 98 Spees and Lave There is an equity-efficiency conflict here. Given the cost of advanced meters and resistance from getting some residential customers to sign up for RTP, it would be more efficient to focus on larger customers. However, not having all customers on RTP would subsidize those small customers whose peak demand occurred at the highest-cost hours. As discussed in Part I, Virginia and Montana have reregulated and other states are studying the issue. The fundamental problem is what value to put on assets as they are pulled into the rate base. An alternative would be to reregulate the system by having each new plant become part of a regulated system. One way to do this would be to have the LSE build and own each new plant. The PUC of each state could approve the new plants, putting their cost into the rate base. The LSE would receive a rate of return on their investments as well as their operating costs and the plants would be offered into the hourly power market. As the last old plant is retired, the new regulated utility would control the entire market and the hourly power auction would be abolished. While this is a simpler structure, it is regulation and does not represent a competitive market. A variant on this process would be for the PUC or LSE to invite investors to offer for the right to construct a new plant, similar to the way that new capacity is offered in states like Georgia. This process would be different because each offer would specify a fixed and a generation cost of the new plant. The offers that were accepted would be paid the fixed cost each year, as long as the owners satisfied their contract obligations. They would be paid the generation cost for each MWh they were asked to generate. This contract could put all of the risks on the generation owner, all on the rate payer, or share them in some way. If this market for new generators is competitive, it would have the virtues of a deregulated market. It would prevent the complacency that would come to any regulated entity whose costs were reimbursed with a fixed rate of return. Competition does not require hourly markets. Instead of a single-price auction paying market clearing prices to all, change the structure to have each generator or demand-side manager offer its fixed and variable cost for a contract of one year or longer. We anticipate that current owners would be reluctant to offer their actual fixed and variable costs in this auction. This would be especially true for plants that have been extremely profitable, but even plants that had not been recovering their fixed costs would see an opportunity to earn high profits through offering prices above their actual fixed and variable costs. This structure would be appealing to generators in the sense that they would know that they would recover their costs, but they could not share in the high profits that come from the hours with price at $1,000 or more per MWh. If the LSE found that plants were not offering their power or were offering prices higher than their actual costs, they could ask for a longer contract. In offering power into an hourly market, if a generator puts in too high an offer and is not selected, it loses its profit for that hour. Since there are 8,759 more hours in the year, there is little cost to signaling other generators to submit high offers that raise everyone's profit. The computer simulations and experiments mentioned above show that generators were able to achieve market clearing prices higher than cost after only 40–100 hourly auctions. If the contract were for five years, a generator offering too high would lose five years of profit, a much higher penalty. If, despite the penalty of not supplying power for a year or more, the LSE found that some generators were still offering power at a significant amount over their costs, lengthening the contract would put even more pressure on the generator to be competitive. However, a large generator that knew it was pivotal during some hours of the year could offer a high price, knowing that the PUC or LSE would have to buy the power for at least some hours. If this occurred, the LSE could offer some “life of the plant” contracts. Adding new capacity to the market would mean that the existing capacity would be used less, lowering profits. Thus, current generators would not want to see new capacity added, unless there is demand growth. If there were sufficient new generation plant sites available, we expect that there would be a competitive market for new generation. A life-of-plant contract with a credit-worthy entity would enable the winner to finance the new plant at favorable rates. If the LSE wrote contracts with generators for all the power needed, there would be no need for an hourly auction market. The LSE or RTO would know the offers of each generator and could proceed with economic dispatch. If the LSE had contracts for only part of the generators, the RTO could continue to run the hourly auction market with the contracted plants offering power at their generation cost. Even if the contracted plants were less than the full capacity needed, they would help discipline the market. Generators with high fixed and low variable costs, such as nuclear power plants and renewable resources, would discipline the market. With the fixed costs of a nuclear, coal, or wind turbine already paid, the generation costs would be so low that plants that had not contracted would not be able to compete. Thus, even if an existing coal generator had average costs lower than a new plant, the new plant would be more efficient (given the same level of air pollution and carbon dioxide control) and thus have a lower generation cost. If the old plant did not win the contract because it had offered too high a fixed cost, it would be unlikely to win in the power auction since its variable cost would be higher than the new plant. It would be dispatched only in the hours when demand was so high that the contracted plants could not supply the power. This means that an existing plant that offered overly large fixed costs would be used only a few hours each year, and probably would not cover these fixed costs. The fixed-cost component of the offer or contract acts as a capacity payment fixed for one year, multiple years, or the life of the plant. If the generator's offers were accepted and it adhered to the contract (maintained the availability and reliability levels), it would be paid its fixed costs. Rather there being a uniform capacity payment for all generators, the fixed cost would be unique to each generator. When a plant was asked to generate electricity, it would be paid its variable generation cost for each MWh it generated. In a highly competitive market, the market clearing prices for a long-term contract would be no greater than the fixed and variable costs of a new generator. The contract would have to specify the number of times each year a plant could be asked to start up and the minimum run time. If there were a number of good sites for a new generation plant and the PUC or LSE assumed the risks in asking for life-of-the-plant offers, a competitive market would provide offers at long-run average cost. Under this plan, the RTO would know the fixed and variable costs of each generator under contract. Knowing demand, it could engage in economic dispatch just as it does today, and as utilities do or did under RORR. Plants would not be paid market clearing prices, but rather their generation cost. Since plants were paid their fixed and generation costs, the owners would earn their return on investment and be satisfied. Thus, the supply side of the market would receive competitive returns and there would be adequate incentives to add needed capacity. No generator would be overpaid, none would be underpaid and there would be no need for “Band-Aids” such as capacity markets. The RTO would calculate LMPs so that it could charge RTP and allow customers to participate in demand-side offers. The LMP would be the sum of the generating cost of the marginal generator and the congestion charge and a component for transmission losses. During periods of high demand, the LMP would be considerably higher than generation cost in load pockets; the LSE would receive payments higher than generation costs. Economic efficiency requires customers to pay RTP, the social cost of providing them each kWh, giving the PUC or LSE revenue considerably greater than its costs at high-demand time in congested areas. During hours of low demand, the LMP would reflect the price paid to the highest-cost supplier, generating revenue greater than the total payout to generators. The revenue above generating cost could be used to pay the fixed costs of the plants or for transmission. In some markets, the RTO would be paid more than the fixed costs of all plants while in others they would have to charge customers a monthly fee to pay for some of these fixed costs. The monthly fee would be a demand charge, based on usage during the peak demand hours. It would reflect the additional cost to the system of the capacity needed for each customer; this would be approximated by usage during the peak hours. For example, suppose that demand increased, requiring new capacity. If the fixed cost of this generation were $300/yr/kW, the demand charge would be $300/kW/yr. If this additional capacity were used for only one hour per year, the customer would pay $300 plus the generation cost. If the additional capacity were used 8,760 If the revenue from RTP over a year exceeded the fixed cost plus generation cost payments, the surplus funds could be used to build new capacity, pay for demand-side reduction, be refunded to consumers with an annual check, or used to reduce taxes. Generators under contract would be offered into the hourly auctions at their generation offer. The generators not under contract would submit their offers (under the watchful eye of the market monitor). As more generators came under contract, the pressure on the remaining generators to come under contract would increase. When all generators were under contract, the hourly auction would be abolished. Since each unit was paid its contract price, no unit would be over- or under-compensated (that is, no unit would be compensated based on the contract price of another unit). This new market design is a competitive market design. The design is more likely to promote competitive behavior than the hourly auction market. In this design, the LSE would solicit offers for new plants and thus would be responsible for ensuring plants were built as part of a rational technology-fuel portfolio. The RTO would continue to perform economic dispatch, something that was managed by utilities in the past. Whether this system would be superior to the current one depends on the following: What is the cost of new capacity? If new capacity is needed, its costs will influence market prices in either the current hourly power auction or the offers for a new plant. The owners of existing capacity benefit from the high prices of new capacity in a restructured market, but not under RORR. There must be a number of attractive sites for new plants that do not engender public opposition (PJM currently has a queue of more than 100 applications for new plants, suggesting that sites for new plants are not necessarily scarce.). The sites have to be attractive in the sense of inexpensive land, easy access to cheap fuel, and easy access to transmission with sufficient capacity to carry the power. There would have to be competition for the new plants, enough to force the offers to converge to the actual fixed and variable costs. The capital cost of new coal and nuclear plants is considerably higher than that of plants built in the 1960s and 1970s. If the offers for existing plants went to the level of new plants, the retail prices would be considerably higher than costs in states that did not restructure. Costs under RORR would gradually catch up to those of restructured states as old plants were replaced. Compared to current prices in restructured states, these costs would be considerably less than the market clearing prices for long-term contracts. The fact that all plants would be paid their generation cost rather than the market clearing price would help lower costs. NIMBY is real. Finding acceptable sites for new plants is not easy. The easiest sites are ones with existing power plants, which gives current generators an advantage, or even a monopoly, in offering to build new plants. To make this market design work, each state might have to acquire options to develop favorable sites and offer these to all aspirants. Inviting offers from companies to build a generator on a specified site open to all aspirants would promote competition. Offering a site whose costs and other attributes is known to all aspirants, together with a life-of-plant contract, should promote intense competition. The competition would be open to all parties that thought that they could build the plant cheaper or operate it more cheaply than others. The competition would be akin to the bidding process for large construction projects with the added provision that the builder would operate the plant over its lifetime. Perhaps a builder and operator would get together to submit a joint offer to build and operate the plant. In either model, a state could lower the cost of power by financing the plant with tax-free industrial development bonds. A state could issue these bonds to the extent that they did not affect the state's broader borrowing power. Such an action on the part of the state would also transfer some risk from a utility's ratepayers to the state's taxpayers as a whole. These contracts would be subject to various risks, as discussed above. A final difficulty is common to all new capital structures that are built: The owner is responsible for being able to operate the plant efficiently and reliably. Since there is nothing unique to an electricity generating plant, we presume that investors would not be put off by this risk. The assumption that hourly power auctions will be competitive is a fundamental flaw in current designs for deregulated markets. During peak demand, one or more generators are likely to be pivotal. More importantly, hourly actions have encouraged firms to bid strategically, increasing prices and profits. This conclusion is evident in the heavy-handed market monitors who are charged with forcing generators to offer when their capacity at their variable generating costs when it is needed. One proposal is to go to long-term contracts for both generation and demand reduction. Each party would be paid its winning offer. If each plant offered power its average cost, this could lower price significantly. However, we doubt that generators would offer their power at prices lower than they expected to receive in the hourly auctions. A second proposal is to give up on deregulation and return the system to regulation. The immediate difficulty in doing that is valuing the assets as they are put into the rate base. We predict that this would be contentious, except in the few restructured states that have not allowed LSEs to divest generators. A third proposal is to regulate each new power plant that is built. Over several decades, this would reregulate the system. That is not a timely solution, since it would require the current level of scrutiny and market monitoring until the system was completely reregulated. We caution that RORR has its own problems. Our recommended alternative is to solicit offers for long-term contracts that specified fixed and generating price for each plant. The PUC or LSE must be prepared to go to life-of-plant contracts in order to use the threat of new capacity to hold existing generators to competitive prices. The contracts would specify the number of times a generator could be asked to shut down, as well as the availability and reliability of the unit. Complying units would be paid their fixed offer if they complied with the terms of the contract and their generation offer for each MWh they were asked to supply. Customers would be charged real-time prices and, if needed, a demand charge based on their usage during periods of peak demand. This pricing structure would be efficient in an economic sense and would motivate customers to find ways to reduce their demand, especially at peak times. In our judgment, this proposal would offer the benefits of competition, ensure that each generator was paid its reasonable costs and no more, and provide for the long-term operation of the system. Examples of how our proposal would work are available at