The standard treatment for patella fractures is tension band wiring. However, with tension band wiring anatomical reduction and rigid fixation can be challenging and the clinical outcome after patella fracture is often not satisfying. The purpose of this prospective clinical observation was to evaluate the clinical outcome in patients with patella fractures treated with an angular stable patella plate. Between 2011 and 2015 a total of 67 patients were treated with an angular stable patella plate. Outcome in these patients was evaluated by the Knee Outcome Survey Activities of Daily Living Scale (KOS-ADL) and range of motion of the knee joint was assessed. Complete follow up was obtained for 35 patients. In these patients, we found one implant-related complication. None of the patients reported any deficits in extension capabilities. The flexion was on average 127° (SD 21°). The patients classified the function of their knee in daily life on average with 77% (SD 24%) in comparison to their function before the trauma. Only kneeling or squatting was a problem in some patients. In conclusion, angular stable patella plating appears to be a promising alternative treatment for patella fractures. The patella plate provides increased mechanical stability for fracture fixation which appeared to result in a reduction of complications and improvement of functional outcome compared to tension band wiring. Especially patients with a multi-part or comminuted fracture or with osteoporotic bone are likely to benefit from the stability provided by the plate and the locking screws.The patella is the largest sesamoid bone in the human body. It increases the effectiveness of the quadriceps muscle and enables flexion of the knee which requires substantial forces in load bearing situations like squatting or kneeling Tension band wiring has been the standard treatment of patella fractures for a long time. The principle of tension band wiring is the transformation of tension into pressure forces to achieve dynamic interfragmentary compression. However, under cyclic loading particularly in knee extension fragmentary compression is neutralized and the fracture might gap An alternative approach avoiding some of these complications is the application of bone plating for patella fractures The purpose of this prospective clinical observation was to evaluate the clinical outcome in patients with patella fractures treated with an angular stable patella plate. For this observational study consecutive patients with fractures of the patella were recruited at our institution. Inclusion criteria were: patients with dislocated fracture of the patella with indication for operative treatment aged between 16 and 80 years. Exclusion criteria were: simple, non-dislocated fracture of the patella with indication for conservative treatment, multiple injuries at the fractured leg, severe brain injury, poliomyelitis. The locking patella plate (Arthrex, Munich, Germany) is available in two different specifications: the Arrowplate and the Starplate ( For the surgical procedure ( Follow up assessment was performed at least 7 months after the index surgery. Patients were evaluated by the Knee Outcome Survey Activities of Daily Living Scale (KOS-ADL). The KOS-ADL is a reliable, valid, and responsive instrument for the assessment of functional limitations at the knee joint Between 2011 and 2015 a total of 67 patients were included in our observational study. In 28 patients the Arrowplate and in 39 patients the Starplate was used. An additional screw osteosynthesis was performed in 16 patients. In 14 patients, the locking plate osteosynthesis was a revision procedure after failed tension band wiring osteosynthesis. All 67 patients were sent the evaluation sheets up to three times. One patient was reported deceased, 7 patients were addressed unknown, 1 patient sent the questionnaire back without any answer and 23 patients did not answer at all. So, the questionnaire was returned and evaluated by 35 patients. Of these, 16 patients were treated with the Arrowplate and 19 with the Starplate. In 8 patients the locking plate osteosynthesis was a secondary revision procedure because of failure of the primary osteosynthesis or of non-union after cerclage wiring. 14 patients were male, 21 were female. Their average age at operation time was 56 years (SD 17 years). The mean follow-up time was 38 months (SD 23 months, range 7–75 months, median: 31 months). Hardware removal was performed in 11 patients for various indications including preplanned plate removal and the patient felt distracted by the implant. In all 35 patients, we found one implant-related complication due to implant failure with secondary fracture dislocation and one secondary fracture after a new trauma. The patient fell on the injuried knee one month after the first injury and suffered from a patella fracture distal of the plate. The plate was not loosened, so the plate was left in situ and an additive screw osteosynthesis was performed ( None of the patients reported any deficits in extension capabilities. The flexion was on average 127° (SD 21°). Three patients had a flexion of less than 100°. One of these patients was first treated with tension band wiring, he developed a pseudarthrosis and was then revised with Starplate. The other two patients had a total knee replacement ipsilateral. A flexion of at least 130° was possible in 15 patients ( Only few patients had symptoms affecting their daily activities moderately or severely ( In this study the outcome after plating of fractures of the patella was assessed in a prospective clinical observation. The findings suggest that osteosynthesis of patella fractures with locked plating is clinically applicable with satisfactory mid-term outcomes. In particular, rate of complications and range of motion appeared to be very satisfactory after locking plate osteosynthesis. In 35 patients, we found one implant-related complication due to implant failure with secondary fracture dislocation and one second fracture after a further traumatic event. Insofar, we had a complication rate of 2 in 35 (6%), which is considerably lower than the complication rate typically reported for tension band wiring found in the current literature with 20–30% In term of functional recovery, we found a very good range of motion with 127° on average and only three patients had a flexion deficit with less than 100° of flexion capability. Two of these patients had a total knee replacement and a periprothetic patella fracture. The third patient underwent a revision operation due to loosening of tension band wiring. Considering the fact that in 8 patients the plate osteosynthesis was a revision operation after failure of their first osteosynthesis, the functional outcome is even more meaningful. In the literature, reduced function after operative treatment of a patella fracture was found in 15–30% of the patients Most of our patients were not affected or were only affected slightly in their activities of daily life. Only kneeling on the front was a problem and four patients were not able to squat. In these patients 50% had a hardware removal and 50% did not. Thus, the inability to kneel seems not to be a problem of the plate, but rather of the cicatrix. In the current literature 30–50% of the patients treated with tension band wiring or screw fixation suffer from residual pain Furthermore, the anatomical shape of both plates easily facilitates fracture reduction and the locking mechanism increases the stability, even in comminuted fractures or osteoporotic bone. Biomechanical tests showed a significantly increased stability in plate osteosynthesis compared to tension band wiring Our observational study has several limitations. Due to the observational character we were not able to directly compare the outcome after plate fixation to other osteosynthesis procedures. In the discussion we compared our findings to the findings reported in the literature for tension band wiring and consistently found inferior outcome results with tension band wiring. Also, our study had an inhomogenous study population and limited number of follow ups. As we tried to include almost all patients who were treated with a patella plate we did not limit our investigation to only fresh fractures but also included revision cases. This certainly created a bias towards worse outcomes in the follow up. In addition, the time to follow up was not limited to a short time frame but included a long interval after fracture. While this allowed us to include more patients it might have concealed some outcome details due to lack of clear memorization of outcomes by the patients at later follow up times. Finally, the number of patients who finally returned their follow up questionnaire was rather small. This might have biased our findings towards better outcomes if patients with worse outcome are less likely to reply to hospital questionnaires. Based on our results, we can conclude that the angular stable patella plate is an appropriate implant for the successful treatment of patella fractures. The patella plate provides increased mechanical stability for fracture fixation which appeared to result in a reduction of complications and improvement of functional outcome compared to tension band wiring. Especially patients with a multi-part or comminuted fracture or with osteoporotic bone are likely to benefit from the locking mechanism. In addition, the anatomical shape improves the reduction. In comparison to tension band wiring, the patient is earlier allowed to bear weight and to flex the knee, resulting in an improved outcome. PA is member of the Research Committee of the OTCF. PA receives institutional research support from aap, Arthrex, Orthofix, Smith & Nephew, and Stryker. SW and VB have no conflict of interest. The authors of this manuscript express their thanks to the Osteosynthesis and Trauma Care Foundation for the sponsorship of the publication of this Supplement in Injury.