A recent comprehensive review of the characteristics and utilization of copper slags encourages (properly) several applications for this important pyrometallurgical byproduct. However, the review does not include possible environmental effects from these slags. The United Nations Basel Convention on the Transboundary Movement of Hazardous Wastes and Their Disposal characterizes copper compounds that exhibit specified hazard characteristics as hazardous wastes. In 1996, the Convention considered further characterization of these and other compounds and substances. The final characterization of copper slags is as non-hazardous, i.e., exempt from control. This decision was based in part (if not largely) on the data that are presented here. Literature reports were used to accumulate data describing the chemical composition and acid leaching of commercial copper slags from three countries. From these data, average values of chemical composition and their statistical confidence limits (95%) were calculated. The variability of the chemical analyses of three commercial slags produced over 19 or 20 months were statistically analyzed and shown to be small. The concentrations of toxic heavy metals in the slags are low and the frequency distributions of the values are narrow. Most of the data are normally distributed, validating the use of the statistics used and permitting predictions of likely values. The amounts of heavy metals extracted by an aggressive standard acid leach procedure are low and well below the United States. regulatory levels derived from drinking water standards. The results for total composition and leaching illustrate why the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency made a regulatory determination that such slags are not hazardous wastes. Later, in 1996, the Basel Convention Technical Working Group concurred and the Parties to the Convention adopted their recommendation.A recent paper in this journal ( Early on, the possible hazardous nature of copper slags was considered under United States law. In 1990, the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency (USEPA) submitted a required extensive report to the U.S. Congress on “Special Wastes from Mineral Processing”. This report formed the basis for the final determination of “not hazardous”. ( Nonetheless, there was—and may still be—concern (particularly in the international context of the Basel Convention) of the possible environmental hazard of such slags. Hence, the chemical composition and possible environmental and health release of heavy metals from copper slags were investigated based on analytical data in reports from three countries. The review and data presented here are not intended to be a comprehensive, up to date, review of the environmental factors associated with copper slags. Rather, this paper is to document some of what the Technical Working Group of the Basel Convention considered and the Conference of Parties (the contracting parties to the Convention) subsequently adopted. The definition of a hazardous waste under the Basel Convention has been described in several places, e.g., by A waste is then hazardous either because of national law or the inability to rebut two presumptions in the Convention: (1) the wastes belong to any category contained in Annex I, and (2) “unless they do not possess any of the characteristics contained in Annex III”. The latter annex lists 14 hazardous characteristics, some without reference to test methods or numerical limits. Because of these ambiguities, the Third Conference of Parties required that the wastes be characterized as hazardous (Decision III-1). In response, the Parties subsequently created two new annexes, VIII and IX. Annex VIII is a list of wastes characterized as hazardous by the Convention. Annex IX is a list characterized as non-hazardous, ignoring some subtleties of argument obscure except to those deeply involved. Annex I lists copper compounds. In 1996, the Convention examined a list of copper compounds (and mixtures of such compounds) resulting from pyrometallurgical and similar operations, among them copper slags. The data below were developed and presented to the Technical Working Group of the Convention to assist their deliberation and decision whether copper slags belong on Annex VIII or IX. The chemical compositions of 28 slags from the United States, Canada and Chile were examined. The data included the results of leach testing of 47 separate copper slags. The sources of the data were: The data in The composition of a particular slag will depend on the metallurgical process producing it and on the particular ore body extracted. Obviously, if the ore contains little or none of a particular element, neither will—nor can—it be in the slag. Some of the elements likely to be present in a copper slag are of more interest than others from an environmental protection standpoint. Available data included monthly analyses of three slags (19 or 20 months for each for 1995 and part of 1996). From these data, mean values and confidence limits (95%) were calculated for several elements as a measure of the variability of the slag composition over this time. The standard kurtosis and skewness of the data for each element listed were calculated to give an indication whether the composition figures were normally distributed over the period. Almost all were; the exceptions were for Bi in slag #1 and Cu in slag #2. The Bi result is not important because of the low concentration ranges. The Cu result is puzzling. The composition ranges listed in The United States and Canada have adopted accelerated laboratory leach tests to help determine the “hazardousness” of a waste. (Other countries use or consult the results of such tests.) Although, there are several types of tests, the approach for all is to extract a sample of the waste with an acid (or distilled water) for a specified period of time, filter, and analyze the filtrate for specified chemicals. In the case of rock-like materials, like slags, the sample must first be crushed and sieved through a fine screen of specified size. The most stringent or aggressive test is the USEPA Toxic Characteristic Leach Procedure (TCLP), which extracts the sample with buffered (constant pH) acetic acid. The buffer prevents the test sample from neutralizing the acid and preventing the extraction of the chemicals of interest. (Other less stringent tests use unbuffered acetic, citric, mineral acids or even distilled water). The leach tests are intended to simulate and accelerate the removal from a waste sample of toxic materials that may be dissolved by acidic rainwater or landfill leachate and then migrate into and pollute groundwater. The U.S. regulatory levels of several pollutants have been set at a multiple (100×) of the permissible level for drinking water. The several sources of slag data cited previously include data on the leaching of copper slags from Chile, Canada, and the United States. The results for 47 slags, using four leach methods, were examined. Only the results for the most aggressive test (TCLP) were analyzed in detail and are summarized here.  The results of the TCLP tests mean that the values for the regulated pollutants are well below the threshold for hazard, generally they are from one-fifth to one-tenth of the regulatory level. It is for this reason (and others) that copper slags are not regulated hazardous waste. The leach test aggressively estimates that the slags would not lose sufficient amounts of As, Cd, Cr, Pb or Se to pollute groundwater. There is no apparent significant correlation between what can be leached (at least by TCLP) and the total composition of a copper slag. Commercial copper slags have been determined to be non-hazardous at least separately in the United States and by the Basel Convention. The data reviewed here show some of the reasons: the chemical compositions of the slags (totals) show very little heavy metal content and the leach tests results show that very little of any of these metals is removed by a simulated leachate in an aggressive laboratory test. The amounts removed are well below U.S. (and probably other national) regulatory levels based on drinking water quality standards. The statistical analyses provide a basis for predicting with high probability that the composition of the copper slags and their leachates will remain in the non-hazardous range. The results encourage the reuse and recycling of properly prepared copper slags.