A new method for extracting nickel from low-grade laterites containing less than 2 wt.% nickel is proposed. The method employs an electrochemical treatment and was used to extract the nickel from four Indonesian low-grade laterites. Electrochemical leaching of the nickel was conducted in an electrolytic cell that was divided into two compartments by using a PVC separator. The cell had a current density of 3.2–32 mA/cm2. Nickel in the laterites was leached together with iron via electrolytic reduction in the presence of sulfur dioxide. It is believed that extraction of nickel from laterites by electrochemical leaching treatment could be related to the reductive dissolution of iron during electrolysis.
                  Our proposed method allows for the low cost recovery of nickel from low-grade laterites regardless of the magnesium and/or iron content, and at ambient temperature.In recent years, investigations have focused on the utilization of low-grade nickel ores, especially those containing <2.0 wt.% nickel, because of the shortage of high-grade nickel sources. Several industrial methods are used to recover nickel from low-grade laterites. These include reduction roasting ( Another pyrometallurgical method, segregation roasting of laterites, may be considered for extracting nickel ( In this work, a new method for the extraction of nickel from low-grade laterites is proposed. The method uses an electrochemical leaching process and dithionite, which can be obtained by the electrolytic reduction of sulfur dioxide in a sulfuric acid solution. Although it is known that dithionite can be an efficient reducing agent in bleaching processes ( Four low-grade laterites from Indonesian mines were used for the leaching tests in this work. The elemental compositions of the ores are listed in Electrochemical leaching of nickel was conducted using an electrolytic cell, and a schematic diagram of the experimental setup is shown in To carry out the tests, the laterites were crushed and ground in a rod mill to obtain a particle size where >70% passed through a 200 mesh, as is shown in Sulfur dioxide was introduced into the slurry at a flow rate of about 50 ml/min for 30 min prior to electrolysis, and also during the runs. Aliquots (5 ml) of slurry were collected at predetermined time intervals and, after filtration, the concentration of nickel and iron in the leach liquor was analyzed using atomic absorption spectrometry (Instrumentation Laboratory 11). Each test was carried out at ambient temperature.  When an electrolyte containing dissolved SO  As far as the effect of current density on the extraction of nickel was concerned, the rate of extraction increased with increasing current density in the range 3.2–32 mA/cm  In addition to the parameters discussed above, temperature may play an important role in the extraction of nickel. As is well known, the rate of extraction and the ultimate extraction rate may be enhanced at higher electrolysis temperature. In the electrochemical extraction of nickel from laterites, the following advantages and disadvantages should be taken into account when comparing our process with conventional processes. First, the method proposed in this work enables the recovery of nickel from low-grade laterites at ambient temperature at relatively low cost. As discussed earlier, conventional pyrometallurgical methods, such as reduction roasting, usually require a high operating temperature and, consequently, invoke high energy costs, especially in the case of low-grade resources. Another advantage of our process is that the electrochemical extraction can be used for any type of laterite, regardless of the magnesium and/or iron content. Despite the above advantages, there are some problems associated with this method. Among these is the low recovery of nickel, which was found to be 50–75% of the initial nickel concentration and dependent on the type of laterite and the iron content. It is expected, however, that the recovery can be enhanced through further developments of the technology. Since our method is based on electrolysis, the selection of the electrodes and the design of the cell will play an important role in determining the efficiency of the extraction, as well as the power consumption. Finally, care should be taken to minimize the environmental pollution from the emission of sulfur dioxide during electrolysis, and the treatment of the leach residues resulting from the extraction of nickel. A new technology has been developed to extract nickel from low-grade laterites using an electrochemical leaching method. From the results of an electrochemical treatment on four Indonesian laterite samples containing <2 wt.% nickel, we could extract >60% of the initial nickel content using electrochemical leaching over a period of about 100 min. It was remarkable that the extraction of the nickel showed an almost identical trend to that of iron, which strongly implies that the extraction of nickel from the laterites was related to the extraction of iron. The acidity of the catholyte did not influence the extraction of nickel from the laterites during electrolysis, and pure nickel oxide was not dissolved under the electrolytic conditions employed in this work. Therefore, it is believed that the acid in the catholyte is not the driving force in the leaching of nickel from the laterites. The rate of extraction of nickel increased with increasing current density in the range 3.2–32 mA/cm Finally, the method proposed in this work is believed to provide a new process for the treatment of low-grade laterites, which is capable of extracting nickel at ambient temperature at relatively low operational cost.