The possibility of a pyrolysis process as a mean of recycling the residual plastic rich fraction (WEEE residue) derived from of a material recovery facility has been evaluated. The unknown product composition of WEEE residue has been supposed through coupled thermal – infrared analysis and ultimate analysis and resulted as PP 3 wt%, PBT 3 wt%, PVC 4 wt%, styrene-based polymers (principally ABS) 50 wt%, thermosetting resins (principally, epoxy/phenolic resins) 24 wt%, inorganic fraction (principally fiber glass) 16 wt%. DSC experiments showed that the overall energy, defined as the degradation heat, needed in order to completely degrade WEEE residue was about 4% of the exploitable energy of the input material. The effect of temperature and different zeolite catalysts were investigated, in particular in terms of yield and quality of the produced oils during the pyrolysis process. Produced oils were potentially exploitable as fuels and almost all catalysts improved their quality. The best performance was reached by NaUSY(5.7) with the second highest production of light oil and the greatest total monoaromatics yield, plus 12 wt% in comparison to thermal pyrolysis experiments. Furthermore, light oil produced by NaUSY(5.7) has one of the best LHV (36 MJ/kg) and no halogenated compounds were detected by GC–MS analysis. Char or pyrolytic gas combustion could supply the energy required for the thermal degradation of WEEE Residue.The total amount of waste electrical and electronic equipment (WEEE) collected in 2016 in Europe (EU-28) was 4.5 Mt ( Further difficulties on the global plastics recycling market were arisen by the import ban on plastic waste announced by Chinese Government on January 2017 and by saturation point reached in the waste-to-energy plants in Europe ( Thermal and catalytic pyrolysis are established processes as alternative routes for chemically recycling plastic wastes into valuable chemicals and fuels ( The plastic sample denoted as “WEEE Residue”, is a residue coming from a WEEE MRF located in the South Italy aimed at obtaining metals recovery through a mechanical treatment of the WEEE categories: information technology and telecommunications equipment and, to a lesser extent, small household appliances. This mechanical treatment of the WEEE MRF consists firstly of a manual sorting by specialized personnel that eliminate the dangerous parts and perform a disassembly of the voluminous equipment in order to separate the big parts of homogeneous plastics, metals and glass, which can be sold to recyclers. Then, the residual parts move through conveyor belts and undergo to a first comminution that leads to particles size less than 40 mm and to the action of electromagnet able to separate the ferrous metals. The materials are milled again to particles size less than 20 mm and, at this stage, undergo further shredding through very strong energy impacts, which are able to free the metals even in the smaller components and strictly intermingled with other materials. Also microchips and printed circuited boards (PCBs) are treated, which would normally be manually separated and sold to centres specialized in pyro and hydro metallurgy. Downstream, a cyclone eliminates the powders while the shredded material passed through a series of sieves that allows dividing the flow into six different grain sizes. Finally, for each grain size obtained, an air density separator separates the plastics from non-ferrous metals. Metals as aluminium, more resistant to trituration, are found in the coarser fraction while copper and precious metals are concentrated in the fine fractions. The plastic residue (WEEE Residue) as well is recovered in six different grains and stored in big bags. Nowadays, WEEE Residue is landfilled. The MRF management states that WEEE Residue is made up principally by thermoplastics such as acrylonitrile butadiene styrene (ABS), high impact polystyrene (HIPS), polystyrene (PS), ABS/polycarbonate blend polymers (ABS/PC), polypropylene (PP), but also includes thermosettings, glass fiber and, to a lesser extent, metals, and other non-plastic materials principally from PCBs. This kind of polymeric composition is very common in the WEEE plastic fraction ( Finally, WEEE Residue is characterized by both high Low Heating Value (LHV) and volatile matter content that makes it potentially exploitable in a pyrolytic process ( Commercial acid zeolites different for structure and silica/alumina ratio (SAR, mol/mol), whose main properties were reported in Table S1, were used in this study as catalysts. NaUSY was also tested in order to verify the performance of a different cation type zeolite in comparison to homologous H In order to evaluate the thermal behaviour of the WEEE Residue during a pyrolytic process and define the amount of heat required for degradation and volatilization of a unit mass of sample plastic material from ambient to decomposition temperature, thermogravimetric (TG) and differential scanning calorimetry (DSC) experiments were carried out using a Mettler Toledo TG/DSC1 instrument equipped with a STARe software. Samples of (20.0 ± 0.2) mg were placed in an aluminium crucible heated under nitrogen flow (60 ml/min) from ambient temperature to 600 °C at a rate of 10 °C/min. After calibration using high purity metals (indium and zinc, > 99.998%) temperature and enthalpy change uncertainties were estimated not higher than ±1 °C and ±3 J/g, respectively. Each TG/DSC measurement was performed with at least three replicas and a preliminary ‘‘blank experiment’’ was performed at the same conditions of the tests using an empty crucible. The heat values of all physico-chemical transformations, coupled with the sensible heat from ambient to decomposition temperatures allow to compute the overall energy needed for the pyrolysis of WEEE Residue, according to Eq. The vapors evolved during the TG/DSC experiments were conveyed to a Thermofisher Scientific Nicolet iS10 Spectrophotometer linked through a 240 °C heated transfer line to prevent the condensation of vapor products. The instrument allows monitoring the actual reaction trend, by collecting a spectrum each 11 s (eight scans performed at 0.5 cm Details of the operating conditions for the pyrolysis experiments and the schematic diagram of the pyrolysis system is described elsewhere ( The weights of the pyrolysis products were determined in relation to the initial weight of WEEE Residue taking into account that gas fraction was obtained by subtraction from 100 of total liquid and char percentages. The total liquid yield is the sum of the oil collected in the cold traps (light oil) and the heavier oil adhered to the reactor’s walls (heavy oil). This secondary oil can’t be collected and analysed, but it is quantified by weighing the reactor, initially dirty of heavy oil, before and after its combustion in a muffle. The liquid, solid and gaseous pyrolysis products were characterized using the analytical techniques described hereinafter. All the analyses except for the qualitative analysis performed by a gas chromatographer coupled with a mass spectrometry detector (GC–MS) were conducted separately on all the substances produced from each pyrolysis run in three replicas. The results presented are average values for the different pyrolysis conditions. Each oil was initially characterised by gas chromatography coupled with a mass spectrometer (GC–MS, a Thermo TRACE fitted with a DB5-MS capillary column) to determine semi-quantitatively its chemical composition by the percentage area of the chromatographic peaks. Then, some of the most representative compounds revealed (i.e., benzene, toluene, styrene and ethylbenzene) were quantified by a gas chromatographer equipped with a flame ionization detector (GC–FID, Perkin Elmer 8700). Oils also underwent elemental analysis (carbon, nitrogen, hydrogen and sulfur) using a Macro VARIO Cube Elemental Analyser. LHV was also determined by a C5000 Berthelot-Mahler Calorimeter IKA. The sample derived by thermal pyrolysis at 500 °C was also submitted to determination of chlorine and bromine through dissolution in the calorimetric bomb with a NaHCO The gases collected in the gas bag were analysed in two different gas-chromatographers: the permanent gases (CO Characterization of the solid residue consisted of the following measurements: proximate and elemental analysis of carbon, nitrogen, hydrogen, and sulphur. The LHV was estimated by the Dulong-Petit expression ( The details of the analytical procedures were reported in previous studies (  Once the results were evaluated, it was also possible to make assumptions on the polymeric composition of WEEE Residue. Indeed, the first two small endothermic peaks without mass variation at 163 and 220 °C are probably ascribed to melting of polymers ( The first degradation DSC peak at 261 °C is connected to a mass loss of about 5 wt% and probably is related to the decomposition of thermosetting resins: formaldehyde was detected through FTIR spectroscopy as the main component among the evolved vapors (2780 and 2850 cm In order to calculate the heat needed for heating the WEEE Residue, its approximate quantitative composition was proposed by the experimental data. PVC in the sample was estimated to be 4 wt%, considering the chlorine content measured by elemental analysis ( The heat capacities of single materials supposed to be present in WEEE Residue were taken from literature (  The higher temperatures do not result in significant variations of products yields, but lead only a slightly larger production of gas, at detriment of the heavy oil. Furthermore, catalytic pyrolysis has a moderate effect on products in comparison to thermal pyrolysis at 500 °C. HUSYs with SAR from 5.1 and 80 favors the production of char with relative reduction of heavy oil, although both these products are not desirable because of their scarce handleable and marketability ( Results of elemental analysis on the light oil show a very similar element distribution for all the samples, being carbon the prevalent element (70–75 wt%), while hydrogen and nitrogen concentrations are around 8 wt% and 1 wt%, respectively. The very high LHV of light oils (31–36 MJ/kg) is in the range of fossil fuels, so its potential application could be as alternative liquid fuel. HUSY(5.1), HUSY(30) and NaUSY(5.7) obtained the pyrolytic oils with the highest energy content (36 MJ/kg). Chlorine and Bromine concentration in the oil produced during thermal pyrolysis at 500 °C was 0.8 and 0.2 wt%, respectively, showing their low tendency to move towards the liquid phase, as also observed by A semi-quantitative study focused on the distribution of compounds in the light oils was determined by GC–MS. A summary of results obtained is presented in Table S2, where all the compounds identified with a percentage-quantified area and similarity index (SI) higher than 0.1%, and 85% respectively, have been divided in two categories according to their number of carbons: C5–C9, and >C10. A further distinction of them was made in aliphatic, aromatic, oxygenated aromatic and halogenated fractions. It is evident that, both catalytic and thermal pyrolysis produce oils almost exclusively composed of light aromatic derivatives, which also include oxygenated compounds, principally originated from the epoxy/phenolic fractions as well as from PC and PBT in the WEEE Residue. In particular, total % area of light aromatic fraction (in the range C5–C9) is above 30% in all cases with few exception: HUSY(30) and HUSY(80), which are about 17 and 24% respectively, and NaUSY(5.7) that reaches 40%, showing the best performance in monoaromatic production. On the other hand, Table S2 shows that the amount of heavier compounds (>C10) always do not exceed 3%. As expected from the degradation of styrene-based polymers GC–MS analysis has also indicated styrene as the most abundant compound in light oils. Considerable quantities of toluene, ethyl-benzene, and phenol and alkyl-substituted phenols are present as well, while nitrogen compounds deriving from acrylonitrile unit of the ABS polymer, such as benzenebutanenitrile were detected in small and not significant amount. Zeolitic catalysts further decrease the concentration of halogenated compounds in the oil, probably promoting the formation of hydrogen or sodium halides ( In order to determine the concentration of commercially valuable monoaromatics found in the pyrolysis light oils and to investigate the catalysts capacity to modify the distribution of these products, the concentrations of benzene, toluene, ethylbenzene, xylene and styrene were determined by GC-FID analysis. Temperature seems not to affect either the total yield or the relative distribution of single monoaromatics as also observed for light oil yields ( As far as a possible reaction mechanism is concerned, it is known that degradation of polymers has generally been described as free radical in the case of a thermal process and ionic in presence of an acid or basic catalyst. For that reason, the preponderance in styrene production is the result of two kinds of decomposition mechanisms which occur simultaneously: a random chain scission to form polymer radicals that initiates the thermal process and the catalytic cracking, where the carbenium ions adsorbed on the catalyst surface undergo subsequent β scissions of the C-C bonds of the polystyrene chain ( In spite of these significant improvements, the effectiveness of catalysts seems weakened in comparison to the obtained increases of light oil and total monoaromatics yields highlighted in our previous studies ( The composition and the LHV of gases from the main representative thermal and catalytic experiments are presented in CO and CO  Table S3 shows the results of a semi-quantitative EDXRF elemental analysis of ash produced after combustion at 550 °C of the solid product derived by thermal pyrolysis at 500 °C. Besides recoverable elements (such as Al, Cu and Ti) it is important to note the presence of Cl and Br in the solid phase. Some authors ( In this study the possibility of a valorization of a WEEE Residue through pyrolysis has been assessed. WEEE Residue is rich in plastics (about 84 wt%) and its rough material composition was supposed by coupling thermal, infrared and ultimate analyses: 3 wt% of PP, 3 wt% of PBT, 4 wt% of PVC, 50 wt% of styrene-based polymers (principally ABS), 24 wt% of thermosetting resins (principally, epoxy/phenolic resins) and 16 wt% of an inorganic fraction (principally fiber glass). This hypothesis is in agreement with literature as well as by information released by the MRF supplier. Furthermore, the TG curve shows a three steps decomposition process with a final temperature of 434 °C (at the maximum decomposition rate). By examining the supposed composition and experimental DSC data, the amount of heat required to complete the thermal degradation of WEEE Residue (heating, melting and decomposition) was estimated 0.96 MJ/kg, corresponding to 3.6% of the energy content of the plastic sample (26.4 MJ/kg). This energy could be supplied by pyrolytic gas combustion. The major pyrolysis product of each experiment was light oil. CG-MS analysis showed that all light oils contain mainly aromatics and oxygenated compounds in the fraction C5-C9. Pyrolysis carried out at higher temperatures didn’t cause significant improvements neither in the production of light oil nor in the monoaromatics yields, while almost all catalysts showed a moderate effect. The best performance in terms of light oil yield was achieved by HUSY(810) at 500 °C with 59 wt%. Nevertheless, NaUSY(5.7) appears to be the best solution taking into account all the aspects: the second highest production of light oil and gas and the lowest production of char was obtained using this zeolite. Furthermore, light oil produced by NaUSY(5.7) has one of the best LHV (36 MJ/kg) and no halogenated compounds were detected by GC–MS analysis. Finally, NaUSY(5.7) also resulted as the best catalyst in terms of production of benzene, toluene, ethylbenzene and styrene and the total monoaromatics yield was 12 wt% higher than thermal pyrolysis at the same temperature. On other hand, it is important to stress that a highly contaminated and heterogeneous waste such as WEEE Residue seems to be less susceptible to the catalysts activity, decreasing the effectiveness of their utilization. The presence of heteroatoms in the WEEE Residue decreases the quality of the final products and narrows the range of their possible uses. In particular, the remarkable content of halogens requests a specific control of the process. Even though some catalysts avoided the presence of halogenated compounds in the light oil, a pretreatment, such as the separation of PVC wires from the WEEE streams, could be useful and easy to operate in order to remove at least the chorine and improve the quality of oil, gas and char. The authors declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this paper. Supplementary data to this article can be found online at The following are the Supplementary data to this article: