It is well recognized that soluble ammonia and nitrite in drinking water has chronic effects on humans. Ammonia has potential environmental health hazards, particularly to young children. European Union Standards limit the concentration of ammonia to 0.5mg/l in drinking water. In Eskisehir (Turkey) drinking and tap water are supplied from a water treatment plant, consisting mainly of screening, sedimentation, filtration and sterilization units and having a capacity of 80.000m3/d. Depend on the industrial and climatic effects the observed high ammonium concentration in treated water causes undesirable effects of water quality. Therefore, people in Eskisehir do not want to use tap water for drinking. The aim of the study was to evaluate the performance of membrane processes, i.e. Nanofiltration and reverse osmosis to the removal of ammonium and Ca ions from plant effluent and recommend one of them for a subsequent pilot plant application.Most high-rate physico-chemical drinking water treatment processes are very efficient at removing of suspended solids, phosphorus, oil and heavy metals, but are unable to eliminate the soluble ammonium Processes for the removal of ammonium ions from waste/potable water include nitrification–denitrification, air striping, ion exchange and membrane filtration. Although, the first two processes have found wide application areas, substantial reduction efficiency occurs at temperatures below 15°C. Ion exchange processes can be considered an attractive treatment method because of the selectivity, relative simplicity of application and low cost The first systematic studies of membrane phenomena appear to be carried out over 250 years ago. Early investigators experimented with diaphragms made from animal gut and bladders. During the nineteenth and early twentieth centuries, membrane had no industrial or commercial use; but instead they were used as a laboratory tool. Despite the obvious success of membranes to make them mechanically strong, defect-free, ultra-thin, there was no significant market in 1960s: because they were too expensive and unselective. At the beginning of 1980s, due to the improvements and advances in membrane technology, it has finally reached to maturity In Turkey, Porsuk River starts in Western Anatolia plateau and flows through two big cities namely Kutahya and Eskisehir. The river is practically unpolluted until reaching the city of Kutahya. But the river downstream from Kutahya is heavily polluted by industrial wastes (e.g. sugar beet factory, nitrogen fertilizer factory, magnesite factory and agricultural run-off). A treatment plant, which supplies tap and drinking water to Eskisehir, was build after the Porsuk dam reservoir. This water treatment plant consists of mainly screening, sedimentation, filtration and sterilization units and has a capacity of 80.000 The aim of the study was to evaluate the performance of membrane processes, i.e. nanofiltration (NF) and reverse osmosis (RO) to the removal of ammonium and Ca ions from plant effluent and recommend one of them for a subsequent pilot plant application. Eskişehir water treatment plant has screens with 2 and 5 The chemical analysis of river and treatment plant water for the selected inorganic substances are given in River and plant water analysis in The membrane tests were performed at the Department of Environmental Process Engineering, Bergakademie Freiberg in Germany. In order to obtain similar ion distribution of Porsuk river water, synthetic water was prepared using Freiberg tap water by adding necessary amount of chemical substances, such as NH A synthetic solution is collected in a storage tank of 25 As indicated by the chemical analyses of treated water ( Nowadays, biological denitrification treatment process has been found an application for a full scale removal system for ammonium and nitrate from potable water. The literature indicates wider application of heterotrophic denitrification with fluidized bed reactors in comparison to packed bed reactors. The problems such as clogging and channeling, commonly associated with packed bed reactors are of no concern. But fluidized bed reactors require recirculation of effluents to achieve sufficient nitrate removal, thus they may require more process control. Moreover, the process still shows dependence to temperature and pH. Being out of optimal pH range (10.8–11.5) and operating at low temperatures significantly reduce the denitrification rates. In addition, possible bacterial contamination and presence of residual organics in treated water needs post treatment of denitrified water. As compared to the biological treatment, RO has the following advantages: lower start-up periods (in minutes), good amenability to automatic control, insignificant reduction on treatment rate at low temperature and wide range of pHs, being a stable operation without the need of additional post treatment The fouling index of the river water cannot be measured. After sand filtration the fouling index of the water was found as 3. Because of high turbidity (5 Membrane filtration has been increasingly used in the filtration of water as compared to conventional treatment techniques. Even though it has been mainly used in desalination of water beginning with the first large scale installations coming on stream in the mid 1990s. The potable water application area may well eventually surpass RO desalination in terms of installed membrane area The results obtained in this study clearly indicated that the RO is an effective method for removing ammonium ions from the Porsuk drinking water. The NH The authors are grateful to Prof. Dr. Haertel, TU-Bergakademie Freiberg for the helpful support and discussion. They are also grateful to Mr. Karaçay, head of the Eskisehir Water Treatment Plant, Eskisehir-Turkey for providing water sample.