Intra-articular calcaneal fractures are associated with high morbidity, persistent pain, and long-term disability. This retrospective study assesses early clinical and radiographic postoperative findings of intra-articular calcaneal fractures following treatment by ligamentotaxis using a delta frame construct with a large fragment external fixator. Minimally invasive percutaneous reduction of calcaneal fractures is an alternative treatment for Sanders type II, III, and IV fractures. Ten patients from the Detroit Medical Center were followed between January 2002 and December 2004 for follow-up over a mean of 353.5 ± 85.45 days postoperatively. The mean age of the patients was 45.8 ± 12.3 years. There were 2 patients with Sanders type IIA, 3 patients with type IIIAB, 1 patient with type IIIAC, and 4 patients with type IV fracture patterns. The results demonstrated that the mean calcaneal width decreased, the calcaneal height increased, and the calcaneal length increased when comparing preoperative to postoperative measurements. Böhler’s angle increased from 20.8 ± 8.27° preoperatively to 25.7 ± 5.21° postoperatively, and Gissane’s angle decreased from 127.4 ± 45.22° preoperatively to 111.2 ± 39.38° postoperatively. The posterior facet step-off on CT examination reduced from 2.6 ± 0.82 mm preoperatively to 0.4 ± 0.26 mm postoperatively. The mean postoperative total subtalar joint range of motion was 19.0 ± 4.5° on the affected side and 34.4 ± 4.58° on the contralateral foot. The mean Maryland Foot score was 85.8 ± 6.41 in the 10 patients. With the exception of the change from preoperative to postoperative Böhler’s angle, and the comparison of the ipsilateral (side of the fracture) to contralateral resting calcaneal stance position, all of the comparisons revealed statistically significant (P ≤ .05) differences. The authors conclude that the delta frame construct is a viable alternative method to open reduction and internal fixation for treating intra-articular calcaneal fractures.Treatment of intra-articular subtalar joint (STJ) calcaneal fractures has remained controversial ( Ligamentotaxis is defined as the realigning of fracture fragments as a result of tension applied across the fracture by the surrounding soft tissue We postulated that external fixation of intra-articular STJ calcaneal fractures using ligamentotaxis can be used to satisfactorily restore comminuted STJ depression and calcaneal alignment. With this in mind, we undertook a retrospective cohort study to determine radiographic and functional outcomes following repair of joint depression fractures of the calcaneus. This prospective study reviewed consecutive patients who presented to the podiatric surgery service with closed, isolated, intra-articular STJ calcaneal fractures at the Detroit Medical Center between January 2002 and December 2004. Patients with contraindications to the surgical repair of their calcaneal fracture, and those with polytrauma, were excluded. Polytrauma was defined as any soft tissue or osseous injury to any other structure of the body or foot. All patients had plain films of cervical and lumbar spine, hip, knee, foot, and ankle to rule out polytrauma. Ten patients were enrolled in the study during this time period and all were available for follow-up. In addition, calcaneal computerized tomography (CT) images were obtained with 3-mm slices in both the coronal and transverse plains. CT was used to visualize restoration of the STJ surface, and plain radiographs were used to compare the restorative effects of distraction by means of ligamentotaxis. Preoperative analysis of the plain films included axial calcaneal width at 5 cm from the plantar calcaneal tuberosity. Calcaneal height was based on a measurement from the apex of Gissane’s angle to a line drawn parallel to the plantar calcaneal tuberosity. Calcaneal length measurements were determined from the posterior aspect of the calcaneus to the proximal aspect of the calcaneocuboid joint. Finally, Böhler’s and Gissane’s angles were also measured. Analysis of the CT scans involved measuring the amount of step-off in the posterior STJ using a coronal scan at the widest undersurface of the posterior facet ( Patients were placed in a lateral decubitus position with adequate padding under the contralateral limb and in between the knees and remaining lower extremity prominences. A thigh tourniquet was applied to ensure appropriate surgical field exposure. General sedative anesthesia or spinal anesthesia was determined by our house anesthesia staff, depending on comorbidities. Under fluoroscopy, Schanz pins were placed into the posterior inferior calcaneus, the talar neck, and the distal anterior tibia ( Patients remained non–weight bearing (NWB) for the first 6 weeks. The external fixator was then removed and the patients remained NWB in a removable cast for an additional 6 weeks and began NWB range of motion exercises. At 12 weeks, patients gradually began weight bearing to tolerance in an athletic shoe. CT and plain films were repeated for comparative analysis at final evaluation 1 year from the date of surgery ( A statistical description of the case series can be found in Anatomic reduction is the key to surgical management of intra-articular calcaneal fractures There are many options in treating intra-articular calcaneal fractures. Omoto et al Percutaneous treatment of calcaneal fractures has shown to be useful in treating tongue-type fractures Recently, some specialists treating calcaneal fractures have been advocating the use of ORIF for these injuries. Most foot and ankle surgeons would agree that the more anatomic the reduction, the better the results. Randle et al Various methods of external fixation have also been reported in the literature. Stein et al Recently, Talarico et al The delta construct described in this study was fashioned after that designed by Lutz et al One disadvantage of the delta construct is that in severely comminuted fractures the calcaneal tuberosity fragment may be too small for the pin to engage. If an associated talus fracture is noted, delta construct is contraindicated. The use of external fixation has its own inherent disadvantages such as the potential for pin tract infections, patient noncompliance with NWB, external fixation neurosis, neuritis from excessive distraction, and inconvenience with fixation bulkiness. However, the authors believe that the ability of this technique to restore calcaneal height, width, and length while avoiding the complications of ORIF, outweigh the disadvantages. Even with severely comminuted fractures that are not completely anatomically aligned, restoration of the height, length, and width provide an excellent foundation for an arthrodesis in the future if needed. This evaluation of the delta frame external fixator is a preliminary study that will need to be expanded to give more validity. We are in the process of comparing other various forms of surgical treatment for calcaneal fractures: ORIF and percutaneous fixation with and without arthroscopic guidance. A comparison of these results using similar parameters as used in this study will be beneficial to show the limitations and advantages of each form of surgical treatment. In conclusion, intra-articular calcaneal fractures have historically been managed by closed reduction with immobilization or open reduction and internal fixation (ORIF). The delta frame construct provides an alternative option to the surgeon with promising clinical results by restoring calcaneal height, length, and width and realigning the posterior subtalar joint facet while avoiding the complications often associated with ORIF.