This work examines the dissolution of spent commercial NiMo/Al2O3 and CoMo/Al2O3–SiO2 catalysts in aqueous solutions containing fluoride ions under mild experimental conditions. Solubilization of samples in the presence of fluoride salts alone was insignificant, but solubilization in pure HF was quantitative after 14–16 h. The addition of a strong inorganic acid led to full solubilization after 30 min (NiMo) or 4 h (CoMo) at 50–60 °C and a stirring speed of 400 rpm. This time was reduced by at least 75% when hydrogen peroxide was added. HF was the best source of fluoride ions for dissolving SiO2 and phosphate-containing species. The recovery of metals from the leach solution could be accomplished very efficiently and with low residue generation.Molybdenum and tungsten based catalysts promoted by nickel or cobalt are very useful for eliminating heteroatoms (N, S, O), metals and olefinic bonds from petroleum distillates under high hydrogen pressure and temperature. This process is known as hydrotreatment (HDT) and the catalyst lifetime varies from 1 to 4 years. The spent material can be submitted to one of the following procedures: restoration of catalytic activity (regeneration, rejuvenation), recycling or disposal. This last procedure was typically used before environmental concerns became more important to the chemical industry and related activities. In fact, The United States Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) classifies a spent HDT catalyst as a very dangerous industrial waste ( The concentration of metals in HDT catalysts usually surpasses those found in natural ores ( Despite the great variety of proposed methods in the literature, they can be grouped into three categories: (i) solubilization in acidic medium; (ii) high temperature chlorination and (iii) pyro- or hydrometallurgical methods. The latter were largely dominant until the 1980s but require extreme operating conditions (calcination, fusion etc.) and are very energy intensive. In the last 20 years most proposed methods have been based on acid digestion under mild experimental conditions. In general, a thermal pretreatment is performed before acid dissolution, this may be controlled coke burning or high temperature calcination to eliminate carbon and most sulfur. Sulfuric acid is, by far, the most employed acid, with or without additives, particularly hydrogen peroxide. After adjusting experimental parameters (acid concentration, time, temperature etc.) high solubilization yields may be achieved, including metal contaminants such as V ( There are very few studies on recovery of metals from spent HDT catalysts in a fluoride medium. However, pure HF ( Spent CoMo/Al Samples went through a pretreatment, consisting of an oxidation step in air (500 °C, 1 atm, 5 h) to remove coke, water and most of the sulfur as SO The following fluoride chemicals were used: 37 wt.% (∼ 20 mol L Metal concentrations were determined by atomic absorption spectrometry (solutions) or X-ray fluorescence (solids). Sulfate, fluoride and phosphate ions were determined by ion-chromatography. Carbon and sulfur contents were determined by a LECO analyser. Crystalline phases in the solid samples were identified by X-ray diffraction analysis ( When fluoride salts were used all samples showed very low solubilities (< Silica was only soluble when HF was used. Phosphate species were also well solubilized in such acid. The solubility of Si and P in HF appeared to increase solubilization of Al, Mo and Co. However, solubilization in HF alone was a very slow process. After 6 h, the solid residue was composed of insoluble Si, P and S phases. Complete solubility was achieved only after 14–16 h. The above results explain why Co, Ni, Mo and Al recoveries, reported in the literature ( Results are shown in Fresh catalyst was submitted to the same pre-oxidation procedure and leached under identical experimental conditions. The results for both samples were comparable ( In this set of experiments leachants with or without fluoride ions were used. One of the components was hydrogen peroxide as it is widely used as an additive for acid dissolution of catalysts ( The results shown in Stirring above 400 rpm did not show significant influence on leaching behaviour ( These experiments were aimed at combining the positive effect of the inorganic acid and the hydrogen peroxide on catalyst solubilization when fluoride ions were present. Results are presented in The catalyst solubilization was complete in 50–60 min (CoMo) or 10–15 min (NiMo) when those leachants were used. The process showed effervescence in the first 10 min and temporary formation of peroximolybdates. The results for both fresh and spent catalysts were identical. It is interesting to note that the dissolution time for this set of leachants was highly reduced when compared to HF Although the inorganic acid Stirring and heat were necessary to dissolve spent HDT catalysts. Complete solubilization in less than 1 h (CoMo) or 30 min (NiMo) was reached when stirring was set to 400 rpm (or higher) and the temperature was in the 50–60 °C range (higher temperatures did not present kinetic advantages). The optimum HF On the other hand, an excess of HF decreased solubilization rate. It was complete only after 1 h when the HF In all experiments the gaseous effluent was washed down with distilled water and HF concentration adjusted to 0.01 mol L Aluminium was recovered by the slow addition of NaOH (6 mol L The solution pH was then further increased slowly to pH 9–9.5 with NaOH solution to precipitate Ni and Co as hydroxide and/or phosphate compounds. The amount precipitated of each element depended on the relative amounts of P and Ni (or Co) in the sample. The precipitate was washed with water 2–3 times (3 mL g The colourless solution was reduced to near 40% of the initial volume by evaporative heating. Crystallization of NaF, from the excess F Sulphuric acid was added to the stirred molybdenum solution at 80–90 °C to adjust pH to 2–3. Then Na The brown solid formed was filtered and washed with H The overall processing scheme is shown in There are two final effluents: one coming from NiS (CoS) precipitation and the other from the precipitation of molybdenum. In both cases oxidation with H Full solubilization of spent HDT catalysts in a fluoride containing medium in less than 1 h, regardless of composition, was possible using HF The best F As shown in this work, recovery of fluoride as commercial value compounds is of great interest since the amount of final wastes generated in the process is drastically reduced. The dissolution and separation processes shown in this work are comparatively low energy with respect to the traditional pyro/hydrometallurgical processes and/or chlorination procedures reported in the literature for processing spent HDT catalysts. Additionally, the recovery efficiency of all metals were very high, normally surpassing the recovery levels claimed in the literature. We are grateful to CENPES/Petrobrás (Rio de Janeiro) for the catalyst samples as well as PO Tatiana Siqueira de Lima and Paula Constante Campos are grateful to SR-2/UFRJ for a fellowship. We acknowledge CNPq, FUJB, CAPES and FAPERJ for financial support. We thank Dr. Luis G. S. Sobral (CETEM/MCT) for a critical review of this paper.