A study has been undertaken to develop a methodology to determine minor and trace elements in geological ceramic raw materials by wavelength-dispersive X-ray fluorescence (WD-XRF) spectrometry. The set up of the methodology has been done either by optimising not only the sample preparation process but also optimising the measurement with the aid of the software Pro-Trace, and also by making an exhaustive compilation of reference materials for calibration and validation.
                  The developed method is precise and accurate and allows the analysis of Ba, Ce, Co, Cr, Cu, Fe, La, Mn, Ni, Pb, Rb, S, Sr, Ta, Th, U, V, Y, Zn and Zr present in the sample as minor or trace elements in geological materials used as raw ceramic material in a relatively short period of time. Besides, the method is more environmentally friendly than other methodologies as it does not require the use of solvents or reagents.The development of new analysis methods capable of determining minor and trace elements in ceramic raw materials has been demanded because of the emergence of new ceramic products with technical characteristics and novel functionalities demands, as some elements present in very low concentrations can generate defects in the final product. The presence of compounds such as pyrites and other sulfur compounds that can decompose at elevated temperatures during the firing process of ceramic materials originates defects in the final product; other elements such as Ti and Fe compounds generate colouring problems, and the presence of U and Th in materials such as zirconium silicates can cause high levels of radioactivity. Trace elements in rocks have often been determined using atomic absorption spectrometry (GFAAS or FIAS-AAS), inductively coupled plasma atomic emission spectrometry (ICP-OES) and inductively coupled plasma mass spectrometry (ICP-MS), which are extremely sensitive but require a tedious pretreatment, including decomposition with acid, due which implies the conduction of digestions, entailing the ensuing increase of the uncertainty and long analysis times, for that reason, analyses of numerous samples are difficult by these methods The use of XRF in the analysis of geological samples is increasing, mainly because of the precision and accuracy with which the major elements and a wide range of trace elements may be determined. Although it is an old and well-established technique, it continues to find widespread use in the analysis of soils and other environmental samples. One reason for the continuing popularity of the technique is the simple sample preparation This study has been undertaken to obtain such a methodology for the determination of minor and trace elements in materials such as sands, clays, kaolins, feldspars and feldspathoids, calcites, dolomites, etc., by wavelength dispersive X-ray fluorescence spectrometry (WD-XRF), and making an exhaustive compilation of reference materials to calibrate and validate the methodology. The following elements were analysed: Ba, Ce, Co, Cr, Cu, Fe, La, Mn, Ni, Pb, Rb, S, Sr, Ta, Th, U, V, Y, Zn y Zr. The developed method is precise and accurate and allows the analysis of minor and trace elements in geological materials used as raw ceramic material in a relatively short period of time. The use of a great number of standards has yield a huge concentration range for all the analysed elements. Besides, the method is more environmentally friendly than other methodologies as it does not require the use of solvents or reagents due to the lack of any sample digestion process; reducing in this way the adverse environmental impact of analytical methodologies The importance of “reliable” analyses of rocks reference materials in the calibration of modern instrumental techniques has already been stressed. In this respect, compilations of data for all available silicate samples are very valuable. However, these lists of data do have one drawback: they give little indication of the error limits in quoted values apart from a crude classification into “usable”, “proposed”, or “recommended” values as opposed to “for information” or “order of magnitudes values” depending on the favoured terminology of the compiler. The calculation of statistically meaningful uncertainty limits from such data is not simple since interlaboratory bias cannot readily be quantified on a statistical basis The results of many geological reference materials indicate that there are few major elements whose values are known with a confidence better than 1% (one sigma). Furthermore, for several elements, coefficients of variation exceed 5%, sometimes substantially so, even though the concentration of the element is significantly above the expected detection limit of modern analytical techniques. And so we have the contradiction that many modern instrumental methods are capable of achieving instrument precisions often exceeding 0.1% relative. Uncertainties in analyses of individual reference materials used for calibrating instruments can be overcome by incorporating a large number of such samples (often over 20) in the calibration data set do that discrepancies will cancel out. However, the only way in which the accuracy of a calibration can be satisfactory tested is by the analysis of individual reference and comparing analysed results with data In the case of trace elements, with a few notable exceptions, error in the analyses of reference materials usually exceeds 5% relative (one sigma). The problems mentioned for setting up and assessing the accuracy of major element calibrations are even more serious for trace element data. An associated difficulty is that is often necessary to determine these elements down to detection limit levels. Such data cannot be achieved unless the calibration line passes through the origin, and in instruments that are calibrated directly from reference materials, this is not always easy to achieve without a highly critical evaluation of the reliability of individual datum points The preparation of the calibration curves and validation of the measurements were carried out with materials coming from different origins: Reference materials from different certification bodies: National Research Centre for Certified Reference Materials GBW (China): GBW07401 Soil, GBW07402 Soil, GBW07403 Soil, GBW07404 Soil, GBW07405 Soil, GBW07406 Soil, GBW07407 Soil, GBW07408 Soil, GBW03122 Kaolin, GBW07152 Lithium Ore, and GBW07153 Lithium Ore. Bureau of Analysed Samples – BAS (United Kingdom): BCS-CRM No. 313/1 High Purity Silica, and BCS-CRM No. 3751/1 Soda Feldspar. Canadian Centre for Mineral and Energy Technology – CANMET (Canada): STDS-1 Stream sediment, STDS-2 Stream sediment, STDS-3 Stream sediment, STDS-4 Stream sediment, SY-2 Syenite, and SY-3 Syenite. Instituto de Pesquisas Tecnologicas (Brazil): IPT-72 Soda Feldspar. Reference materials obtained from the participation in round robin test organised by different associations: GeoPT series of reference materials obtained from the Interlaboratory Test for the Analysis of geological samples (GeoPT) organised by IAG (International Association of Geoanalysts) (United Kingdom): GeoPT-7 Biotite, GeoPT-8 Microdiorite, GeoPT-11 Dolerite, GeoPT-12 Serpentinite, GeoPT-16 Basalt rock, GeoPT-19 Gabbro, GeoPT-20 Ultramafic rock, GeoPT-21 Granite, GeoPT-22 Basalt, GeoPT-23 Lake pegmatite, GeoPT-24 Greywake, GeoPT-25 Basalt, GeoPT-28 Shale, GeoPT-29 Nepheline, GeoPT-30 Syenite, GeoPT-30A Limestone, GeoPT-31 River sediment, GeoPT-34 Basalt, GeoPT-35 Ball clay, and GeoPT-35A Metalliferous sediment. Mercury Soil-2 MS-2 obtained from the interlaboratory organised by the Central Geological Laboratory of Mongolia (CGL) (Mongolia). Depending on the certification body and certification procedure, data with different quality can be found in the reference materials certificate, such as certified values with assigned uncertainty (combined ( Most of them present an assigned value ( A few of them are submitted to a subsequent certification process (GeoPT-16, GeoPT-14, and GeoPT-12) and some elements present an assigned value ( As can be seen from the relation of reference materials used in this study, materials of different nature and with a variety of matrix were used in the preparation of the calibration curves. After the calibration was performed, geological materials different from those used in the calibration were analysed and the results compared in other to validate the established methodology. The study was conducted with a PANalytical model AXIOS wavelength dispersive X-ray fluorescence (WD-XRF) spectrometer with a Rh anode tube, and 4 Although XRF analysis requires only simple preparation techniques, sample preparation is usually necessary to ensure XRF analysis to be truly effective and contribute to the optimisation of X-ray analysis For WD-XRF analysis, the sample needs to be prepared in the form of pellets or beads. When the analyte is present in the sample in very low concentration (minor or trace), the sample is prepared in the form of pressed pellets in order to have lower detection limits as the sample does not suffer any significant dilution during the sample preparation. There is literature where the analysis of rare earth elements in rocks by WD-XRF was carried out preparing the sample as beads with a very low dilution which obliged them to reheat the glass at 1200 The pellet preparation was optimised forming pellets of a soil with different binders and studying the one that gave the best results, that is, better surface, and better reproducibility in the results. Four binders were studied: All pellets were formed at a pressure of 100 After forming the pellets, their surface was observed, the one with stearic acid being the best. To confirm this, ten pellets were prepared using this binder and measured; the results obtained showing dispersion lower than 5% (relative). So, all pellets were prepared using stearic acid as binder. As can be seen in Empirical calibration curves comparing intensities with concentrations can be used for the analysis of samples with limited variations of the matrix composition. However, a general-purpose calibration procedure that is applicable to a larger variety of matrix types and covering wider ranges of the analyte concentration is usually more desirable. The calibration procedure known as “empirical” compares directly the net intensity of the analyte peaks with their concentrations, without making any correction for the inter-element of matrix effects. It is possible to use this type of calibration only when the analyte concentration range is limited and when the standard and sample matrix compositions are extremely similar. This can occur in certain industrial applications where the standards are normally typical “samples” that have been analysed by a technique other than XRF. With this calibration type, it is assumed that the net intensity is linearly related to concentration. However, the relationship between intensity and concentration becomes non-linear when significant differences in matrix compositions are present between samples and standards. The analyst must be extremely cautious when using empirical coefficients calculated by multiple regression analysis because such an approach contains many potentials pitfalls. Not only do empirical coefficients correct for matrix effects, but they can also conceal other error types that may be present, such as errors on measured intensities, poor standard chemical data, poor sample preparation, variation of particle size effects, of mineralogical effects, of surface effects, and so on. As opposed to empirical coefficients, theoretically determined influence coefficients allow the error sources to be detected, isolated and estimated, thereby giving the analyst greater confidence in the reliability and applicability of the calibration data. When calibrating for an analyte, it must always be kept in mind that a significant intercept value means an error somewhere, and one must try to discover the cause of it and correct for it. In the case of trace element determination, the best method to correct the matrix effects lies in the use of theoretical influence coefficients, calibration curves should be constrained to pass through the origin, and, whenever possible, the use of linear regression analysis is recommended The measurement was undertaken with the aid of an analytical programme called Pro-Trace, supplied by PANalytical, which uses primary and secondary or only secondary mass attenuation coefficients (MAC's) to make matrix corrections or net intensities. Advantages of the use of Pro-Trace are: the more accurate background interpolation, the matrix effect correction thanks to MAC's and finally the smart element selector (SES) which allows the reduction of measurement times with the use of shared background positions Once the calibration conditions were selected, the reference materials were measured in order to construct the calibration curves. The software of the instrument permits the quality of the value to be defined. In this way, assigned values from GeoPT proficiency test and certified values were defined as high quality, while those provisional, reference or informative where defined as low quality. The software fits the experimental data taking into account the quality of each value, minimising the RMS value (root mean square), obtained from the following equation: Very low RMS value was obtained for all the analysed elements, which depends on the number and quality of standards, the interelement coefficients calculated, the range and of course the quality of the measurement process.  After the calibration was performed, the following reference materials were analysed by WD-XRF in order to validate the developed method: GeoPT-9 Slate, GBW07153 Lithium Ore, and GBW07407 Soil. The The The measurement uncertainty  Once the calibrations were performed, the methodology was validated measuring reference materials. The results obtained, together with their uncertainty ( In order to compare the results obtained with the known values of the validation standards, the difference between both was compared, together with the related uncertainty: that is, the combined uncertainty of the known and measured values, as specified in the literature The absolute value of the difference between the measured value and the known value is calculated as follows: The uncertainty of The expanded uncertainty In order to verify the goodness of the method, The results of this comparison are presented in The value of  To be noted are the low detection and quantification limits reached for all analysed elements.  An exhaustive compilation of geological reference materials has been undertaken which has allowed the achievement of a wide working range for all the elements studied, these materials coming from different sources: round robin tests, certification bodies, etc. Low detection limits have been obtained for all the elements analysed owing to the optimisation of the sample preparation as pressed pellets, the optimised measurement conditions, together with the use of the Pro-Trace software, and the use of a WD-XRF instrument that could operate at 4 The developed analytical method is robust, allowing the precise and accurate analysis of trace and minor elements in geological ceramic raw materials. Time required to carry out the analysis, including the preparation of the sample and the measurement, is much less than for any other method which uses ICP-OES or ICP-MS, being really suitable to be used as a fast control method. The method is environmentally friendly compared with others such as ICP-OES, ICP-MS, etc., because it does not required reagents and high temperatures in the process of sample preparation. This study was cofunded by the