A sandwich-structured composite blank containing a high chromium cast iron (HCCI) and low carbon steel (LCS) claddings was successfully fabricated by casting and hot rolling, and then a series of quenching and tempering treatments were employed. The evolution of microstructures and microhardness of as-cast, hot-rolled and heat-treated specimens were investigated. The microstructures of hot-rolled HCCI are refined and significant variations of carbides are observed. A perfect metallurgical bonding between HCCI and LCS is revealed by the continuous distributions of alloy elements. The microhardness of hot-rolled HCCI after quenching and tempering is found to be close to that of as-cast one. The hardness of HCCI can reach up to HV 750 or above after oil quenching. The hardness of HCCI reduced to HV 600–750 after tempering due to the tempering of martensite.High chromium cast irons (HCCIs) are excellent wear-resistant materials, which have been widely used for wear-affected equipment operated under extreme conditions, such as facilities in the slurry pumping systems of the oil sands handling and mineral processing The sandwich-structured composite blank containing low carbon steel (LCS) claddings surrounding the high chromium cast iron (HCCI) core was prepared by composite casting. The main composition of the HCCI material is listed in Hot-rolled and heat-treated specimens were machined, polished and etched by a 2% nitric acid alcohol solution for 20–30 During hot rolling process, the compatible deformation of HCCI layer together with the LCS claddings is observed. According to hot rolling experiments, the total thickness of composite plates is reduced from 80  Alloy elements such as Cr and Ni would diffuse across the interface between HCCI and LCS during the hot rolling process. The distribution of Cr and Ni elements across the interface zone are determined through EDS, which are shown in   The tempering treatment is generally used following the quenching treatment to transform retained austenite remaining in the structure Tempering treatments on the destabilized material give a significant drop in hardness due to the tempering of martensite. The hardness of HCCI reduces to HV 600–750 after tempering, as shown in In this work, a sandwich-structured HCCI/LCS composite blank was successfully fabricated through casting and then hot-rolled into composite plates, with a perfect metallurgical bonding between them. The plastic deformation of HCCI material was realized through this method. The microstructures of hot-rolled HCCI are refined and significant variations of carbides are observed. The hardness of HCCI can reach up to HV 750 or above after oil quenching. The sample quenched at 1000 We would like to acknowledge the experimental center in University of Science and Technology Beijing and Professor Huiping Feng for experimental advices.