Fractures of the proximal humerus are a very common presentation in modern Trauma and Orthopaedic practice. In an ever-aging population, the incidence has dramatically increased resulting in a large socioeconomical burden.
                  The surgical management of these injuries has evolved over the years. Patient outcomes are variable and there is no consensus on treatment approach. This review article focuses on the outcomes following fracture fixation using common surgical techniques.Fractures of the proximal humerus are very common and account for 6–10% of all fractures. The burden created by these fractures is quite significant, especially in the elderly. The vast majority of these patients are still active and, subsequently to the injury, lose their independence in terms of activities of daily living. Management remains controversial. Conservative treatment is generally accepted for minimally displaced fractures which account for 80% of all fractures with good reported functional outcomes. Good outcomes are reported with the majority of studies looking at operative interventions. A more recent RCT looking at the effectiveness of surgery versus non-surgical management of displaced fractures in adults concluded that there was no difference in clinical outcomes at two years. This review will focus on the outcomes of fracture fixation using plates, nails or pinning techniques. Proximal humeral fractures are generally described by the number of parts generated, level of displacement and angulation to each other. The humeral head is a distinct part where articular cartilage covers a dense subchondral bone. The articular cartilage margin is attached to the joint capsule and this area is thin, rendering it vulnerable to fractures. This is described as the anatomical neck. The fracture lines can propagate here into the head leading to articular damage. The most common fractures occur at the surgical neck area. Neer's classification has a complex but clear criteria about part displacement (>1 cm gap) or angulation/rotation between the parts (>45°). However, Hertel et al. Different surgical fixation methods have been used in the management of proximal humeral fractures. Surgical outcomes rely on patient and surgical factors Surgical techniques can be categorised into three different groups: percutaneous Kirschner wires, proximal humeral nails, and fixation using locking plates. In otherwise fit and healthy patients, age, fracture type and bone quality play a vital part in the success of surgery. This is one of the first techniques used in the surgical management of proximal humeral fractures. Under X-ray guidance, closed reduction is first achieved with traction and manipulation of the fracture. This can also be supported by temporary non-threaded k-wires to joystick and manipulate the fracture into position. Two threaded K-wires are inserted above the deltoid insertion and directed proximally into the head. This can be further reinforced by two more threaded k-wires starting from the tuberosities directed distally into the humeral shaft. It is a technically demanding procedure, but good results are reported in the literature. A recent cohort study investigating all three surgical options mentioned above as well as hemiarthroplasty for displaced 2 and 3 parts fractures against conservative management found K-wire fixation has a superior Constant Score of 68.7 when compared to conservative management. Another emergent technique is the use of metal humeral block screwed into the lateral humeral cortex to secure wires threaded into the head at 35°to the shaft and 25°to each other. Screws can be added to secure other fragments if necessary. Early results show a good mean Constant score of 80–90 compared to the contralateral arm. K-wire fixation is generally safe with minimal blood loss, less soft tissue disruption, shorter operative time and low cost. LP technology has evolved over the past 80 years. In 1949, the first 120° blade plate was introduced. LP is commonly used for 2-part surgical neck fractures. In a recent cohort study, Constant and Disability of the Arm, Shoulder and Hand (DASH) scores in 44 patients with 2,3 and 4-part fractures fixed with LP did not prove to be advantageous when compared to conservative management. Nonetheless, new techniques are being employed in displaced 3 and 4-part fractures yielding promising results. The use of fibular strut allograft, cancellous bone graft and synthetic bone graft in deficient medial calcar have shown promising results on cadaveric models. A case series looking at LP fixation of 71 adults with 2-, 3- and 4-part fractures with fibular strut graft with more than one year follow up showed a mean Constant score of 82.7. Calcium sulphate augmentation with LP fixation have also shown promising results. A retrospective case series of 21 patients found very good outcomes with modified Constant and Murley score of 64.04 with two-year follow-up. Functional outcomes following LP fixation are difficult to interpret. Complication rates of over 20% are reported in most series despite achieving bony union in over 75% of cases. Therefore, a steep learning curve of surgical techniques, predicting factors outside the surgeon's control (age, female-sex and poor bone stock) and lack of robust evidence in the literature dictates a cautious approach to LP fixation especially in elderly patients. HN is a rigid angular stable device that gives a biomechanical advantage over plates with a shorter leaver arm and higher stiffness in bending and torsional rigidity. As for LP, HN is commonly used for 2-part, and to lesser extent, 3-part fractures. The literature also reports on a few complications associated with HN. However, starting medial to the greater tuberosity and through the muscular part of supraspinatus avoids rotator cuff dysfunction, post-operative pain and joint stiffness. As per LP, it is vital to restore and maintain medial buttress and anatomical neck/shaft angle for successful outcomes. In a recent retrospective cohort study, mean Constant and DASH scores of 19 patients with 2-, 3- and 4-part fractures showed a distinct outcome compared with conservative management when age was taking into consideration. HN is gaining popularity among surgeons as it offers a high degree of stability and better biomechanics with a short level arm even in poor bone quality. However, the lack of strong evidence to support their use in those over the age of 65 years restricts their wider use in fracture fixation. Proximal humeral fractures are very common injuries in an ever-ageing population with increased burden to the health system and wider social effects on patients. No consensus has been established with regards to management, with the literature leaning toward conservative management in the majority of cases. Many surgical techniques and implants have evolved in the past 80 years. The complexity of the fracture may dictate the type of fixation suitable although surgical expertise and patient factors (age, sex and bone stock availability) directly affect surgical outcomes. In 2011, Smejkal et al. compared percutaneous K-wiring with LP fixation in 61 patients. In 2015, the Proximal Fracture of the Humerus Evaluation by Randamisation (PROFHER) national UK multicentre randomised clinical trial published on clinical effectiveness of surgical versus non-surgical treatment of proximal humeral fractures in one of the highest impact journals. However, at closer inspection the conclusion may not be that simple. The PROFHER trial only included 11 4-part fractures (4.4%) which is much lower than the expected 20–30% seen in the population. Another recent meta-analysis on specific fracture configuration has concluded that differences in the type of fracture and surgical treatment results in outcomes that are distinct from those generated from analysis of all types of fracture and surgical treatments grouped together. With advanced surgical implant designs and techniques, the jury is out in recommending either approaches. Proximal humeral fracture management remains a controversial topic. Conservative management is showing a good clinical outcome in the treatment of 2 -, 3- and 4-part fractures in a recent level I evidence trial. However, flaws in their data collection and interpretation coupled with advanced surgical techniques and improved implant choice continues to tip the balance towards surgical management for displaced fractures. Recent study looked at the difficulties in decision making in the treatment of 476 patients with displaced proximal humeral fractures and its subsequent effect on surgical outcomes. Therefore, as per current evidence, we conclude that the management of proximal humeral fracture should be considered on a case-by-case bases taking into consideration the merits and potential complications of each treatment modality. Until more robust evidence emerges, both conservative and surgical options are justifiable in the treatment of proximal humeral fractures. The following is the Supplementary data to this article: Supplementary data to this article can be found online at