Mesoporous silica nanoparticles (MCM-41) were used as a carrier system to study the influence of surface charge and hydrophobicity on solubility and in-vitro drug release behavior of Griseofulvin, a potent antifungal drug with low water solubility. Bare MCM-41 with a pure silica composition, MCM-41 after amino functionalization (MCM-41-NH2) and methyl functionalization (MCM-41-CH3) were used in this study followed by encapsulation of griseofulvin. Various characterization techniques have been employed to confirm the successful drug loading inside the nanopores. The surface functionalization on MCM-41 is found to have significant effect on griseofulvin’s in vitro release and solubility. Both negatively and positively charged surface showed enhancement in solubility and drug release of griseofulvin. However, the hydrophobic modification led to a retarded drug release, which is caused by the poor wetting effect in the case of MCM-41-CH3 nanoparticles.Relatively higher proportions of newly emerging drug molecules from high throughput screening are hydrophobic (poor aqueous solubility), posing a major obstacle in clinical applications Mesoporous silica nanoparticles (MSNs) such as MCM-41 Griseofulvin (GRIS), a potent antifungal drug, belongs to BCS class II and is slightly soluble in water In this study, we report the influence of surface charge and hydrophobicity of MSNs on solubility and drug release behavior of griseofulvin in a series of MCM-41 materials ( Cetyl trimethylammonium bromide (CTAB), tetraethoxy orthosilicate (TEOS), (3-aminopropyl)triethoxysilane (APTES), chlorotrimethylsilane (TMCS), sodium lauryl sulfate (SLS) and griseofulvin (GRIS) were purchased from Sigma–Aldrich. Reagent grade sodium hydroxide (NaOH) was received from ChemSupply. Methanol AR and Toluene were purchased from RCI labscan and Merck, respectively. X-ray diffractograms (XRD) and wide angle XRD (WXRD) were recorded on a Rigaku Miniflex X-ray diffractometer with Fe-filtered Co radiation ( MCM-41 synthesis was performed with slight modification to a previously reported method by Yang et al. Surfactant template was removed by a reported method by Lu et. al. Amino modification was performed according to a published report with slight changes Methyl modification was performed according to a published report Griseofulvin loading was performed using rotary evaporation technique. 160 The Griseofulvin solubility studies were conducted by adding an excessive quantity of griseofulvin and MCM-41-GRIS, MCM-41-NH The XRD patterns of MCM-41 material ( To study the nature of griseofulvin encapsulated in MCM-41 materials, WXRD study was performed. The WXRD patterns ( Typical TEM images of MCM-41, MCM-41-NH The nitrogen adsorption/desorption isotherms of MCM-41, MCM-41-NH After griseofulvin encapsulation in MCM-41, MCM-41-NH The surface modification of MCM-41 materials was further analyzed by measuring zeta potential (Z.P.). As shown from The modification of MCM-41 materials with amino and methyl groups as well as the encapsulation of griseofulvin in MCM-41 materials was confirmed by FTIR analysis as shown in TGA analysis was used to evaluate the griseofulvin loading amount in different samples under study ( Differential scanning calorimetry (DSC) analysis was performed to further confirm the crystallinity of griseofulvin in MCM-41-GRIS, MCM-41-NH SEM images of GRIS, MCM-41, MCM-41-GRIS and MCM-41-GRIS PM samples were collected to provide further information on the drug loading ( To compare the effect of surface charge and hydrophobicity in griseofulvin encapsulated MCM-41 materials, griseofulvin release was studied in 0.5% SLS (under sink conditions) as the dissolution medium. After 1 Encapsulation of griseofulvin in negatively charged MCM-41 resulted in faster release while positively charged MCM-41-NH Hydrophobic modification of MCM-41 using methyl group results in poor influx of dissolution media in the pore channels leading to very slow dissolution of drug resulting in its slow release The effect of Griseofulvin solubility was determined by preparing saturated solution of GRIS, MCM-41-GRIS, MCM-41-NH MSNs were synthesized with different surface charge and hydrophobicity while retaining similar particle and pore size to study their influence on solubility and We acknowledge the support from the Australian Research Council, the Australian National Fabrication Facility and the Australian Microscopy and Microanalysis Research Facility at the Centre for Microscopy and Microanalysis, The University of Queensland, Australia. We thank Ms Ying Yu from Centre of Microscopy and Microanalysis, The University of Queensland for SEM images.