Low acidity ZSM-5-supported iron catalysts were synthesized for use in Fischer–Tropsch conversion. Low acidity ZSM-5 was particularly chosen for its lower activity in respect to zeolite-acid catalyzed reactions (i.e. hydrocracking) which might lead to the lower selectivity for the light hydrocarbon and high selectivity for gasoline range components and for its high stability. Selective surface dealumination was also applied to zeolite and the resulting zeolite was used as a support for the catalyst in order to enhance its selectivity for gasoline.
                  Zeolite-supported catalysts were synthesized by using incipient wetness impregnation method and hybrid catalyst was prepared by physical admixing of ZSM-5 and base iron. The performances of catalysts prepared by two different methods were compared with respect to activity, selectivity and hydrocarbon yields. The catalytic activities of the catalysts were found to be considerably affected by the catalyst preparation method, percentage of iron in the catalyst and the reaction temperature. All catalysts displayed a CO conversion higher than 40% at 553K. The selectivity toward C5–C11 hydrocarbons of catalyst prepared by impregnation method was determined to be 50–74%. The selectivity of the hybrid catalyst toward the same fraction was about 45%. No wax was detected in the products during the FT process using zeolite-supported iron catalysts. About 2wt.% wax was measured in the FT products obtained by hybrid catalyst under similar conditions. Catalyst prepared with dealuminated zeolite displayed higher gasoline range hydrocarbon selectivity in comparison with catalysts having same iron content. Results of a 260h time-on-stream test, carried out for one of the supported iron catalysts with 8wt.% Fe, indicated that the catalyst was stable without any activity loss.A major limitation of the Fischer–Tropsch (FT) technology is the low selectivity of the conventional catalysts toward targeted compounds. The well-known Anderson–Schulz–Flory (ASF) kinetics of the FT reaction imposes a limit to the maximum selectivity of 48% attainable for gasoline-range products The direct production of high octane gasoline through FT reactions is a great challenge related to catalyst development. This may be overcome by the use of metal/zeolite bifunctional catalysts, which can enhance the selectivity of the synthesis toward the desired products, i.e. gasoline range hydrocarbons The methods which have been used in synthesis of bifunctional FT catalysts based on zeolite and metals are the physical admixing The acidity, surface area, pore structure and cation exchange capability of the zeolite support are crucial factors affecting the catalytic performance of zeolite–metal FT catalysts with respect to aromatization, oligomerization, isomerization as well as alkylation reactions. By virtue of shape selectivity of zeolite, the chain-growth process is restricted to give low molecular weight products. Acidic nature of zeolite influences secondary hydrocracking and isomerization reactions, thereby producing more light, aromatic and branched hydrocarbons in the whole product portfolio. The efficiency and selectivity of a supported zeolite catalyst are closely related to the dispersion and particle size of the active metal component and to the nature of the interaction between the metal and the support. Supports with high surface area, like zeolites, generally yield well dispersed catalysts. A variety of zeolites such as ZSM-5 The acidity of zeolites can be reduced by dealumination process, thereby influencing the catalytic performance of the bifunctional FT catalysts. Preferential dealumination of acid sites on the external surface of the zeolite also can affect the stability of the catalysts against coking Iron, cobalt and ruthenium are well-known metals to be active for FT synthesis. Cobalt has been used in many zeolite-FT catalyst studies due to its low water gas shift activity and its convenience for production of heavier hydrocarbons mainly in the diesel range In this study, FT synthesis has been studied using bifunctional iron–low acidity ZSM-5 catalysts. A zeolite with very high silica to alumina ratio (SAR) of 280 due to its low acidity and cation exchange sites was used in the study. The purpose for choosing this zeolite was to take advantage of its shape selectivity while suppressing acid-catalyzed reactions like hydrocracking originating from its acidic nature. We aimed to reduce the light hydrocarbon selectivity and enhance the stability of the catalysts. In order to decrease role of the external surface which might favor hydrocracking reaction and to improve the internal surface utilization, zeolite was selectively dealuminated. In addition, dealumination reduces the aluminum content further and so the number of active sites for hydrocracking. Thereby, it was expected to have higher gasoline range hydrocarbon selectivity. Iron was used in order to take the advantage of low methane and high olefin selectivity. The aim of the study was to maximize the gasoline yield with a stable catalyst. This paper presents the comparison of the two catalyst preparation routes with respect to activity, selectivity and hydrocarbon yields. The results of the catalytic activity of ZSM-5 supported iron catalysts with various iron percentages are given. Time on stream tests have been carried out for one of the catalysts. Finally, the effects of operation conditions on the FT reactions are given for temperature and the feed hydrogen to CO ratio. The zeolite supported catalysts were prepared by the incipient wetness impregnation method. Ammonium form of ZSM-5 powder was provided by Zeolyst International Inc. It is a low acidity zeolite having a silica to alumina molar ratio of 280. ZSM-5 was used both as support and component of hybrid type catalysts. Iron nitrate (Fe(NO Base iron was prepared by precipitation method. Pure base iron was used as a catalyst in the FT activity tests and also used as a hybrid catalyst constituent. A promoted iron based catalyst was also prepared from the base iron catalyst via sequential impregnation of aqueous solutions of Cu(NO A hybrid catalyst was prepared by physical admixing of the base iron and ZSM-5. Both components were grinded, sieved to 250–350 mesh and then mixed completely. The ZSM-5 zeolite was dealuminated by the following procedure. The zeolite was treated with 0.5 The ZSM-5 supported catalysts and hybrid catalyst were designated as SFeZ The synthesized catalysts were characterized by using X-ray diffraction (XRD), N The FT activity tests were carried out in a stainless-steel fixed-bed tubular reactor (15 Catalyst samples were activated in situ under a hydrogen stream under atmospheric pressure by increasing the temperature from 298 to 693 An overall mass balance was established for all performance runs. Using N The characterization results and XRD analysis of catalysts are presented in The position and relative intensity of the XRD peaks recorded at 2 As seen from Unsupported iron catalysts (BFe and CFe) have very poor micropore volume, total and external surface areas in comparison to the zeolite supported catalysts. Acidity measurements showed no considerable acidity for mother zeolite, de-aluminated zeolite and catalyst samples which confirm low acidity of the zeolite as pointed out before. These results are in line with literature which described ZSM-5 with SAR of 280 as low acidity zeolite A parametric research on the steady state FT activities, selectivities and stabilities of zeolite containing iron based catalysts was carried out under various operating conditions. To be used as basis for comparison, an iron and a conventional iron catalyst were also synthesized and tested in the scope of the study. Certainly, there exist other conventional catalyst formulations exhibiting different selectivities. The aim of the study is to evaluate the performance of zeolite containing catalyst in comparison with conventional catalysts under similar reaction conditions. A series of tests were carried out to investigate the effect of synthesis method, composition of catalyst, the reaction temperature and the gas composition on the FT catalytic activities of the catalysts. Results are compiled in Hydrocarbon productivity calculated based on per gram of Fe is shown in Tests were carried out in the temperature range between 523 The catalyst synthesis method seemed to cause considerable change in the activity of the zeolite containing catalyst. With the same iron loading of 9%, catalyst prepared by impregnation showed a much higher activity than the hybrid catalyst (HFeZ9) prepared by physical mixing in respect to CO conversion. A better dispersion of iron in the former catalyst was considered to be responsible for that result. On the other hand, dealumination of ZSM-5 before impregnation decreased the activity of the resulting catalyst to some extent. In A 260 It is known that the FT reaction on iron catalyst is accompanied by the water gas shift (WGS) reaction. In WGS reaction, CO reacts with water which is generated from FT synthesis and produces CO The CO Experimental results, given in Product distributions obtained from the catalysts activity tests carried out between 523 Conventional catalyst showed higher selectivity toward light hydrocarbons (C1–C4) in comparison with other catalysts. ZSM-5 containing iron catalysts narrowed the spectrum of the products by reducing the amount of light and heavy hydrocarbon fractions, maximizing the gasoline range hydrocarbons. These catalysts, due to their acidity, could also catalyze oligomerization reactions of the low molecular weight olefins. On the other hand, heavy hydrocarbon production in FT process over zeolite containing catalysts could be substantially hindered by the shape selectivity nature of the zeolite. In spite of its lower acidity degree, zeolite used in the synthesis might catalyze the hydrocracking reactions, so that the heavy hydrocarbons could be converted into lighter hydrocarbons. The preparation method of zeolite containing catalyst has also an impact on the selectivity but to a lesser extent. As seen in On the other hand, dealumination resulted in a moderate change in the selectivity of catalyst. In comparison with catalysts having the same iron loading, SFeZ9, the selectivity of C5–C11 hydrocarbon fraction increased for catalyst of dealuminated zeolite, SFeDZ9. This increase could be originated from lower acidity nature of the dealuminated zeolite support used in the synthesis. Selectivity of the supported catalyst, on the other hand, toward the C19+ fraction was lower than that of the hybrid catalyst. It seemed that zeolite as a support could suppress the reactions which produced high molecular weight hydrocarbons and thus reduced the amount of wax. On the contrary, the hybrid catalysts (HFeZ9) produced small amounts of wax of about 2%, under the same process conditions. The superior selectivity of the supported catalysts might be attributed to the shape selectivity property of the zeolite combined with the better zeolite–iron interaction, resulting in a more effective utilization of zeolite properties. C2–C4 range gas olefin hydrocarbon percentages obtained with different catalysts are compared in There was a methane production for zeolite supported catalysts up to 7.9–17.4% at 553 The selectivity shifted toward heavier hydrocarbons as the iron percentage in the zeolite supported catalyst increased. As concentration of iron in the catalyst increased the amount of the iron located out of the pores, which had poor interaction with zeolite, was expected to increase as well. This was likely responsible for higher long chain hydrocarbon concentration. Moreover, increased conversion with increasing iron content, might also contribute to the higher selectivity for heavy hydrocarbon. Changes in process conditions had considerable impact on the catalyst selectivity. Selectivity of conventional (CFe) and base iron (BFe) catalysts shifted to lighter hydrocarbons with increasing temperature. Generally, the C12+ selectivity of zeolite containing catalysts decreased at higher temperatures while selectivity toward C5–C11 hydrocarbons increased. As previously discussed, this behavior was mostly due to the zeolite activity which increased at high temperatures. The effect of H Zeolite containing iron based catalysts for FT conversion were prepared by incipient wetness impregnation and physical mixing methods. Their catalytic activities were tested under different conditions. The following are the major conclusions. Catalytic activities of all catalyst were considerably affected by catalyst preparation method, iron loading, and the reaction temperature. The activity of the catalyst enhanced as the percentage of iron in the catalyst and the reaction temperature increased. All catalysts synthesized had CO conversions higher than 40% at 553 Catalyst prepared by impregnation showed much higher activity in respect to CO conversion in comparison with those prepared by physical admixing of zeolite and iron. The zeolite supported catalyst with 9% iron (SFeZ9) was tested for the stability through 260 Activity test results indicated that zeolite in the catalyst formulation could suppress the WGS activity of the iron catalyst. This was proved by much lower CO ZSM-5 supported iron catalysts were found maximizing selectivity of C5–C11 range hydrocarbon through reducing the amount of the light and heavy hydrocarbon fractions. On the contrary, conventional catalysts produced heavy hydrocarbon fraction. The maximum selectivity of 74% for C5–C11 range hydrocarbon was observed for SFeZ18 catalyst at 553 Process conditions affected the selectivity of the catalysts considerably. Selectivity of zeolite containing catalysts for C5–C11 hydrocarbons increased with temperature while selectivity of base iron and conventional iron catalyst shifted toward lighter hydrocarbons. This work was financially supported by the