From simulation results of a liquid–liquid mixing vessel using a population balance model and known breakage functions for the hydroxyoxime–sodium sulfate system, a coalescence frequency function was determined. For the determination of this function, equilibrium drop size distributions obtained from concentrated dispersions for the same hydroxyoxime–sodium sulfate system were used.
                  Two coalescence frequency functions were used in the simulation work. The results indicated that a constant coalescence frequency, independent of the size of the coalescing drops is the more appropriate function to model the hydroxyoxime–sodium sulfate system studied here.In the acid leaching of copper oxide ores, impure, dilute aqueous copper solutions are produced, which are normally treated subsequently by solvent extraction (SX) for solution purification and concentration. The SX process involves the formation of a liquid–liquid dispersion between the leach solution and an immiscible organic phase, followed by the separation of the two phases. Since the organic phase contains a copper specific extractant, the liquid–liquid dispersion thus produced allows a rapid and selective extraction of the copper from the aqueous to the organic phase. Mixer–settlers are the preferred equipment used in industrial copper solvent extraction operations, because they are appropriate for treating the large solution volumes, which are typically produced in the processing of copper ores. Each stage of a mixer–settler extraction system comprises a mixing unit, and a settling unit. In the mixing unit, the dispersion of the two liquid phases is generated usually by mechanical agitation, and in the settling unit, the two phases separate by gravity. A thorough knowledge of the drop size distribution produced in the mixing vessel is necessary for controlling and predicting not only the global performance of the solvent extraction process, but also the rate of copper extraction in the mixer and the rate of phase separation in the settler as well. The most common approach to simulate the generation of dispersions in mixing vessels is the use of population balance models. ( The use of a population balance model for predicting practical situations requires prior knowledge of the functions that describe the breakage and coalescence processes. The determination of the breakage and coalescence functions is usually accomplished by using experimental data on drop size distribution, which are obtained in batch mixing vessels. Since these functions are not amenable to direct measurement, they have to be inferred from experimental drop size distributions by means of a mathematical model of the batch mixer. For the case of a batch mixer with uniform dispersion properties throughout the vessel, the balance equation for the number of drops per unit volume of the dispersion can be written as ( In Eq. For the present work, Eq. The above described methodology was adopted in this work for the determination of an appropriate coalescence frequency function. It is known that the breakage and coalescence rates have a strong dependence on the system composition and on the vessel and impeller characteristics as well ( Two commonly used binary coalescence frequency functions were considered in this work for the simulation of the equilibrium drop size distribution under various experimental conditions. The first was a coalescence function originally proposed by In these equations, The second coalescence frequency tested in this work was the random coalescence function ( This coalescence frequency is independent of the size of the two drops undergoing coalescence. Although the parameter The organic phase used in this study was a 1:1 mixture of a salicylaldoxime (LIX 860N-IC) and a ketoxime (LIX 84-IC) (3.5% by volume of each) in an aliphatic type diluent (ESCAID 103 from EXXON). The aqueous solution was a 0.25-M sodium sulfate solution, with a pH of 5.7. This aqueous solution was chosen instead of a copper sulfate solution to avoid copper mass transfer to the organic phase. The mixer was a rectangular vessel 25 cm long, 25 cm wide and 31 cm tall, made of acrylic, without baffles and a total capacity of 19.4 L. The impeller was of the pump–mixer type (commonly used in the copper industry to provide pumping and mixing requirement). This impeller was made of acrylic, 15 cm in diameter, with eight curved blades, with shrouds located above and below the impeller blades. The distance between shrouds (blade width) was 2 cm. The thickness of the blades was 0.25 cm and the lower shroud had attached a 7.5-cm diameter and 1-cm height draft tube. The impeller was connected to a variable speed motor and located in the center of the mixer, 4 cm above the bottom of the vessel. All experiments were carried out under aqueous continuity. The mixer was initially filled with the required amount of aqueous and organic phase to give a total dispersion volume of 16 L, and the temperature of the system was regulated to the value specified for the test. The system was stirred for 60 min to obtain an equilibrium drop size distribution (preliminary tests showed that the system reached equilibrium in about 30 min), and samples of the dispersion were taken from a point located at 6 cm from the vessel wall and 10 cm from the bottom. A gelatin embedding technique together with an image analyzing system was used to determine the size distribution of the dispersion samples ( The equilibrium size distributions of organic drops were determined at 22 °C for stirring speeds of 300 and 350 rpm and for various organic phase fractions.  It can be observed in these figures that the equilibrium drop size distributions for concentrated solutions are much coarser than the equilibrium distributions obtained in lean dispersions ( For the simulations carried out in this study, appropriate analytical forms for the breakage functions for the hydroxyoxime–sodium sulfate system determined previously by –Binary breakage: –A modified power function for the breakage frequency: –A U-shaped daughter drop density function, The values of the parameters of the breakage functions, Eqs. For For However, for a stirring speed of 350 rpm and 22 °C, the values of the parameters of the breakage functions were not known. These were determined in this study from transient distributions obtained with a lean dispersion ( For For As one can expect, the increase in stirring speed produced a decrease in the maximum stable drop size ( After the breakage functions and their parameters were defined, the two coalescence frequency functions, Eqs. In the simulation work carried out here, it was assumed that the values of the parameters of the breakage functions determined for dilute dispersions are valid for concentrated dispersions as well. It has been suggested by some authors ( Since the equilibrium state in a batch mixer is independent of the earlier states of the system, any drop size distribution could be used as initial distribution. However, for convenience, a lognormal distribution was used as the initial distribution in this work. The simulated equilibrium drop size distributions for 300 rpm, 22 °C, and a dispersed phase fraction We can observe in The simulated equilibrium drop size distributions obtained for the conditions: 350 rpm, 22 °C, and We can also observe in To test further the two coalescence equations, additional simulations were carried out to predict the equilibrium drop size distribution for other dispersed phase fractions It can be seen in this figure that the use of the random coalescence equation produces good predictions of the equilibrium drop size distribution for both concentrated and lean dispersions. Similar simulations, using both the random coalescence function and the Coulaloglou and Tavlarides' function, were carried out for a stirring speed of 350 rpm and dispersed phase fractions of 0.006 and 0.4. The simulation results are shown in We can see in Thus, the simulated results shown in It should be realized that although the same random coalescence frequency value can be used to model the dilute and the concentrated dispersions, it does not prove that the coalescence frequency is independent of the dispersed phase ratio. Since any possible effect of the dispersed phase fraction on the breakage frequency was ignored in the simulations, a similar effect of this variable on the coalescence frequency would not show (e.g., if both From the results of this study, the following can be concluded. An increase in the stirring speed from 300 to 350 rpm produces a decrease in the maximum stable drop size The sequential method outlined in this work allows the determination of appropriate breakage and coalescence functions for modeling a dispersed phase system. In this method, the breakage functions are determined first, using data on transient drop size distributions obtained with dilute dispersions at short stirring times, and the population balance equation neglecting the coalescence terms. Then, the coalescence frequency function is determined from equilibrium drop size distributions obtained with concentrated dispersions by using the known breakage functions and the population balance equation with all of its terms. Finally, of the two coalescence frequency functions tested in this work, the random coalescence equation was the appropriate function to model the hydroxyoxime–sodium sulfate system studied here. Parameters of the daughter drop density function, Eq. Number fraction of drops with volumes smaller that Parameters of equations for Number of drops with size Stirring speed (s Impeller diameter (cm) Breakage frequency of drops of size Volume of the dispersion drops (cm Maximum stable drop size (cm Stirring time (s) Probability density function for the daughter drops Coalescence frequency between drops of size Viscosity of the continuous phase (poise) Density of the continuous phase (g/cm Interfacial tension (dyn cm Number of daughter drops formed by breakage of a drop of size Volume fraction of the dispersed phase The support from the Fondo Nacional de Ciencia y Tecnología (FONDECYT) of Chile, through Project No. 1980473 and the Andes Foundation through Project C-13755(1) is gratefully acknowledged.