We present particle size data from 31 samples of carbonate cataclastic rocks collected across the 26 m thick fault core of the Mattinata Fault in the foreland of the Southern Apennines, Italy. Particle size distributions of incoherent samples were determined by a sieving-and-weighting technique. The number of weight-equivalent spherical particles by size is well fitted by a power-law function on a log–log space. Fractal dimensions (D) of particle size distributions are in the 2.091–2.932 range and cluster around the value of ∼2.5. High D-values pertain to gouge in shear bands reworking the bulk cataclastic rocks of the fault core. Low D-values characterise immature cataclastic breccias. Intermediate D-values are typical of the bulk fault core. Analysis of the ratio between corresponding equivalent particle numbers from differently evolved cataclastic rocks indicates that the development of particle size distributions with D>2.6–2.7 occurred by a preferential relative increase of fine particles rather than a selective decrement of coarse particles. This preferentially occurred in shear bands where intense comminution enhanced by slip localisation progressed by rolling of coarse particles whose consequent smoothing produced a large number of fine particles. Our data suggest that during the progression of cataclasis, the fragmentation mode changed from the Allègre et al.'s [Nature 297 (1982) 47] “pillar of strength” mechanism in the early evolutionary stages, to the Sammis et al.'s [Pure and Applied Geophysics 125 (1987) 777] “constrained comminution” mechanism in the subsequent stages of cataclasis. Eventually, localised shear bands developed mainly by abrasion of coarse particles.The physical characterisation of cataclastic fault cores is of critical importance for studies of fluid flow (e.g. The fault core Fault core rocks develop by particle comminution with increasing fault displacement. This progressively reduces the size of particles and changes their shape (e.g. A large amount of particle size data have been collected from natural fault zones (e.g. In this paper, we present particle size data collected in the cataclastic fault core of the Mattinata left-lateral strike-slip fault zone in southern Italy The Mattinata Fault consists of an E–W striking envelope of anastomosed left-lateral strike-slip faults and associated cataclastic rocks Thirty-one samples Particle size distributions were determined by a sieving-and-weighting technique (e.g.  Sample particles with diameter smaller than 0.063 mm (i.e. those passing through the smallest sieve) are out of the size range considered in the above-discussed fractal analyses. In The evolution of the particle size distributions during the overall comminution process can be inferred by comparing the abundance of normalised equivalent particles in corresponding size classes between samples from different locations within the fault core The particle ratio between samples MA1 and MA2 Our results show that carbonate cataclastic rocks from the core of the Mattinata Fault have power-law distributions of particle size in the 4.0–0.125 mm interval, with fractal dimensions An explanation for the observed variability of fractal dimensions may be that fragmentation mechanisms evolved through space and time within the analysed fault core Rotation-enhanced particle abrasion is another important mechanism that may have contributed to determine the size distribution of cataclastic rock particles (e.g. We analysed particle size distributions of carbonate cataclastic rocks collected in the fault core of the regionally sized, left-lateral strike-slip Mattinata Fault in southern Italy. Our results show that particle size distributions of fault rocks are well fitted by power-law best fits over the 4.0–0.125 mm size interval. Fractal dimensions ( Encouragements for this study derive from an early research project funded by Enterprise Oil and coordinated by F. Salvini, to whom we are in debt for useful suggestions and advice. Reviews by T. Blenkinsop and J. Hadizadeh significantly improved the science of the paper.