This work reports the synthesis of polydispersible SnO2, TiO2 and Ti0.5Sn0.5O2 nanoparticles via microwave-assisted polyol as an efficient method using diethylene glycol (DEG) and triethylene glycol (TREG) as solvent. The properties of as-prepared samples were investigated by X-ray diffractometry, transmission electron microscopy, diffuse reflectance and FTIR spectrophotometery, photoluminescence spectroscopy and N2 physisorption. The X-ray diffraction patterns of the samples were indexed on the anatase phase of TiO2 and cassiterite phase of SnO2 and Ti0.5Sn0.5O2. The TEM images show uniform isotropic morphologies with average sizes close to10 nm. The band gap is reduced for Ti0.5Sn0.5O2 and enhances visible light absorption, a shift resulting in the absorption threshold towards the visible spectral range, compared to pure titania and tin. Slight shifts to longer wavelength are attributed to the change in the acceptor’s level induced by the mixture of both oxides. The evaluation of the photocatalytic activity is carried out using indigo carmine (IC) as model of chemical pollutants in UV irradiation conditions. The photocatalytic decolorization of the dye follows a pseudo-first-order kinetics and the constant apparent rate was increased with the increase of the tin oxide content up to 50%.SnO Up to now, a variety of techniques has been used to prepare mixed Ti For the preparation of nanoparticles of SnO The crystalline quality and the grain size of the samples were evaluated using X-ray diffraction (XRD) measurements. The study was carried out using a Bruker D8- Advance diffractometer equipped with a source delivering a monochromatic Co Kα1 radiation (λ = 1.789 Å). The θ–2θ scans were recorded using a step size of 0.02° over the 2θ range between 20° and 80°. The particle size of the as-prepared and thermally treated samples deduced from the intense peaks using the Scherrer equation (Eq. The grain size distribution of the powders were measured by transmission electron microscopy (TEM) and performed on a FEI TECNAI 20FST. For TEM observations, nanopowders were ultrasonically dispersed in ethanol and deposited on amorphous holey carbon membranes. The UV–vis diffuse reflectance spectra (DRS) was recorded between 200 and 800 nm to determine the band gap using a Shimadzu UV2550 spectrophotometer at the room temperature. Band gap analysis for an indirect/direct semiconductor was done following standard procedures, for example, plotting (αhν) Photocatalytic activity of the nanopowders was investigated by degradation of Indigo Carmine (IC) under UV lamp. The initial concentration of the dye was 40 mg/l. The dosage of the oxide powders was 0.1 g for 100 ml of dye solution with the pH value of 7. Before switching on irradiation, the dye solution was continuously stirred in the dark for 30 min to ensure adsorption–desorption equilibrium. The solution samples were collected from the reactor at regular intervals, centrifuged and analyzed to determine the amounts of residual the dye after photo-irradiation, using UV–vis spectrophotometer. The polyol was used as an excellent microwave absorbing solvent with high boiling point. However, there are different factors which may influence on the structure, morphology and sizes of nanoparticles. Two main parameters were the solvent (polyol) used for the synthesis and calcination conditions. The effect of calcination temperature on crystallinity was investigated by BET surface areas and XRD diffractogram for different samples.  The lattice constants calculated from the XRD patterns are found to be very close to the SnO In the case of Sn:Ti = 1:1, after heat treatment at 550 °C for 4 h in air,Ti The TEM images of anatase TiO The absorption spectra in the UV and VIS range of different nanoparticles are presented in The optical band gap (Eg) of the direct transition semiconductor for, SnO Indigo Carmine dye is one of the organic dyes which are extensively involved in textile industry ( However, the existence of this hazardous dye in the waste water causes serious environmental problems. Thereby, removal of this hazardous dye is considered one of the promising challenges in the recent years. For this purpose, pure and mixed titania photocatalyst are was involved for complete removal and mineralization of this hazardous dye. The photocatalytic experiments were carried out on the catalyst samples with definite dye concentration (40 mg/l) in attempts to compare the efficiency of the various catalysts and select the most active sample. The concentration of IC dye is estimated using the linear part of the absorbance – concentration curve (Beer’s Law). The influence of five different photocatalyst P25, SnO The photocatalytic reactivity of samples is more influenced by the crystalline and electronic structure of SnO This work shows the possibility of synthesizing nanoparticles of oxides, such as SnO