Lithium is an important metal for energy storage applications. With the increase in demand for lithium in the near future it is important to explore low-grade brine resources, which contain the majority of known lithium resources. In this work, a λ-MnO2 diatomaceous earth composite adsorbent was synthesized by using a combination of hydrothermal treatment and solid-state calcination. The synthesized adsorbent was tested with LiCl buffered solution for various batch adsorption parameters. Loading of 28–29% λ-MnO2 on diatomaceous earth showed the best performance for lithium adsorption. The adsorption was found to follow the Langmuir isotherm model and pseudo second order kinetic model. The increase in adsorption capacity with higher temperatures indicates that lithium adsorption is endothermic in nature. It was also observed that there is a 30% loss in adsorption capacity after five adsorption-desorption cycles when hydrochloric acid was used as an eluent due to loss of Mn2+. Replacing hydrochloric acid with (NH4)2S2O8 as an eluent at 80 °C, increased the recycling stability of the adsorbent by decreasing manganese loss. The adsorbent was tested with Great Salt Lake water and 95% of lithium was extracted with high selectivity from the brine over alkali and alkaline earth metals.Lithium is a critical and technologically important metal that has found increased use in energy storage applications due to its high energy density. The current end market share in battery applications is 39% ( Extraction of lithium from brine solutions has been carried out by a variety of methods such as precipitation ( A possible method to selectively adsorb lithium from high Mg Various LMOs have been synthesized such as, LiMn Diatomaceous earth is fossilized remains of aquatic unicellular algae and is an economically viable and naturally occurring mineral, which has found commercial applications as a filter material. Its 3D cage-like structure, along with high porosity makes it a suitable support material for various applications such as removal of organic ( All chemicals used were of analytical grade and used as received unless otherwise noted. Diatomaceous earth (DE, EP Minerals, MN-84) was used without any prior treatment. A summary of the step-by-step synthesis is shown in The crystal structures of the adsorbents were studied using XRD (Rigaku MiniFlex 600) with an irradiation source of Cu K Different masses of adsorbents (0.25–2.0 g) were stirred in 100 mL of 50 mg/L LiCl solution (pH = 10.20, adjusted with ammoniacal buffer, 0.058 M NH Adsorption kinetic studies were carried out using 2.5 g of DLMO@DE-2 in 500 mL of 50 mg/L Li For recyclability tests, after adsorption, LMO@DE-2 was collected and subject to magnetic stirring in 0.5 M HCl for 24 h at V/m = 0.2 L/g. Regenerated DLMO@DE-2 was washed with plenty of deionized water and used for another cycle of adsorption at V/m = 0.1 L/g. This was repeated for five adsorptions/desorption cycles. For tests with real brine solutions, Great Salt Lake (GSL) surface water was collected from the Salt Lake Marina (Magna, UT), which is located in the southern part of the lake. For GSL adsorbent tests, 2 g of DLMO@DE-2 adsorbent was added to 100 mL of GSL water and magnetically stirred for 48 h, maintaining a homogenous slurry to ensure no mass diffusion limitations. The percent adsorption of the ions present in the GSL water was calculated by The X-ray diffraction patterns of the materials used in this study are shown in Scanning electron micrographs of DE, MnO The specific surface area of MnO The amount of MnO The effect of mass (DLMO@DE-2) on lithium uptake at room temperature was investigated by using masses in the range of 0.25–2.0 g. The percentage adsorption increases proportionally as the mass of the adsorbent increases (Supplementary material, Fig. S3). Almost 95% of Li Adsorption isotherm models were studied by applying Langmuir and Freundlich adsorption models. Langmuir adsorption is based on the assumption that all the adsorbent sites have uniform energy, which leads to homogenous monolayer adsorption ( Linear regressions of Langmuir and Freundlich adsorption isotherm models are shown in Kinetic studies were performed to understand the nature of adsorption and determine rate-controlling steps. Pseudo first order, pseudo second order, and intraparticle diffusion kinetic models were applied to the adsorption kinetic data. The linear form of pseudo first order adsorption kinetics is given by: Linear form fits of pseudo first order and pseudo second order reaction kinetics are shown in In order to further understand the kinetics of lithium adsorption, an intraparticle diffusion model proposed by Weber and Morris ( The Li In order to initially study the adsorbents reusability, five adsorption-desorption cycles were performed using 0.5 M HCl. In The XRD scans of DLMO@DE were recorded after five adsorption-desorption cycles (Supplementary Material, Fig. S5). It was observed that the spinel structure is maintained, which indicates that Mn It is evident that lithium elution in HCl medium involves high Mn The enhanced performance and stability of the adsorbent can be attributed to the hydrolysis of S The H The GSL water chemistry has previously been analyzed and reported by ( The effect of mass of adsorbent on lithium adsorption in GSL water was varied from 0.04 L/g to 0.2 L/g ( Kinetic studies using GSL water were carried out with a V/m ratio of 0.05 at room temperature ( Removal and insertion of Li In the above disproportionation mechanism, Mn The above reaction shows a redox mechanism where Mn Later, ( The kinetics studies indicate a chemisorption mechanism, which involves bond dissociation in the lithium adsorption process. The Li After treatment of LMO@DE with the acid, the vacant sites formed due to Li In this work, the macroporous channels of DE, a 3D cage-like porous structure, are utilized as reaction sites for LMO nanowire immobilization. One of the major advantages of this composite material is that there is enhanced interaction between the adsorbent and the brine solution. Immobilization of lithium ion sieve nanowires on a DE was successfully carried out and is shown to improve the contact between the adsorbent and the adsorbate. Adsorption isotherm studies indicate a Langmuir-type adsorption of lithium on DLMO@DE. Kinetic and temperature studies indicate that the adsorption is endothermic in nature. The high selectivity of lithium from Great Salt Lake water over alkali and alkaline earth metal is attributed to the 3D (1 × 3) tunnel structure of spinel λ-MnO R.M. would like to acknowledge support through the Cooper Hansen Fellowship, College of Mines & Earth Sciences, University of Utah. The authors would like to thank Dr. Diego P. Fernandez for the ICP-MS data.  Supplementary data to this article can be found online at