Denosumab is one of the most commonly prescribed anti-resorptive drugs for the treatment of postmenopausal osteoporosis. The therapeutic effect of denosumab is to inhibit osteoclast differentiation and consequently bone resorption. Gains in bone mineral density (BMD) are achieved based on the ability of the bone matrix to undergo secondary mineralization. Experimental data show that the increase of BMD after commencing denosumab treatment are bone site specific.
                  In this paper, we developed a comprehensive mechanistic pharmacokinetic-pharmacodymamic (PK-PD) model of the effect of denosumab on bone remodeling in postmenopausal osteoporosis (PMO). The PD model is based on a bone cell population model describing the bone remodeling process at the tissue scale. The conceptual model of the bone mineralization process, originally proposed by Boivin and Meunier, is quantitatively incorporated using a FIFO (First-In-First-Out) queue algorithm. The latter takes into account the balance of mineral within bone tissue due to the mineralization process, distinguishing the primary and secondary phases and removal of bone matrix due to bone resorption. The numerical simulations show that the model is able to predict the bone-site specific increase in BMD as was observed in the experimental data of Bone et al. 2008 for a typical denosumab administration pattern of 60 mg every 6 months. At the hip a 5 % increase in BMD was observed, while at the lumbar spine a 7.5 % increase of BMD was achieved after a 2 year treatment period. The difference in BMD is due to the fact that bone turnover at the hip is lower compared to lumbar spine and consequently has less potential for secondary mineralization. Parametric studies revealed that the rate of bone mineralization is an essential parameter regulating BMD gains. If mineralization is neglected only minimal increases in BMD are observed.Osteoporosis is a major skeletal disease linked to an imbalance in bone remodeling, with bone resorption exceeding bone formation Denosumab is one of the most commonly prescribed anti-resorptive drugs for the treatment of PMO These experimental findings can be explained based on the conceptual model of bone mineralization, which links the rate of bone remodeling with the degree of bone tissue mineralization (BTM) The time dependent dose-effect response of drugs is most commonly described using pharmacokinetics (PK) − pharmacodynamics (PD) modeling approaches In the present paper, we present a comprehensive mechanistic PK−PD model for quantifying the effect of denosumab on bone turnover and BMD taking into account the mineralization process. This model is an extension of a previously developed model of bone remodeling taking into account the process of bone mineralization. The bone remodeling model accounts for bone cell interactions via the RANK-RANKL-OPG pathway, the action of TGF− Utilizing this model, we investigate some model features in a drug treatment scenario whose clinical results were available in the literature This paper is organized as follows: In Several pharmacokinetic (PK) models of denosumab have been proposed including one- and two-compartment models In the following, a description of the extended mathematical model describing bone cell interactions taking into account bone mineralization is provided. Similar as in previous models, the RANK-RANKL-OPG pathway, together with the action of several regulatory factors on bone cells, including TGF− Following the approach taken by Pivonka et al., the bone remodeling process can be described as cell balance equations. The bone cell types (i.e. state variables) considered in the current model are: (i) osteoblast precursor cells (OB  Similar to previous mechanistic PK-PD models, we incorporate the action of denosumab on bone remodeling via competitive binding reactions within the RANK-RANK-OPG pathway [ In Eq. ( Bone is a composite of tissue matrix and pores, which may be filled with marrow, blood vessels and nerves. A reference bone volume, The link between the bone cell population model described in The osteoid laid The mineral content is usually measured by the so-called ash fraction, defined as the ratio between mass of mineral We define the specific volumes Bone apparent density can be assessed through: Mineral accumulates by displacing water present in bone matrix We have assumed that The amount of mineral contained in a RVE depends on the age of the tissue through Eq. ( The second term of the right-hand side represents the fraction of volume The queue is truncated at the residence time, The mineral content has influence on the mechanical properties, and particularly on the stiffness of bone tissue, which was studied by Hernandez et al. A constant, uniaxial compressive stress We follow the approach described in detail in Lemaire et al. PMO was simulated by introducing a disease-related increase in RANKL production over time The predicted evolution of apparent bone density is shown in For comparison purposes, the results were screened at 1, 6, 12 and 24 months, as is typically performed in clinical studies, including the one of Bone et al. BDG obtained here in silico was compared with the values reported in that clinical study so as to adjust the drug accessibility factor The next set of simulations investigates the effect on BDG of different initial porosities, which is representative for different bone sites such as vertebral body/Lumbar spine and femoral neck/Hip. The effect of the mineralization rate on BDG is analyzed in The final set of simulations investigates the effect of bone turnover rate ( In this paper we presented a novel mechanistic PK-PD model describing the effect of the anti-catabolic drug denosumab on bone remodeling and the associated changes in bone mineral density. Unlike for anabolic drugs, where bone volume (and consequently bone mineral density) is gained due to bone formation by osteoblasts, for anti-catabolic drugs the existing bone matrix has the ability to embed more mineral in the extrafibrillar space, so increasing bone tissue density. The latter phenomenon of bone mineralization is strongly influenced by the bone turnover rate, which in turn is defined by the activity of osteoclasts. The conceptual model of bone mineralization was originally proposed by Boivin and Meunier and states that bone undergoing higher remodeling activity is less mineralized compared to bone that exhibits fewer remodeling events The proposed computational model clearly indicates that the phenomenon of bone mineralization is primarily responsible for the bone density gain after commencing denosumab treatment. More generally, this is true for any anti-resorptive drug treatment. Neglecting the ability of bone matrix to increase its mineral content delivers only moderate increase of BMD (see We note that several PK-PD models have been presented decribing the effect of denosumab on BMD As described in Peterson and Riggs, the lumbar spine BMD was predicted using a zero-order production rate that is affected by osteoblast function and a first-order elimination that is affected by osteoclast function. Sigmoidicity terms for each bone marker are estimated to describe the steepness of the BMD change relative to the proportional change in the marker One issue to be addressed in the future is the fact that a highly mineralized bone matrix gives rise to a more brittle material behavior, which increases the stiffness and reduces the fracture toughness of bone In this paper, a comprehensive mechanistic PK-PD model has been presented which allows simulating the effects of denosumab treatment on bone remodeling and bone mineral density (BMD) in postmenopausal osteoporosis. For this purpose, a PK model of denosumab has been coupled to a bone cell population model of bone remodeling taking into account the mineralization process. The latter accounts for the mineral balance in bone tissue and distinguishes between primary and secondary mineralization and removal of bone matrix due to bone resorption. Furthermore, mechanobiological feedback was accounted for in the model. The numerical simulation results have shown the following novel model capabilities: The bone mineralization process is an essential mechanism of bone mineral density (BMD) gains after treatment with denosumab. Neglecting bone mineralization (i.e. assuming a constant mineral content) leads to a significant reduction of BMD gains. The potential for mineralization is strongly affected by the rate of mineralization and consequently affects changes in BMD over time. High values of the mineralization rate lead to earlier saturation of the mineralization process. The initial bone turnover is an essential factor in determining bone’s ability to continue the mineralization process upon reducing bone resorption due to anti-catabolic drug treatments. The slope of the BMD vs. time curves is increased for high bone turnover, while it is reduced for low turnover cases. The drug accessibility factor is an essential parameter which controls the ease by which denosumab is distributed from the central compartment to the respective bone tissue compartment. The effect of denosumab on BMD is bone site specific. The lumbar spine exhibits a higher bone turnover rate compared to the hip and, consequently, denosumab treatment is more effective in increasing BMD in the lumbar spine in relative terms. We note that the current model does not include the formation of microcracks due to dynamic mechanical loading as occurs during habitual loading. The increased brittleness of the bone matrix following denosumab treatment can be of concern for patients being on denosumab treatment for extended time periods. In future studies we aim to explore these effects in more detail identifying safe time periods for anti-resorptive treatments. The values of the constants of the PK-PD model are given in We must note the influence of the absorption parameter of the PK model,