The effects of perfluorobutyric acid, perfluoroheptanoic acid and perfluorooctanoic acid, in the presence and absence of antimony(III), on the cathodic current efficiency, power consumption and polarisation behaviour of the cathode during the electrowinning of zinc from acidic sulphate solutions were investigated. The surface morphology and crystallographic orientations of the zinc deposits were also examined. Addition of any of these perfluorocarboxylic acids increased the current efficiency, decreased power consumption and produced better surface morphologies. Voltammetric studies indicated that polarisation of the electrode in the presence of these additives was in the order PFOA > PFHA > PFBA. The nature of the electrode reactions was investigated through measurements of exchange current densities, Tafel slopes and transfer coefficients. Perfluorocarboxylic acids were found to be better additives for zinc electrodeposition when Sb(III) was absent from the zinc electrolyte.Metallic impurities play complicated roles Antimony(III) is one of the most injurious impurities whose presence in the electrolyte produces spongy and dark deposits Glue The salts of aliphatic carboxylic acids are anionic surface-active agents As these properties appear to be very attractive, their use as additives to improve the electrodeposition characteristics of zinc from acidic sulphate electrolytes has been investigated. The experimental procedures, apparatus, and the composition of the electrolytes used in this work were similar to those described previously The effects of the perfluorocarboxylic acids (PFCAs) on CE and PC during zinc electrodeposition were studied in the presence and absence of Sb(III) in the zinc electrolyte ( The effects of the addition of Sb(III) in the presence of the PFCAs on CE are also reported in The effects of the PFCAs on the PC in the presence and absence of Sb(III) are also listed in Cyclic voltammograms for the Zn At very high additive concentrations the active sites for electrodeposition on the cathode surface are blocked and thus a higher driving force for zinc ion reduction is required, usually resulting in an increase in CV and hence PC. However, the present measurements show no significant change in either CV or PC with increasing additive concentrations. This may be attributed to the lower molecular size of the compounds. The NOP values which decrease in the order PFOA > PFHA > PFBA ( Linear sweep voltammograms were also recorded for aluminium and zinc electrodes in the various solutions. The presence of Sb(III) in solution activates the electrodes by shifting the deposition potentials to less negative values and the effect is similar on both aluminium and zinc cathodes. A typical example of the effect of Sb(III) on zinc ion electroreduction behaviour with an aluminium cathode from additive free solutions is shown in All of the PFCAs when present alone in the solution have a similar effect in polarising the zinc and aluminium cathodes. A typical example of this effect has been shown in Tafel slopes ( When Sb(III) is added to the zinc electrolyte alone a significant decrease in Tafel slope indicates that the presence of Sb(III) alone affects the zinc deposition process. On the other hand, the PFCAs does not have any significant effect on the Tafel slopes even when Sb(III) is present in the electrolyte, indicating that they do not control the charge transfer reaction. The transfer coefficient remains around 0.5 in addition-free as well as in the presence of the PFCAs. However, when Sb(III) is also present in the solution, Increasing additive concentrations decrease The zinc deposits obtained from the additive-free zinc sulphate electrolyte are bright but somewhat rough microscopically. They consist of hexagonal platelets of moderate size with (1 An increase in the concentration of PFHA or PFOA does not affect the platelet size significantly, whereas the size of the platelets decreases in the presence of PFBA when its concentration exceeds 12.5 mg The addition of Sb(III) to the zinc electrolytes containing any one of these PFCAs affects the deposit morphology and preferred crystallographic orientations. For example addition of 0.01 mg  The CE increases from 89.3 in additive-free acidic zinc sulfate solution to ∼95% in the presence of PFCAs. In the presence of all PFCAs, even 0.01 mg PFHA is found to be the most effective additive for reducing PC by 80 kW All the PFCAs increase the zinc deposition potential consistent with surface adsorption. The presence of even 0.01 mg PFCAs are found to produce smooth and bright zinc deposits with better surface morphology than additive-free solutions. The presence of 0.01 mg Correlations also appear to exist among CE, PC, polarisation behaviour and deposit morphology in the presence of these additives, alone and in combination with Sb(III). It is found that these PFCAs are useful organic additives for zinc electrodeposition only when Sb(III) is absent in the zinc electrolyte. The authors thank P. Fallon and K. Seymor for analysing the electrodeposits by SEM and XRD respectively. Both are from Murdoch University, Perth, Western Australia.