The removal of oil from water is of increasing importance in many industries, such as oil and gas, petrochemical and food industries, because of the large volumes of oily wastewater they produce. The aim of this work is to evaluate and compare the performance of ferrous and aluminium sulfate coagulations and to compare between sand filter, coagulation and a hybrid coagulation/sand filter process when used as pre-treatment options. When the concentration of oil was low in the oil-water emulsion, the treatment by sand filter alone was adequate (oil ≤50 mg/L). On the other hand, when the oil concentration was greater than 50 mg/L, advanced treatments such as coagulation are required as post-processes to reach good water quality. Aluminium sulfate was observed to be more efficient (about 5% to 7% higher than the use of ferrous sulfate) and less costly than ferrous sulfate to remove oil from oil-water emulsion using coagulation. The optimal technology for pre-treatment to remove oil from oil-water emulsion was found to be a coagulant dosage of aluminium sulfate combined with sand filter at pH 8 during various concentrations as hybrid. Optimal conditions were found to occur at mixing duration and speed of 120 s and 250 rpm respectively.The use of pre-treatment separation for the removal of oil from water is becoming very important in many various industries such as in the oil and gas industry, petrochemical industries and some food industries. These industries produce large amounts of oil-water emulsion, such as oil well produced water and the hydrocarbon concentration in oily wastewater from various industries usually ranges between 50-1,000 mg/L [ To date, there have been many studies about processes for treatment of oil-water emulsions. For instance, the roles of aluminium and ferric sulfates as coagulation agents for oil–water emulsions were investigated in terms of oil removal by Al Shamrani et al. [ However, these methods have some drawbacks, such as high cost, especially coagulation/flocculation by air floatation, because the flotation process requires energy, and generation of secondary pollutants, especially by chemical de-emulsification processes [ The objective of this study was to reduce fouling when membrane techniques are used after the pre-treatment process because membrane fouling is the major problem during membrane separation processes [ Aluminium sulfate Oil-water emulsions were prepared by mixing commercial vegetable oil and deionised water at 1500 rpm in a magnetic stirrer (Fisher Scientiﬁc, UK) for 10 min. After adjusting the pH to the appropriate value, the oil-water emulsion was mixed with the coagulant in a standard jar-test apparatus (Bibby-Stuart Flocculator SW6) for 120 s at 250 rpm as rapid mixing, followed by slow mixing for 18–20 min at 30 rpm. After 20 min of settling, the ﬂoc formed and the sample was taken from approximately 3 cm below the liquid surface. Oil concentration was determined by a Shimadzu Total Organic Carbon (TOC) analyser (Model TOC-L, Shimadzu). This procedure was applied when the coagulation process was to be used without sand filter and when using the sand filter after coagulation. Samples were also taken after purification using the sand filter. In addition, the zeta potentials of oil droplets were measured in prepared emulsion using a Zeta-Sizer 3000 HS (Malvern Instruments, UK). The sand column used in this study had dimensions (70 mm Inside Diameter (ID) and 400 mm length) ( At this condition, the filtration rate for clean water was estimated to be around 0.94 m Sand filtration will remove both oil droplets and oil flocs (after coagulation process) by capturing suspended particles on to the surface of sand grains as they pass through the sand filter. Therefore, when removing oil droplets from emulsion by using sand filter there are three mechanism steps [ The effect of the sand filter pre-treatment on oil removal between initial concentration of oil and final oil concentration was investigated. The initial concentration of oil was 0.546 (concentration of oil from Ras Tanura in Arabian Gulf) [  The final oil concentrations after using the sand filter at initial oil concentrations of 0.546 and 50 mg/L were about 0.003 and 1.86 mg/L respectively. According to the United States Environmental Protection Agency (USEPA) [ The final oil concentrations after sand filtration at initial oil concentrations of 200, 350 (concentration of oil in produce water), 500, 650, 800 and 1000 mg/L were 32.9, 66.3, 104.6, 132.6, 212.66 and 320 mg/L respectively. These concentrations require the process of coagulation, because sand filtration alone was insufficient to reduce oil concentration to less than 2 mg/L. The effect of pH on the zeta potential of the dispersed oil droplets at initial pH 5, pH 7, pH 8 and pH 10 is shown in The negative charges observed are caused by the absorption of hydroxyl ions at the oil water interface [ Calcium carbonate can be added to make the alkaline mixture at a concentration of 0.45 mg/l as CaCO Aluminium hydroxide is insoluble and settles slowly through oily water and collects suspended materials. When aluminium sulfate is added to the oily water, the aluminium ion (monomeric) Al These results show that when pH values are low, the values of zeta potential are low and hence the chance of coagulation increases. However, the aluminium sulfate reaction needs alkalinity and therefore the most appropriate pH for coagulation to occur is between 7–9 where it has the lowest zeta potential [ When the pH is controlled between 7–8 in the wastewater, coagulants are usually positively charged and they are designed to neutralise the charge of suspended particles, these positive ions have the potential to combine with the negatively particles such as hydroxide (OH)-, and then produces a non-dissolved product or solid precipitates [Al(OH)  The relationship between reductions in the concentration of oil removed from the oil-water emulsion during (oil concentration in treated water subtracted from initial oil concentration) the coagulation process and the dosage of aluminium sulfate, at various concentrations of oil is shown in Therefore, increasing the dose of aluminium sulfate resulted in reduced oil in the emulsion after coagulation process due to aluminium hydrolysis. Negative ions can absorb the positively charged ions, such as Al  Similarly to the situation with aluminium sulfate, when ferrous sulfate is added to oily water, alkalinity is required for the reaction by using sodium hydroxide in order for the reaction to occur: Calcium carbonate can also be added to make the alkaline mixture. Therefore, the following reaction occurs: Fe (OH) In addition, the ferrous sulphate needs alkalinity to form ferrous hydroxide and therefore The most appropriate pH is between 7–8, where it has the lowest zeta potential [  The effect of ferrous sulfate concentration on oil removal at several oil concentrations is presented in These results show that when the dose of ferrous sulfate is increased it leads to the reduction of oil in the emulsion after coagulation process due to iron hydrolysis, up to a saturation concentration above which further reduction does not occur. Negative ions can absorb the positively charged ions, such as Fe Both aluminium sulfate and ferrous sulfate coagulants are effective in removing oil. But choosing the best one depends on their relative ability to remove the oil as well as the amount of the coagulant needed and the cost of the added dose. Costs were obtained from Fisher Scientific-UK Ltd of chemicals used for controlling the pH, ferrous sulfate and aluminium sulfate as coagulants. Therefore, the cost was determined from unit costs combined with the optimal dose of the coagulant. The optimal doses of ferrous sulfate and aluminium sulfate on the removal of oil at various concentrations of oil are shown in After determining the optimum doses of ferrous sulfate and aluminium sulfate, the costs were calculated ( There are a few reports which describe the effects of the mixer speed and mixing duration of the rapid and slow mixing stages on the coagulation process for oil drops [ With regard to the slow mixing, Out of the approaches examined here, the best technology for pre-treatment to remove oil from oil-water emulsion is a hybrid process utilising a coagulant dosage of aluminium sulfate combined with sand filtration. In this process, the coagulation process is done first using aluminium sulfate as a coagulant and after 20 min of settling, the ﬂoc formed. Then, samples were taken after purification using the sand filter. This process has the advantages of increased efficiency, low cost due to the use of the sand filter, compact solution [ In this study we investigated treatment of oil-water emulsions for the reuse of water by coagulation using aluminium sulfate and ferrous sulfate as coagulants combined with using a sand filter as pre-treatment. Vegetable oil was used to form the oil-water emulsions. These combined processes demonstrated increased efficiency, lowered cost, due to the use of the sand filter as compact solution. The conclusions from this work can be summarized as follows: The magnitude of the negative zeta potential of the oil droplets gradually increased with increasing pH to reach a maximum of −100 mV at pH 10 for all concentrations of vegetable oil. It is believed that the negative charges are caused by the absorption of hydroxyl ions at the oil water interface. When the concentration of oil is low in the oil-water emulsion (oil ≤50 mg/L), treatment by sand filter is sufficient to meet regulatory requirements for drinking water. On the other hand, when the oil concentration was greater than 50 mg/L, advanced treatments, like coagulation processes, were required as post-processes to reach good water quality based on the United States Environmental Protection Agency (USEPA) standards. Both coagulants from aluminium sulfate or ferrous sulfate are effective in removing oil. But choosing the best one depends not only on their ability to remove the oil, but also on the amounts of coagulant required and their cost. Aluminium sulfate was found to be more efficient (about 5% to 7% higher than the use of ferrous sulfate) and less costly than ferrous sulfate to remove oil from oil-water emulsion. The optimum duration for the rapid mixing step was 120 s at a stirring speed of 100 rpm, 200 rpm and 250 rpm. The optimum speed of mixing for the coagulation process was 250 rpm. The optimum duration of the slow mixing step, recorded at 30 rpm stirring speed, was between 18–20 minutes. The best performing method to remove oil from oil-water emulsion was found to be a coagulant dosage of aluminium sulfate combined with sand filtration for various concentrations of oil.