It is very important to know the properties of natural stones that are used in building construction in order to determine the specific areas of usage. Among those, water absorption is one of the most important as it determines various mechanical and physical properties. The objectives of this study are to determine the water absorption characteristics of natural building stones with different composition, structure and texture properties, to determine the parameters affecting the water absorption ratio and to obtain the drying features of natural building stones. For this purpose, in this study 12 natural building stones with different structural and textural properties are studied in detail based on their water absorption attributes. For every rock type, graphics of water absorption against time are prepared and evaluated. The relationships of density, apparent density, open porosity, total porosity and open/total porosity ratios with water absorption are studied. The drying features of the samples which absorbed water are also determined. Relationships between standard times and measured real times are obtained and the results of detailed evaluations are presented with the purpose of helping standard developers and experimental researchers. The results of these tests indicate that first 24h are very important for water absorption and drying test and apparent porosity, open and total porosity properties are highly related with water absorption ratio. On the other hand, it is found that porosity of more water absorbing stones is also an accelerating factor for drying process.Water absorption (WA) value is one of the most important parameters of rocks which have an impact upon their physical and mechanical properties Water absorption is the proportion of water which can be absorbed by stone under specific immersion conditions Durability is a complex criteria determined by inherent strength, water absorption and pore space. Lower water absorption generally correlates to a greater durability, as it restricts the passage of deleterious solutions, but a larger pore size can assist with durability by reducing the pressure applied by salt or ice crystallization on the walls of the pores There are three main factors that determine stain resistance; these are water absorption, composition and appearance. The weighting of each of these factors varies depending on the stone type and application. Water absorption is directly related to stain resistance. Simply put, a higher water absorption capacity allows for a higher ‘stain holding’ capacity There are many studies on the water absorption properties of natural building stones. These studies are mostly focused on the changes in the mechanical property of natural building stones which have absorbed water The calculation methods and procedures employed to obtain the water absorption value of rocks have been explained in several publications, including ASTM C-97 In this study, the water absorption and drying features of different types of natural building stones were characterized. To achieve this, natural building stone samples were characterized and monitorized until they were completely saturated and dried. In addition, physical tests (such as true density, apparent density and open and total porosity tests) were carried out and the results were discussed. Rocks with different formation, structure, texture and porosity features were chosen and water absorption and drying experiments were performed on 12 different samples which can be commercially obtained and are commonly. These samples consisted of the following rock types: marbles, limestones, granites, andesites, travertines, onyx and conglomerate. The names and types of these samples are presented in In order to better determine the water absorption and drying features of natural building stones with different properties, experiments were performed with 10 samples for each stone. Experimental samples were prepared as cubes of 50 In order to better evaluate their water absorption and drying features, the samples were also tested for real density, apparent density, open and total porosity. The results are shown in Tests were performed using a Accupyc 3600 multipicnometer with helium gas in accordance with Real density ASTM D-5550-06 The relationships between the chemical composition and water absorption ratios of natural building stones were compared and studied regardless of their origin and type. The compositions of natural building stones were determined using the XRF method and the results obtained are presented in Detailed studies were carried out to determine the effects of the chemical properties of specimens on their water absorption ratio. Graphs based on these chosen parameters were drawn and relationships were investigated. Mineralogy is one of the most important factors that determine the kind of effects water has on stone types (physical, chemical or physico-chemical effects). Most minerals do not show any reaction to water; however some of them are very sensitive to water. The percentages of these minerals in rocks must be determined in order to estimate the effect of water on them. Two groups of minerals are prone to reaction in presence of water: evaporite minerals (halids, sulfates, carbonates, nitrates and borates) and clay minerals Mineralogical-petrographical analyses were carried out with the purpose of discovering the relationship between water absorption properties and mineralogical structure. Thin sections of the natural building stone samples were prepared and were then examined under a polarized microscope to determine the textural features of each sample. The petrographic descriptions and microphotographs of the samples were determined from these thin-sections and are given in Relating the physical, chemical and mineralogical properties of natural building stones of different origins and types with their water absorption properties is important with regard to learning about the factors affecting water absorption. The different textural features and mineralogical compositions cause different properties of water absorptions to arise for each rock unit. The properties examined were analyzed in detail and are presented below because of this. The results of the testing are graphically presented in According to the results, almost every natural building stone shows the same water absorption trend respectively. Even though water absorption levels may vary, the behavior against time is almost the same. The least water absorbent natural building stone was determined to be marble (0.07–0.12%). Granite (0.24–0.37%), onyx (0.27%), conglomerate (0.33%) and some beiges (0.20–0.44%) also have low water absorption ratios. While travertines absorbs a little more (1.42%), the most water absorbent natural building stones were determined to be andesites (3.24–3.99%). With the exception of andesites, travertines and some beige, all of the examined natural building stones are determined as water absorbent at a rate below 1%. Due to andesites’ porous structure and different compositions, different types of andesites were determined to not display similar water absorption and drying characteristics. GA seems to absorb water over a longer duration and to take a similarly long duration to dry. This is important to consider when planning experiments. Marbles were determined to not need long durations for water absorption and drying. In under one day, both water absorption and drying processes were carried out. Considering this, the first 24 Lesser water absorbent natural building stones dry in a shorter duration respectively as expected, while more absorbent specimens takes more time to dry. The greater porosity of more absorbent stones must be considered as a factor in shortening the drying process. This phenomenon is observed clearly with travertine and andesite specimens. Meanwhile tighter textured and closed-porous specimens were observed to take a longer time to dry. Conglomerate and gray andesite specimens are separated in time from the other specimens which had the same water absorption and drying trend. Other specimens absorb water fast in the beginning but the absorption progresses at a slower rate as time goes on. These same two specimens have a similar fashion of drying as well considering the other specimens, and dry within almost the same durations. This situation can be observed clearly on the slopes of graphs given in In this area, the effects of the physical properties of rocks given in Considering all natural building stones, some physical properties were observed to directly affect the magnitude of the water absorption ratio. When While the relationship between apparent density and absorption ratio ( As expected, a high level of correlation between water absorption and porosity was determined. As porosity increases so does the water absorption. While for the relationship between water absorption and open porosity, the Considering the type of natural building stones separately, The water absorption ratios of natural building stones that are to be used for external cladding, load-bearing masonry units, non-load-bearing masonry units, copings, sills, lentils, roofing, internal flooring, external pavements, internal walls, kitchens, dining areas, hospitals, cold storage areas are factors for selecting the stone type to be used. Natural building stones that are used especially for exterior applications and interior applications such as bathrooms and kitchens must absorb low levels of water and dry fast. Marbles, some limestones and granites are good choices for usage on wet sections of buildings. Because they are more absorbent, travertines can be used for exterior applications because they can dry fast. Due to their porous structure, bacterias may breed in travertines and this may present a challenge to the desired hygienic conditions, so the usage of travertines in interior applications is inconvenient. While pink andesites have similarly fast drying features, because of their strength values as observed in literature, instead of covering applications like travertines, gardening applications would be more convenient for pink andesites. For the purpose of determining the water absorption ratios of natural building stones with different properties, it is maintained that 48 In this study, the effects of the chemical components of rocks employed in experiments on their water absorption ratio were also investigated. Firstly, the relationships between each chemical component and water absorption ratios were investigated. Then, due to the fact that a high degree of correlation was not observed, water absorption ratios were classified as lower than 1 and higher than 1 for natural building stones. Also, due to high differences in CaO values, another classification was made as CaO When When According to As a result of the classification made due to the high level of difference in CaO values (CaO In this study, beside the main chemical components, the relationship between the trace elements and water absorption were also investigated. Examinations of the relationships between large amounts of trace elements with respective water absorption ratios as well as the related graphs are provided in When In specimens with volcanic origins, the most interesting trace elements were found to be Zn and Zr which had the high correlation coefficients 0.986 and 0.942 respectively. Ga (0.743) and Ce (0.742) had respectively high coefficients as well. For Cu and Ni, the coefficients were found as 0.349 and 0.432, respectively. The rest of the trace elements had much lower correlational coefficients. As can be seen also from Karaca To determine the exact magnitude of the relationship between chemical analyses and water absorption, analyses and tests need to be performed on numerous specimens of different types. This study only indicates some important clues as regards this phenomenon. For the purpose of determining the effect of mineralogical structure on the water absorption and drying characteristics of natural building stones, rocks are classified as: (1) volcanically originated and (2) sedimentary and metamorphically originated, and As seen in When As can be seen in When It is understood that there have been no studies focusing on the relationship between the mineral structures of natural building stones and water absorption ratios after the literature research. Although the mineral structure types of natural building stones cannot be taken into account when considering the usage areas of current water absorption ratio informations, they are still to be studied in order to understand the water absorption characteristics completely. In addition, a natural material consisting of minerals with relationship of a very low or a very high degree to water absorption will be always important in the composite material production stage. Results obtained from the studies done for determining the water absorption characteristics of natural building stones with different composition, structure and texture properties, determining the parameters affecting the water absorption ratio and obtaining the drying features of natural building stones are presented below: Natural building stones that absorb less water dry as fast as expected and the ones that absorb more water take more time to dry. It should be considered that the porosity of more water absorbing stones is also an accelerating factor for the drying process. The first 24 The least water absorbing natural building stone is determined to be marble (0.07–0.12%), granite (0.24–0.37%), onyx (0.27%), conglomerate (0.33%) and some beiges (0.20–0.44%) also have low ratios for water absorption. While travertines absorb more than these stones (1.42%), the most water absorbing stones are determined to be andesites (3.24–3.99%). Considering all natural building stones, apparent density as well as open and total porosity properties is highly related with water absorption ratio. As porosity increases and as apparent density decreases, the water absorption increases. The chemical components of all natural building stones of different origins and types do not have direct effects on water absorption. But, high relationships are only found between loss on ignition (LOI), SiO Although a relationship cannot be found between trace elements in examined all specimens and water absorption ratios, Zn and Zr percentages for volcanic originated rocks seem to have high relationships with water absorption ratios. An increase in those elements is observed to cause also an increase in water absorption ratio. However there are no significant relationships between water absorption of carbonates rocks and trace elements. Although Karaca When the effects of natural building stones’ mineralogical structures on water absorption ratio were investigated, Biotite in volcanic originated rocks is observed to have a high relationship to water absorption ratio ( This study is supported the by