During the last few decades, there has been a tremendous rise in the number of research studies dedicated towards the development of diagnostic tools based on bio-sensing technology for the early detection of various diseases like cardiovascular diseases (CVD), many types of cancer, diabetes mellitus (DM) and many infectious diseases. Many breakthroughs have been developed in the areas of improving specificity, selectivity and repeatability of the biosensor devices. Innovations in the interdisciplinary areas like biotechnology, genetics, organic electronics and nanotechnology also had a great positive impact on the growth of bio-sensing technology. As a product of these improvements, fast and consistent sensing policies have been productively created for precise and ultrasensitive biomarker-based disease diagnostics. Prostate-specific antigen (PSA) is widely considered as an important biomarker used for diagnosing prostate cancer. There have been many publications based on various biosensors used for PSA detection, but a limited review was available for the classification of these biosensors used for the detection of PSA. This review highlights the various biosensors used for PSA detection and proposes a novel classification for PSA biosensors based on the transducer type used. We also highlight the advantages, disadvantages and limitations of each technique used for PSA biosensing which will make this article a complete reference tool for the future researches in PSA biosensing.Today prostate cancer causes the fatality to approximately 10% of all cancer patients Regarding the discovery of PSA in blood, there have been numerous controversies existing. The first report regarding the properties of PSA was made by Rubin Flocks, an American urologist in the year of 1960 There are various PSA testing procedures available currently in the market. But all of them are carried out at centralized dedicated laboratories or hospitals by using automated high-through-put systems. The main benefits of such setups are the ability of the device to uncover the analytes with low detection limits. A biosensor is a detection device which uses a living component or a biomolecule as a mode of sensing and a physicochemical method to express it Biosensors are classified according to transducer type or according to the nature of their biological component. One of the most common and major types of biosensors in use today is the electrochemical biosensor. This is mainly due to their advantages like small size, portability and being more economical when compared with the other types of biosensors. The portability and small size enable electrochemical biosensors to be used as a point-of-care device by the patient himself at home or in a doctor's clinic. They also take the advantage of sensing parameters without causing any damage to the sensing element. This property makes the electrochemical biosensors a suitable candidate for PSA sensing applications. They utilize redox reactions to measure the amount of an analyte present. The sample is quantified in response to the potential difference or using the current flowing through the system owing to the oxidation and reduction reactions comprising the analyte. A novel dual function electrochemical biosensor based on a sandwich immune binding format for the detection of PSA and telomerase activity has been recently reported The target protein PSA is first captured on the Ab1 coated gold electrode, which in turn forms a mutual sandwich immunocomplex with biotinylated Ab In PSA electrochemical biosensors, a bio electrochemical component functions as the main transduction element and the measurement of electrical properties for obtaining the quantitative information from the biological system is generally electrochemical in nature Based on this principle, electrochemical PSA sensors are classified into two. Potentiometric PSA biosensors mainly use ion-selective electrodes for the detection an electrical response and amperometric PSA sensors measured current which is generated when a potential is applied between the two electrodes. The electrochemical PSA sensors do not experience the disadvantages of optical sensors. They have more steady output, have elevated sensitivity, firm response and suffer from lesser interferences. Despite of these advantages electrochemical biosensors has some drawbacks like narrow or limited temperature range and short life span. Various PSA biosensors which use potentiometric and amperometric approaches are discussed below. The working principle of potentiometric PSA biosensors is that they use conventional ion-selective electrodes so as to transduce the biological response into an electrical signal. They have advantages like simplicity and clear principles of operation. With the usage of modern silicon technologies, potentiometric PSA biosensors can be easily mass fabricated for commercial applications. Their applications can vary from simple disposable sensing device to advanced analyzers and monitors. Rebelo, et al., The proposed biosensor revealed reasonable performances comprising wide linear range, low detection limit and decent selectively. The results demonstrated that this potentiometric addressable photoelectrochemical biosensing strategy not only owned unlimited potential as a new point-of-care diagnostic tool for early detection of prostate cancer but also can be conveniently expanded to multiplex biosensing by simply changing biomarkers. The working principle of amperometric PSA biosensors is that a current is produced when a potential is applied between two electrodes. The generated current will be proportional to the amount of analyte present in the sample applied. The main advantages of these sensors are their quick response times and vibrant ranges, which are similar to the potentiometric biosensors. They are highly sensitive and more appropriate for mass production than the potentiometric biosensors Notwithstanding various advantages for amperometric based biosensors, they have some serious limitations like the interloping from chemicals present in the sample matrix to the analyte to be tested. This can be primarily challenging when comes to the testing of biological samples in specific. This limitation due to matrix interference can be overcome by optimizing the parameters like pre-concentration, derivatization and extraction. Even though, the direct use of biosensors in a matrix is desirable in order to avoid the time spent for complex sample preparation steps Recent developments in the area of micro and nano fabrication facilitate a broad range of the latest technologies, including the advancement in the field of mechanical devices and nano sized robots. The vital problems in biological physics and bioengineering concerning the development of applied micro- and nano-electromechanical biosensors have come to an end with the introduction of standard wafer-scale semiconductor processing techniques. This also facilitated the mass production of nano and mechanical biosensors for various diagnostic purposes. Microelectromechanical systems (MEMS), are the broad category of technology using microscopic devices, principally those with moving parts. It combines at the nano-scale into nanoelectromechanical systems otherwise known as NEMS systems, which are the type of devices incorporating mechanical and electrical functionality at the nanoscale level In a broad spectrum, mechanical PSA biosensors exploit the characteristics of reduced physical size of the components. Mainly in mechanical biosensors, the minimum measurable mass is proportional to the total mass of the device. Second property, which makes them unique, is their ability to be displaced or deformed uniformly in all dimensions according to the corresponding reaction. They have high mechanical compliance, which can be tailored according to the application. This property converts an applied force into a measurable displacement which then can be converted to electrical signals and measured. The heightened force responsivity unlocks new openings for quantifying the miniscule forces that control biological interactions. For example, nanomechanical sensors can detect events like rupturing of individual hydrogen bonds with forces of ~10 pN. They can also exhibit fast response times. This allows biological processes in fluids to be studied on the time scales of milliseconds or shorter There are many classifications of mechanical biosensors, but for the detection of PSA micro-cantilever mechanical biosensors are mostly reported. During the biological reaction, cantilever based sensors react in two different ways. One method is the static deflection where the binding of the biological analyte on one side of the cantilever causes alteration in the surface stress, which then further develops into a detectable deflection; and the other is the dynamic method where binding on a cantilever produces deviations of its mass and subsequently changes the resonant frequency. Various physical methods can be employed to sense the cantilever motion. They can be mechanical, optical or electromagnetic in nature. The resulting signal is converted to an electrical response and calculated for the quantification. Cantilever devices are mostly fabricated using MEMS photolithography processes which enable them to be tailored in various shapes and forms Wu et al., Due to various limitations of electrical and mechanical biosensors, optical biosensors is considered for the sensing of various biological components for diagnostic and analytical purposes Use of fluorescent biosensors is widely accepted method for detecting biologically significant molecules and various biochemical reactions for diagnostic purposes. Latest advancements and investigations in the field of fluorescent biosensors have led to many breakthroughs in understanding the role of different biomolecules and the intercellular relationship of various biological components in disease diagnosis including cancer markers. Even though there have been many recent discoveries in the field of PSA fluorescent biosensing, logical design approaches of these fluorescent biosensors are yet to achieve. Their inability to be used in multiplexed assays still remains as a major drawback. Fabrication of fluorescent biosensors generally requires some basic strategies. The main task is to select receptor molecule which has specificity and appropriate affinity to the target molecule. Once the correct receptor molecule is finalized, the signal transduction task, which will be triggered in response to the corresponding biological reaction, has to be incorporated. This can be either through direct or indirect fluorescent method A novel aptamer-functionalized Molybdenum disulfide (MoS The binding of the aptamer to the target PSA persuades a rigid aptamer structure which makes the incorporation with the MoS Surface plasmon resonance (SPR) biosensors are another classification of optical biosensors. They work on the basis of utilizing surface plasmon polaritons, a special type of electromagnetic waves in order to make the connection between the analyst and the bio recognition probe, which are immobilized on the sensor surface A PSA biosensor based on surface plasmon-enhanced fluorescence spectroscopy is illustrated in the  Luminescence is defined as the emission of light energy from an electronically excited compound or substance returning to its ground state. Based on the source of energy used for excitation, luminescence is classified into various types. Chemiluminascence happens during a chemical reaction in an electronically excited state This can be either direct or with the use of an enzyme labeling. In this method, there is minimal background hindrances compared to other methods due to the absence of emission filters and excitation light sources There are also other types of biosensors used for the detection of prostate specific antigen for diagnostic purposes. In specific, with the high photo stability and narrow emission peaks, fluorescent sensing using nanoparticles, such as quantum dots and luminophore-doped nanoparticles, have provided an appealing ground of research for PSA biosensor development. Surface-enhanced Raman spectroscopy biosensor using labeled antibodies, which are attached to gold nanoparticle probes, were used for PSA detection by Despite of all the breakthroughs in the area of PSA biosensing, there are still many issues, which require a great deal of attention. Even though PSA is considered as the most reliable biomarker for prostate cancer in the last 25 years, there has been many limitations reported for this test method. Mainly its low specificity and sensitivity, which ranges from 20% to 40% and 70–90%, respectively, and the variation in the cutoff values which is based on the geographical area of the patient The fundamental goal of cancer biosensor technology is to bring point of care advantage to the diagnostic field. PSA is recognized as the most relevant biomarker for the early detection of prostate cancer. Biosensor technology has developed to a point where the PSA testing has been moved to near patient diagnostic methods from large centralized high throughput laboratories. In future these sensors can be developed in the form of hand held devices where the patient can test and see the results by himself without medical assistance. The evolution of hand held glucometers are a good example of this. This type of biosensors will revolutionize the health care industry by reducing the treatment cost and by improving the clinical outcomes. There have been various biosensors used for the detection of PSA from blood and some reviews have been published on various types of PSA biosensors. However, in this review we introduce a novel classification for PSA biosensors based on the transducer type used. The authors are thankful to the