Carnallite is a double salt (KCl·MgCl2·6H2O or KMgCl3·6H2O), which is a common source of potassium chloride (KCl). It is treated with a mother liquor containing magnesium chloride (MgCl2), KCl and sodium chloride (NaCl), and then KCl and NaCl precipitate in the mother liquor solution. The amount of water and the temperature are the two crucial factors for the decomposition of carnallite in aqueous solution. Because of the lack of research on the decomposition process of carnallite, the yield and quality of the KCl produced are limited. In this study, we develop a model for the decomposition of carnallite based on the multi-temperature quaternary diagram of the NaCl–KCl–MgCl2–H2O system and the principle of mass conservation for MgCl2. The model is verified using experimental and literature data for different types of carnallite: normal, Mg-rich, Na-rich, and (Mg and Na)-rich. The proposed model predicts the amount of water required for decomposition of carnallite and the yield of KCl very well for normal and Mg-rich carnallite (within 2%), for Na-rich and (Mg and Na)-rich carnallite (within 8%), and for ancient evaporite carnallite in Laos (within 2%).Potassium chloride is an important chemical fertilizer in agriculture ( As discussed above, we found that the water amount and decomposition ratio of carnallite are related to the temperature and composition of the equilibrium mother liquor. The model for the effect of the system properties on the decomposition process of carnallite was established by the multi-temperature quaternary diagram data of the NaCl–KCl–MgCl Carnallite was taken from the drilling core of Vientiane potash deposits in Laos. Its composition ( The ionic compositions of the liquid and solid phases were determined using well-established procedures. The Mg The decomposition process of carnallite in aqueous solution is an endothermic reaction, and was carried out in a super constant temperature water-bath. The reaction temperature was controlled at 293.15 Because there is water adsorbed to the crystals/minerals in the products of the decomposition, it is necessary to remove this water and discuss the experimental results in this study. There are four methods for the removal of this solution: (1) Washing with an organic solvent ( Additionally, the mass of the product is always lower than the mass of the feed because of the viscosity of the brine and solution adsorbing to the surface of the container during the experiments. When the quantity of the solid phase in the product is weighed by electronic balance with an accuracy of ± The decomposition ratio of carnallite in aqueous solution includes the KCl yield and the MgCl The MgCl The various processes used for KCl production from carnallite depend upon the equilibria existing in the quaternary salt system at the desired temperature. When the carnallite is decomposed by adding an appropriate amount of water, MgCl However, if only a small amount of water is added, the carnallite cannot completely decompose in the aqueous solution. The process occurs in a suspension and can be represented as In both cases, the process occurs at the interface between the solid and liquid phases, MgCl The left-hand side of Eq. Eq. Analysis of Eq. The KCl yield and MgCl The functional relationships of Eqs. In addition, when carnallite is decomposed by adding an excessive amount of water, MgCl Eq. Analysis of Eq. In this case, the KCl yield and MgCl Thus, the functional relationship of Eqs. Generally, the functional model (Eqs. In this study, the hypothesis is that the decomposition process of carnallite in aqueous solution either completely or incompletely occurs, and the reaction pressure is normal atmospheric pressure. A series of experiments were carried out at room temperature. To obtain the model parameters and demonstrate the model, the data for the composition of the triple-saturation equilibrium mother liquor should be obtained. Generally, the reaction temperature of decomposition is in the range from 280 to 300 However, if the carnallite is decomposed by adding superfluous water, the parameters of the predicated model for the water amount, KCl yield, and MgCl The compositions of the triple-saturation equilibrium mother liquor ( The model expressed in Eq. Analysis of Eq. The model expressed in Eq. Analysis of Eq.  As shown in The effect of the amount of water on the decomposition ratio of carnallite from ancient evaporite in Laos under isothermal conditions was also investigated, and the predicted model and experimental results are compared. The reaction temperature of 293.15 During the decomposition of carnallite in aqueous solution, the functional models for water amount  amount of water used to decompose carnallite (g) mass of carnallite (g) temperature (K) pressure (Pa) MgCl KCl concentration in carnallite (wt.%) NaCl concentration in carnallite (wt.%) MgCl KCl concentration at the triple-saturation point (wt.%) NaCl concentration at the triple-saturation point (wt.%) MgCl KCl concentration at the double-saturation equilibrium mother liquor (wt.%) NaCl concentration at the double-saturation equilibrium mother liquor (wt.%) The authors thank the