The aim of this study was to investigate the feasibility of using glass-nonmetals, a byproduct of recycling waste printed circuit boards (PCBs), to replace wood flour in production of phenolic moulding compound (PMC). Glass-nonmetals were attained by two-step crushing and corona electrostatic separating processes. Glass-nonmetals with particle size shorter than 0.07mm were in the form of single fibers and resin powder, with the biggest portion (up to 34.6wt%). Properties of PMC with glass-nonmetals (PMCGN) were compared with reference PMC and the national standard of PMC (PF2C3). When the adding content of glass-nonmetals was 40wt%, PMCGN exhibited flexural strength of 82MPa, notched impact strength of 2.4kJ/m2, heat deflection temperature of 175°C, and dielectric strength of 4.8MV/m, all of which met the national standard. Scanning electron microscopy (SEM) showed strong interfacial bonding between glass fibers and the phenolic resin. All the results showed that the use of glass-nonmetals as filler in PMC represented a promising method for resolving the environmental pollutions and reducing the cost of PMC, thus attaining both environmental and economic benefits.Printed circuit boards (PCBs) contain nearly 28% metals, including Cu, Al, Sn, etc. The purity of precious metals in PCBs is more than 10 times higher than that of rich-content minerals Phenolic moulding compound (PMC) is produced with phenolic resin acting as a bond, various fillers, solidifiers and colorants under high temperature and a certain pressure. Due to their ease of fabrication, high mechanical strength, heat-resistance and high dielectric strength, PMC is widely used to manufacture products like saucepan handles and electronic switches. Increasing production of PMC in recent years has greatly increased the need of wood flour, which is used as an organic filler in the moulding compounds. With the timber resource depletion and the increasing price of wood flour, it is an urgent assignment for producers of PMC to protect timber resource and reduce the cost of raw materials by finding alternative materials of wood flour. Kharade studied the effect of partial replacement of wood flour filler by lignin on the properties of moulding powders The type of waste PCBs used in the study was made from glass fiber reinforced epoxy resin. Nonmetals reclaimed from this kind of PCBs (glass-nonmetals) were used to replace wood flour for producing PMC. Effects of adding content of glass-nonmetals on the properties of PMC were investigated. Therefore, from the use of renewable resources and environmental protection viewpoints, the study to analyze the possibility of substituting wood flour by glass-nonmetals and develop new types of PMC with lower cost and better properties than traditional PMC, can be very useful and practical. In this study, the process technology for recycling PCBs contained two-step crushing and corona electrostatic separating. The waste PCBs were from a local PCBs factory (without electronic elements). The PCBs consisted of a woven fiberglass mat impregnated with epoxy resin. The PCBs were firstly pulverized in a process consisting of a coarse-crushing step and a fine-pulverizing step, using a shearing machine and a hammer grinder together. Then, an electrostatic separator was used to separate the metals from the nonmetals Two kinds of PMC were prepared, one with ordinary raw materials, as a reference PMC (RP), and another PMC with glass-nonmetals (PMCGN). RP was prepared in a formulation used in one of the local industries for moulding insulating electrical apparatus. Phenolic resin was obtained as commercial grade from the Shanghai Twin-tree Plastics Factory. RP was prepared by mixing this resin (38%) with wood flour (20%), talc powder (30.6%), stearic acid (1.6%), urotropin (7%), magnesium oxide (0.6%), lime (0.6%), and nigrosine (1.6%) as coloring matter. Properties of PMC with similar relative density can be comparable. Thus, PMCGN was prepared through adjusting the content of resin and fillers. The glass-nonmetals of PCBs were added to the raw materials mixture at a weight fraction of 10%, 20%, 30%, and 40%, respectively. Some toxic components such as bromide and bisphenol were added to PMCGN. The function of them in PMCGN was in conformity with the function in PCBs. Some toxic components such as brominated flame retardants can reduce fire risk. Then, the environmental risk assessment of toxic components is needed to be further investigated. To ensure the surface smoothness, the size of nonmetals used to study effect of different contents on the properties of PMC was less than 0.15 The producing process of PMC was shown in Field emission scanning electron microscopy, FEI SIRION 200, was used to analyze the dispersion of fillers into the phenolic resin matrix using fractured surfaces. Prior to the analysis, the fractured surfaces of the specimens were sputter coated with a thin layer of gold. The mechanical properties like flexural strength and charpy notched impact strength were tested. Specimen shapes for flexural strength and charpy notched impact strength were 120 Heat deflection temperature (HDT) was determined as per ISO 75-1:1993 wherein the flexural stress was 1.80 Dielectric strength was determined in accordance with IEC 60243-1: 1998. The test specimen (100 Rasching fluidity was characterized by the flowing length of stated quantity of powder in a cylindrical metal mold at a fixed pressure, temperature and time. Moulding powder (7.5 Glass-nonmetals can be attained after two-step crushing and separating process as shown in Phenolic moulding compound is a composite material with multi-phase materials. Schematic illustration of nonmetals of waste PCBs filling in the PMC was shown in The national standard of heat-resisting PMC (PF2C3) and properties of PMCGN with different contents of glass-nonmetals were shown in In addition, the rasching fluidity is also an important parameter for PMC, which indicates the ability to fill the mould when moulding powders are manufactured by injection moulding. The rasching fluidity is agreed by the two sides of supply and demand. The value of 100 Glass fibers in glass-nonmetals could be as a reinforcing material in the PMCGN. In general, the performance of reinforcing strongly depends on the interfacial adhesion between the fillers and matrix, and the stronger is the interfacial adhesion, the more effective becomes the reinforcement. In addition, better wetting between matrix and fillers permits better dispersion of fillers in the matrix In China, the profit from recycling of PCBs is attained by selling recycled metals, and the profit can offset the cost of the recycling system, which includes management policies, a chain from production to consume, and behavior concepts. PCBs waste recycling enterprises have to pay 2000 China's demand for PMC has grown at a fast pace in the past decade. In the next 5 years, both production and demand will continue to grow. Long-term cooperation between producers of PMC and recycling enterprises of PCBs will attain economic benefits for both sides. Taking a PMC producer with annual output of 10,000 The economic value of saved material costs was decided by comparing material costs of PMC with different formulations. Economic benefit can be calculated as Eq. It is assumed that the adding content of glass-nonmetals is 40 Economic benefit of using nonmetals in PMC production was caused by different material prices of fillers (glass-nonmetals of PCBs, wood flour and talc powder). The adding contents of other materials such as resin and additives were same between RP and PMCGN-40. So costs of resin and additives were not taken into account when accounting the economic benefit. Based on above assumption, economic benefit of 2,750,000 Nonmetallic material, a byproduct of PCBs recycling industry, can be used to replace wood flour to produce qualified PMC. This would not only greatly decrease the manufacturing cost of PMC but would solve an environmental problem caused by nonmetallic materials of PCB and achieve complete recovery of reusable resources, gaining a win–win result. The glass-nonmetals of waste PCBs with particle size from 0.3 to 0.125 The addition of the glass-nonmetals did not negatively affect the properties of PMCGN. From the environmental viewpoint, 40% was recommended. When the adding content of glass-nonmetals was 40%, PMCGN-40 showed flexural strength of 82 Economic analysis showed that the filling of glass-nonmetals would greatly decrease the manufacturing cost of PMC, which was attractive for producers of PMC. It is thus concluded that the glass-nonmetals, produced during the recycle of waste PCBs, can be utilized as a filler in PMC production, to attain both environmental and economic benefits. This work was supported by the National High Technology Research and Development Program of China (863 program 2006AA06Z364), Program for New Century Excellent Talents in University and Research Fund for the Doctoral Program of Higher Education (20060248058).