The aim of this study was to evaluate the effect of carboxymethylcellulose (CMC) as a pore generator and hydroxyapatite (HA) as an osteoconductive agent on the physicochemical properties and in-vitro mineralization ability of porous polymethylmethacrylate (PMMA) cement. To this end, various compositions of PMMA cements, which differed in amount of millimeter-sized hydroxyapatite (HA) particles and CMC hydrogel, were prepared and immersed into simulated body fluid (SBF) for 0, 7, 14, 21 and 28days. It was demonstrated that the incorporation of CMC hydrogel decreased the maximum temperature of cement to the normal body temperature and prolonged the handling time during polymerization. Further, the amount of CMC was responsible for the creation of porosity and interconnectivity, which in turn determined the final mechanical properties of cements. The loaded HA particles enhanced the potential bioactivity of cement for bone ingrowth. Albeit different amount of HA particles influenced their final exposures on the surface of cured cement, all of the three amounts of HA did not weaken the final mechanical properties of cements. The data here suggests that the HA particle loaded porous PMMA cement can serve as the promising candidate for bone reconstruction.Bone defects caused by injuries, diseases or surgeries severely influence the function, aesthetics, and psychosocial well-being of patients Among numerous approaches to improve PMMA, the inclusion of pore forming phase, In recent years, our group performed a series of studies to fabricate porous PMMA-calcium phosphate (CaP) cements and investigated their physiochemical properties and bioactivity both It is known that the porosity of PMMA correlates with its mechanical characteristics and final tissue response, which can be controlled by the amount of pore generator, PMMA powder (Dentalbiolux International, Belgium) was mixed with 1% Dibenzoyl peroxide (BPO, Acros Organics, Geel, Belgium), which served as a radical polymerization initiator. Methylmethacrylate (MMA, Acros Organics, Geel, Belgium) was mixed with 2% N,N-dimethyl-p-toluidine (DMPT, Sigma-Aldrich Chemical, Zwijndrecht, The Netherlands), which acted as an accelerator for the polymerization reaction. Sodium carboxymethylcellulose (Na-CMC, AkzoNobel (Akucell AF 2205, Arnhem, The Netherlands) was used as a pore forming phase and sintered hydroxyapatite (HA, Merck, Darmstadt, Germany) with a particle size of 1.0–1.5 Porous PMMA samples were prepared using the method as described before Once the homogeneous mixture was packed into the molds, the polymerization temperature was monitored by a type K thermocouple (Testo 925, Lenzkirch, Germany). The probe of the thermocouple was located at the center of the sample surface and the highest temperature (T A high-resolution μ-CT (SkyScan 1072, Skyscan, Belgium) was used to examine the porous structure of PMMA matrix and distribution of HA particles. One representative sample from each group was placed in a custom-made holder to ensure that the long axis of the samples was oriented perpendicular to the axis of X-ray beam. A pixel size of 18.88 The porosity of samples was measured and calculated based on a gravimetric method: Porosity where M SBF solution was prepared by using the method of Kokubo to test the mineralization ability of prepared cements SEM (JEOL 6340; Japan) performed on the cross-section of fractured samples was used to analyze the porous structure and morphology. Fractured samples were mounted on aluminum stubs using conductive carbon tape, sputter coated with gold using a JEOL JFC-1200 sputter coater and then examined using SEM (JEOL 6340; Japan) at an accelerating voltage of 10 Cumulative calcium uptake of cements after immersion was evaluated by assessing the remaining calcium concentration in SBF after 3, 7, 14, 21 and 28 Mechanical compression testing was performed by using a material test machine (858 MiniBionixII®, MTS, USA). Compressive yield strength (σ Data was reported as mean The data for the T The surface morphologies of cement samples are shown in Due to the big difference in radiopacity between the HA particles and PMMA matrix, it was impossible to reconstruct both PMMA matrix and HA accurately in the same image for the HA-loaded samples. Therefore, we used different thresholds to determine the porous structure of the PMMA matrix and the distribution of the incorporated HA particles ( The volume fractions of HA and PMMA and the porosity of samples are listed in Cements were immersed in SBF solution up to 28 The cumulative calcium uptake of cements during SBF immersion is shown in The mechanical results are displayed in The aim of this study was to evaluate the effect of CMC and HA on the physicochemical properties and High polymerization temperature is one of the major disadvantages of conventional PMMA and this exothermic reaction during setting could even reach up to 80 Surface composition and cement structure influence the bone-cement interface, which is critical for final clinical application. We observed that an increasing amount of incorporated HA particles into the cement resulted also in more surface exposed particles. As the HA particles are supposed to be osteoconductive and form a direct chemical bond with bone μ-CT revealed the interconnected porosity of PMMA and homogenously distributed HA particles within PMMA matrix. SEM further confirmed the presence of porosity and HA particles. Since Kokubo and Takadama clearly proved that the bone-bonding ability of a material is often evaluated by examining the ability of apatite to form on its surface in a SBF with ion concentrations nearly equal to those of human blood plasma Cumulative calcium uptake analysis confirmed the mineralization ability of the cements quantitatively. A clear increase of cumulative calcium uptake could be observed for all cements after 28 The σ In the current study, we characterized the The authors declare no competing financial interest. This work was supported by Academic Award for Excellent Ph.D. Candidates funded by