The study tested the use of a trommel screen originally designed for compost materials to reject oversize particles from hog fuel, processed from several sources and by two different comminution devices. The experiment consisted in screening material previously comminuted by a convertible crusher, designed to use both hammers and knives. Three different feedstock types were used, and namely: discarded pallets, logs and branches from park maintenance. Each feedstock type came in two different qualities, depending on the tool used for comminution, i.e. hammers or knives. Trommel screen productivity varied between 4.2 t h−1, and 5.2 t h−1 of oven dry material. Screening hog fuel derived from pallets was 30% and 40% less productive than screening fuel derived from logs and branches, respectively. Screening cost varied from 16.2 € t−1 dry material in the case of branches, to 19.9 € t−1 oven dry material for pallets. Screening allowed an increase of fuel quality only when applied to pallet-derived hog fuel.The demand for wood biomass has consistently increased in the last years in Italy, as a response to the new and ambitious EU renewable energy strategy. Italy has received the EU Directive 2009/28 CE in her National Action Plan approved in 2010. In this new plan, biomass plays a major role, becoming the main renewable source and accounting for 44% of renewable energy production Low-quality wood waste contaminated with nails and dirt is usually comminuted with crushers, fitted with blunt tools (hammers) and capable of producing hog fuel, a coarse feedstock within the particle-size specification of large-scale automated boilers. Bigger plants are less sensitive to the presence of oversize particles, rather abundant within hog fuel Thus, several machine makers now offer a new line of horizontal crushers that can be temporarily converted into chippers by replacing the standard blunt hammers with sharp knives Particle size distribution is one of the most important parameters for an efficient combustion at heating plants The goal of this study was to analyse the performance of a trommel screen specifically designed to ameliorate the characteristics of woody and herbaceous biomass from park and riverbeds maintenance before composting. The experiment aimed to determine: a) the productivity and the cost of the mechanical screening process and b) the quality improvement obtained when applying a composting screen to hog fuel. For the latter purpose only material of dimensions included between 3 and 63 mm (“accepts”) was considered suitable for a medium size biomass plant. Material smaller than 3 mm (“fines”) and bigger than 63 mm (“oversize”) was considered unsuitable. The Authors tested a trommel screen, used in the composting sector to separate organic wastes into different size fractions. The machine was a Caravaggi V3000D mobile drum screen Productivity was estimated with a time-motion study, conducted during commercial operation by one of Caravaggi's workers, at the firm location in Palazzolo sull'Oglio (BS), in Northern Italy. The study consisted in screening material previously comminuted by a convertible horizontal crusher Operating costs were calculated using the procedures described by Miyata For the purpose of the analysis, chips were considered as belonging to three different main groups: undifferentiated pile before screening (“in” pile); fraction that did not fall through the screen mesh (“out large” pile); fraction that fell through the screen mesh (“out fine” pile). One sample was collected from each pile on occasion of every screen run, or repetition. Each sample was analysed for particle size distribution, using a certified automatic screening device model FTL0200. Five sieves were used in order to separate the six following chip length classes: >100 mm, 100 mm – >63 mm, 63 mm – >45 mm, 45 mm−16 mm, 16 mm – 3 mm, <3 mm. Each fraction was then weighed with a precision scale. The different fractions were grouped into three functional classes: oversize particles (>63 mm), accepts (63 mm–3 mm) and fines (<3 mm). Data were analysed with the Statview advanced statistics software, in order to check the statistical significance of the potential differences between treatments. The software was used on the productivity data for performing a typical analysis of variance (Anova), especially suited to the factorial experiment just described. In contrast, the distribution of particle size did not satisfy the normality assumption and the statistical significance of differences between treatments was checked using non-parametric tests The results of the time study refer to pure screening work, excluding all other work time and delays Average screening cost amounted to 10.9 € t Between 70% and 83% of the total mass went through the screen and into the small size particle pile ( Concerning the actual quality upgrade, the test did not result into any significant shift of the fraction of accepts from one pile to the other. The % incidence of accept particles was about the same for the input pile and the two output piles. The only significant differences were found in the chips obtained from discarded pallets through knife action. Only in this case did screening allow a significant increase of accepts in the large particle pile. This was obtained through the total elimination of all fine particles from this pile. In fact, the main effect of screening as applied in this test was that of removing fine particles from the origin material and moving it to the small particle pile. This effect was strong and significant for all feedstock and tool types ( Very few studies are available on the mechanical screening of wood chips for energy use, but it seems clear that the results are closely related to screening method and type. We suspect that the same screening unit used for this test could have offered completely different results if we had used a different mesh size. More tests should be conducted in order to find the best match between mesh size and target product. Screening is not overly expensive, but the screening units developed for the composting sector need some adaptation before they can be effectively used with wood chips. Under their standard configuration, these units cannot offer an equally good job with coarse particles. The increasing interest in using waste wood for energy production in a wide range of boilers has made screening attractive, in an effort to upgrade fuel quality and to divide product lots into different streams directed to different boiler types. Domestic users offer better prices than industrial ones, but they have stricter particle size and moisture content specifications. However, upgrading must consider all fuel quality aspects, and not just particle size distribution. Even if a screened product met the quality specifications for particle distribution, it could still miss the moisture content target for residential use. These results are based on a short-term study, and should be taken with caution. Finally, this study tested only one of the many machines that can be applied to the screening of wood chips: further studies should test different machines types and screen size specifications. The research leading to these results has received funding from the European Union