Abstract
                  Hydroxyapatite (HAp)/bacterial cellulose (BC) nanocomposites were prepared by an optimal biomimetic mineralization synthesis approach for bone tissue engineering application. BC with ultrafine three dimensional network was negatively charged by the adsorption of polyvinylpyrrolidone (PVP) to initiate the nucleation of HAp. The HAp was grown in vitro along the nanofiber network of BC via dynamic simulated body fluid (SBF) treatment. It was found that rod-like HAp particles in the nano-scale (100–200 nm) homogeneously deposited on the surface of PVP-BC. ATR-Fourier Transform Infrared Spectroscopy (ATR-FTIR) results showed that carbonate-containing HAp crystals resembling natural bones were formed by biomimetic mineralization method. Moreover, the amount of HAp observed increased with increasing mineralization time. And the Ca/P overall ratio ranged from 1.37 to 1.59. The results from Inductively Coupled Plasma Atomic Emission Spectroscopy (ICP-AES) indicated that PVP treatment enhanced the apatite nucleation ability of BC with higher HAp deposit amount.In recent years, bone diseases have caused large tissue deficits which can not heal normally and acquire bone grafts to replace the missing bone. The traditional bone grafts include autografts and allografts [ As one of the most abundant biodegradable and biocompatible natural polymers, cellulose has attracted considerable attention for bone tissue scaffold application [ The bacterial strain As reported in the literature, the Hestrin-Schramm culture media (2.5% d-glucose, 0.5% peptone, 0.5% yeast extract, 0.115% citric acid, 0.25% disodium hydrogen phosphate, ratio of mass to volume) was used for BC membrane fermentation [ PVP solution was firstly prepared by adding 0.05 g PVP into 200 mL high pure water. Native BC containing 200 mg dry cellulose was treated in PVP solution at 30 °C for 2 d. Then, the PVP treated BC membrane coded as PVP-BC was washed with ultrapure water several times. Subsequently, these pellicles were immersed in 0.1 mol/L CaCl The morphologies of the samples were observed by using Hitachi S–4800 FE-SEM. Prior to analysis, the samples were cut into small pieces and coated with thin layer of evaporated gold. FTIR-ATR spectra of samples were recorded using a Nicolet NEXUS-670 instrument in the absorption mode with the wave number range of 4000–600 cm A schematic description of the preparation mechanism of HAp/BC nanocomposites is shown in The ATR-FTIR spectra of freeze-dried native BC, PVP-BC and PVP-HAp/BC nanocomposites are shown in Figure 3 shows FE-SEM images of native BC and HAp/BC nanocomposites. As shown in The XRD patterns for native BC and the HAp/BC nanocomposites are given in  In principle, when mole ratio Ca/P of the obtained apatite crystal is lower than 1.67, it is more beneficial as a substitute material for bone as it enables rapid bonding with bone [  HAp/BC nanocomposites were fabricated by using the biomimetic route comprised of PVP treatment, CaCl The homogeneous spherical HAp nanoparticles were formed on the surface of PVP-BC after 5 d mineralization time and then became rod-like shape crystals after 7 d mineralization time. Moreover, the rod-like shape HAp crystals were carbonate-containing apatite with low crystallite size (49.5 nm) and crystallinity (0.79%). The Ca/P mole ratios of the formed HAp crystals were lower than 1.67 which is similar to the value of natural bone apatite. Compared to HAp/BC samples without PVP treatment, the nanocomposites had higher HAp deposit weight in identical mineralization time. It indicated PVP treatment promoted the apatite nucleation ability of BC and enhanced the mineralization rate. The novel HAp/BC nanocomposites consisting of uniform rod-like shape apatite crystals and porous nanofiber network are a good prospect as the bone biomaterial substitute.