Flotation tests using different size fractions of molybdenite with 50 ppm of Diesel oil and 25 ppm of MIBC, carried out in 0.01 M NaCl solutions and seawater, showed much lower floatability of the −10 μm size fraction. The flotation of this finest size fraction was very much improved with the use of polyethylene oxide (PEO). The tests revealed that the improvement resulted from aggregation of fine molybdenite particles by Diesel oil-PEO emulsion. The flotation in seawater was good only in the pH range from 7 to 9 and it was strongly depressed around pH 10–11. While addition of PEO could improve flotation in the good flotation range over pH 7–9, it was not efficient in the depression range caused by precipitating magnesium hydroxy-complexes/magnesium hydroxide.Much of the losses in mineral processing operations may be attributed to the fine size of mineral particles. A very low efficiency of capturing fine particles by bubbles results from unfavourable hydrodynamic conditions. The best means of extending froth flotation to lower size ranges is by the use of techniques that permit aggregation of fines. However, since these aggregates are to be recovered by flotation they must be – at least to some extent – hydrophobic. Particle size enlargement is a common process employed in solid/liquid separation unit operations such as settling and filtration. Efficiency of these processes is improved with the use of flocculants, water-soluble polymers. However, the use of flocculants in flotation circuits in most cases is impossible since common flocculants are not selective, are very hydrophilic, and thus the flocs they produce are hydrophilic, too ( The list of commercial flocculants includes many polymers, varying in molecular weight, anionic and cationic, and also non-ionic. The last group also contains polyehylene oxide (PEO), ( One of the promising techniques to handle beneficiation of very fine particles is so-called floc-flotation (also known as agglomerate flotation). The process involves selective aggregation/flocculation of the flotation feed and the recovery of the flocs by froth flotation. Both sub-processes determine the efficiency of the separation: the flocculation must be selective and the produced flocs, in order to be recoverable by flotation, must be to some extent hydrophobic. It is known that molybdenite flotation is depressed by common flocculants (e.g. polyacrylamides) ( Micro-flotation tests were carried out in a 225 cm Second series of the flotation tests was carried out following identical procedures but with the use of filtered seawater. A sample of polyethylene oxide (PEO) used in this study was obtained from Sigma Aldrich, its molecular weight was M The surface tension of PEO aqueous solutions, and Diesel oil/PEO aqueous solution interfacial tension were measured using DuNouy ring method. Error bars shown in the figures along with all the experimental points are based on standard deviations. In some cases these error bars are so small that they hide entirely behind the graphical points. The flotation results obtained while working with various size fractions of molybdenite, and with Diesel oil and MIBC, are shown in  The effects of pH and PEO on the flotation of the −10 μm size fraction of molybdenite are summarized in Flotation of molybdenite in seawater reveals two pH ranges: the range of good flotation over pH from 7 to 9 and the range of poor flotation around pH 10–11. In the range of good flotation, Mo recoveries are better in seawater than in 0.01 M NaCl solutions, while in the pH range from 10 to 11 the flotation is much worse in seawater than in 0.01 M NaCl ( As The two pH flotation zones are clearly visible when the effect of pH is separately shown for the −10 μm size fraction ( As As these results indicate, PEO is to some extent surface active and tends to accumulate at the oil/water interface supporting the idea that it could be a good emulsifier for Diesel oil. As we have reported in our recent publications ( It is interesting to compare  In all the flotation tests 50 ppm of Diesel oil and 25 ppm of MIBC were utilized. The dosage of PEO was varied. While addition of 15 ppm of PEO was essential for a good flotation of the finest fraction in  In comparison with coarser size fractions, both in 0.01 M NaCl solution and in seawater the −10 μm size fraction of molybdenite floats poorly. In the flotation in seawater there are clearly two flotation ranges: a food flotation range over pH. 7–9 and a depression range over pH 10–11. Worse flotation of the −10 μm fraction can be restored over the whole pH range by addition of polyethylene oxide (in combination with Diesel oil) in the case of the tests using 0.01 M NaCl solution. In the tests using seawater, poor flotation of fine molybdenite can only be restored over the good pH flotation range by addition of polyethylene oxide (in combination with Diesel oil). This positive effect of PEO on the flotation of molybdenite is not observed when PEO is added at pH 10–11. The tests in which aggregation of the −10 μm molybdenite fraction was observed with the use of optical microscope revealed that Diesel oil emulsified in the presence of PEO efficiently agglomerates fine molybdenite particles. The fact that aggregates formed from molybdenite particles when PEO-Diesel oil emulsion is utilized are recovered by flotation indicates that these aggregates are hydrophobic. The authors acknowledge the financial support of