A parametric study has been conducted to investigate particle deposition on solid surfaces during free convection flow in an internally heated and cooled square cavity filled with air. The cavity walls are insulated while several pairs of heaters and coolers (HACs) inside the cavity lead to free convection flow. The HACs are assumed to be isothermal heat source and sinks with temperatures Th
                      and Tc
                      (Th
                     
                     >
                     Tc
                     ). The problem is numerically investigated using the Eulerian–Lagrangian method. Two-dimensional Navier–Stokes and energy equations are solved using finite volume discretization method. Applying the Lagrangian approach, 5000 particles, distributed randomly in the enclosure, were tracked for 150s. Effects of drag, lift, gravity, buoyancy, pressure gradient, shear stress terms, thermophoresis and Brownian forces on particles movements are considered. Furthermore, effects of various design parameters on the heat transfer rate and deposition of particles such as Rayleigh number (
                        
                           
                              
                                 10
                              
                              
                                 4
                              
                           
                           ⩽
                           Ra
                           ⩽
                           
                              
                                 10
                              
                              
                                 7
                              
                           
                        
                     ) as well as orientation and number of the HACs are investigated. Our simulations indicate that thermophoretic force can significantly affect the distribution of particles of 
                        
                           
                              
                                 d
                              
                              
                                 p
                              
                           
                           =
                           1
                        
                     
                     μm diameter. It is also found that at low Rayleigh numbers the particle distribution is strongly non-uniform. Moreover, it was observed that by increasing number of the HACs and changing orientation of the HACs from vertical to horizontal, deposition rate of the solid particles increases significantly.dimensionless surface area per depth Cunningham’s factor drag coefficient constant in Eq. specific heat, J constant in Eq. constant in Eq. diameter of the nanoparticle, m deformation tensor lift force per unit mass in the thermophoretic force per unit mass in the Brownian force per unit mass in the pressure gradient force per unit mass in the shear stress per unit mass in the gravity acceleration, ms Gaussian random numbers enclosure height, m dimensional height of the heater and cooler, m constant in Eq. Boltzmann constant (=1.38 fluid thermal conductivity, Wm particle thermal conductivity, Wm Knudsen number (=2 number of particles or pairs of the HACs average Nusselt number on the walls of fluid pressure, ( Prandtl number ( universal gas constant, J Rayleigh number relative Reynolds number (= relative density (= Stokes number fluid temperature, K reference temperature (=( time, s dimensional velocity components, ms fluid velocity in the particle velocity in the dimensional Cartesian coordinates, m dimensionless Cartesian coordinates, m density, kg thermal expansion coefficient, K dimensionless temperature dynamic viscosity, kg kinematic viscosity, m particle relaxation time (Eq. thermal diffusivity, m gradient delta cold or cooler base fluid hot or heater vector axis indicators lift particle thermophoresis Brownian Natural convection fluid flow and heat transfer in enclosed spaces with a heater and/or cooler inside are encountered in a number of industrial applications such as indoor ventilation with radiators, cooling of electrical components, and heat exchangers On the other hand, particulate fouling, i.e. particle deposition on heat exchanger surfaces can reduce the heat transfer rate and adversely affect the energy efficiency of these equipment Akbar et al. In view of the above, a comprehensive study investigating the effects of different forces on particle flow and deposition on solid surfaces as a result of buoyancy-induced flow, caused by internal heating and cooling in a cavity, is missing in the literature. Hence, on top of addressing this question, the effects of design parameters, e.g. the orientation and number of HACs, on the rate of heat transfer and the deposition of particles inside the cavity will be investigated in this work. For this purpose, motion of 5000 particles, over a wide range of particle sizes, is investigated numerically using an Eulerian–Lagrangian solver. As depicted by Newtonian fluid and two-dimensional flow, Thermophysical properties are constant except for the air density which varies according to the Boussinesq approximation, Following The initially stagnant particles are distributed randomly in the cavity, Local thermal equilibrium between the particle and air, Particles are sticky, i.e. they will stick to the surface when they come in contact with the walls The two-dimensional transient equations of the continuity, momentum and energy for an incompressible flow are given by:  The corresponding boundary and initial conditions are: The average Nusselt number for each isothermal heater is computed as: The equations of particle dispersion are given as The left hand side of Eq. The drag coefficient is a function of particle Reynolds number, In Eq.   In Eq. The last term, The dimensional governing equations (Eqs. In order to find the proper grid size for the numerical implementation, free convection in a cavity filled with air ( Our results are verified against those of Bagheri et al. Distribution of the solid particles in a square enclosure with several pairs of HACs is investigated through Eulerian–Lagrangian numerical simulations. Effects of various design parameters such as: orientation and numbers of HACs are studied. The effects of some other major parameters such as fluid pressure gradient, shear stress terms, thermophoretic force and Brownian motion on distribution of the solid particles are also investigated. For each combination, Rayleigh number is altered between 10 In this section, a square cavity filled with air containing a pair of HAC with Ensembles of 5000 particles with random spatial distributions were tracked over 150 A sensitivity analysis is performed to evaluate the effects of pressure gradient, shear stress terms, thermophoresis and Brownian forces on deposition rate and distribution of particles for case 1. In order to do so, five possible conditions are considered: (i) all of forces are on (  For a more comprehensive understanding of the deposition process, Knowing the wall on which the particles are deposited, as In this section results pertinent to the effects of increase in total surface area of HACs due to increase in the number of HACs (1, 2 and 3 pairs of the HACs), on the fluid flow, the heat transfer rate and deposition rate of the particles are presented.  Using the least squares method to curve-fit numerical simulation results, similar to Hooman and Merrikh To study the effect of number of HACs on the deposition rate,  Numerical results indicating the effects of HAC orientation (horizontal and vertical) on the heat and fluid flow as well as deposition rate of the particles are presented. In order to have a proper comparison, surface area of the HAC is kept constant when orientation of the HAC is changed (vertical ( As  Distribution of the solid particles in a square enclosure with several pairs of HACs is investigated through Eulerian–Lagrangian numerical simulations. The natural convection flow was considered and the two-dimensional Navier–Stokes and energy equations are solved using finite volume discretization method. Lagrangian method is used to simulate the flow of 5000 particles with diameters of 1 With increasing particle size from At low Rayleigh numbers the particle distribution is strongly non-uniform but with increasing Thermophoretic forces can significantly affect the distribution of the solid particles with diameter of By increasing number of HACs, the particle deposition rate increases; so does the heat transfer rate. On the other hand, for a given At low With a fixed HACs’ surface area, moving from vertical to horizontal HACs leads to higher particle deposition rate and lower heat transfer rate. Support from