Biochar addition to soil often increases the activity of alkaline phosphatase (ALP) involved in phosphorus (P) cycling, but the underlying mechanisms of its effect is poorly understood. This study investigated the response of kinetic parameters including maximal velocity (Vmax) and Michaelis–Menten constant (Km), and thermodynamic parameters including activation energy (Ea), enthalpy (ΔHa) and temperature coefficient (Q10) of ALP to addition of two maize biochars (400 and 600 °C) in two calcareous (Typic Haplocalcid) soils with clayey and sandy loam texture. The biochars were added to the soils at 1% (w/w) and the mixtures were incubated for 90 days under laboratory conditions (25 ± 1 °C and 70% of water holding capacity). Soils with addition of raw residue were used as positive controls and soils without biochar and raw residue were included as negative controls. The potential activity of ALP was assayed at the end of incubation period. The kinetic parameters of ALP were estimated using non-linear regression techniques and the thermodynamic characteristics were determined at different incubation temperatures (17, 27, 37, 47 and 57 °C) using the Arrhenius equation. Compared with the negative control, the addition of raw residue and biochars increased ALP activity (3.1- to 4.4-fold) after the 90-day incubation, depending upon the pyrolysis temperature and soil texture. The positive effect of biochar addition on soil ALP was greater with low than high temperature biochars and in sandy loam than clayey soils. Biochar addition increased the Km and Vmax values of ALP in the clayey soil but decreased these parameters in the sandy loam soil compared with the corresponding negative controls. Generally, application of maize raw residue and biochars increased the Ea, ΔHa and Q10 values of ALP compared with the negative controls, and the increases were similar for the two pyrolysis temperatures. Soil ALP can be strongly adsorbed by biochar particles; increasing its thermal stability and decreasing its sensitivity to elevated temperatures. In conclusion, application of maize biochar to arid-soils has a high potential to improve the ALP activity, with implications for organic P mineralization and availability. Biochar would change ALP kinetic and thermodynamic characteristics differently, depending mainly on soil texture, through the surface adsorption of this enzyme on biochar particles. These changes will be useful for modeling P mineralization and biochemical processes in biochar-amended calcareous soils.Recent interests in sustainable management practices in agroecosystems have been focused on the application of carbonized organic feedstocks produced through pyrolysis to increase soil biochemical processes and soil quality ( Alkaline phosphatase (ALP) enzyme is an important soil hydrolase that catalyzes the hydrolysis of both esters and anhydrides of phosphoric acid; therefore, it has an important function in organic P mineralization and plant P nutrition, especially in P-limited calcareous soils ( The potential enzyme activities assayed using current soil enzyme procedures reflect the total amount of an enzyme present in the soil and are indeed indicative of overall enzyme concentrations ( On the other hand, thermodynamic parameters of soil enzymes; e.g., activation energy (E Nevertheless, the mechanisms involved in soil enzyme-biochar interaction still remain largely unclear, and the link between biochar properties and enzyme kinetics and thermodynamics, remains a research priority in soil enzymology ( The experimental soils used for this study were collected from agricultural fields located in Alborz province (50° 15′ 1.2″ N, 35°44′ 11.7″ E and 50° 42′ 27.2″ N, 35° 49′ 4.03″ E), northwest Iran. The study area is dominated by a cold and dry continental climate with mean annual temperature of 21 °C and average annual precipitation of <250 mm. The soils in the study area are developed on andesite and pyroclastic parent materials and classified as Typic Haplocalcid. Soil samples were collected from 0 to 30 cm, air-dried and passed through a 2-mm sieve for homogenization and to exclude large stone and organic fragments. Subsamples were initially analyzed for the determination of soil particle-size distribution. The sand, silt and clay contents were 80%, 10% and 10% for the sandy loam soil and 10%, 38% and 52% for the clayey soil, respectively. Additional details regarding the soil sampling, preparation and analysis are provided in The raw maize stalks (residues) were initially air-dried and milled to pass a 2-mm sieve. The biochars were then produced over a 2 h period by slow pyrolysis process at the temperatures of 400 and 600 °C in a thermal furnace. Subsamples of the biochars were used for chemical analysis. Detailed information for biochar analysis is provided in Our experiment consisted of a completely randomized design with 2 × 4 factorial treatment combination with four replicates ( At the end of 90-day incubation, soil pH ( The activity of ALP (EC 3.1.3.1) was determined based on the colorimetric determination of the For estimation of the kinetic parameters, the ALP activity was assayed at different PNPP concentrations (0, 0.2, 0.5, 1.0, 5, 15 and 50 mM) as outlined above. The kinetic parameters, K ALP thermodynamic parameters were estimated by calculating the potential enzyme activity (k) at different incubation temperatures (17, 27, 37, 47 and 57 °C) for biochar-treated and untreated soils. The activation energy (E Activation enthalpy (ΔH Temperature coefficients or sensitivities (Q We also determined the adsorption and immobilization of ALP and PNP on biochar surface ( Analysis of variance (ANOVA) was used to test the differences in ALP activity, kinetic and thermodynamic parameters between the amended and unamended soils. Significant differences between the treatments were estimated by using the Fisher's LSD test at P < 0.05. All statistical tests were carried out using the Minitab16 software for Windows. The non-linear regression analyses were performed to calculate the enzyme kinetic parameters using the regression equation Both biochars showed greater pH, EC, ash, C, N and specific surface area than the raw maize feedstock, whereas oxygen (O), hydrogen (H), O/C and H/C atomic ratios, cation exchange capacity and volatile matter (VM) decreased by pyrolyzing the raw feedstock ( Amendments had a significant effect on soil attributes, depending on soil texture and pyrolysis temperature, as evidenced by significant interaction (P < 0.05) between these factors (Table S1). The addition of biochar increased pH (1–5%), EC (52–65%), OM (95–230%), SIR (60–121%) and MBC (80–116%) of both soil types over the negative control (CK) without amendments ( The positive effect of biochars on soil OM content was greater with 600 °C than 400 °C biochar (113–230% vs. 95–162%) and in sandy loam (162–230%) than clayey (95–113%) soils. By contrast, increases were greater at low than high temperature biochars for soil SIR and MBC. Yet, increases in soil OM were greater in biochar-amended soils (95–230%) than the positive control (UMR) soils (56–72%), while increases in SIR and MBC showed an opposite trend, being lower in biochar-amended soils (61–121% for SIR and 80–121% for MBC) than the positive control (165–216% for SIR and 162–180% for MBC) ( After the 90-day incubation, potential ALP activity ranged from 1.8–3.2 μmol PNP g The amendment with maize biochars (B400 and B600) decreased ALP activity (42–55% in clayey soil and 55–67% in sandy loam soil) when compared with the positive control (UMR) or uncharred feedstock ( Biochar may potentially affect soil enzymatic activity through the surface adsorption of enzyme and substrate molecules ( The adsorption test indicated that the adsorption capacity of maize feedstock for ALP increased with charring ( Likewise, maize biochars demonstrated a high capacity for PNP adsorption (7–22 μg g Our data show that the assay pH is a critical regulatory factor in PNP adsorption since solution pH has a great influence on the surface properties of the adsorbent and the degree of ionization/dissociation of the molecules ( As indicated in The kinetic parameters of soil ALP were significantly affected by biochar addition and varied interactively with addition of amendment and soil texture (Table S1). This supports the first hypothesis that application of biochar would change ALP kinetic parameters. In both soils, application of uncharred (raw) maize biomass significantly increased the V Furthermore, the changes in the K Although the K Biochar had also a significant effect on the catalytic efficiency (V The results showed that soil ALP activity increased within the temperature range of 17–37 °C, with maximum activity at 37 °C but it decreased and deactivated at temperatures of above 37 °C, probably due to enzyme denaturation (Fig. S1). Accordingly, the optimum temperature of ALP in the studied soils was 37 °C, which is roughly within the range reported by The temperature dependence of ALP activity conformed to the Arrhenius model up to the point of enzyme inactivation (37 °C) observed for the biochar-treated soils ( Amendment and soil texture interactively affected the thermodynamic parameters of ALP (Table S1). Addition of maize biochars increased the E Our results also demonstrated that the thermodynamic parameters of ALP were more influenced by biochar addition rather than the pyrolysis temperature, suggesting the importance of biochar application as a soil amendment for the enhanced temperature sensitivity and thermal stability of soil ALP. Application of biochar increased ALP resistance to inactivation and resulted in additional thermal stability at higher temperatures ( The increased E This is the first document reporting the interactions between the kinetic/thermodynamic parameters of ALP and biochar amendment in calcareous soils. Our study demonstrated the significant effect of maize biochar application on ALP activity, kinetic and thermodynamic parameters by affecting enzyme surface adsorption, and the stimulation of microbial biomass and activity, successfully confirming the first hypothesis. Increasing pyrolysis temperature had a negative effect on soil microbial activity and biomass, and the subsequent ALP activity. Soil ALP can be strongly adsorbed by biochar. Biochar decreased the affinity of ALP for substrate (increased K This study was supported by a grant (Grant no.:  Supplementary data to this article can be found online at