The most ballistically efficient armour materials and systems have a lamellar, laminated or layered structure. This is true whether it be through the intrinsic anisotropy of metallic microstructures, the use of individual plies in fibre-reinforced polymers, or through the development of a ceramic-composite hybrid armour system. But, when does a laminated material become a layered structure, and what are the effects of an interlayer, especially when that interlayer material is fresh air? This chapter covers the principles of lamination and the influence of layers, interlayers and coatings, as well as the objectives in designing laminated armours, especially the prevention of low-energy-absorbing mechanisms. International research into steel-based and aluminium-based armours is covered along with very effective hybrid systems like steel/composite armours. This chapter stimulates thought, and ideas for new designs, by linking earlier chapters on monolithic, metallic armours with the “designer armours” covered in later chapters.Material#1 Material#2 Thickness, Thickness, Bonding technique, if any Material#1 Material#2 Thickness, Thickness, Interlayer material Interlayer thickness, Bonding technique, if any Number of materials Material#1,#2, etc Thicknesses, Number of plies per material Orientation of plies Ply sequence Total thickness, Bonding technique, if any The most ballistically efficient armour materials and systems have a lamellar, laminated or layered structure. This is true whether it be through the use of anisotropy in specific metallic microstructures (see Just by having a layered structure does In 1986, I carried out my first review of armour materials ( At this point the reader should appreciate the extent of anisotropy within the world of materials and structures – anisotropy is extremely common – in fact, purely isotropic materials are quite rare. Most materials are, in fact, orthotropic, meaning that they have a different set of properties in the three orthogonal directions. The full range of lamellar, laminated materials and layered structures is listed in These groups of armour materials share many common features. However, apart from orthotropy, the one characteristic that defines all of them is their ability to delaminate, in one form or another. Whether the materials are continuous (as in the case of wrought solid metals), discontinuous materials (as in layers of soft fabrics), or simply separated by an interface (either a contact, spaced or bonded interface) the lamellar/laminated structure facilitates delamination (or further separation). It is appreciated, at this stage, that classifying a heavily wrought homogeneous armour material like rolled homogeneous armour (RHA) (see This is a transition chapter between The creation of a laminated material or layered system introduces added value. It provides choice for the armour engineer. It provides flexibility. Most of all, it opens up creative thinking – but in a focused way. The driver for an armour engineer is to defeat a threat whilst avoiding low-energy-absorbing failure mechanisms, as described in The architecture of any laminate is engineered for a specific function and the functionality of each layer is not only related to its inherent properties but also to those of its nearest neighbours (adjacent layers). Consider the three categories listed in A three-ply laminate introduces even more variables and a great deal more choice. If the third layer is considered to be an interlayer, a minor layer between the two principal layers, a number of other effects come into play based mainly around thin-film effects (see Increasing the number of plies increases the complexity of the laminate. In fact, there are an infinite number of combinations and variables within a multi-ply laminate. In As will be described in As the number of material variables rise, in any multi-ply system, it is common to use numerical modelling to assist in investigating various effects. There are many classical engineering textbooks that cover the mechanics of materials ( Fracture toughness, through various orientation effects (see Fatigue behaviour, through crack arresting or splitting processes; Wear resistance, through modification of the subsurface; Corrosion resistance, through the application of hard coatings; Damping capacity, through the incorporation of low-modulus interlayers; Formability, through the use of multiple layers of thin material, rather than one thick-sectioned piece.   Crack divider, in which the individual lamina fracture under plane stress conditions, rather than the whole laminate fracturing under plane strain conditions and, as a consequence, exhibit a much higher level of fracture toughness (see Crack arrestor, in which the principal crack is blunted or deflected at right angles through the presence of a layer at normal to its path. This is a very powerful means of retarding crack growth. Crack splitter, which is the normal delamination mode. If one considers a bonded joint, for example, there is a plethora of data on peel strength or fracture toughness associated with this classical mode of delamination. However, this delamination mode is affected by the nature of the interlayer/interface and much can be gained by prudent material selection. In Through-thickness compression; Through-thickness shear (in the Transverse - Short transverse (T-S) and Longitudinal - Short transverse (L-S) orientation); Three-dimensional (3D) bending of the target, creating membrane stretching (elastic and plastic). For a laminated material, as schematically shown in The maximum flexural stress, at the outer surface of a flexing beam, Further consideration given by So, in both the elastic and plastic regimes, the existence and structural properties of the bond in a laminated panel is extremely important and will dictate how much energy the armour panel can absorb in flexure. For a given laminate, does the number of plies make a difference to how it might behave in a ballistic impact? Is a larger number of thin layers any different to a fewer number of thicker layers? In the previous section we learnt that the flexural properties of an unbonded laminate are substantially less than its monolithic equivalent. So, clearly, as far as energy absorption is concerned in an unbonded or weakly bonded laminate, a fewer number of thicker plies is beneficial. However, the opposite is true for the fracture toughness of bonded laminates, as seen in In laminates of two materials or more, the order in which those materials are laid-up is also important. Dual-hardness armours were briefly discussed in Having a multilayered armour is sometimes unavoidable. For example, most ceramics cannot be manufactured in thicknesses greater than 20–25 The existence of any dissimilar joint between materials, whether it is within a simple dual-hardness laminate or an interlayer between two adherends of similar materials, introduces a possible mismatch of physical and mechanical properties. Amongst the most significant are differences in coefficients of thermal expansion, In a recent study by Consider a bonded three-ply laminate as shown in Cohesive delamination (ie, pathway 1 in For ductile interlayers, one can observe a classical ‘thin-film effect’. This was even measurable during through-thickness tensile testing performed on welded joints between thick plates of armour steel and an aluminium armour alloy ( The final example in this section refers to a classical armour-grade laminate between a ceramic supported by a composite material (see In this section, we need to consider the limitations and nature of the front material in a two-ply laminate. With reference to There is a role, however, for thin coatings, less than 1 Some armour technologists have proposed two main categories for armour materials and systems (see Disrupters, which are placed on the impact side, are those materials or systems that disrupt the penetrator by some mechanism or another. For high-hardness, brittle materials, like the ultrahigh-hardness steels and ceramics, these disrupt the penetrator through plastic deformation, erosion or by initiating shatter. For glasses, it is often through comprehensive fracture and comminution. For armour systems, as described in Absorbers, which are placed on the distal side, as the name implies, absorb the residual energy of the penetrator after it has been disrupted. For materials, these are normally characterised by high ductility and an ability to absorb energy in flexure. Whilst very top level, this classification does illustrate some classical disrupter/absorber combinations: UHHS and RHA as in dual-hardness armour (see Consider the three-ply laminate in Why do this? What are the benefits of introducing an air gap, since clearly the armour is no longer structural? Perhaps the general answer is to allow Material #1, the disruptor, to maximise its ability to absorb energy without putting any dynamic or engineering loads on the absorber, Material #2. In absorbing impact energy, the strike face material may respond by forming a large bulge on its rear side – if this is the case, the gap should be large enough to accommodate this protrusion, without impinging on the front face of the absorber. If the gap is wide enough, and the angle of attack is oblique, then having a gap may allow the penetrator, exiting the front plate, to yaw and thereby strike the rear plate at an even more oblique angle. The case study described in In 1996, one of Mike Iremonger's research students at RMCS, Shrivenham ( This example does bring to light two main disadvantages of using a spaced armour system: first, a reduction in space efficiency, because the system is now 50 Whilst this might not be a real concern for lightweight systems, it certainly is for the heavier armour systems. Finally, more details about the complex, spaced armour system shown in It would appear that many scientists have researched laminated or layered armours but seemingly without the appropriate motives – not quite ‘research for research sake’ but close on occasions, because it sounds, to the researcher, as though having a laminated armour should be fruitful! In fact, in a recent review of multilayered metal shields, In the author's view, the sole motive for designing a laminated, or layered, armour should be to overcome or prevent a failure mechanism or to enhance a well-recognised energy-absorbing mechanism. This is front, and central, to understanding the science of armour materials: designing an armour material or armour system to prevent a particular To my knowledge, This effect was also recognised in the work of The application of elastomeric coatings to high-hardness steels has reportedly been beneficial in increasing V-50 values against fragmentation attack. In an elegant paper by Plugging of monolithic armour materials is the least energy-absorbing mechanism of all. Preventing, or suppressing, its occurrence can bring immediate benefits in terms of ballistic penetration resistance. The crack arrestor principle is applied to greatest effect (see One other simple way of avoiding plugging failure of the entire system is to adopt a simple, spaced, two-plate array, with a well-defined air gap. Simply having an air gap prevents the transverse shear crack from propagating all the way through the system. Instead, the rear plate undergoes a series of higher-order energy-absorbing mechanisms like plastic deformation and membrane stretching. However, the spacing is important in relation to the length of the projectile. In work by Discing failures are the Achilles heel of the family of armour-grade, light alloys, as covered in Perhaps the most direct approach is to physically attach a second layer to the rear of the light-alloy plate. This approach was suggested by However, lamination is not always the solution. During development of the family of ABALs, Crouch and others ( Brittle materials, like UHHS and ceramics, have excellent compressive properties but lack ductility in tension. They are very notch-sensitive materials and, when placed in bending, will fail prematurely. As will be learnt in Placing an additional layer in front of the ceramic can also influence the ballistic performance of brittle materials. This is discussed more in  The design and performance of Japanese swords is legendary amongst both steelmakers and historians, and multiple layers of finely worked steel laminae have been crafted into very elegant and effective weapons, like the Damascus steel dagger ( Steels are also amenable to explosive welding and roll bonding and have been favoured approaches to produce experimental quantities of dual-hardness armours. There is even a US specification to facilitate purchase of such product, MIL-A-46099C, issued in 1987. Of all the material developments that have occurred over the past few decades, none, in my opinion, compare in success and influence with the creation, evolution and delivery of a family of bonded laminates often referred to as fibre metal laminates (FMLs). They consist of a small number of thin sheets (∼0.3 Developed in the Netherlands during the 1970s and 1980s, from original work carried out by Fokker Aviation ( This family of FMLs is really a subset of bonded aluminium laminates, as summarised in With reference to The classical use of ceramics as disrupter materials is covered, in detail, in The use of spall liners to reduce the damaging effects from shaped–charge weapons and overmatching kinetic energy rounds will be described in In a follow-up study, the same group published results for steel/composite laminates in which the composite was either an aramid-reinforced polymer, with a bulk density of ∼1100 In conclusion, the more recent paper by Three examples have been chosen in order to demonstrate that the geometrical design of a laminated armour is just as important as the correct selection of the base materials. In the first, in  The ABAL story can be traced through the following ABAL citations ( Applying the crack arrestor principle to prevent shear cracks developing in the armour and thus preventing premature failure by plugging (see illustration in Recognising that, for this to occur, the shearing event had to be restricted to the outermost ply, as seen in Recognising that the dynamic, through-thickness compression of the interlayer material, an epoxy adhesive, needed to be understood and well-characterised (see Developing an ability to numerically model this impact event (see Recognising that it was not only the thickness of the interlayer that was important but, crucially, the ratio of the thickness of the interlayer to the thickness of the ply (see So, when designing a ballistic laminate, it is not just about having a dry stack of laminae, nor just an adhesively bonded laminate, but one in which the laminae thickness to interlayer thickness is in the optimal ratio. Then, and only then, will plugging be suppressed and a ballistic advantage be gained. The more recent work of  NewSentry armour is a commercial steel-composite ballistic laminate that has been applied to the walls and ceilings of the lookout towers of an Australian correctional centre. It is not only a good example of a poor-man's ceramic armour system but an excellent example of how to design a ballistic laminate with the optimal choice of disruptor and absorber materials. In this instance, the threat was only 7.62 The design philosophy was to reduce the thickness of the steel so as to reduce the The developed solution, certified to Level R2 in the AS/NZS 2343:1997 armour standard, consisted of: 5-mm thick, medium-strength steel, with a hardness of ∼360 0.5-mm thick bondline of Hysol adhesive 9309.3, a toughened epoxy adhesive; 19-mm thick, glass-fibre-reinforced, vinylester resin, with a volume fraction of glass fibres of ∼55–60%' The steel was chosen for its intermediate hardness – it was not a standard grade of armour steel. The absorber material, the GFRP, was selected for its high-volume fraction of fibres (see In this final example, a classic body of work has been chosen to illustrate how the ratio of the thickness of the disrupter to the absorber is important in ceramic-based armour systems. The chosen work is that of John Hetherington who published data on a simple alumina/aluminium system back in 1992 ( In conclusion, it is hoped that this transition chapter has not only stimulated some thought and design ideas, but has encouraged the reader to find out more about laminated armours and layered structures by reading