Endochondral bone formation occurs when mesenchymal cells condense to differentiate into chondrocytes, the primary cell types of cartilage. The aim of the present study was to identify novel factors regulating chondrogenesis. We investigated whether kaempferol induces chondrogenic differentiation in clonal mouse chondrogenic ATDC5 cells. Kaempferol treatment stimulated the accumulation of cartilage nodules in a dose-dependent manner. Kaempferol-treated ATDC5 cells stained more intensely with alcian blue staining than control cells, suggesting greater synthesis of matrix proteoglycans in the kaempferol-treated cells. Similarly, kaempferol induced greater activation of alkaline phosphatase activity than control cells, and it enhanced the expression of chondrogenic marker genes, such as collagen type I, collagen type X, OCN, Runx2, and Sox9. Kaempferol induced an acute activation of extracellular signal-regulated kinase (ERK) but not c-jun N-terminal kinase or p38 MAP kinase. PD98059, an inhibitor of MAPK/ERK, decreased in stained cells treated with kaempferol. Furthermore, kaempferol greatly expressed the protein and mRNA levels of BMP-2, suggesting chondrogenesis was stimulated via a BMP-2 pathway. Taken together, our results suggest that kaempferol has chondromodulating effects via an ERK/BMP-2 signaling pathway and could potentially be used as a therapeutic agent for bone growth disorders.Chondrogenesis is a multi-step cellular process that leads to differentiation of mesenchymal cells into chondrocytes during the growth and development of vertebrates. This process includes cell migration, aggregation, condensation, and chondrocyte differentiation ( Since ancient times, people in Asian countries have used a variety of plant-derived substances to treat disease. In a previous study, we assessed whether Genkwadaphnin stimulates chondrogenesis in ATDC5 cells ( In the present study, we investigated the chondrogenic-stimulatory effects of kaempferol on ATDC5 cells in vitro. We found that kaempferol induced the synthesis of matrix proteoglycans and the expression of other chondrogenic markers, such as collagen type II, collagen type X, osteocalcin (OCN), Runx2, Sox9, and the chondrogenic signaling molecules, BMP-2 and BMP-4. Kaempferol also induced MAP kinase activation, suggesting that chondrogenesis was stimulated through a BMP-2/ERK pathway in our in vitro experiment. We suggest that kaempferol could potentially be used as a therapeutic agent for the treatment of skeletal disorders. PD 98059 and SP 600125 were purchased from Calbiochem (San Diego, CA, USA). Cell culture medium and fetal bovine serum (FBS) were obtained from Invitrogen (Gaithersburg, MD, USA). PCR primers were purchased from Bioneer (Daejeon, Korea). All other chemicals were purchased from Sigma (St. Louis, MO, USA), and unless otherwise indicated, they are the same as those described elsewhere ( Pre-chondrogenic ATDC5 cells were purchased from the RIKEN Cell Bank (Ibaraki, Japan). ATDC5 cells were cultured in a 1:1 mixture of Dulbecco’s modified Eagle’s medium (Invitrogen, Gaithersburg, MD, USA) and Ham’s F-12 medium (Invitrogen) containing 5% FBS, penicillin (100 ATDC5 cells were cultured for up to 21 Total RNAs were isolated from cultured cells using TRIzol (Invitrogen), and cDNA synthesis was performed with SuperScript II reverse transcriptase (Invitrogen) in accordance with the manufacturer’s protocol. The primer sequences and PCR conditions used in this study are listed in Cells were harvested and re-dissolved in lysis buffer [20 Cells (5 Cell extracts were separated by 8–10% SDS–PAGE and then transferred to a polyvinylidene difluoride (PVDF) membrane (Bio-Rad). Membranes were blocked with 5% nonfat skim milk in Tris-buffered saline (TBS) containing 0.25% Tween-20 (TTBS) at room temperature for 1 Results are expressed as mean We evaluated whether treatment with kaempferol stimulates formation of cartilage nodules in ATDC5 cells. Cells were treated with kaempferol or insulin for 21 We used alcian blue staining to verify the production of matrix proteoglycan after treatment with kaempferol in ATDC5 cells ( Alkaline phosphatase (ALP) activity can be used as a marker of hypertrophic chondrocytes involved in the mineralization process ( MAP kinases are involved in signal transduction networks and have been demonstrated to contribute to a diverse portfolio of cellular events, including cell differentiation ( During chondrogenesis, a variety of extracellular matrix marker molecules, such as collagen type II, are expressed To determine the role of MAPK in the kaempferol-mediated chondrogenic differentiation of ATDC5 cells, we compared cells that were treated with 5 Bone morphogenic proteins (BMPs) play a variety of important roles during the later stages of cartilage development. BMP-2, -3, -4, -5 and -7 are expressed in perichondrium, and BMP-2 and -6 are expressed in hypertrophic chondrocytes ( Chondrogenesis is an important biological event involved in tissue patterning, skeletal development, and endochondral ossification ( In this study, we demonstrate for the first time that kaempferol has chondromodulating effects in clonal mouse ATDC5 cells. Kaempferol treatment of cells produced more and larger cartilaginous nodules than cells treated with vehicle alone, and the results for cells treated with kaempferol were similar to the results for cells treated with insulin, which was used as a positive control. The cells treated with kaempferol also showed more intense staining with Alcian blue than control cells, suggesting greater synthesis of matrix proteoglycan. Kaempferol efficiently induced the activation of alkaline phosphatase, as well as the expression of chondrogenic marker genes, such as collagen type II, collagen type X, osteocalcin, Sox9, and Runx2. Previous studies have shown that Sox9 and Runx2 have a primary role in chondrogenic differentiation ( To determine the molecular mechanisms underlying the effects of kaempferol on chondrogenic differentiation, we analyzed signaling pathways known to regulate chondrocyte differentiation. Insulin is a major regulator of endocrine signals and activates various intracellular signaling pathways, thereby regulating development in diverse tissues ( Several previous studies have suggested that keampferol mimics the effects of insulin by lowering the serum glucose level. Compared to insulin, kaempferol is faster and more efficient at lowering serum glucose levels ( The importance of the BMP-2 signaling pathway during chondrogenesis and homeostasis has been studied for many years. BMPs play an important role in the earliest stages of chondrogenesis, such as mesenchymal condensation and cell fate determination. In vitro BMPs can cause mesenchymal cells to differentiate into chondrocytes in high density cultures, in part due to Sox9 expression ( In summary, kaempferol markedly induced the synthesis of matrix proteoglycans and the expression of chondrogenic marker genes, such as collagen type II, collagen type X, osteocalcin, Runx2, and Sox9 in ATDC5 cells. Kaempferol also induced the expression of BMP-2 and BMP-4 signaling molecules and activated the ERK signaling pathway in a pattern similar to that of insulin, which was used as a positive control. Taken together, our in vitro data show that kaempferol has chondromodulatory effects. Thus, kaempferol could potentially be used to treat a variety of skeletal diseases, such as dwarfism, though research on the The authors declare that there are no conflicts of interest. This work was supported by the Grant from Ministry of Knowledge Economy, Republic of Korea (R0000949)