The appropriate management of early treatment failures in patients with elbow injuries requires the identification of the cause of failure. In this work, six types of elbow injury are considered: (i) identification of early failed reduction of a dislocation or fracture-dislocation of the elbow should lead to a repeat reduction procedure, testing for elbow instability, and ligament repair, followed by the use of a hinged external fixator to allow early mobilisation. Differentiating an isolated dislocation from a dislocation combined with a fracture of the coracoid process is crucial. Re-implantation of the coronoid process allows repair of the ligaments and restoration of stability in the sagittal plane; (ii) early secondary displacement of a distal humeral fracture after internal fixation is usually due to insufficient fixation confined to a single humeral pillar. If both humeral pillars are fractured, then both must be repaired; (iii) early treatment failure of an intra-articular distal humeral fracture in an elderly patient with bone loss warrants distal humeral hemiarthroplasty or total elbow arthroplasty; (iv) in fractures of the olecranon, treatment failures are due to insufficient fixation or to a mistaken diagnosis of trans-olecranon fracture-dislocation; (v) in fractures of the radial head, causes of early revision include excessive tilting of the head in radial neck fractures, with secondary displacement due to insufficient internal fixation, and adverse effects on the wrist of radial head resection performed without assessing the ulnar variance. In patients with radial head fractures, no treatment decisions can be made before performing an anteroposterior radiograph of the wrist; (vii) in fracture-dislocations of both the radius and ulna, accurate reduction of the ulnar fracture is a pre-requisite to proper reduction of the radio-humeral and proximal radio-ulnar joints. An early postoperative assessment, within 10 days after surgery, is of paramount importance to re-evaluate the initial treatment and, if needed, to introduce modifications. Early failure of the initial treatment of an elbow injury should lead to the prompt implementation of corrective measures: follow-up anteroposterior and lateral radiographs must be obtained on day 8 to ensure the diagnosis of initial treatment failure and to allow the institution of an appropriate management strategy; the dogma stating that the elbow should never be immobilised remains valid, and every effort should be made to ensure that mobilisation starts as early as possible.The first step in managing early treatment failures in patients with elbow injuries consists in recognising the inadequacies of the initial management so that corrective measures can be implemented. The shorter the time to the introduction of corrective measures, the more favourable the outcome is likely to be. Consequently, the first postoperative assessment must be performed early, before the end of the classical 3-week period needed for the primary tissue healing process. In some situations, however, once the initial treatment is revealed to be inadequate, revision surgery may have to be postponed until early sequelae develop; examples include soft-tissue damage (e.g., associated skin lesions), damage to bone (e.g., bony defect), or health conditions in the patient (e.g., contra-indications to anaesthesia). Failures of the initial treatment of elbow injuries may be related to the capsule and ligament complex, distal humerus, or proximal ulna and/or radius. Failed treatment of ligament lesions results in early instability and failed treatment of bone lesions to healing disorders and motion-range limitations. Elbow injuries include dislocations and fracture-dislocations, distal humeral fractures, proximal ulnar or radial fractures, and lesions of the proximal parts of both the radius and ulna. This work does not include a discussion of the skin lesions that may be present initially (open fractures) or develop secondarily (scar dehiscence, skin necrosis), which are usually viewed as complications or concomitants of the trauma rather than as early treatment failures. Furthermore, ulnar nerve injuries and iatrogenic complications are not specifically discussed. Based on the recent literature, the management of early treatment failures of elbow injuries can be reviewed by considering six questions: treatment complications in elbow dislocation: what is the management strategy in failed reduction of elbow dislocation? early failure of internal fixation of distal humeral fractures: causes and management? does inadequate fixation of an intra-articular distal humeral fracture warrant elbow arthroplasty? what are the causes and management of early treatment failure in olecranon fractures? what is the best management of early treatment failure in proximal radial fractures? what are the causes and management of early treatment failure in patients with combined radial and ulnar injuries? All the ligaments that stabilise the elbow run between the humerus and the ulna. None of them connects connect the humerus to the radius. Instability occurs chiefly in the lateral and postero-lateral directions. Dislocation of the elbow involves the humero-ulnar joint and manifests as posterior or postero-lateral displacement, which usually disrupts both collateral ligaments, namely, the ulnar collateral ligament (UCL) and the radial collateral ligament (RCL) Of the six bundles that make up the two collateral ligaments of the elbow, four attach to the coronoid process. Partial, intermediate, or total avulsion of the coronoid process results in partial or total loss of the anterior stabilising system. The Regan–Morrey classification in three types ( In the coronal plane, two bone-ligament dyads are involved: the coronoid process and RCL are the key stabilisers in varus, and the radial head and UCL are the key stabilisers in valgus. After reducing an isolated elbow dislocation, the surgeon must record the sectors of stability and instability. An example might be ‘After reduction, the elbow dislocates again in 45° of flexion and exhibits marked instability in valgus…’. Complete reduction can be followed by active mobilisation within the sector of stability When reduction is incomplete and rapidly followed by recurrent dislocation, an assessment is in order to confirm the diagnosis of isolated dislocation. Thus, recurrent dislocation should prompt a search for a concomitant bony lesion and/or major ligament disruption. Coronoid avulsion type II or III in the Regan-Morrey classification results in loss of the anterior stabilising system. Disruption of the RCL causes loss of the mechanism that centres the joint in the coronal plane. Avulsion of the antero-medial portion of the coronoid process jeopardises stability in varus. CT without contrast injection is useful to take into account all the causes of incomplete reduction, which may include one or more foreign bodies and an overlooked fracture. Only if this assessment is negative can the diagnosis of simple reduction failure be made. Tissue interposed within the joint usually consists of bone. Very rarely, the joint may contain a tendon (biceps brachii) or a nerve (median nerve caught behind the epicondyle). The time to treatment is important. Papandrea et al. Inadequate initial reduction: on the lateral radiograph, the joint line may appear excessively visible if the patient's muscles are relaxed by regional or general anaesthesia, even when proper alignment of the bones has been achieved. In this situation, the joint line seems to be abnormally wide, although the osteo-articular structures are properly positioned (concentric reduction). When the flexors (biceps brachii, brachialis, and brachio-radialis) and extensor (triceps brachii) recover their normal tone, joint coaptation is usually restored. A repeat lateral radiograph should therefore be obtained after muscle recovery to check that reduction is complete. Active mobilisation can then be started rapidly within the sector of stability identified by the surgeon who performed the reduction. Early recurrent dislocation requires repeated reduction manoeuvres with correction of the lateral displacement until complete reduction is achieved. During this procedure, the muscles must be fully relaxed by the administration of local, regional, and/or general anaesthesia. Gentle traction along the axis of the forearm to release the coronoid process from the distal humerus is combined with gradual flexion of the elbow ( Recurrence of posterior dislocation at 60° of flexion indicates major instability. A radiographic assessment is crucial. The anteroposterior radiograph is often difficult to interpret as the elbow is flexed within the immobilisation system. In this position, the relationships of the bone structures with one another cannot be properly evaluated. Closed reduction should be attempted in the operating theatre as conversion to open surgery may be required to achieve reduction, remove an intra-articular foreign body, and/or repair disrupted ligaments. Repair of the RCL ( Primary surgical stabilisation is indicated. Internal fixation of the coronoid process is the first step. Our preference goes to the suture lasso technique, as the coronoid fragment is often too small to accommodate a screw. The two sutures are attached to an anchor. However, strong anchoring may be difficult to achieve, as there is no cortical bone. The sutures can be threaded through a trans-osseous tunnel then attached to an endobutton fixation device placed on the posterior aspect of the ulna. Alternatively, two tunnels may be drilled, one for each suture, and the sutures then tied posteriorly on the proximal part of the ulnar ridge. The tunnel methods provide greater stability to the reduced coronoid process fragment and, therefore, to the stabilising apparatus of the elbow. If the coronoid process fragment is sufficiently large, it can be fixed using a screw introduced in the anterograde or retrograde direction via a medial approach ( After the bony repair step, the RCL is repaired (2,3) using trans-osseous sutures or a suture anchor to reattach the ligament either under the lateral epicondyle or at the lateral aspect of the olecranon, depending on the site of ligament disruption. In the event of persistent marked valgus instability, the UCL is also re-attached, via the medial approach used to fix the coronoid fragment. Repaired ligaments must be protected from undue stress. Consequently, hinged external fixation should be used. Special case: an antero-medial avulsion fracture of the coronoid process is a rare lesion that can result in postero-medial instability of the elbow, due to slackness of the middle ligament bundle ( A hinged external fixator is useful but when used alone cannot compensate for inadequate ligament repair (2). Several rules must be followed when positioning the hinged external fixator. The elbow is positioned to obtain a lateral fluoroscopy view, on which the trochlea and capitulum form a cylinder. The pin representing the axis of elbow flexion is positioned at the centre of the cylinder ( Hopf et al. When managing early treatment failures in elbow dislocation, a crucial distinction must be made between isolated dislocations or dislocations with a type I coronoid fracture, on the one hand, and fracture-dislocations with type II or III coronoid fractures, on the other. These are two different traumatic entities that require different treatments. The distal humerus can be likened to a trapezium ( The introduction of locking plates has limited the mobility sometimes observed at the junction of the screwheads and plate. However, under no circumstances does locking plate fixation obviate the need for double stabilisation, which is the only method capable of resisting the torque forces generated by pronation-supination of the forearm. Finally, in patients with bone defects, a graft of cortical and cancellous bone is required in addition to internal fixation. The final construct must be sufficiently strong to allow early mobilisation. Prominence of an articular fragment or a marked step-off at the cartilage surface carries a very poor prognosis and is therefore unacceptable. Ideally, a postoperative radiograph should be obtained in the operating theatre, as the anaesthesia allows a true anteroposterior view in full extension and a true lateral view at 90° of flexion. Anteroposterior radiographs obtained in flexion with the elbow in the immobilisation system are difficult to interpret and fail to clearly show the true contours of the trochlea and capitulum. CT should be performed at the slightest doubt to check that the articular surfaces are restored to their normal shape. However, artefacts related to the metallic fixation material limit the quality of the CT images. Early revision surgery is required in the event of inadequate reduction. Olecranon osteotomy is performed if needed to facilitate revision of the fixation of the distal humeral epiphysis. A total osteotomy is needed to provide a meaningful improvement in exposure. A chevron cut is used. The cut ends anteriorly at the junction of the cartilage surfaces of the olecranon and coronoid process, which is seen as a narrow groove where the cartilage is absent or very thin. The chevron cut facilitates reduction at the end of the procedure. Before performing a revision procedure, the surgeon must obtain the initial surgical report and be aware of the procedures performed, if any, on the triceps tendon. The unreconstructable fracture concept is important Special case: caution may warrant delaying the arthroplasty procedure in certain situations, for instance when doubt exists regarding the local condition of the skin (e.g., contusion, compromise due to the haematoma, or initial open fracture). A delay of a few weeks allows the arthroplasty to be performed with a lower risk of infection and healing disorders, even when the initial treatment of the injury has clearly failed. Selection of the type of arthroplasty depends on the condition of the local osteo-articular and ligamentous structures. Criteria for choosing humeral hemiarthroplasty are conserved humeral length, intact ulnar and radial bone stock, good-quality joint surfaces, and intact collateral ligaments. In our experience, however, these criteria are only very rarely present in combination. Consequently, we have consistently performed semi-constrained total elbow arthroplasty to treat intra-articular distal humeral fractures in patients with osteoporosis. With humeral and ulnar arthroplasty, the native radial head can be conserved if its condition allows. When performing humeral hemiarthroplasty, we prefer to preserve the integrity of the triceps tendon (Morrey or triceps-on approach) The ulnar nerve must be isolated and protected throughout the procedure, notably during the olecranon osteotomy. We concur with Mighell In our experience, early treatment failures in true olecranon fractures occur when a sagittal fracture of the olecranon fragment develops around the axial pins, probably due to a secondary sagittal fracture line. Although wound dehiscence with exposure of the fixation material is not specific of olecranon fractures, the position of the olecranon directly under the skin is a risk factor for healing disorders. Additional risk factors are the frequent use of anticoagulants and the large size of the fracture site haematoma. A non-operative and functional treatment strategy is used in a tiny minority of cases, in elderly patients with osteoporosis and multiple comorbidities. This treatment approach may need to be modified if there is a major threat of skin complications. Early revision surgery after internal fixation of olecranon fractures has been chiefly required in our experience in patients with trans-olecranon fracture-dislocations (TOFDs) mistaken initially for olecranon fractures. TOFD is defined as dislocation of both forearm bones combined with a fracture of the olecranon ( Tension-band wiring ( Strong internal fixation by a screw-plate is required to resist the traction forces applied by the flexors anteriorly and extensor posteriorly. In the event of inadequate internal fixation by tension-band wiring due to an erroneous diagnosis of isolated olecranon fracture, revision surgery with screw-plate fixation should be performed ( The plate is placed in a posterior or postero-lateral position. We prefer the postero-lateral position to avoid skin complications related to the thickness of the plate and screw heads. Reconstruction of the trochlear notch may require bone grafting in the event of comminution of bone and cartilage. When an isolated radial head fracture with little or no displacement initially is treated non-operatively, secondary displacement may occur. Failure to recognise Essex-Lopresti syndrome may lead to radial head resection in a patient with a comminuted fracture, who will then be at risk for proximal migration of the radius ( Functional treatment is indicated when the elbow was immobilised initially, although the local conditions allow mobilisation, notably pronation and supination. If the fractured radial head remains well contained within the annular ligament, with no secondary displacement visible on an early follow-up radiograph (day 10), the elbow should be mobilised in all four planes. Pronation and supination movements, first passive then active, are started first. Flexion and extension are added as soon as allowed by improvements in pain and oedema. Misguided or incomplete initial treatment can result in the prescription of prolonged immobilisation, which results in joint stiffness. To avoid this complication, early correction is in order. When displacement of a radial neck fracture was missed initially, the early follow-up radiograph obtained on day 8 shows marked tilting of the radial head. This situation precludes early mobilisation and results in valgus malalignment. Early revision surgery is therefore necessary. Treatment options include reduction and fixation by retrograde intra-medullary nailing as described by Métaizeau and internal fixation in situ. In isolated radial head fractures, early arthroplasty should be performed if the first follow-up evaluation shows proximal migration of the radius with ulnar variance inversion, inadequate reduction, or secondary displacement after internal fixation. In patients with terrible triad injury, a fragment of the fractured radial head can be used to reconstruct the coronoid process The sagittal displacement with anterior or posterior angulation of the ulnar shaft must be corrected to allow reduction of the humero-radial and proximal radio-ulnar joints. The dislocation of the proximal radio-ulnar joint can be reduced only in the absence of interposition of the torn annular ligament. If interposition has occurred, open surgery is needed to allow reduction of the proximal radio-ulnar joint. If the radial head is fractured, it must be repaired or replaced. The ulnar fixation must be revised. After removing the fixation material (intra-medullary pin or screw-plate), the ulnar fracture site must be carefully debrided to allow accurate reduction of the fracture. The ulnar ridge is a useful landmark for correcting bone fragment malalignment. Reduction of the proximal radio-ulnar joint is another helpful criterion that reflects the quality of ulnar shaft reduction. The new plate is positioned and held in place temporarily with forceps. Fluoroscopy is then used to check that both the ulnar shaft and the proximal radio-ulnar joint are accurately reduced. Permanent fixation is then performed ( A removable splint protects the skin wound and diminishes the local postoperative oedema during the first few days. Mobilisation is passive initially then active after 2-3 weeks. Mobilisation contributes to decrease the risk of secondary stiffness, while also protecting bone healing. The trauma surgeon who provides initial treatment for an elbow injury should consider the range of possible outcomes, including the complications that may require further management. Stiffness is a case in point. Ideally, if stiffness requires surgical release, this procedure should be performed by the surgeon who took the initial treatment decision. This practice would no doubt substantially contribute to decrease inappropriate immobilisation and its adverse effects. Prevention deserves close attention when predicting the risk of initial treatment failure and of long-term sequelae due to early complications. The surgeon is accountable at several phases of the management process: initial treatment: were good clinical practice guidelines followed? diagnosis of the complication and early patient information: the information given initially should include the risks of construct disassembly related to osteoporosis, instability after reduction of a dislocation or fracture-dislocation, and revision surgery with the attendant increased risk of surgical-site infection. Early complications must be acknowledged and the patient informed about the corrective measures; management of the complication: were good clinical practice guidelines followed and was treatment provided within an appropriate timeframe? Six answers can be given to the six initial questions: differentiating an isolated elbow dislocation from a dislocation with a coronoid fracture is crucial. Re-attaching the coronoid fragment not only repairs the bone, but also repairs the ligament complex, thereby restoring stability in the sagittal plane; if both humeral pillars are fractured, both must be repaired; elbow arthroplasty is warranted for the initial treatment of intra-articular distal humeral fractures in elderly patients with bone loss; a repaired olecranon fracture must be capable of withstanding the forces applied by the triceps brachii, and a trans-olecranon fracture-dislocation is very different from a simple olecranon fracture; in patients with a radial head fracture, no treatment decisions can be made before examining an anteroposterior radiograph of the wrist; accurate anatomic reduction of the ulnar shaft and olecranon is required before the humero-radial and proximal radio-ulnar joints can be reduced. Early failure of the initial treatment for an elbow injury requires the prompt implementation of corrective measures: during follow-up, anteroposterior and lateral radiographs must be obtained on day 8 to ensure the diagnosis of initial treatment failure, thereby allowing an appropriate management strategy; the rule that the elbow should never be immobilised remains valid, and all the measures taken should be designed to allow mobilisation as soon as possible. None. F. Duparc: concept, editing. M.-C. Merlet: editing, section “Elbow prosthetic arthroplasty”. F. Duparc is a consultant for Wright-Tornier. We thank Professor Pierre Mansat for contributing to the illustrations accompanying this lecture.