The expected conversion and selectivity of the investigated propane dehydrogenated plant were not achieved due to many causes. One of causes is the inefficient performance of the gas separation and fractionation unit especially the deethanization process. Thus, the primary goal of the present work is to increase the propane and propylene recoveries as well as to overcome some operational problems of this process. In order to accomplish this goal, a change in the process configuration and in some operating conditions was suggested. The simulation tool used in this study to examine the proposed modifications is HYSYS version 8.0 with Peng–Robinson Equation of State (EoS). The validity of simulation is proved by the good correspondence between laboratory and simulation results of the modified plant. The benefits of this study were realized when our proposed modification was applied to the original plant. The results show that the modified plant in operation is capable of recovering 2235 tons/year of propane and propylene more than the original plant. It is also noted that more ethane and ethylene are separated in the modified plant. Furthermore, the modified process provides a solution to some operational problems like increased carryover in the deethanizer rectifying column. The last part of this work considered the investigation of the maximum feed stream CO2 concentration at which the plant can operate properly without freezing.In the natural gas industry, the separation of hydrocarbon liquids from natural gas streams can range from simple dew point control to deep ethane extraction [ Since the startup of the propane dehydrogenation (PDH) plant of the Egyptian Propylene and Polypropylene Company (EPP), it hasn't reached the full design production rate. In the present study, a modification to the deethanization process was proposed to increase propane and propylene recoveries and to overcome some operational issues of the existing facility either in normal or in abnormal operations. The proposed modifications involve changes in the process configuration and in some operating conditions. These modifications aim also to enhance the bulk separation of light gases as well as to overcome the equilibrium limit in the composite column of the deethanizer. In order to test these modifications, the deethanization process simulation is carried out by HYSYS version 8.0 for three cases; design basis, original and modified processes. One of the biggest Egyptian projects in the field of petrochemical industry is the Egyptian Propylene and Polypropylene Company (EPP) constructed by ThyssenKrupp Uhde. The complex consists of two plants; The propane dehydrogenation (PDH) plant: Fresh propane feed is partly converted into propylene via steam reforming reaction. The polypropylene (PP) plant: Polypropylene grades are produced using the propylene product of the PDH plant. The complex also includes utilities and offsites, as well as air fractionation and refrigeration units. The PDH Plant consists of several processing steps: Reaction section and heat recovery, raw gas compression, CO The reaction effluent from PDH plant contains many light components besides the main product of propylene. These unnecessary components should be separated in the gas separation and fractionation unit to produce the final product of polymer-grade propylene. The deethanization process is the first separation step where all components lighter than propylene are separated from the process gas. In this process, treated process gas, after removal of CO The core exchange package U01 is a multi-stream plate-fin heat exchanger (PFHE) in which heat exchange of deep cold effluents with cold box feed gas takes place. Temperature of process gas is reduced to approximately −90 °C and more hydrocarbons will condense. The liquid phase is separated from the gas phase in flash drum d01 and is pumped to D03 after a cryogenic exchange in U01 and E04, respectively. The remaining cold gas phase is sent back to U01 where it serves as refrigerant media. By heat exchange with the cold box feed gas, it is warmed up and together with overheads product gas from deethanizer rectifier C04 sent to the turbo-expander. Due to the poly-tropic expansion from approximately 31.1 kg/cm Ethane removal is considered the most important step in the gas separation and fractionation process. If the deethanization process is well optimized, the recovery of propane and propylene from the process gas would be achieved efficiently and some operational problems would be solved. This means that the plant can operate properly according to its design basis. The following subsections discuss the deethanization process problems. According to the design basis, the conversion of propane is approximately 40% with an overall selectivity for the propylene of approximately 88.5%. Accordingly, the propylene production rate should be 44 tons/h. However, the reaction section wasn't able to achieve the conversion and selectivity claimed by design. Additionally, higher amount of light gases and coke were formed due to the increased rate of the cracking reactions. Efforts were exerted to enhance the reaction efficiency in order to increase the productivity, but it did not reach the desired objective. Now, the composition and conditions of the reaction effluent are different from that stated in the design basis. Consequently, the gas separation and fractionation unit could not handle this situation efficiently. As a result, the recovery of propane and propylene in the bottom product of the deethanizer was 5.92% less than that expected by design. Thus, there is a twofold problem; lower quantity of propylene out of the reaction section and both propylene and propane cannot be recovered efficiently by the fractionation unit. There are two types of refrigeration used in the gas separation and fractionation unit; ammonia absorption refrigeration and propylene mechanical refrigeration. The ammonia chillers are used in the unit as a precooling step followed by the propylene chillers, so any drop in the ammonia refrigeration efficiency will affect the efficiency of the propylene chillers. The main refrigeration required for the gas separation and fractionation unit is provided by the propylene refrigeration. Any drop in the refrigeration efficiency results in a loss of the recoverable hydrocarbons. The drop can happen due to many reasons. The drop in the ammonia refrigeration efficiency is one of the reasons that will affect the efficiency of the propylene refrigeration. This means that inefficient refrigeration by ammonia in E02 and/or E05 will lead to more load on propylene refrigeration in E06 and E08. The higher load on E06 and E08 in many cases cannot be handled by the refrigeration power available. Low refrigeration efficiency, especially for E08, means more losses of valuable hydrocarbons to fuel gas system. This is because the profile of the composite deethanizer column will be changed in such a way that the top product will be richer in propane and propylene than required to recover them efficiently. Removal of CO Solid compounds are formed as a result of reactions between oxygen containing compounds and MDEA. The main problem of solid compounds is the blockage of pump strainers. When the pump strainer is blocked, the pump cannot deliver the desired flow rate; the circulation rate will be reduced and may be stopped. Thus, the spare pump should be started until the blocked strainer is cleaned. The foaming tendency and solid problems will lead to low or no CO If the vapor load through the deethanizer rectifier column increases, the liquid hydrocarbon carryover from the reflux drum D04 will also increase. The vapor load increases when ethane and lighter fraction or CO The proposed modification to the deethanization plant includes changes in some operating conditions and in the process configuration. Concerning operating condition changes, the temperature of separation of flash drum D02 should be reduced from −19 °C to −24 °C at the allowable operating pressure of 32.3 kg/cm Reduces the load on the propylene chiller (E08). Reduces the vapor load in the rectifying column to minimize the carryover problems. Enhances deethanization process.  HYSYS version 8.0 with Peng–Robinson EoS [ First step: The process was simulated according to design data to provide the unavailable data for streams or equipment. The validation of this simulation was achieved by comparing the simulation results with that of design data. Second step: The original process was simulated based on the field data to be compared with the design basis and modified processes as well as to introduce the unavailable field data. Last step: The modified process was simulated. After this step, the process simulation results for the three different cases (design, unmodified and modified) were discussed to show the improvements done by the considered modifications. The considered modification of the deethanization process was proposed, not only to increase propane and propylene recovery, but also to overcome some of the existing plant problems depicted above. It should be noted that the importance of plant simulation based on the design data is to obtain the missing data. The only section chosen to be simulated is the cold box section because it has not sufficient design data. As indicated in The core exchanger U01 was simulated in HYSYS using a multi-stream LNG (liquefied natural gas) exchanger [  Data of stream P-01Out is not available in the plant design basis. The present simulation provides the required information of stream P-01Out that is necessary for calculating the recovery of hydrocarbons such as propane and propylene in the cold box. The simulation results of this stream presented in The water content was eliminated from stream compositions and the simulation was performed, depending on a dry basis for simplification. Stream A0F is cooled to a temperature of 38 °C by E01, then to a temperature of 13 °C by E02. The technical and operational data used for simulating heat exchangers E01 and E02 such as admission and calculated pressure drop, in and out temperatures and pressures of shell and tube sides are available from field data. Furthermore, the pressure and temperature of ammonia refrigerant before and after the expansion valve, and the tube pressure drop required for simulating E02 are also available from field data. The dryer was not simulated in this case as the simulation is based on a dry basis calculation. The knockout drum D01 was simulated as a two phase separator with outlet pressure drop of 0.17 kg/cm The field data for the four paths of the core exchanger U01 are not available except for streams ToD-01 and ExpOut. Therefore, the exchanger U01 was simulated based on the design data (indicated in subsection The simulated temperatures of streams ToD-01 and ExpOut are −107.3 °C and 108.3 °C compared with their field data of −107.2 °C and 106.7 °C respectively. It is obvious that the simulation results are corresponding well with the available field data. It is important to compare between the design data, field data and simulation results of stream ToFuelGasSys as shown in As it has been stated before, the stream P-01Out represents the recovered liquid hydrocarbons from the cold box section. According to simulation results, the recovered propane is 50.98 kmol/h out of 53.582 kmol/h entered the cold box with a recovery of 95.14%. However, the recovered propylene is 31.187 kmol/h out of 38.452 kmol/h entered the cold box with a recovery of 81.11%. The calculated overall recovery of propane and propylene achieved by the cold box is 89.28%, which is lower than that of the design by 5.92%. It is necessary to remark that the chosen conditions and lab analysis used in this simulation are of the best situations of the plant without any operational troubles. This means that the overall recovery of 89.28% is the best recovery the plant can achieve in reality. The main objective of the proposed modifications to the plant under consideration is to increase the recovery of recycled propane and produced propylene. This means that their losses to the fuel gas system should be minimized by the application of these modifications. The most interesting part that may be enhanced is the light gas removal section. In this section, the propane and propylene those escape through the turbo-expander could be reduced to increase their recovery and productivity. The recovery and productivity enhancement can be achieved by modifying the operating conditions and/or the process configuration for the light gas removal section. The process simulation after modifications was performed for the entire deethanization section. This is because the modification is supposed to have effects on the stream comes from the deethanizer stripper after passing through drum D04 and on the feed streams of the cold box, i.e. streamsA17 and A08 as presented in Streams ToD31 and A10 that represent recovered liquid hydrocarbons from the entire gas separation section are collected in drum D03. This drum acts as a buffer drum during the regeneration time to have a safe and stable operation for the deethanizer. It means that the withdrawal of the drum as a feed to the deethanizer stripper is not equal to the supply to the drum which changes during operation and regeneration cycles of the reaction section trains. To achieve a stabile operation, a level of approximately 12 m of liquid hydrocarbon at the start of regeneration cycle and a level of approximately 2 m at the end of regeneration cycle should be obtained. The technical data of the vertical tank D03 are 4 m for diameter, 15.1 m for height, and 206 m The deethanizer stripper column C01was simulated using reboiled absorber unit operation in HYSYS with 37 theoretical plates, a top pressure of 33.32 kg/cm The composition of streams A08 and FD resulting from the three different simulation cases are illustrated in Stream ToFuelGasSys compositions resulted from the original and modified plant simulation are shown in After investigating the modified process by simulation, the EPP company management committee members decided to apply the proposed modification on the deethanization plant. The considered modification was applied in the plant and the lab analysis was used to evaluate these modifications by making a comparison between original and modified plants. The bottom product of the deethanizer after modifications has an accepted ethane mole fraction of 0.0002. Considering the cold box after modification, the temperature of the knockout drum d01 is about −74 °C which is slightly higher than that calculated by simulation (−77.5 °C). Both real and simulated temperatures of d01 are higher than its temperature before modification (−90 °C). Although the temperature of d01 was increased, the recovered propane and propylene still high enough to favor the modified process over the original old process. This could be seen from the lower concentrations of propane and propylene in the stream ToFuelGasSys after modification as shown in The total recovery of each hydrocarbon in the entire de-ethanization plant can be calculated easily by calculating the flow rate of the component in the feed stream and subtracting it from its flow rate in the outlet steam to the fuel gas system as listed in There are actually two modes for formation of solid CO It should be indicated that CO  In this study, modifications for the deethanization plant of the EPP Company constructed by Uhde were proposed to increase propane and propylene recovery as well as to overcome some operational problems either in normal or abnormal operations. The first part of these modifications focuses on changing the flow path of the light gases separated from the deethanizer rectifying column to be introduced to the core exchanger of the cold box instead of sending it directly to the turbo-expander. The second part of these modifications considered some changes in the operating conditions of specified locations in the original plant. The modified plant showed many advantages over the original one as summarized in the following: The total recovery of propane and propylene achieved in the modified process is higher than that obtained in the original process. The deethanizer top product becomes leaner in propane and propylene content with the same degree of ethane separation. This leaner gas reduces the load on the core exchanger of the cold box and leads to more recovery of propane and propylene. The turbo-expander is protected against any expected carryover in the deethanizer rectifier and this in turn reduces its maintenance cost. The proposed modification was applied on the original plant and the lab analysis was used to evaluate the effectiveness of these modifications. Due to the modification, the cold box overall recovery for propane and propylene was increased to reach 94.8% that is very near to the simulation value of 95.05% and higher than that of the unmodified plant by 5.5%. The total recovery of propane and propylene in the real modified plant is more than that of the original plant by 2235 tons/year. Moreover, more ethane and ethylene are separated in the light fuel gas stream and this in turn increases its heating value as a fuel gas used in the plant. The results showed that there is a good correspondence between the simulation and lab results for the modified plant. This in turn proves the reliability of this simulation. The last part of this paper was directed to investigate the CO