Dentin matrix protein 1 (DMP1) is a bone- and teeth-specific protein initially identified from mineralized dentin. Here we report that DMP1 is primarily localized in the nuclear compartment of undifferentiated osteoblasts. In the nucleus, DMP1 acts as a transcriptional component for activation of osteoblast-specific genes like osteocalcin. During the early phase of osteoblast maturation, Ca2+ surges into the nucleus from the cytoplasm, triggering the phosphorylation of DMP1 by a nuclear isoform of casein kinase II. This phosphorylated DMP1 is then exported out into the extracellular matrix, where it regulates nucleation of hydroxyapatite. Thus, DMP1 is a unique molecule that initiates osteoblast differentiation by transcription in the nucleus and orchestrates mineralized matrix formation extracellularly, at later stages of osteoblast maturation. The data presented here represent a paradigm shift in the understanding of DMP1 function. This information is crucial in understanding normal bone formation, remodeling, fracture healing, and skeletal tissue repair.dentin matrix protein 1 osteocalcin alkaline phosphatase fluorescein isothiocyanate phosphate-buffered saline bovine serum albumin nuclear localization signal nuclear export signal green fluorescent protein open reading frame glutathione casein kinases I and II 5,6-dichloro-1-औ- Hanks' balanced salt solution charge-coupled device tetramethylrhodamine isothiocyanate extracellular matrix myocyte enhancer factor 2 histone deacetylase inositol 1,4,5-trisphosphate 1,2-bis( Mesenchymal stem cells have the potential to differentiate into several cell types that give rise to bone, cartilage, fat, and muscles. Proliferation and differentiation of mesenchymal cells to osteoblastic lineage is regulated by an intrinsic genetically defined program, which is well-controlled by various transcription factors, cytokines, morphogens, and secreted growth factors. There are two known transcription factors, namely Cbfa1 and osterix, that regulate osteoblast differentiation and skeletal formation during embryonic development ( The mouse pre-osteoblastic cells, MC3T3-E1, were cultured with Dulbecco's modified Eagle's medium supplemented with 107 heat-inactivated fetal bovine serum (Celgro). Transient transfections with reporter plasmids were performed with Superfect (Qiagen) as per the manufacturer's protocol. Reporter transfections were carried out in triplicates and repeated at least three times to obtain a mean value. All the transfections contained an internal control vector pRLSV40, which contains a 100 ॖg of recombinant DMP1 was adjusted to pH 9.5 with phosphate buffer (400 ॖl). 100 ॖl of FITC solution (0.1 mg/ml) was added and incubated at 4 °C for 2 h. The reaction mixture was passed through a G-25 column to remove excessive FITC. Furthermore, the labeled protein was dialyzed against PBS buffer at 4 °C for 18 h. Bovine serum albumin was labeled in a similar manner and was used as a control. For the uptake studies labeled proteins were added exogenously to the cells at a concentration of 30 ॖg/ml. Polyclonal DMP1 antibody was affinity-purified as described earlier ( Site-directed mutagenesis was carried out with the following primers to mutate the respective potential NLS sites. The lowercase letters represent the modified bases. NLS1: 724 bp, 5′-TCAAGCaGGAcATCCTTCAGAAGGTCCgGGGTCTCT-3′, 760 bp; NLS2: 1294 bp, 5′-TCTCAGGACAGTAGCgGATCCAcAGAAGAGAGC-3′, 1327 bp; NLS3: 1384 bp, 5′-GCTGACAATgGGAcACTAATAGcTGATGCT-3′, 1414 bp. An Double-stranded oligonucleotides synthesized for the NLS1 (724–760 bp), NLS2 (1294–1327 bp), NLS3 (1384–1414 bp), and NES (13–48 bp) were ligated to the carboxyl-terminal end of the GFP protein at GST-importin constructs were obtained as a kind gift from Dr. Stephen Adams, Northwestern University, Chicago. Recombinant GST-importin α bound to glutathione-Sepharose beads was used in GST pull-down assays. 100 ॖg of the extracted protein was added to the column and washed with 0.1 Recombinant DMP1 was An CKII assay was carried out using the casein kinase II assay kit (Upstate Biotechnology). Briefly, 20 ng of recombinant DMP1 was incubated with the nuclear extracts of MC3T3-E1 cells in the presence and absence of CKII-specific peptide (RRRDDDSDDD) or CKII-specific inhibitor (5,6-dichloro-1-औ- Mineralization was induced as described earlier ( Cells were seeded onto glass coverslips at least 24 h prior to use. Attached cells were washed four times with Hanks' balanced salt solution (HBSS) without calcium chloride. The cells were then loaded with Fluo3 (Molecular Probes, Eugene, OR, 10 ॖ Based on immunohistochemical data from mature bone tissue we had expected to localize the protein in the mineralized matrix ( To address the role of DMP1 in the nucleus, we have previously shown that overexpression of DMP1 in MC3T3-E1 cells and C3H10T1/2 (embryonic mesenchymal) cells resulted in characteristic morphological changes accompanied by transcriptional up-regulation of osteocalcin and alkaline phosphatase ( The regulated transport of proteins across the nuclear envelope has been recognized as a critical step in vast number of cellular processes ( Immunohistochemical studies have demonstrated the presence of DMP1 in the mineralized extracellular matrix of bone and dentin. This suggests that DMP1 must migrate from the nucleus rather than be maintained in a nuclear pool. To examine the export mechanism, MC3T3-E1 cells were treated for 2 days (early maturation stage) with ascorbic acid and औ-glycerophosphate, an organic phosphate, to stimulate differentiation, because Dulbecco's modified Eagle's medium does not have sufficient phosphate ion product to support normal mineral formation. Immunostaining of these mineralizing cultures with a DMP1 antibody demonstrated a striking relocation of DMP1: instead of being in the nucleus, DMP1 was now located in the cytoplasm and the plasma membrane (Fig. One of the main events during osteoblast differentiation and maturation is the release of calcium from intracellular stores. We hypothesized that Ca To investigate the functional role of Ca An important question is whether this Ca To investigate the signal sequence responsible for controlling the export of DMP1 into the extracellular matrix in coordination with calcium release, the sequence of DMP1 was examined for a nuclear export signal (NES). Sequence analysis indicated the presence of a classic leucine-rich hydrophobic export signal present at the amino-terminal end (5–16 amino acids) of the polypeptide and is conserved in all species identified thus far. The functionality of both the NES and NLS domains in DMP1 was further confirmed by ligating the NES domain (LLTFLWGLSCAL) and the NLS3 sequence, individually to the carboxyl terminus of the GFP construct with an ORF. Transient transfections and confocal images demonstrated that NLS3-GFP hybrid protein accumulated in the nuclear compartment. On the other hand, the NES-GFP hybrid was found to accumulate at the cellular boundary and in the ECM (Fig. DMP1 is a phosphoprotein with a high negative charge. Phosphate groups confer a very high capacity to DMP1 for binding calcium ions, which is important for its potential function in mineralization. If fully phosphorylated, DMP1 would bear a net charge of −175 per molecule of 473 residues. To examine whether DMP1 is differentially phosphorylated DMP1 has several consensus sites for phosphorylation by CKII. To identify the casein kinase responsible for We further explored the role of Ca For the first time, the results presented in this study shed new light on the mechanism by which nuclear localization of DMP1 might play an important role in the regulation of specific genes that control osteoblast differentiation. Experimental evidence presented here and elsewhere indicates a dual biological function for DMP1 both as a transcriptional signal during early differentiation of osteoblasts and as an initiator of mineralization during the terminal differentiation of osteoblasts ( The export of DMP1 from the nucleus during maturation of osteoblasts was found to be in response to a stimulus from calcium ions. Calcium ions have been reported as ubiquitous second messengers. The modulated release of Ca Casein kinase II is a messenger-independent Ser/Thr kinase found predominantly in the nucleus of most cells ( The novel finding that DMP1 is localized in the nucleus and acts as a transcriptional regulator for OCN expression is appealing, because it is consistent with the observation that OCN might be one of the downstream genes known, to be regulated by DMP1. Based on our overexpression studies, we also speculate that DMP1 may directly activate transcriptional pathways leading to expression of alkaline phosphatase in osteoblasts ( We thank Dr. Trisha Gura and Dr. Primal de Lanerolle for critical editing and helpful comments on the manuscript. We acknowledge Dr. Mei Lin at the confocal microscope center for her assistance.