The aim of this study was to synthesize human milk fat substitute (HMFS) enriched with medium-chain fatty acids (MCFAs) by Lipozyme® RM IM-catalyzed acidolysis. The reaction substrates (tripalmitin, hazelnut oil fatty acids and Neobee® fatty acids) were specially chosen to mimic human milk fats and to enrich HMFS with MCFAs. Substrate molar ratio, reaction temperature and enzyme content were used to model and to optimize the reaction conditions via response surface methodology. The experiment was carried out at the optimal condition generated from the model yielded structured lipids with caprylic acid (12.8 g/100 g), capric acid (10.6 g/100 g) and palmitic acid (30 g/100 g). These values were found similar to the values predicted by the model (15.9 g/100 g, 14.1 g/100 g and 33.3 g/100 g). It can be concluded that the potential use of the structured lipids (SLs) produced in infant formulas provide energy source delivering a reduced calorie value for newborn, term and preterm infants.Human milk is naturally unique source of nutrients for newborn, term and preterm infants. Human milk fat provides a major source of energy as well as the required nutrients ( Long-chain fatty acids (LCFAs) are more slowly absorbed compared to medium-chain fatty acids (MCFAs). An increase in change length of saturated fatty acids reduces the absorbability of them, which results in the formation of insoluble calcium soaps of these fatty acids. The loss of energy intake and calcium occur since the insoluble soaps are excreted with the feces. The incorporation of MCFAs into infant formulas has been suggested to provide a concentrated source of energy ( The aim of this study was to produce human milk fat substitutes enriched with medium-chain fatty acids by lipase-catalyzed acidolysis of tripalmitin, hazelnut oil fatty acids and Neobee fatty acids. The response surface methodology (RSM) was used to model and to optimize the reaction conditions. Substrate molar ratio (total mole of fatty acids:mole of tripalmitin), enzyme amount and temperature were the factors used to set up the experimental model. Caprylic, capric and palmitic acids were the responses to optimize the reactions. Tripalmitin (glycerol tripalmitate, minimum purity 85%) was purchased from Sigma Chemical Co. (St Louis, MO). Neobee (the mixture of medium-chain fatty acids) were donated from Stepan Company/Kale Kimya Group. Refined hazelnut oil, obtained from the fruit of a hazelnut tree ( Preparation of free fatty acids from hazelnut oil and Neobee The acidolysis reactions were performed by incubating 1:2, 1:4, 1:6 substrate molar ratios of tripalmitin/total FA (hazelnut oil FA and MCFA) in 3 mL n-hexane, at 50 °C, 55 °C, and 60 °C using Lipozyme A five-level central composite rotatable design (CCD) was used for the RSM studies, and 17 experimental settings were generated with three factors by using Modde 8.0.2 (Umetrics) software. The three factors chosen were substrate molar ratio (Sr, total FA/tripalmitin), (2–6 mol/mol); temperature(T,°C), (50–60 °C); and enzyme content (Ec, wt%), (10-20 wt%). The independent variables and experimental design are presented in Reaction products were filtered through an anhydrous sodium sulphate column to remove enzyme particules and moisture. 50 μL of the reaction product, was applied to thin layer chromatography (TLC) plates (20 × 20 cm) coated with silica gel G. TLC plates were developed with petroleum ether: diethyl ether: acetic acid mixture (80:20:0.5, v/v/v). The TAG bands visualized under UV light after being sprayed with 2,7-dichlorofluorescein in methanol (0.2 g/100 ml), was scraped off into a screw-capped test tube for methylation ( 3 mL of HCl in methanol (6 g/100 ml) and 50 μL of internal standard (10 mg/ml heptadecanoic acid) was added to TAG bands and incubated in the oven at 70–80 °C for 2 h. Then, fatty acid methyl esters (FAME) were extracted two times with 2 mL of hexane and 1 ml of KCl. FAMEs were filtered through a sodium sulphate column to remove moisture. The solvent was reduced to 0.5 mL under a stream of nitrogen ( The fatty acid composition of substrates and reaction products were analyzed by gas-liquid chromatography (GLC). The gas chromatography, Thermoquest Trace GC 2000 was equipped with a J&W DB-wax (J&W Scientific, Folsom, CA) column (30 m × 0.25 mm id) and a flame ionization detector (FID), and operated on split mode with split ratio of 1:100. The injector and detector temperatures were 250 °C and 260 °C, respectively. The column temperature was held at 150 °C for 3 min, then programmed to 215 °C at 10 °C/min, and held for 10 min. 1 μL of sample was injected into the GLC. Relative contents of FAME as weight % were calculated by computer, using heptadecanoic acid (C 17:0) as the internal standard. To verify the feasibility of the scaled-up acidolysis, a batch reaction (25 times scaling-up) was carried out at the optimal conditions. The effect of different temperatures, enzyme contents and substrate molar ratios studied in this work and their interaction were analyzed using ANOVA. The fatty acid compositions of hazelnut oil and Neobee Human milk fat substitute enriched with medium-chain fatty acids was synthesized by enzymatic interesterification of tripalmitin with Neobee fatty acids and hazelnut oil. A 3-factor and 5-level central composite design was applied for the reactions, the design points and responses are presented in The best-fitting quadratic models were determined for caprylic acid, capric acid and palmitic acid incorporation after the multiple regression analysis. The first-order parameters of enzyme content (E Although the second-order parameter of substrate molar ratio (S It can be seen from Eq. The first order-variable, substrate molar ratio had negative impact on the incorporation of palmitic acid. Palmitic acid incorporation was positively correlated by second-order variable of substrate molar ratio ( The Impact of the interactions of factors on response incorporation can be evaluated by contour plots. Three contour plots describing the interaction of three factors on the incorporation of each response. The contour plots obtained for caprylic acid, capric acid and palmitic acid were shown in An increase in temperature increased the incorporation of caprylic and capric acid until the midpoint of the response surface was reached ( The incorporation of palmitic acid was found to increase with an increase in temperature after the midpoint of response surface was reached ( As can be seen from An increase in substrate molar ratio resulted in decrease in the incorporation of palmitic acid until the midpoint of response surface was reached. ( At a substrate molar ratio below 4.5 mol/mol, caprylic and capric acid incorporation were found to decrease with a decrease substrate molar ratio ( In The optimal conditions for the targeted responses were generated by the Modde 8.0 (Umetrics) software. At optimal conditions (57 °C; 3.35 mol/mol; 19.78wt%), the predicted values were 15.9 g/100 g, 14.1 g/100 g and 33.3 g/100 g for caprylic acid, capric acid and palmitic acid, respectively. Lipase-catalyzed acidolysis reactions were carried out at the optimal conditions to verify the model. At the optimal conditions, the product contained caprylic acid (12.8 g/100 g), capric acid (10.6 g/100 g), and palmitic acid (30 g/100 g), which were similar to the values predicted by the model. The fatty acid compositions of colostrum and mature milk fat were studied by It was reported that an increase in temperature led to increase in enzyme activity and acyl migration until maximum reaction rate was reached as hydrogen bonds and other weak attractions holding the enzyme in its 3-D shape were sensitive to temperature. Temperature improves the interaction between the substrate and enzyme as well ( The TAG composition of the products in lipase-catalyzed reaction was reported to depend on the substrate molar ratio ( It was stated that acyl migration was accelerated by increasing enzyme content. The influence of enzyme content on the incorporation of response varied to the type of fatty acid ( In conclusion, HMFS enriched with medium-chain fatty acids was successfully produced by Lipozyme