The intensified leaching behavior of potassium from phosphorus-potassium associated ore in HCl-CaF2 system with different surfactants was investigated. It was found that anion surfactants could enhance the dissolution fraction of potassium and sodium dodecyl sulfate (SDS) had the best effect. The dissolution fraction increased from 89.50% to 98.01% with the addition of 0–1.25 g/L SDS, but dropped to 91.5% with 5.00 g/L SDS. The cationic surfactants could only shorten the time to the equilibrium, while the nonionic surfactant would hinder the leaching of potassium. The intensified leaching observed in the presence of 1.25 g/L SDS could be interpreted as follows: SDS was adsorbed on the surface and micro-porous cracks of mineral particles, then the adsorption film was appeared, which leaded to more SiF4 stayed in the adsorption film and more SiO2 produced, indicating the residual became smooth, thereby the ore was eroded thoroughly due to the produce of more HF. But much micelle covering on the residue was formed if the dosage such as 5.00 g/L SDS exceeded the critical micellization concentration (CMC), which hindered acid and fluorine entered into the interior of the ore, indicating dissolution fraction decreased. In addition, the leaching kinetics of potassium was successfully modeled by a semi-empirical kinetic model based on the modified shrinking-core model with chemical reaction being the rate-controlling step.Potassium is one of the essential nutrients for plant and crop growth Recently, the phosphorus-potassium associated ore, which contains 6–12% phosphorus pentoxide (P In recent years, surfactants are gaining attention in leaching or extraction processes, especially bioleaching process considering surfactants can adjust the properties of mineral surfaces and bacterial outer cytomembranes. For example, Fang et al. It is worth noting that some significant progress has been achieved by the research on examining the enhancement of mineral leaching or bioleaching with the addition of surfactant. However, most of the previous studies have focused on the bioleaching and the leaching of copper, phosphate, and uranium ores, the leaching of potassium ore, especially the intensified leaching kinetics of phosphorus-potassium associated ore with surfactant has hardly been addressed in detail. Therefore, the objective of this study is to investigate the effect of various surfactants on acid leaching of potassium from phosphorus-potassium associated ore, and determine the suitable surfactant and its additive amount. What is more, the strengthening leaching kinetics with surfactant was comprehensively studied and a semi-empirical kinetic model based on the modified shrinking-core model was applied to fit the experimental data. The phosphorus-potassium associated ore used in this study was obtained from Yingjia Ping mining area of Yichang city in Hubei province, China. The chemical composition of the ore was listed in Leaching experiments were conducted in a round-bottomed split flask, with a three necked top, equipped with a Teflon impeller driven by a multi-variable speed motor under auto-controlled agitation, a mercury thermometer, and a delivery tube for acidic solutions. The flask was heated by a thermostat-controlled oil batch within an accuracy of 1 °C. A certain volume of hydrochloric acid solution with a desired concentration was added into the flask, which was heated to the desired temperature and maintained there by an oil bath. Then 20 g of dry phosphorus-potassium associated ore (0.0385–0.105 mm) and a certain amount of CaF The potassium concentration in the solution was determined by atomic absorption spectroscopy (AAS, SOLAAR.M6, America). XRD (D8 Advance, Bruker), X-ray fluorescence method (XRF, EDX-8000, Shimadzu), BET specific surface area analyzer (ASAP 2460), laser diffraction particle size analyzer (Winner 2308), 3D micro-technique (Leica DVM6), Scanning Electron Microscopy (SEM) (JSM-5510LV) were used to characterize the solid products (raw ore and the residues with and without SDS). Anionic surfactants are widely applied in the modern industry. Especially, sodium dodecyl sulfate (SDS) is one of the anionic surfactants with wetting, emulsification, dispersion, decontamination actions and high surface activity. SDS has been generally used as a foaming agent in the industrial fields such as detergent, cosmetics, paper making, textile and oil extraction due to the good foaming, emulsifying, water-soluble, biodegradable and hard water resistance  The Influence of nonionic surfactant on the dissolution fraction of potassium was investigated, as the results shown in Based on the above discussed, 1.25 g/LSDS had the best intensified effect. In the leaching process, liquid/solid ratio (L/S, ratio of the volume of acid solution (mL) to the mass of ore (g)), hydrochloric acid concentration (C, wt.%), material ratio (M, mass ratio of CaF Generally, temperature is an important parameter regarding reaction kinetics of chemical and hydrometallurgy processes The influence of hydrochloric acid concentration on the dissolution fraction of potassium is shown in  The influence of material ratio on the leaching of potassium was investigated, and the results are shown in The effect of leaching time on the dissolution fraction of potassium at 90 °C was studied, as the results shown in On the basis of the previous research results Many side reactions can also occur during the leaching process. The raw ore and the residues obtained after leaching at 90 °C, 80 mL of HCl with the concentration of 22.5%, leaching time 6 h, stirring speed 750 rpm, 20 g ore, and CaF  After leaching, the strongest diffraction peak was 26.62° of SiO As can be seen from SEM was used to analyze the morphology of raw ore and reaction residuals, as shown in The 3D microscopical technique was also used to analyze the raw ore and reaction residuals and the results are shown in Fluid-solid heterogeneous reaction systems have many applications in chemical and hydrometallurgical processes Fortunately, a modified shrinking-core model with considering the degradation of PET particles was proposed by Toshiaki Yoshioka The experimental kinetic data under different conditions were correlated respectively by the modified shrinking-core model (Eq. According to Arrhenius’s law, the relationship between reaction rate constant ( The natural logarithmic plot of Kversus reciprocal absolute temperature gave straight line, as shown in Besides, thermodynamic parameters for the leaching of potassium by SDS can be estimated using following equations In order to determine the effects of experimental factors, viz, the concentration of hydrochloric acid, liquid-solid to ratio, material ratio and leaching temperature, a semiempirical kinetic relation is also developed to correlate experimental date for the leaching process The regression coefficients were determined by multielement non-linear regression analysis with the aid of Matlab software, and the determined values are as follows: Eq. To verify the kinetic equation, the agreement between the experimental data and the values calculated by the modified shrinking core model under different reaction conditions was tested by plotting X The small value of relative mean square of errors indicates that the modified shrinking core model can be reliably used to describe the relationship between dissolution fraction of potassium and leaching parameters in the presence of 1.25 g/L SDS.  The anion surfactants could enhance the dissolution fraction of potassium and SDS had the best effect. The cationic surfactants could only shorten the time to the equilibrium, and the nonionic surfactant would hinder the leaching of potassium. Under the optimum conditions, up to 98.01% of the potassium from the ore used herein was dissolved in the acidic liquid. The leaching kinetics of potassium with the addition of 1.25 g/L SDS could be fitted by a semi-empirical kinetics model based on the modified shrinking core model with the chemical reaction as the rate-controlling step and the activation energy was 85.25 kJ/mol. The intensified leaching effect in the presence of 1.25 g/L SDS could be interpreted as follows: the absorption film was formed with the addition of SDS, which could control the reaction of SiF The authors gratefully acknowledge the financial support of