It is significant to understand deeply interfacial properties and interfacial phenomena appeared in high temperature metallurgical processing. In particular, highly purified steel production is a clear and important goal to be aimed at in steelmaking processes. In order to produce highly purified steel, there are a lot of subjects which we should cope with, such as generation and growth of nonmetallic inclusions and their wettability with liquid steel, and furthermore engulfing small droplets of molten slag or CC molten flux into liquid steel. Those subjects are strongly related to interfacial properties and interfacial phenomena of liquid steel, solid oxides, and molten slag. In addition, solidification of metals and alloys are also related to interfacial phenomena between solid and liquid phases.
               In this chapter, we focus on (1) wettability between liquid metals and solid oxide, (2) interfacial free energy between solid and liquid phases in metals and alloys, and (3) interfacial tension between liquid steel and molten slag and some fundamental information on them are explained.It is significant to understand deeply interfacial properties and interfacial phenomena appeared in high temperature metallurgical processing. In particular, highly purified steel production is a clear and important goal to be aimed at in steelmaking processes. In order to produce highly purified steel, there are a lot of subjects which we should cope with, such as generation and growth of nonmetallic inclusions and their wettability with liquid steel, and furthermore engulfing small droplets of molten slag or CC molten flux into liquid steel. Those subjects are strongly related to interfacial properties and interfacial phenomena of liquid steel, solid oxides, and molten slag. In addition, solidification of metals and alloys are also related to interfacial phenomena between solid and liquid phases. In this chapter, we focus on (1) wettability between liquid metals and solid oxide, (2) interfacial free energy between solid and liquid phases in metals and alloys, and (3) interfacial tension between liquid steel and molten slag and some fundamental information on them are explained. Although wettability of liquid steel with solid oxides is one of the typical wetting behaviors between liquid and solid phases in metallurgical processing, the wettability of molten slag with refractories is another important phenomenon in steelmaking processing. In general, the wettability between solid and liquid phases is expressed by the following Young–Laplace’s equation: The balance of the above three interfacial tensions are drawn in The wettability can be evaluated by the contact angle. That is to say, the wettability is recognized to be good when the contact angle is smaller than 90°. On the other hand, the wettability becomes bad when the contact angle is larger than 90°. The contact angle is affected by various factors except for the above three interfacial properties appeared in Young–Laplace’s equation. For example, the contact angle is affected by physic–chemical properties such as chemical reactions between liquid alloy and solid oxide, oxygen partial pressure, crystal structure of oxide phase as well as surface roughness of solid oxide. Eustathopoulos  In The wettability of liquid metals and alloys with solid oxides has been studied extensively and many literatures have been published so far. The references in this section include some representative reviews on this subject. The wettability of molten slag with solid oxides is another important subject in high temperature metallurgical engineering. Generally, we get the good wettability between materials which have the same type of bond, e.g., mutual metallic bond, ionic bond and covalent bond etc. We describe here the interfacial free energy between solid and liquid phases in pure metals and some alloy systems. The wettability between those phases is generally well because both phases have the same metallic bond. A lot of information on the interfacial free energy between solid and liquid phases in pure metals has been reported so far and they can be summarized as shown in The wettability between liquid steel and molten slag is generally good and the interfacial tension between those phases have been investigated extensively so far. The measurements on the interfacial tension are based on the following three procedures: When a droplet of liquid steel is placed on the bottom of a crucible which contains molten slag, the contour is recorded by an X-ray to determine the interfacial tension. When a droplet of molten slag is placed on a flat surface of liquid steel which is put in a shallow crucible, the contact angle of the molten slag with liquid steel is measured to determine the interfacial tension. Measurement of the drop weight when metal rod immersed in slag melts down or is introduced through the capillary. An apparatus as shown in An example of an apparatus for the method (2) is shown in An apparatus for the estimation of the interfacial tension via metal drop weight (method 3) is shown in If the capillary radius Some examples [ The measured values on the interfacial tension between liquid metals except for Fe and molten slag have been reported so far. Some of the examples are shown in