Particle size of diets or ingredients plays an important role in pig growth and gut health. The way the size of particles is measured and expressed, however, is limited in explaining pig growth performance differences. This review explores new possibilities to determine, express and predict particle size. Different grinding methods, including the use of roller mills, hammer mills, multicracker and multi-stage grinding were reviewed. Roller milling tends to produce a more uniform particle size distribution (PSD) and consumes less energy, whilst hammer mills have a greater grinding capacity and a higher reduction ratio compared to roller mill. The multicracker system, a more recently developed technology, can be considered cost-effective and ensures grinding capacity. Since the effects of different grinding methods vary, multi-stage grinding, combining different grinding methods, might be a solution to obtain a defined PSD. Particle size determination techniques, including dry/wet sieving, laser diffraction, microscopy, and static/dynamic image analysis are described and compared. It is concluded that more characteristics of particles (e.g. shape, volume or surface area) should be investigated. Besides geometric mean diameter (GMD), particle size can also be expressed with parameters such as D
                     50, D
                     4,3 and span of PSD. Equivalent particle size (EPS) is introduced as a mean of describing the size of particles related to a functional trait of the particles. A meta-analysis was performed by collecting particle size and pig performance data from scientific studies examining the effect of recalculated EPS on pig performance (feed conversion ratio, FCR). Regression/linear modelling shows that recalculated EPS was not better than GMD in explaining pig performance differences due to the high variation among studies. Different expressions of PSD may result in different conclusions. An introduction of describing the breaking behavior of diet ingredients via mathematical models is provided. The development in breakage functions of wheat in roller milling in food preparations indicates that breakage functions are applicable in predicting the output PSD. Functions may also be extended to diet ingredients to be ground in animal feed manufacture. In feed manufacturing diagrams, particle size reduction for downstream processes (e.g. pelleting, extruding, expander processing) should be taken into account when the relationship between pig performance and particle size of diets is investigated. In conclusion, the determination, expression and prediction of particle size can be a new direction for controlling the grinding process in the feed mill to better explain its relationship with pig performance.In the field of feed manufacturing, grinding is a standard procedure for particle size reduction to make ingredients suitable for animal feeding and digestion. The principle of grinding methods is applying force to the ingredient, so that the bonds between various physical structures in feed materials are broken. For diet ingredients, the energy input and the extent of particle size reduction are important factors in feed manufacturing practices. Reducing particle size of ingredients can bring many benefits for feed processing and animals. According to The effects of the particle size of ingredients or diets on pig performance and health (stomach and gut functioning) have been widely discussed. Smaller particles of ingredients or diets can improve nutrient digestion in animals ( However, too finely ground ingredients can increase the risk of gastric ulcer development in pigs ( The relationship between particle size of diet or feed ingredients and pig performance seems obvious: finely ground particles can enhance animal performance and the coarse fraction of particles can aid in maintaining gut health in pigs. So, the optimal particle size distribution (PSD) of animal diets has been of great research interest over the last decades. Although optimal PSD of pig diet is difficult to define, there is a general consensus among researchers that optimal particle sized feed for animals should be evaluated on the basis of animal performance, animal health and processing costs ( Generally, smaller particles lead to better pig performance, and larger particles are essential for pig health. In some cases, different results were also observed. In the study of Particle size of diets and feed ingredients in animal feed manufacturing is usually determined by dry sieving, and reported as PSD or GMD ( The objective of this review is to provide new insights into particle reduction technology related to pig feed ingredients based on fundamental theory analysis. Alternative ways to measure particle size are reviewed and the use of breakage functions as an innovative method to predict PSD is discussed. Particle size reduction is accomplished by grinding for which different types of mills can be used. Currently, the hammer mill and roller mill are the most commonly used mills in the pig feed industry. Thomas et al. (2012; 2018) also investigated the possibility for the use of a multicracker device. Mill choices are usually based on ingredient type, energy consumption, grinding capacity as well as the animal species. Multi-stage grinding, which combines the advantages of different mills, may be a possible solution to obtain an ideal PSD with less cost ( Hammer mills consist of a series of hammers suspended from a central shaft and enclosed within a rigid metal casing. Particle size reduction in a hammer mill occurs as a result of the impaction/attrition between the rapidly moving hammers and relatively slow-moving particles ( The extent to which the material will be broken down in a mill can be characterized by their reduction ratio. This ratio is calculated by dividing the average input particle size of a whole ingredient by the average output particle size of the ground sample ( Compared to the roller mill and multicracker system, the hammer mill requires more energy. For a similar grinding intensity (particle size reduction), the hammer mill consumes more specific mechanical energy (kJ/kg) compared to the roller mill ( Many factors influence the milling output of hammer mills. For a similar percentage of screen openings, large screen openings result in less screen area leading to less collisions of particles in the hammer mill, therefore, the yield of coarse particles increased ( Particle size reduction in a roller mill is achieved by compression (same roll rotating speed) or shear (different roll rotating speed) forces and the roll design features (grooves and corrugations) (  For the development of breakage equations with roller mill, many factors have been identified that influence the breakage process of diet ingredients. From roller mill studies, it became evident that kernel size, milling ratio (the ratio of the roller gap to the input particle size) and the hardness of wheat for example have their influence on the quantity of larger and smaller particles in the output of the PSD. It has been shown that the number of large particles increased when kernel size decreased ( The multicracker was introduced in 2005 as an alternative method to the conventional particle size reduction systems, such as hammer and roller mills. This technology comminutes ingredients by a method of cracking/cutting-edge crushing by two rows of special discs. A desired pig feed structure is considered to contain the highest possible amount of medium- sized particles, with a low fraction of fine particles as well as coarse or very coarse particles ( Methods of measuring and expressing particle size are different; in order to describe particle size or PSD, we therefore have to make a choice among available methods. Particles used in pig feed are normally larger than 100 μm, meaning that methods like sedimentation, electro zone sensing and dynamic light scattering systems are not routinely included in pig feed particle size research, since they are mainly used for very small particles (<100 μm). An overview of techniques that can be used for pig feeds is provided below including dry sieving, wet sieving, microscopy, laser diffraction, static and dynamic image analysis is presented in At present, dry sieving which discriminates particles into size classes and converts these to mass, is the most commonly used method to investigate particle size in animal nutrition. According to the recommended procedure of Wet sieving is commonly applied in soil science, but can also be employed in the pig feed industry. Wet sieving is often used to determine the PSD of feed pellets. The pellet sample (50 g) is soaked in 1000 ml water for 1 h, and the feed-water-suspension is then poured onto a sieve tower (  Wet sieving makes it possible to examine PSD in pellets and to investigate the influence of pelleting and expander treatment on PSD ( Optical microscopy can also be used to determine particle size and provide information on the shape of particles. Despite that, the use of microscopy in particle size determination can be influenced by the limited freedom in the orientation of the particles during measurement ( Laser diffraction measures angular variation in intensity of light scattered as a laser beam passes through a dispersed particulate sample to evaluate PSD. When the laser hits the flowing particles, it will provide a geometric size of the particles by measuring scatter light angle size and intensity ( Besides the size of particles, particle shape is considered another important characteristic. Particles sharing the same size in cross section but with different shapes may have different properties and behaviors (e.g. the flow ability of materials). Compared to traditional manual particle measuring methods, image analysis combined with computer programs has been widely employed due to the quicker and more objective measurement ( Dynamic image analysis allows materials to flow free over one or more cameras allowing a large number of particles to be projected in a random orientation (3D) during the measuring procedure. Consequently, a large number of images (several 10 The techniques mentioned above define a particle size in different ways. As such, the analytical facilities used to determine the particle size can yield different summarizing statistics of identical samples. In fact, no analysis method provides the true particle size except for spherical particles ( Curves or plots are a very common tool to visualize the analysis of PSD measurements, which are very suitable for quality control. However, PSD are not always easily viewed using graphs, especially when a large quantity of PSD measurements needs to be compared or different size classes were used. Using numerical values to describe PSD makes a rapid comparison possible among different ingredients and analysis methods. In addition to calculated mean particle size and parameters derived from PSD, an equivalent particle size (EPS) can be determined. This EPS provides the possibility to describe irregular-shaped particles with one single parameter, and may be an alternative way to express particle size by using other properties of particles, like volume, surface area or ratio of surface area to volume. According to the ASAE standard (2008), after sieving and weighing, both fractional and cumulative PSD can be obtained (see  d d W n = number of sieves +1 (pan)  Slog = geometric standard deviation of log-normal distribution by mass in ten-based logarithm, dimensionless  Mean, median and mode are parameters that can be derived from absolute PSD values. The median is obtained by sorting all the sizes, which is not affected by the maximum and minimum extreme values and choosing the value where half of the data falls below and half above this number. The influence of extreme data values has no effect on the median. The mean is calculated based on all sizes of particles in the sample, so it is sensitive to each data change. The mode is the most frequently occurring particle size class in the sample, reflecting the concentration of a set of particles in the sample. The cumulative distribution curve (see Besides GMD, GSD, mean, median and mode, the ‘Sauter mean’ diameter (surface weighted mean diameter) can also be used to estimate the mean particle size of a given particle distribution (see Eq. 4). It is defined as the diameter of a sphere that has the same volume-surface area ratio as the particle of interest (   Another weighted mean diameter is ‘de Brouckere mean’ diameter (volume weighted mean diameter). It can be applied where coarse particles that make up the bulk of volume is the determining factor. The number of particles is not required in this formula, and the laser diffraction detects the volume of the particles, not the quantity, so the results of the laser diffraction are presented with (   The span of PSD is an additional parameter to the average particle size, which provides the user with additional information on the PSD ( The type of parameter that should be used depends on the objective for which it may be used. For example, The main idea of expressing the particle size of a ground material is to obtain one descriptive parameter to allow comparison of values between ground materials and for quality control. However, it is difficult to describe a three dimensional (3D) and irregular-shaped particle with only one parameter. Spheres can be described by only one parameter (diameter); this directs us to describe these irregular shaped particles also with one parameter by equalling them to a sphere but on a different basis (see Equivalent particle size is a virtual diameter of a sphere to represent the size of a given irregular particle, calculated based on the same volume, surface or weight etc. So, an equivalent sphere has the same characteristics as the observed particle in relation to a given measurement principle, whether volume, projected perimeter, surface area, etc. This means that a given irregular particle can be represented with several equivalent spheres depending on the property considered. For example, consider a cube with a side length of 1 cm, then the volume of this cube is 1.0 cm Estimates of certain EPS’s can be derived when GMD and GSD are known (       These four EPS’s are used in very different ways for measurements, in pharmaceuticals, food or mining. According to We use Eqs. (7) – (10) to transform GMD and GSD to EPS. To explore the relationships between EPS and pig performance, studies in the scientific literature were collected which reported both GMD and indicators for pig performance, then EPS was calculated ( However, similar results for EPS were not obtained from the data of These two examples indicate that some of these EPS expressions might be superior in explaining pig performance to GMD, but not in all cases. The variation of different study results should be accounted for in studies relating pig performance to particle size. The variation of results, based on the different plots led to the unsuccessful construction of a mathematical model. It becomes clear that different expressions of particle size differ when related to pig performance, and directly measured EPS data contrary to recalculated data have a preference in further research. Grinding theory is supposed to provide design concepts and equations that can help engineers to improve milling systems, so that the required PSD can be obtained efficiently ( Breakage functions are mathematical functions for describing particles breakage behavior during the comminution process, which can provide information on milling system design and grinding efficiency ( ‘Retained mass in a size interval = [original mass] – [mass broken into down size interval] + [mass created from size interval above]’. For example, consider a batch of material to be ground, which can be divided into 5 classes, named In grinding, a certain rate of the material is selected and engaged in breakage, which can be described by a (mathematical) selection function. Particles selected for grinding from a certain size class depend on raw material characteristics, grinding time, as well as properties and geometry of the mill. In the batch processing, the material is kept in the mill until everything is ground; for continuous grinding process, the material flows continuously, and therefore, grinding time and properties are related to the selected particles. This means for instance there is a difference between batch processing and continuous grinding. However, it is difficult to determine the selection functions in practical feed manufacturing. Usually in practice the selection function is assumed to be equal to one, and is combined with the breakage functions. When the ground material can be distributed into It should be noticed that: If the ground product is taken as Then it is possible to present these equations in matrix form (take 5 classes as example): The matrix (14) can be expressed in short as:    This matrix is referred to as the basic breakage matrix, which is considered sufficient for milling application ( Where the ground product vector ( In which:   Selection matrix (Eq. 17) is shown below: it’s units depend on the layout of the process and can be expressed in (fractional) rate of degradation per second (s The basic breakage matrix (Eqs. 14 and 15) is describing a once-through grinding process (‘open circuit’) without classification, like roller milling or hammer milling in the feed milling operation. While in practice, feed materials are hardly broken into the desired sizes within a single pass which, therefore means a classifier is needed to bring the oversized material back to the mill, and remove undersized material. This process (‘closed circuit grinding’) is illustrated in The classifier matrix is shown below: From The milling product And the material to recycled is: Then the mass ( Therefore, Then combine Eqs. (19) – (23), it is possible to provide the recycled product: The above equations can be used for all grinding processes, however, its accuracy will differ between the type of machines, since materials will show a different breaking behaviour in different machines. For example, in the roller mill, particles are ground independently, while in the hammer mill, there are interactions among particles during grinding. Therefore, selection of particles for grinding within the mill as well as the total grinding time must be considered in order to optimize the grinding efficacy of the milling operation. Developing the breakage equations and turning them into breakage matrices greatly improves understanding of certain milling systems and the raw materials that are comminuted by those systems. However, having determined the breakage matrix of a product and machine, this matrix can only be used for these products/machine combination specifically. This makes this method very inflexible. A breakage matrix determined for one set of grinding conditions cannot be instantly used for another set of conditions. Since diet ingredients in animal feeds may differ in their nutrient levels, size, moisture content, hardness etc., this is not desirable. Breakage functions have been widely discussed in the mining and coal industry comminution process. However, in feed manufacturing practices, to the best knowledge of authors, the breakage function was only developed for the combination wheat/roller mill by the research group of Campbell (  As Campbell and Webb described in their study, a single setting cannot be used all year round to mill a certain product. Therefore, it is needed to develop a breakage function which considers the characteristics of the whole and milled product and the traits of the milling machine. Consequently, some conditions in the breakage equation were considered, which include the concept of normalization, selection and first-order law of breakage ( Cumulative breakage functions are currently investigated to be employed in the breakage equations of wheat ( As illustrated above, many researches were done with respect to the breakage of wheat using a roller mill. As shown above, reducing particle size of diet ingredients can bring many benefits. In order to further increase the availability and digestibility of nutrients, thermal treatments (pelleting, extrusion or expander treatment) are often involved as feed processing technologies. Therefore, the effects of particle size reduction in the downstream feed manufacturing processes should also be considered. There are some researches indicating that the pelleting process can even out the PSD of feed diets ( Particle size reduction during pelleting also gave some reasonable explanation about differences in animal performance. According to the research results of Extrusion and expander technology can also be involved in the feed processing for pigs starter diets to increase the palatability and nutrient availability. High temperature steam is then added in this process to reach a higher moisture content (20∼30%) and temperature (up to 130℃) of diets which cannot be realized in pelleting ( Reducing the energy consumption during grinding, whilst obtaining an optimal PSD for pigs is one of the key objectives in a feed milling operation. Roller mill, a hammer mill and the multicracker all have different advantages and drawbacks and have been reviewed in this article. In addition, new configurations and systems can be used, like multi-stage grinding. However, only limited research data is available for these two technologies, and further research in comparing these configurations and systems in terms of PSD and energy utilization should be carried out. Dry sieving is the most used method in pig feed research regarding particle size determination. Wet sieving, laser diffraction, microscopy or statistic/dynamic image analysis are further methods for determining particle size to explore additional characteristics of particles like volume, surface area. As a result, better suggestions about the efficacy of milling operations may be provided. However, no research has been done to address such possibilities. For example, the use of EPS along with span of PSD, Breakage functions are applicable in predicting the output PSD. The development of breakage equations for the first milling of wheat with a roller mill has been done, and many factors of milling operation and material characteristics then can be considered. This type of research can be extended to predict the output PSD using hammer mill to grind ingredients for pig diets. Factors that may affect the milling of feed ingredients such as grinding time, feeder capacity and material characteristics will lead to a better understanding of breaking behavior of specific feed ingredients in the hammer mill. Therefore, a better-defined PSD of feed can be realized with a higher accuracy: the development of breakage functions is necessary to increase the accuracy of prediction and to predict output PSD of different feed materials under several different grinding conditions in different types of mills. Whether the breakage function can be used to predict defined PSD for animal performance is a further issue that can be examined in the future. To ensure a certain PSD in animal feeds, the use of breakage functions shows a promising application. After grinding and mixing, material is processed by pelleting, expander treatment or extrusion. Particle size reduction also takes place in these downstream processes, which is considered a possible reason for pigs performance differences in this kind of studies. Pelleting can decrease the large particle size fraction, so in order to achieve a defined PSD for pigs, particle size changes as a result of the pelleting process should not be ignored. However, there are few researches being done which show how expander treatment and extrusion affect the PSD of diets. This can be a direction for further research into the particle size distribution in animal feed processing technology. The authors declare that none of them have a conflict of interest regarding this manuscript. The authors wish to acknowledge Rudolf Dantuma in performing a literature study, and the financial support from