This study focuses on the comprehensive utilization of a limonitic laterite from the Philippines. The ore was screened to remove some silicate minerals and then treated via reduction roasting-ammonia leaching. The optimal conditions of reduction roasting of screened ore (Ore I) were determined through a series of tests. Compared with the extractions of nickel and cobalt from the initial ore, those from Ore I increased from 84.0% to 87.9% and from 35.5% to 47.4%, respectively. The iron in leach residue increased from 56.2% to 60.7% without any further treatment, and the final recovery of iron was up to 85.2%. The improved reduction roasting process was analyzed to illustrate the phase transformations of iron, nickel, and cobalt, as well as the effects of such behaviors on the recoveries of these metals.Laterite ores, which are widely distributed in equatorial regions, are usually formed through the prolonged tropical weathering of ultramafic rocks containing ferromagnesian minerals (such as olivine, pyroxene, and amphibole) associated with a variety of geological settings spanning the Precambrian to the Tertiary ( In general, laterite ores are the major sources of nickel products, and nickel is present in various minerals in the limonite, saprolite, and garnierite zones of laterite ores. Considering the acid consumption and economical throughput, magnesium-rich saprolitic and garnieritic laterite ores are amenable to the pyrometallurgical process for the production of high-carbon ferronickel, low-carbon ferronickel, or matte, whereas limonitic laterites are suitable for pressure acid leaching and reduction roasting–ammonia leaching ( The standard reduction roasting–ammonia leaching process originally defined by Considering the current issues, an improved reduction roasting–ammonia leaching process has been developed for producing high-grade iron concentrates simultaneously with nickel and cobalt extractions from the Philippine limonitic laterite ore; and a series of tests was completed in January 2012. Furthermore, preparation for the construction of a plant with an annual capacity of 300,000 The laterite ore sample used in this study was from the Philippines, provided by Jiangsu Huahai Material Science and Technology Company Ltd., China. A representative sample was obtained through coning and quartering. The characteristics of the selected representative sample were then determined. The size analysis was carried out by wet screening and the composition of Fe, SiO Typical reduction roasting tests were performed in a muffle furnace using corundum crucibles with tight-fitting lids to ensure no gas inflow. The temperature of the ores during roasting was monitored using a sheathed thermocouple inserted into the muffle furnace, and controlled by a programmable temperature controller with a precision of ±1 The cooled reduction product was filtered by a Buchner funnel to obtain the solid, and then transferred into a 250 The leach residue was dried at 50 The chemical components of the initial ore sample were analyzed and listed in The mineralogical analysis revealed that the predominant constituent mineral in this ore was fine-grained limonite (mainly consisting of goethite) with a particle size less than 74 All the investigations stated above indicate that the ore after some reasonable treatments enables the production of high-grade iron concentrates (Fe As shown in As stated above, a treated ore sample (denoted as Ore I) was obtained by screening and elutriating the ore slurry after adequate mineral particle dispersion using vibration screens with a 74 Laterite ores are complex minerals containing various metal oxide components. In the process of reduction roasting, bitumite was used as the reductant. The main reactions between fixed carbon and metal oxides are shown as follows: The standard Gibbs free energies of these oxides in the reaction system are plotted and presented in Generally, the reduction reactions of coal are regarded as the combination of indirect reduction reactions and the Boudouard reaction, i.e., fixed carbon reacting with generated carbon dioxide to form carbon monoxide, and carbon monoxide acting as the reductant of valuable metal oxides. The process can be represented by reactions The standard Gibbs energy calculations indicate that reaction Wustite can be further reduced to metallic iron when the reductant is unstinted and the roasting temperature is appropriate. The chemical reaction is represented as follows: Therefore, the reduction sequence of iron oxides is postulated as 3Fe The reduction behavior of oxides in laterite ores by butumite is strongly influenced by the particle size, crystallinity, constituents and conditions of reduction roasting. The results summarized in The results depicted in The results of the effect of reductant dosage are shown in The corresponding nickel extractions for different cooling styles are presented in As aforementioned, Ore I is extremely sensitive to reduction roasting; thus, careful control of the conditions in this process, particularly during cooling, is required. The optimal conditions are proposed as follows: roasting temperature of 825 Contrast tests between the initial ore and Ore I were performed under the optimal conditions proposed above. The results presented in Full flowsheet tests for the reduction roasting–ammonia leaching of Ore I were conducted under the aforementioned optimal conditions. The results of 36 replicate tests on the iron in leach residue are plotted in Thus, apart from a relatively higher nickel–cobalt extraction rate, the high-grade iron concentrate with a considerably higher degree of iron recovery can be produced simultaneously following the aforementioned process. From the viewpoint of the recovery of potentially valuable metals, the technical route proposed is advantageous. As stipulated in the literature, a prerequisite for the high recoveries of valuable metals is controlling the mineral phase transformation in the reduction roasting process, i.e. iron oxides should be reduced predominantly to Fe  The XRD patterns of the samples after reduction roasting show the formation of the phases of magnetite [Fe  In this study, a Philippine limonitic laterite was treated by an improved reduction roasting–ammonia leaching process. Based on the studies carried out, the following conclusions are drawn: The mineralogical analysis suggests iron oxide/oxyhydroxide is the predominant constituent mineral and the main carrier of nickel and cobalt. As the particles of silicate minerals are coarser than those of the iron-bearing minerals, approximately 50% of silicon can be removed from the initial ore by screening and elutriating the ore pulp using 74 The optimal conditions for selective reduction during roasting are: temperature of 825 The extractions of nickel and cobalt can increase from 84.0% and 35.5% to 87.9% and 47.4%, after conducting the same process to treat Ore I. Simultaneously, the iron in leach residue also increases from 56.2% to 60.7% with a total iron recovery of 85.2%. Magnetite is the dominant mineral formed, and wustite is the minor one from the reduction product from Ore I, whilst the generated fayalite is lower. The incomplete migration of nickel and cobalt to the metallic state is attributed to the highly endothermic reaction of goethite dehydroxylation. The slower migration of cobalt is thought to lead to the lower extraction of cobalt than that of nickel. Consequently, the removal of silicate minerals from the laterite ore prior to reduction roasting is a key prerequisite. High-grade iron concentrates suitable for iron making can be produced simultaneously with the higher extractions of nickel and cobalt by using the proposed method. This work was financially supported by the