Coronoid process fractures are common in traumatic elbow injuries and can lead to significant elbow instability. With extensive fracture comminution, few options exist for reconstruction. The olecranon tip, being morphologically similar to the coronoid, may be a suitable option for reconstruction. In this study, we evaluate the morphology, suitability and biomechanics of an olecranon tip transfer procedure for type III coronoid fractures. Twelve fresh-frozen cadaveric elbows were tested in this study. All soft tissues were removed, leaving the collateral ligaments intact. The coronoid process was osteotomized to create a type III fracture model and subsequently reconstructed using the appropriate amount of olecranon process. The elbows were mounted on a custom jig on an MTS load frame and an axial load of 100N was applied to the elbows at 15mm/min in 15-degree intervals from 0 to 120 degrees of flexion. Posterior ulnohumeral displacement was obtained using crosshead motion data in each of 3 configurations: 1. Intact coronoid 2. Osteotomized coronoid 3. Olecranon transfer. Elbow range of motion was compared between the intact and reconstructed states. A paired t-test was used to compare differences in posterior displacement between the osteotomized and reconstructed states. The olecranon graft provided a precise anatomic fit in all specimens, and all reconstructed specimens had full range of motion. Intact translation (mean ± SD) ranged from 0.3 ± 0.1 mm to 1.1 ± 0.6 mm, and translation in the osteotomized state ranged from 1.3 ± 1.0 mm to 2.0 ± 1.0 mm. Resection of the coronoid resulted in a significant increase in posterior ulnar translation compared with intact at all flexion angles except 75 degrees. Reconstruction decreased translation versus the osteotomized state to some extent at all flexion angles, significantly at 60 and 120 degrees of flexion. There was no significant difference in translation between reconstructed and intact states at 15, 45, 60, 90, and 120 degrees of flexion. Reconstruction of a simulated type III coronoid fracture with an osteochondral olecranon tip autograft decreased posterior ulnar translation to a level not different from the intact state at five of eight elbow positions tested. A decrease in translation compared with the osteotomized state was observed at all flexion positions. The olecranon graft provided a continuous osteochondral articular surface, and all reconstructed specimens had full range of motion.