Objective
                  The objective of this in vitro study was to assess the effect of several chelating agents on the mineral content of root dentin.
               
                  Study design
                  Extracted human mandibular incisor roots were prepared and divided into groups according to the following irrigation protocols: 1) 17% ethylenediaminetetraacetic acid (EDTA); 2) 10% citric acid solution; 3) 18% etidronate; 4) 2.25% peracetic acid; 5) and deionized water (control). Dentin chips were obtained (Gates-Glidden nos. 3, 4, and 5). The levels of different minerals were analyzed with the use of inductively coupled plasma-atomic emission spectrometry (ICP-AES).
               
                  Results
                  1) Peracetic acid significantly decreased P, K, Mg, Na, and S levels compared with the other groups (P < .05). 2) S decreased by different levels in all of the chelating solutions (P < .05), and the greatest decrease was observed in peracetic acid. 3) Ca levels significantly decreased in peracetic acid, citric acid, and EDTA (P < .05). 4) Mn levels significantly decreased in the citric acid and peracetic acid groups (P < .05). 5) Na and Zn levels significantly decreased in the peracetic acid, citric acid, and etidronate groups (P < .05).
               
                  Conclusions
                  The chelation agents can create different effects on mineral contents of root dentin, so it is important to know what effects each solution will have on root dentin before their clinical use. In addition, according to the results of this in vitro study, it might be recommended that peracetic acid, in particular, should be used with caution.Root canal treatment is a series of procedures in which the goals include the disinfection and sealing of the root canal system. After canal enlargement using reamers and files, the dentin surface is covered with a smear layer, which has an amorphous, irregular, and granular aspect and is composed of inorganic material (dentin chips containing hydroxyapatite) and organic material (necrotic or vital pulp tissue, odontoblastic remnants, coagulated proteins, blood cells, nerve fibers, collagen, tissular fluid, saliva, bacteria, and their by-products). For smear layer removal, a chemical chelating solution together with sodium hypochlorite should be used. Dentin consists of both organic and inorganic components. The calcium present in hydroxyapatite (Ca Ethylenediaminetetraacetic acid (EDTA) and citric acid are probably the most frequently used chelating agents for that purpose today. The aim of the present in vitro study was, therefore, to assess the effect of several chelating agents (17% EDTA, 10% citric acid, 18% etidronate, and 2.25% peracetic acid) on the mineral content of root canal dentin using inductively coupled plasma-atomic emission spectrometry (ICP-AES) as the analytical method. Sixty human mandibular anterior teeth that had been recently extracted for periodontal reasons were used. The teeth were placed in saline solution, and the soft tissue covering the root surface was removed with curettes. The teeth were decoronated using a high-speed diamond disk with a cooling system. The pulp tissue was extirpated using a barbed broach, and the working length was established by inserting a #10 K-file (Mani, Tochigi Ken, Japan) into each root canal until it was just visible at the apical foramen and then subtracting 1 mm from that distance. The root canals were enlarged with K-files (MAF #35) and then Gates-Glidden burs (nos. 1, 2, and 3). During preparation, the root canals were irrigated with 2 mL deionized water at each file change. Root canals were rinsed with 5 mL deionized water to remove possible dentin chips. After cleaning and shaping, the apical foramen was sealed with composite resin to keep the test solutions inside the root canal, and specimens were randomly divided into 5 groups to test the following solutions (n = 12 per group): Group 1: 5 mL 17% EDTA (pH 7.7; Merck, Darmstadt, Germany) Group 2: 5 mL 10% citric acid (pH 2; Merck) Group 3: 5 mL 18% etidronate (pH 10.5; Zschimmer and Schward, Burgstadt, Germany) Group 4: 5 mL 2.25% peracetic acid (pH 2.5; Merck) Group 5 (control): 5 mL of deionized water All of the solutions were prepared in the research laboratory of the Faculty of the Dentistry, University of Selcuk, Konya, Turkey, and used within 24 hours. All of the irrigating solutions were introduced into the canal with the use of stainless steel 30-gauge needles (KerrHawe, Bioggio, Switzerland). The needle was placed within 1-2 mm of the working length in each canal. Each solution remained in the root canal for 5 minutes (1 mL/min). The root canals were finally irrigated with 2 mL of deionized water for 1 minute to remove any precipitate that might have formed. The canals were dried with sterile paper points (Dentsply-Maillefer, Ballaigues, Switzerland). A test method similar to that previously reported by Secilmis et al. All decalcification procedures were carried out on the same day at the same room temperature, because an increase in temperature accelerates the demineralization process. The levels of 8 elements—calcium (Ca), phosphorus (P), potassium (K), magnesium (Mg), sodium (Na), sulfur (S), manganese (Mn), and zinc (Zn)—in each specimen were measured by ICP-AES. The differences in mineral content between the groups were analyzed with 1-way analysis of variance and the comparison of means with Duncan tests.  Peracetic acid significantly decreased P, K, Mg, Na, and S levels of root dentin compared with the other groups ( It has been important to test the effect of irrigation solutions on all dentin tissues, because contact might occur during irrigation procedures. Earlier studies showed that irrigating solutions significantly change the mineral content of root dentin. In the current study, we evaluated the mineral contents of root canal dentin that were treated with different chelating agents using ICP-AES. Conventional (EDTA and citric acid) and nonconventional solutions (etidronate and peracetic acid) were used. Zehnder et al. In the present study, peracetic acid significantly decreased P, K, Mg, Na and S levels of root dentin compared with the other groups ( In addition to Ca and P, small amounts of Mg and S that have been detectable in the mineralized tissues have been considered to influence the mineralization process. At the present time, there has been little knowledge regarding the role of K, which is present intercellularly. Trace metal concentrations in teeth are most often determined by bulk techniques, in which whole teeth or some portion of enamel or dentin is digested in a suitable mineral acid. It must be kept in mind that in the present study, the mineral contents before treatment in the same samples were not determined. Because the teeth were collected from patients at random, the mineral content most likely was different for all teeth, which made it unlikely that all groups of teeth were equivalent before treatment. Therefore, the results may have varied between groups owing to the original content of dentin. Nevertheless, in the present study, similar-number teeth to the experimental groups were used as control samples. In addition, in other methods used to assess the mineral content of root dentin, such as x-ray fluorescence spectrometry analysis, scanning electron microscopy, and energy dispersive spectrometry, the mineral content of dentin was not established before treatment; therefore, we used a control group. It has been recommended to combine the chelating agents with an NaOCl solution, because no single irrigation solution has been capable of dissolving organic remnants and predentin or demineralizing the inorganic calcified portion of the root canal wall. However, earlier investigations have shown that the combined use of irrigating solutions decreases the effectiveness of chelating agents and might heighten the destruction of the dentinal surface. There has been a debate regarding the ideal time-effect of each chelating agent. Even with the vast amount of research on the topic, no clearly defined irrigation protocol has been established. There have been disagreements regarding the ideal chelator and the application time. The amount of time these solutions stay in contact with the canal walls has reportedly varied from 1 to 15 minutes. In conclusion, the results obtained under the experimental conditions of this study provided evidence that chelation agents may create different effects on the mineral content of root dentin. Therefore, it is important to know how each solution affects the root dentin before clinically using them. In addition, we recommend that peracetic acid, in particular, should be used with caution. However, further in vivo and in vitro studies are required to confirm the findings obtained in this study.