Mechanochemical effects of ZnO powders in a wet grinding system were characterized by the changes of ZnO particle micrograph, crystal structure, surface group, and water solubility during the grinding process. In addition, the Williamson–Hall formula was used to show the trend of changes in ZnO crystal size and lattice deformation. The results suggested that in a wet grinding system, the primary function of mechanical power was to prompt formation of crystal defects on ZnO rather than reduction in crystal size of ZnO. The mechanical grinding activated ZnO particles, decreased the binding energy between Zn and O, improved the solubility of ZnO, and formed more associating hydroxyls. As the concentration of Zn2+ in solution increased to a certain level, recrystallization of ZnO might take place. Both crystal size and lattice deformation of ZnO showed fluctuation under the combined action of recrystallization and formation of crystal defects.Mechanochemistry refers to reactions, normally of solids, induced by the input of mechanical energy, such as by grinding in ball mills ( Zinc oxide (ZnO), with a crystal structure of wurtzite, has a wide range of applications including functional devices, catalysts, pigments, optical materials, cosmetics, UV-absorbers and additives in many industrial products ( Most of the abovementioned studies were conducted under dry-grinding conditions. Basic studies on the effects of ZnO mechanochemistry in a wet super-fine grinding system were rarely mentioned in recent years. In comparison to drying milling, catalysts obtained by mechanochemical treatment of Ca(OH) The material used was ZnO purchased from Dalian ZnO manufactory with a purity of 99.6%. It has a relatively uniform particle size distribution with a mean particle size of 200–300 The mechanochemical treatment was performed in a GSDM-003 wet grinding mill with a mixing rotor of 50 The mean particle size of raw ZnO was 200–300 The concentrations of Zn ZnO had good cleavage on (101) and (001) crystal faces. The peak intensities of (101) and (102) crystal faces decreased persistently as grinding time increased ( Crystal size and lattice deformation of ZnO ground at different accumulative time periods were calculated with the Williamson–Hall approach using the Jade 5.0 XRD analysis software. Williamson–Hall plots can be applied to a Gaussian profile ( A slight increase in crystal size was notice after 3–4 Similar to SEM observations and XRD analyses, the FTIR spectra of raw ZnO, and ZnO ground for 3 and 6 The XPS patterns of O In addition, the atomic concentrations of Zn and O on the surface of ZnO particle were about 2/3 and 7/18, respectively, based on XPS data analyses. The reduction of the binding energy of O On the basis of analysis of mechanochemistry of ZnO in the wet super-fine grinding system, the following conclusions could be drawn: The mechanical force could be mainly applied for prompting formation of ZnO crystal defects in wet grinding system, that is, the mechanical force activated the surface of ZnO powder, decreased the binding energy between Zn and O, and increased the solubility of ZnO. As a consequence, when the concentration of Zn By mechanical grinding, partial mechanical energy was converted into surface energy stored in ZnO particles, which eventually activated ZnO particles. There were more associating hydroxyls formed on the surface of activated ZnO particles after super-fine grinding in a wet system.