The consideration that the mass discontinuities of brittle materials statistically present fractal behavior makes available a new approach to the elucidation of crushing and grinding process.
                  Through crushing and grinding experiments of characteristics brittle materials, the breakage distribution function (particle size distribution of products of a single breakage event) is defined as the sum of two distinct distribution (fragments and dust).
                  The breakage distribution function follows a geometric dimensional scale and is depending on two new statistical characteristics constants of the material.
                  Entering the number of breakage events, as the independent variable of the aforementioned function, a theoretical model of grinding process is formulated.
                  The application of the theoretical model in any given size reduction process allows the definition of the process breakage probability distributions function and thus the theoretical model can be transformed to an actual simulation model of the process.
                  The reliability of the new approach in describing the evolution of particle size distribution during the crushing or grinding was evaluated by its application in characteristics experimental and industrial installations.Research on the nature of fracture resulted in the distribution of discontinuities, which exists in the mass of brittle materials, determines the evolution of their size reduction process For most commonly comminuted materials elastic behavior predominates over plastic behavior until particle sizes reach below 30 μm and in the case of limestone below about 10 μm Moreover, modeling of particle fracture according to continuum damage mechanics theory – in which the inelastic behavior is solely due to the presence of growing microcracks – shows that damage accumulation is very limited and breakage can be described by Griffith's model for materials of high brittleness The characteristic feature of mass discontinuities of various materials is complexity; but statistically discontinuities follow certain laws and thus the network of discontinuities presents fractal behavior Certain known qualities of materials indicate the fractal behavior of mass discontinuities such as: The same material, ground in equipment of the same type, produces geometrically similar particles. In the expressions of surface and volume of particles The surface shape factor The experiments aimed at the study of the breakage distribution function (crushing tests) Series of tests were performed on slow loading rate compression of a single specimen fracture. In each series were included 30 specimens of the same material having about the same mass. The materials were limestone (in series of 5 g, 15 g, 25 g, 35 g, 45 g), sandstone, shale and clinker (in series of 15 g, 25 g, 35 g). Batch comminution tests of limestone and clinker were performed in laboratory Ball Mill (BM) and in Hardgrove grindability machine (HG). The feed material was of the same quality as in the crushing tests and was prepared in a laboratory jaw crusher (minus 5 mm size). Three grinding tests per material were conducted using the BM, while one grinding test per material was conducted by means of the HG (8 tests in total). In the case of the ball mill, three different charge compositions of grinding media were used. During each test, samples were taken at regular time intervals for the particle size distribution calculation. The main observations while conducting both types of tests were: Crushing tests: Right after the application of pressure, fractures occurred locally on the points of contact between the specimen and the plates of the press resulting in dust production, deriving from the activation of small dimension discontinuities. At first the minimum dimension discontinuities were activated and this process evolved until a certain dimension, which depended on the specimen size and the material. As the stress was increased and applied to the mass of the specimen sudden breakage occurred due to another activation, starting from the largest dimension discontinuities and resulting to fragment production, having a total mass of 80% to 95% of the initial specimen. The description of the fracture process leads to the assumption that particle size reduction progresses by, at least, two basic actions. One action is due to local application of forces, mainly on the surface of the specimen that produces dust. The other is due to stresses that are raised inside the specimen mass and produce fragments Grinding tests: Size reduction of the material, where the particle distribution is driven sequentially to the lower dimensions, that represents the fragments' crushing and the parallel production of dust. At the later stages of the process the fragments become so fine that the differences from dust are minimized and the particle size distribution appears as a continuous probability distribution ( Until the later stages the description of the particle size distribution is a complex problem that cannot be formulated by a continuous probability distribution function. The main reason is the dependence of the breakage probability on the material particle size. The treatment of the test results was separated in two parts: In the study of fragments breakage distribution based on the crushing experiments. In the examination of dust breakage distribution based on the fractal behavior of the material mass discontinuities and the grinding experiments. Due to the two distributions overlapping in the dust size range, the experimentally calculated parameters can be used only as approximations of real values. More accurate estimation of these values can be achieved by the grinding test simulation, which will be presented in For the same reason in each specimen's fracture the fragments, of which the volume were big enough and out of the probable range of dust grains, were selected to contribute to the fragment distribution approximation (practically maximum 6 fragments per fracture). The selected fragments of the crushing experiments were classified in order of their mass. Their class was characterized by the ratio of the fragment mass to the mass of the initial specimen ( Finally for every fragments classis and for all series of each material, the average of the fraction is the independent variable of fragments function (classes of mass or volume) is a constant coefficient dependent of the material and is the successive fragments volume ratio ( According to the fragments classification from higher to lower ratio and the observation on the fragments production the shape of the formula In order to simplify the formula The substitution Finally substituting The formulae Moreover the above precondition leads to the assumption that the dust distribution derived from the fracture of a specimen will be geometrically similar to the fragments distribution (having the same shape at different particle size ranges), as a result of the mass discontinuities activation at two different scales. The assumption's validity will be justified in During the grinding process the dependence of the breakage probability on the particles size transforms the particle size distribution forms. Thus the observations on the differences between fragment and dust distributions are more representative at the first stage of grinding and in the case of BM when using the coarser grinding media load. Consequently for the description of dust distribution two tests of grinding time of 2 min for limestone and another two tests of grinding time of 5 min for clinker were examined. Considering that the particles of the selected tests were constituted of fragments and dust, each particle size distribution is separated approximately in two distributions, according to the trend of the fragments' curve towards the fine range and inversely ( In As a result of the above, if The particle size distribution In accordance to the way fragments classes have been defined in Furthermore in the range, where fragments and dust obtain the same size, formula According to formula If the initial piece size According to the aforementioned after the fracture of a piece, of initial size From the formulae Formula Formula The examination has until now denoted that the real independent variable scale of particles size distributions is a geometric progression size scale with ratio Moreover when a size reduction steps (SRS) scale is applied, having dimensions ratio between successive steps equal to the characteristic material constant The density probability distribution of the fragments of a single fracture event (formula In order to formulate the complete products differential distribution of a single fracture event, the dust and the fragments distributions must be summed. Dust size distribution is determined in respect to the grinding experiments, which result that dust distribution is geometrically similar to the fragments' distribution and the distance between them according to formula Thus the differential distribution of products of a single fracture event BD′ (Breakage Distribution) subdivides into two distinct parts where: Only fragments appear ( Fragments and dust appear ( The value of Supposing that in a repeated fractures process, all fragments break in each single fracture exactly like the initial piece, the differential distribution of fragments With the addition of the dust (for Since the determination of the sum in formula The values of With this transformation for The Characteristic forms of GD′ are presented in Moreover the characterization of materials as “easy to crush and hard to grind” like clinker, or the opposite like hard limestone, can be justified based on the The GD′ distribution is a mathematical model of the grinding process, having as parameters the material constants Actually these conditions do not constitute a problem in the size reduction processes simulations, if GD′ is applied per short time stage of the process (it is prerequisite for approximate constant breakage probabilities) and per fraction of granulometry. The values of In order to evaluate the GD′ distribution reliability, each one of the 8 grinding tests was simulated according to the above. The materials constants Limestone: The breakage probability distributions functions ( The method was applied again to achieve the best-fit approximation between particle size distribution measurements and the simulation computations, by a new estimation of The differential distributions were preferred, since they describe the particle size granulometry more precisely than the cumulative distributions. A total of 62 particle size differential distributions at different stages of the 8 grinding experiments were examined ( The Limestone: Clinker: Limestone: Clinker: Regarding to the In addition to the experimental process simulations the GD′ distribution has already being applied to industrial size reduction process simulations in the following cases: Cement grinding in open circuit cement Ball Mill ( Clinker pre-grinding in Roller Press Rhyolite crushing in Impact Crusher. Rhyolite crushing in Roll Crusher. The approximation of the industrial measurements by the simulation calculations was in the same accuracy range as in the grinding tests. According to the fractal behavior of the brittle materials mass discontinuities and the experimental results, three main principles related to the crushing product sizes are concluded: During the breakage of a piece forces are applied at certain points on its surface, where they start producing dust (fine material) and then break the main mass of the piece into fragments (pieces smaller than the original). The fragments present a statistical constant size ratio between successive fragments. The same ratio stands for the successive dust particles. This ratio that can be defined experimentally is a characteristic constant of the material. The size ratio between the fragments and dust particles of the same order can be defined experimentally and is also a statistical constant characteristic of the material. A general mathematical model of the evolution of particle size distribution during the size reduction process is formulated. The model is based on the above principles and the two aforementioned statistical constant characteristics. In actual situation applications the model, in combination with the breakage probability distributions functions, is able to provide accurate process simulations in accordance with the nature of the phenomena.