The treatment of tibial plafond fractures is challenging and often is complicated by the compromise of the anterior ankle soft-tissue envelope and a high degree of fracture comminution. Many of these injuries are nonreconstructable and posttraumatic osteoarthritis of the tibiotalar joint is unavoidable. These patients may benefit from a salvage procedure using a posterior blade plate fusion of the tibiotalar joint. This procedure avoids the compromised anterior ankle soft-tissue envelope and allows simultaneous reconstruction of the metaphyseal defect as well as fusion of the tibiotalar joint. Indications include the acute treatment of severely comminuted tibial plafond fractures that appear nonreconstructable, management of posttraumatic tibiotalar osteoarthritis that is associated with significant compromise of the anterior ankle soft tissue envelope, and salvage of distal metaphyseal nonunions or delayed unions that are associated with posttraumatic tibiotalar osteoarthritis. We suggest posterior blade plate fusion as a standard procedure for these patient populations. Further clinical trials are required to investigate the clinical long-term outcomes in these patients.Tibial plafond fractures often are associated with severe articular destruction, loss of the joint surface, soft-tissue damage, and metaphyseal bone loss. In many cases, the anatomy of the ankle joint is not reconstructable, and subsequent posttraumatic osteoarthritis of the tibiotalar joint is unavoidable. The treatment of these patients remains challenging, and an arthrodesis of the ankle joint is a frequent outcome. Various surgical techniques to perform an ankle arthrodesis have been described, including compression techniques using plate fixation or lag screw fixation, arthroscopic arthrodesis, external fixation, retrograde intramedullary nailing, and condylar blade plate fusion. Selection of the surgical technique should be based on the underlying disorder. As a general rule, external fixators are preferred for patients undergoing arthrodesis for a preexisting septic joint and for those with severe osteopenia. Arthroscopic arthrodesis or the mini-open arthrodesis should be used only for patients with minimal deformity. Retrograde intramedullary nailing requires fusion of the subtalar joint. Open arthrodesis is appropriate for patients with significant ankle deformity and foot and ankle misalignment. However, open arthrodesis of the ankle joint often is complicated by the compromised soft-tissue envelope. In particular, the soft tissue in the anterior portion of the ankle may be compromised by the initial injury and previous surgical procedures, which often limits the use of standard anterior or lateral surgical approaches for the ankle arthrodesis. This treatment dilemma can be addressed by the use of an angled, blade-plate inserted through a posterior approach, as reported by Gruen and Mears in 1991. The aim of this article is to describe the posterior blade plate technique as a salvage procedure in patients with nonreconstructable tibial plafond fractures, distal tibial nonunions, and posttraumatic osteoarthritis of the tibiotalar joint with a compromised soft-tissue envelope. The surgical procedure is performed under general anesthesia. Previously placed external fixators or skeletal traction pins are removed after induction of anesthesia. The patient is placed on the operating table in a prone position. A pneumatic tourniquet is applied around the upper thigh of the operative leg to minimize the blood loss during the surgery. The surgical area includes the ipsilateral posterior iliac crest to obtain cancellous bone graft. The 2 surgical fields are prepped and draped in a standard fashion. A standard iliac crest bone graft harvesting procedures is performed. If 2 surgical teams are available, the bone graft can be harvested while the other surgical team is proceeding with the approach to the ankle joint. A modified posterior approach to the ankle joint and tibia is used as described by Gruen and Mears. In most situations, a repair of a tibial plafond fracture or nonunion is required, which can be addressed during this part of the procedure by appropriate fracture alignment and bone grafting of the defect if necessary. Alignment and position can be assessed and adjusted, as needed, with the aid of intraoperative fluoroscopy. Obtaining the appropriate joint alignment is crucial for a satisfactory clinical outcome. The optimal postoperative position of the affected foot and ankle joint can be obtained by placing the heel in up 5° of valgus, externally rotating the ankle by 5°, and displacing the talus slightly posteriorly, with the ankle joint in neutral flexion. A 52-year-old pilot lost control of his plane, which then crashed to the ground. He was seen at an outside hospital where he had multiple procedures performed for his injuries, which consisted of retrograde intramedullary nailing of a right closed comminuted femoral midshaft fracture, open reduction and internal fixation of a right closed bimalleolar ankle fracture, and external fixation of a left closed comminuted tibial plafond fracture. The patient also had a traumatic brain injury with subarachnoid hemorrhage that was treated nonoperatively. The patient’s past medical history was noncontributory. Past surgical history included and L4-5 diskectomy 9 years ago. The patient does not smoke or drink and he does not take any home medications. The patient was referred to our level 1 trauma center after the initial treatment. His radiographs showed a severely comminuted misaligned nonreconstructable left distal tibia fracture that had been treated in a delta frame external fixator ( Given the severity of the patient’s distal tibia fracture, it was felt that the distal tibial articular surface was nonreconstructable, and informed consent was obtained for a tibiotalar fusion. The external fixator was removed and the patient placed into a short leg cast as a staged procedure. Three weeks after removal of the external fixator, the pin sites were pristine, and the patient was taken to the operating room for a tibiotalar fusion and correction of the malunion of the distal tibia. The deformity was approached through a posterior approach. We performed tibial osteotomy to correct the tibial deformity. Iliac crest bone graft was used to fill the metaphyseal defect. The tibiotalar fusion and fixation of the distal tibia was accomplished with a 14-hole, 4.5-mm 95° blade plate (Synthes, Paoli, PA). After the cartilage surfaces of the distal tibia and talus were removed, the surfaces were compressed and more iliac crest bone graft was placed between the two. Wounds were closed over a drain in a layered fashion. Postoperative radiographs showed the fracture to be well aligned and appropriate position of the implant ( Tibial plafond fractures often result from high-energy trauma and often are associated with loss of metaphyseal bone, high comminution, articular destruction, and severe soft-tissue damage. The treatment of these injuries often is associated with a prolonged course of treatment and multiple complications. Tibial plafond fractures with nonreconstructable joint surfaces secondary to bone loss or destruction of the articular surface commonly require a surgical arthrodesis to obtain painless weight bearing of the injured extremity and satisfactory clinical outcomes. An important treatment goal in these patients should be to achieve an early fusion of the tibiotalar joint to shorten the rehabilitation period and to allow an early return to activities of daily living. However, commonly used arthrodesis techniques using lag screw fixation or retrograde intramedullary nailing are difficult to perform in the presence of a metaphyseal defect because an adequate bone stock is required for the fixation. One method to address this problem is a staged reconstruction in which the metaphyseal defect is first addressed, followed by tibiotalar arthrodesis once metaphyseal union has been achieved. To decrease the treatment time associated with staged reconstruction, various investigators have addressed the problem using simultaneous arthrodesis of the ankle joint and reconstruction of the metaphyseal defect in a single procedure, such as the blade plate fusion. Various ankle arthrodesis techniques have been described in the literature. The most commonly performed techniques include open compression techniques using plate fixation or lag screw fixation, arthroscopic arthrodesis, external fixation, retrograde intramedullary nailing, and condylar blade plate fusion. Given these circumstances, posterior blade plate fusion of the tibiotalar joint has been suggested as a useful technique in patients after high-energy tibial plafond fractures. Reports in the literature on the clinical outcome after posterior blade plate fusion of the ankle are limited. Gruen and Mears We conclude that the treatment of tibial plafond fractures is challenging and often is complicated by the compromise of the anterior ankle soft-tissue envelope and a high degree of fracture comminution. Many of these injuries are nonreconstructable, and posttraumatic osteoarthritis of the tibiotalar joint is unavoidable. These patients may benefit from a salvage procedure using a posterior blade plate fusion of the tibiotalar joint. This procedure avoids the compromised anterior ankle soft-tissue envelope, allows simultaneous reconstruction of the metaphyseal defect as well as fusion of the tibiotalar joint, and provides sufficient axial and rotational stability. Indications include the acute treatment of severely comminuted tibial plafond fractures that appear nonreconstructable, management of posttraumatic tibiotalar osteoarthritis that is associated with significant compromise of the anterior ankle soft-tissue envelope, and salvage of distal metaphyseal nonunions or delayed unions that are associated with posttraumatic tibiotalar osteoarthritis. In our experience, satisfactory clinical outcomes can be obtained in these selected indications, and we suggest posterior blade plate fusion as a standard procedure for these patient populations. Further clinical trials are required to investigate the clinical long-term outcomes in these patients.