Inhibition of dendrite growth in all-solid-state lithium batteries (ASSLBs) has long been a challenge to the field. In the present study, the conditions for dendrite growth for a similar but less mature technology, all-solid-state sodium batteries (ASSNBs), are investigated. By simply sticking sodium metal to Na3.4Zr2(SiO4)2.4(PO4)0.6 (NZSP) ceramic pellets and without applying external pressure during operation, the critical current density of Na/NZSP/Na symmetric ASSNBs reaches 9 mA cm−2 at 25 °C. The cells can be stably operated at an areal capacity of 5 mAh cm−2 (per half cycle, with 1.0 mA cm−2) at 25 °C for 300 h in a galvanostatic cycling measurement without any dendrite formation. The results outperform the existing ASSLBs and ASSNBs, and also go beyond satisfying the requirements for practical applications. The influence of the high metal self-diffusion coefficient on the dendritic plating/stripping is regarded as the most likely reason for the high dendrite tolerance of ASSNBs. A mathematical model based on Fick's second law was applied as a first approximation to illustrate this influence. Full ASSNBs were fabricated with infiltrated Na3V2(PO4)3 (NVP) as the cathode and can be stably operated with a capacity of 0.60 mAh cm−2 at high rate of 0.5 mA cm−2 at room temperature.Among commercialized energy-storage systems, Li-ion batteries (LIBs) have gained worldwide acceptance in various market segments because of their high energy density, efficiency and long cycle life. They are also regarded as promising stationary energy-storage systems for fluctuating energy sources, such as solar and wind power, the future energy solutions of mankind [ Besides the increasing demand of critical resources for battery production, the market requirements necessitate a significant increase in the energy density of batteries to satisfy the steadily growing electrical energy consumption. One intensively explored trend in battery research is the use of solid-state electrolytes in e.g. all-solid-state Li-batteries (ASSLBs) or all-solid-state Na-batteries (ASSNBs), which have the potential to compete the energy density of the very mature conventional LIBs [ Very recent investigations point out that the morphological conformity of the metal/solid electrolyte interface (both during metal dissolution in a discharge process and electroplating in the charging cycle), and the steady state flow of metal ions between the current collectors through the bulk battery components and the interfaces, are the key prerequisites for stable dendrite-free battery operation [ Only recently, a few studies started to contemplate the relationship between the self-diffusion of metal electrodes and dendrite formation in ASSLBs. Krauskopf et al. correlated the formation of dendrites with self-diffusion of lithium metal and identified the vacancy diffusion coefficient in lithium metal as a fundamental physico-chemical limitation of the lithium metal anode under anodic load [ In the present study we demonstrate that the symmetric cells assembled with metallic Na as anode in combination with NaSICON-type solid electrolyte Na NZSP powder was synthesized on a laboratory scale (10 g–1 kg per batch) using a solution-assisted solid-state reaction method (SA-SSR). NaNO NZSP powder was put into a cylindrical pressing mold with the diameter of 13 mm and pressed with a uniaxial pressure of 100 MPa at room temperature. The green density of the as-pressed pellet is about 50% of the theoretical density of NZSP (the theoretical density of NZSP is 3.29 g cm Na-metal sheets were attached to NZSP pellets by mechanical pressing with the force of about 1 kN (~12 MPa). The thickness of the Na-metal electrode is 0.5–1 mm. All electrochemical tests of the Na/NZSP/Na symmetric cells were carried out inside Swagelok cells. No extra pressure was applied during cell testing. The impedance spectra of the Na/NZSP/Na symmetric cells were measured at 25 °C using a commercial electrochemical system (Biologic VMP-300), with an AC frequency range from 3 MHz to 1 Hz, and fitted with the software “Z-view” (Scribner Associates Inc.). The current-voltage behavior of the cells was tested using an electrochemical system (Biologic VMP-300) with controlled temperature in a climate chamber (Vötsch, VT4002). Part of the NZSP powder was mixed with 10 wt % rice starch. The mixture and pure NZSP powder were put into a cylindrical pressing mold (diameter 13 mm) layer by layer, and then pressed. The pressed pellets were sintered in air at 1280 °C for 6 h to produce the dense-porous bi-layered NZSP pellets. NVP precursor solution was made by mixing ethanolamine (Merck), citric acid (Merck), de-ionized H The pellets were then heat treated at 740 °C in Ar-4%H During the operation or testing of all the cells in this work, no external pressure was applied. The resistance of a typical Na/NZSP/Na symmetric cell was investigated by impedance spectroscopy. The critical current density (CCD) of a symmetric ASSNB cell was characterized by DC cycling analysis at 25 °C, where CCD is defined as the lowest current density at which cell short-circuiting occurs due to metal penetration. Typical CCD behavior of the Na/NZSP/Na symmetric ASSNB is shown in Typical galvanostatic cycling behavior of a Na/NZSP/Na symmetric ASSNB (initial total resistance: 49 Ω) operating at 25 °C is shown in The typical appearance of Na/NZSP/Na symmetric cells before and after cycling is shown in Based on the provided experimental evidence it can be asserted that the mechanism of short circuiting in NZSP-based ceramic cells with Na electrodes is different from that observed in the solid state cells with Li metal electrodes. Although the mechanism of this phenomenon is not investigated yet, it is possible that the more ductile sodium and faster surface diffusion of Na as compared to Li prevent the dendrite formation and are responsible for this effect. It should be mentioned that although the solid electrolyte/metal interface is very important for stable battery operation, it is not the only factor responsible for dendrite formation. For example, the interface resistance of the ASSLBs in Ref. 14 is similar to the present study (2 Ω cm During the galvanostatic cycling of SSBs with metal anodes, the transfer of metal ions into the solid electrolyte is motivated by electromotive force (which appears as current), while the replenishment of metal atoms in the metal is motivated by the self-diffusion. At the interface between the metal and ceramic, the flux of ions through the interface and the self-diffusion may have a mismatch, which might be the origin of the dendrite formation. Very recently, several groups started to perceive the relationship between metal self-diffusion and dendrite formation [ The above is solved as to Equation  The self-diffusion coefficient The above calculation is based on an “ideal” solid electrolyte, also with flawless interface with Na-metal, which is independent of any practical electrolyte and practical interfaces. To investigate the practical limit of areal capacity, constant direct-current (DC) polarization tests were applied to Na/NSZP/Na symmetric ASSNBs, as shown in  In the present study, we also prepared full battery cells to verify the realization of high performance cells. The ultimate goal of the current research is to develop ASSNBs which can be operated at high current density and high areal capacity without dendrite formation. For full cells, the preparation of the anodes is as simple as for symmetric cells, where sodium sheets were directly mechanically stuck to the NZSP ceramic. While the preparation of the cathode is based on an infiltration technique, where the cathode active material, Na In general, the dendrite formation is regarded as a result of point contacts between the metal anode and ceramic electrolyte [ Since Li and Na metals show a significant difference in the intrinsic property of the metal self-diffusion coefficient (5.1 × 10 In conclusion, a low interface resistance of 1.7 Ω cm  The authors declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this paper. The authors thank Dr. D. Sebold (IEK-1) and Dr. D. Grüner (IEK-2) for SEM investigations. Partial financial support from The following is the Supplementary data to this article: Supplementary data to this article can be found online at