Objective
                  Platelet-derived growth factor-BB (PDGF-BB) is one of the most abundant growth factors in platelet derived products and has been shown to stimulate regeneration after tissue injury. There is a population of mesenchymal stem cells (MSC) in human periodontal ligament (PDL) which can contribute to tissue regeneration under appropriate conditions.
               
                  Design
                  PDL cells were isolated and characterized using stem cell and differentiation markers via immunofluorescence and flow cytometry and then cultured in vitro and treated with different concentrations of PDGF-BB. The effect of PDGF-BB on cell proliferation, stem cell and differentiation markers expression, soluble collagen production, lysyl oxidase (LOX) activity, alkaline phosphatase (ALP) activity and calcium nodules formation was assessed.
               
                  Results
                  PDGF-BB stimulated the proliferation of cells with the maximum effect at 50ng/mL. The growth factor increased the expression of stem cell markers and SPARC; Col1a2 expression was decreased, whereas the expression of Col3a1 remain unchanged. Soluble collagen production, ALP activity and calcium nodules formation were also significantly decreased by PDGF-BB; LOX activity was significantly increased.
               
                  Conclusions
                  PDGF-BB is a powerful promoter of cell proliferation and increases the expression of stem cell markers; inhibites collagen production and mineraliration but accelerates the maturation of collagen chains through increased LOX activity and SPARC expression.Tooth periodontium consists of periodontal ligament (PDL), cementum, alveolar bone and gingiva. These soft and hard tissue components provide the tooth stability, nutrition and resistance to mastication. PDL is a specialized fibrous connective tissue located between the cementum, covering the tooth root and the alveolar bone ( Central to tissue engineering is the ability to regenerate naturally occurring structures using an appropriate combination of stem/progenitor cells, extracellular matrix (ECM) or biomaterials such as scaffolds and appropriate growth factors ( The presence of mesenchymal stem cells (MSC) in human PDL was first reported in 2004 by Cell proliferation, migration, differentiation and ECM synthesis are the main events providing tissue recovery regulated by the growth factors ( In recent years many clinicians apply autologous platelet derived products to enhance healing process and regeneration of PDL with mixed success. Growth factors contained in human platelets are crucial for blood clot formation and tissue regeneration ( The effect of PDGF on stem cell markers expression, enzymatic activity, ECM synthesis and mineralization in PDL, however, has not yet been fully elucidated. Transplantation of PDL derived stem cells could serve as a promising tool for regenerative therapy. The purpose of the present study is to determine the presence of cells in human PDL capable of expressing stem cell and differentiation markers and to determine the effect of PDGF-BB on cell proliferation, markers expression, collagen synthesis, enzymatic activity and mineralization. Research was approved by Ethics Committee of Medical University – Sofia, Bulgaria. Cells were obtained from intact surgically extracted third molars (n The medium was replaced every 2nd or 3rd day thereafter until a sub-confluent monolayer was established. Cell growth was monitored by phase contrast microscopy (Leica DMRE, Leica Microsystems GmbH, Germany). The cells were detached by trypsinization (0,05% trypsin/EDTA, (Lonza)) for 10–20 The experiments in the present study were mainly conducted in serum-free media. Cell culture medium was supplemented with 1% insulin-trasferrin-selenium (ITS) (Gibco Life Technologies Inc., Grand Island, NY, USA) as FBS substitute. The aim was to eliminate the influence of all active substances present in FBS that could confound the experiment. Recombinant human PDGF-BB (Santa Cruz, Santa Cruz, CA, USA) was dissolved in sterile filtered PBS supplemented with 0,1% bovine serum albumin (BSA) (Miltenyi Biotec, Bergisch Gladbach, Germany) to achieve 50 Expression of the following markers: CD49f, CD117, CD146, CD271, STRO-1, alkaline phosphatase (ALP), collagen type 1α2 (COL1a2), collagen type 3α1 (COL3a1) and osteonectin/Secreted protein acidic and rich in cysteine (SPARC) was assessed. Five thousand cells/cm At the end of the incubation period the cells were trypsinized, washed with PBS and blocked with 2% BSA-PBS for 15 Saturating levels of the following non-conjugated antibodies (1:250) (all Santa Cruz): mouse anti-human CD44, rabbit anti-human CD105, mouse anti-human COL1a2, mouse anti-human COL3a1 and mouse anti-human SPARC were used. Alexa Fluor 488-conjugated goat anti-mouse (1:1000) and Alexa Fluor 568-conjugated donkey anti-rabbit were used as secondary antibodies (1:1000) (Invitrogen). Cells were incubated with primary non-conjugated antibodies for 30 The following conjugated antibodies were used: rat anti-human CD49f conjugated with PE (1:1000) and mouse anti-human CD146 (FITC) (1:1000). Cells were incubated with primary conjugated antibodies for 20 Cells stained with directly conjugated CD4 – APC, CD4 – FITC, CD4 – PE antibodies (Beckman Coulter International SA) were used as negative controls (1:1000). Non-stained and cells incubated only with the primary antibody also served as negative controls. Flow cytometry analysis was conducted within 15–30 Human PDL cells were seeded at a density of 5000 Cells were cultured for 1 week in serum-free DMEM with 1% ITS, supplemented with 10 or 50 LOX activity in the culture medium and in newly formed ECM in the cell layer were individually measured after 1 week cultivation of PDL-derived cells in serum-free DMEM with 1% ITS and various concentrations of PDGF-BB, using a Lysyl Oxidase Activity Assay Kit (Abcam, Cambridge, UK), according to the manufacturer’s instructions. A standard curve was determined by using known concentrations of Recombinant Human Lysyl Oxidase Homolog 2 Protein (R&D Systems). Data were normalized against total lysate protein content determined via Bradford Reagent (Sigma – Aldrich). Fluorescence was assessed via microplate reader at Ex/Em Cells were cultured in serum-free DMEM with 1% ITS, supplemented with PDGF-BB at concentrations of 10 and 50 Alizarin Red S was used to detect calcium nodule formation in PDL-cell cultures after 3 weeks treatment with serum-free media supplemented with various concentrations of PDGF-BB. Fixed cells were incubated with 2 Each Immunofluorescent staining was performed to characterize the investigated PDL cell culture population, by the application of a panel with well-known specific antibodies associated with stem cell- and differentiation phenotype. Representative images are shown in We established the fluorescence profile of cells after immunostaining for the following markers: CD44, CD49f and CD105. All selected markers were found to be expressed by the cell culture ( We investigated the effect of PDGF-BB at a concentration of 50 To eliminate the effect of all active substances included in FBS, we examined the activity of various concentrations PDGF-BB added to a serum-free media on the cell proliferation rate. PDL cell cultures were treated for 48 ALP-activity in the culture medium and in the cell layer was investigated to determine osteoblastic cell differentiation after 1 week treatment with 10 and 50 Soluble collagen content in the PDL cell culture was measured after 1 week treatment in serum-free media supplemented with 10 and 50 LOX is an extracellular enzyme found to participate in the collagen cross-linking process. We investigated its activity in both the cell layer and supernatant of PDL cell culture. Cells were incubated with 1, 10, 50 and 100 Alizarin red staining is used as another method to determine osteogenic cell differentiation. Human PDL cells were cultured for 3 weeks with various concentrations of PDGF-BB. This period is necessary for calcium nodules formation. Results demonstrate a significant reduction in cellular calcium content in the presence of PDGF-BB but a concentration-dependent manner was not observed ( These findings are in line with the results of the ALP-activity assay and show that PDGF-BB added to the cell culture medium reduces cellular calcium content. Periodontitis is one of the most common oral bacterial infections in adults. It causes progressive destruction of the tooth supporting apparatus followed by tooth loss. Once lost, alveolar bone and PDL hardly regenerate spontaneously. Consequently, regeneration of periodontal structures could be accomplished following recruitment of locally derived MSC that are able to differentiate into various cells types upon stimulation. The presence stem/progenitor cells capable of supporting homeostasis and sustaining the regeneration of periodontal tissue represent a promising tool in facilitating stem cell based therapies aimed at regenerating damaged tissues as a result of trauma, cancer, infectious and degenerative disease. We isolated heterogeneous PDL cell culture and maintained it in standard cell culture conditions. There is no single unique stem cell marker currently known for the characterization of human PDL stem cells, therefore a combination of 2 or 3 markers should be used in order for the proper establishment of stem cells. For PDL cells cultures characterization we chose markers previously used for characterizing PDLs (STRO-1, CD44, CD105, etc.) ( The immunofluorescence revealed a pool of cells showing positive staining to the panel of stem cell markers. Flow cytometry proved our results showing 99,87% (±0,07%) of cells positive for CD44; 97,79% (±0,65%) for CD49f and 35,14% (±3,66%) for CD105 ( Apart from the stem cells, human PDL contains various cell types (fibroblasts, endothelial cells, bone-associated cells, cementoblasts, epithelial rests of Malassez, immune cells, cells associated with sensory system) with different functions. The heterogenenous cell culture investigated in the present study contains a mixed population of cells of distinct differentiation potential, hence we expected to find positive staining for markers related to collagen synthesis and mineralization along with the expression of stem cell markers. Fibrillar collagen is the major protein component of the ECM in PDL with collagen type I and type III represented in highest amount (∼75% and 20% respectively) ( SPARC is the most abundant non-collagenous glycoprotein in the extracellular space responsible for maintaining the balance between bone and ECM formation, turnover and resorption ( To identify the existence of cells associated with bone formation in the study we used ALP as mineralization marker. These non-collagenous proteins in ECM of human PDL are responsible for the regulation of bone metabolism. ALP is mainly used as an early marker for osteoblastic differentiation in the cell cultures. It is also expressed in MSC cultures. The positive expression of differentiation markers by human PDL cell culture reveals their ability to sustain ECM synthesis and turnover ( It is well known that a wide range of active molecules and growth factors is released locally to enhance the regeneration of damaged tissues after injury. One of these growth factors is PDGF. Of all the isoforms of this growth factor PDGF-BB shows optimal ability to accelerate mitogenesis and chemotaxis in PDL cell culture ( PDGF-BB is a major active molecule for cell cultures. Growth factors might have diverse effects on tissues depending on concentration applied. In our experiments we used 1 At first, we established the influence of PDGF-BB on the cell proliferation rate and found a dose-dependent increase with maximum effect at a concentration of 50 Culture medium containing 10% FBS actively stimulates the proliferation of PDL cells. For accurate assessment of the effect of growth factors on cell processes, optimal conditions that do not alter the cell survival or proliferation are needed ( We examined the effects of PDGF-BB on the expression of stem cell and differentiation markers via flow cytometry. Markers used in the experiment were CD105, CD146, COL1a2, Col3a1 and SPARC. The expression of CD105 and CD146 in PDL cells was increased by the growth factor from 31% The present study explored the effect of PDGF-BB on the total soluble collagen production in the ECM and COL1a2 and COL3a1 intracellular markers expression in human PDL cell culture. Results demonstrate that the growth factor at a concentration of 10  Another protein participating in collagen fiber formation is SPARC ( The results of cell proliferation rate and collagen synthesis tests have shown that higher concentrations of PDGF-BB can promote cell proliferation but down-regulate collagen synthesis whereby an inverse relationship is observed between the two. However, high concentrations of PDGF-BB considerably stimulate the maturation of collagen chains through increased SPARC expression and LOX activity enhancement. The results indicate that PDGF-BB shifts the equilibrium towards stabilization of existing extracellular collagen network combined with reduced One of the well-known properties of MSCs is the ability of osteogenic differentiation. It has been established that PDL contains cells with osteoblastic properties, capable of calcium nodules formation, expression of mineralization markers (ALP, BSPII, etc.) and influenced by osteinductive factors like hormones, insulin-like growth factor 1 (IGF-1), bone morphogenetic proteins (BMPs), transforming growth factor-TGF-beta 1 (TGF-β1), etc. ( The effect of PDGF-BB on ALP activity in PDL cells and change of cellular calcium concentration was revealed. The conducted functional tests are indicative enough to evaluate the mineralization process in the cell culture. A dose-dependent decrease in the ALP activity was observed in the present experiment. Both concentrations of the growth factor applied (10 and 50 We can conclude that PDGF-BB initiates self-renewal through maintainence cell proliferation and retaining stem cell properties on one hand, and inhibition abnormal mineralization in human PDL on the other. Our findings prove the presence of stem cells within human PDL together with cells capable of collagen synthesis and mineralization which is a significant indication that there are different cell populations responsible for the tissue homeostasis and regeneration of oral tissies such as bone, cementum and PDL. We focused on PDGF-BB as it is the most abundant growth factor in platelet derived products. Our results reveal the significant role of PDGF-BB on biological processes in human PDL as it stimulates cell proliferation and stemness. When it comes to collagen synthesis, PDGF-BB decreases collagen production in a concentration-dependent manner and initiates stabilization of collagen chains and the maturation of ECM. However, this growth factor decreases mineralization and might thus prevent the development of clinically important pathological processes in dental tissues like hypercymentosys and ankylosis. All these findings are significant for the potential therapeutic application of PDGF-BB, in particular with regard to periodontal regeneration. Research was approved by Ethics Committee of Medical University – Sofia, Bulgaria. All authors report no potential conflict of interest. The study was supported by Supplementary data associated with this article can be found, in the online version, at The following are Supplementary data to this article: