Background
                  Loss of motion is common after intercondylar fracture of the distal humerus despite proper management. The purpose of the current study was to report the results of contracture release for stiffness that developed after open reduction and internal fixation (ORIF) of distal humeral intercondylar fractures.
               
                  Methods
                  Twenty-four consecutive patients with a stiff elbow after ORIF of intercondylar fractures (20 AO type C2 and 4 type C3 fractures) were managed with contracture release at a median of 13 months. The surgical indication was total arc of motion of less than 100° despite physical therapy for more than 6 months. Plates and screws for ORIF were removed concomitantly in 16 patients. Each patient was evaluated by final arc of motion and Mayo Elbow Performance Score (MEPS).
               
                  Results
                  The main lesions causing stiffness were heterotopic ossification or excessive callus in 13 patients and capsular fibrosis in 11. The mean total range of motion (ROM) was improved from 60.2° preoperatively to 104.8° postoperatively. At the final follow-up, 17 of the 24 elbows (71.8%) obtained a total ROM of more than 100°. The mean MEPS improved from 69 points preoperatively to 87 points at the final follow-up (P < .05). Refracture occurred during ROM exercise in 4 patients who had undergone concomitant implant removal during the contracture release.
               
                  Conclusion
                  Surgical release of a stiff elbow that develops after ORIF of intercondylar fractures can result in satisfactory restoration of ROM in most patients. However, potential risk of refracture after release should be considered when implants are concomitantly removed.The treatment principle of intercondylar fracture of the distal humerus is to achieve stable anatomic reduction of the fracture and joint to allow early mobilization. However, this is often difficult to achieve, especially in patients with articular or metaphyseal comminution and associated soft tissue injuries or in elderly patients with osteoporosis. Open reduction and internal fixation (ORIF) of intercondylar fractures usually requires an extensive approach, including olecranon osteotomy or massive stripping of muscular structures. Loss of elbow motion arc is the most common sequela after ORIF of distal humeral fractures and is frequently observed even after optimal stable fixation and proper rehabilitation. Sanchez-Sotelo et al Elbow stiffness after surgical fixation of intercondylar fractures of the distal humerus can arise from a variety of causes, which are intrinsic or extrinsic or both, including incongruity or adhesions of the articular surface, capsular contractures, callus formation, heterotopic ossification, and prominent hardware. Medical records of patients who had undergone surgical release for elbow stiffness after ORIF of intercondylar fracture during the period from July 2001 to March 2008 were retrospectively reviewed. Surgical release was indicated when the total range of motion (ROM) was less than 100° despite physical therapy for at least 6 months after ORIF. The criteria for inclusion were (1) union of fracture as determined radiologically and clinically, (2) skeletally mature elbows, (3) normal anatomy and function before injury, and (4) congruent joint surface on plain radiographs and on computed tomography in suspected cases. Exclusion criteria were (1) stiffness due to malunion or loss of joint surfaces requiring osteotomy or arthroplasty or to (2) associated central nervous system injuries. Selected were 25 consecutive patients who satisfied the inclusion and exclusion criteria. No patient had skin or muscle contracture as the main features of stiffness. After additional exclusion of 1 patient who did not return to the clinic after the first postoperative visit, 24 patients (11 men, 13 women) were evaluated for the final results. The participants were a mean age of 38.8 years (range, 20-61 years). The mean time from ORIF to the contracture release was 26.1 months (range, 6-228 months). The dominant arm was involved in 10 patients. Two patients had an accompanying injury, which consisted of radial nerve palsy in one and wrist fracture in the other. The initial intercondylar fractures were classified as type C fractures of the distal humerus according to the AO/Orthopaedic Trauma Association classification. For the initial ORIF, transolecranon osteotomy was used in 17 patients and the posterior triceps-sparing approach in 7. The ulnar nerve was transpositioned concomitantly in 6 patients. Before their presentation to us, 6 patients underwent additional surgeries after the initial treatment, including 2 osteosyntheses for nonunion, 1 drainage for postoperative infection, 1 skin graft for skin defect, 1 ulnar nerve transposition for ulnar neuropathy, and 1 implant removal without any attempt at contracture release. The mean follow-up duration was 60.0 months (range, 24-135 months) after the index contracture release. Preoperative routine evaluation included biplanar radiographs (anteroposterior and lateral view of an involved elbow). Oblique views or computed tomography scans were obtained if there was any uncertainty about the union or mechanical block. Medical records covering more than 24 months were available for 10 patients. Fourteen patients who did not visit after 2 years postoperatively were interviewed by telephone. All patients had been discharged from our clinic after they obtained a plateau in ROM in the injured elbow. During the telephone interview, they stated that the ROM had not essentially changed since the last clinical visit. For those patients, we defined the final ROM as the arc of motion measured at the final clinical visit. The final outcomes were assessed by measuring the final flexion and extension arcs with a handheld goniometer positioned along the lateral aspect of the arm and forearm and centered on the lateral condyle of humerus. When patients required additional surgery for recurrent stiffness or any other complication, their final postoperative ROM (ie, their ROM at final follow-up after all surgical treatment and rehabilitation had been completed) was considered to be their final result in accordance with the intent-to-treat paradigm. The Mayo Elbow Performance Score (MEPS), which includes the evaluation of pain (maximum score, 45 points), motion (20 points), stability (10 points), and daily function (25 points), was used to assess the function of elbow before the operation and at the final follow-up. Contracture release was performed based on the general surgical approach for stiff elbows. Contracture release was initiated with a posterior capsulectomy. Excessive callus, spur, or heterotopic bone within the olecranon fossa and the olecranon tip that obscured the terminal extension was removed. A medial or lateral flap was developed to approach the anterior part of the elbow. On the medial side, the brachialis and the superior portion of the flexor-pronator muscles were elevated from the anterior surface of the humerus and the medial supracondylar ridge. The plane between the brachialis and the anterior aspect of the capsule was developed to address the anterior compartment. Even after the surgical release for all contributing factors, the elbow will need to be manipulated. It will take some force to stretch the remaining capsule and muscle contributing to stiffness. However, one should be careful not to push too hard, because the removal of bone, osteophyte, or implants can act as a stress riser. A guideline described in previous reports is that the surgeon should push only as hard as can be done with 2 fingers. At the end of the operation, all metal implants fixed during the previous fracture surgery were removed in 16 patients. The plate and screw were determined suitable for removal when (1) the time from the initial fracture surgery to the index surgery was long enough for the fracture to heal (at least 10 months after the fracture surgery), (2) preoperative radiographs showed solid union of the fracture, (3) and the patient wanted the metal removed during the contracture release to avoid an additional operation. Before wound closure, union of the fracture and elbow stability was assessed to ensure that all patients could initiate ROM exercises immediately. A long arm splint with the elbow in 90° of flexion was applied after the surgery. After removal of a drain (usually 2 to 4 days postoperatively), ROM exercise was started. Gentle passive flexion and extension exercise with an assistance of a continuous passive motion machine and active-assisted ROM exercise was performed 2 to 3 times daily for approximately 30 minutes. Continuous passive motion was routinely used for the initial 3 to 5 days for the purpose of easy initiation of the exercise and obtaining confidence for an improvement of ROM with exercise. A thermoplastic long arm removable brace was applied for protection postoperatively. In particular, when the implant was removed with surgical release of contracture, or when there was partial injury or attenuation of collateral ligamentous structures, the brace was applied for protection as long as 4 weeks (2 to 4 weeks) postoperatively. However, patients were permitted to remove the brace for motion exercise, eating, showering, and changing clothes, as tolerable. The rehabilitation program was individually tailored to each patient's operative findings (eg, concomitant collateral ligament repair, metal removal) and soft tissue status. ROM exercise usually continued for 2 to 6 months until the total ROM was not affected by the exercise. Improvement in arc of motion and MEPS were evaluated using paired The mean flexion contracture decreased significantly from 35.8° preoperatively to 14.2° (range, 0°-40°) postoperatively ( The mean MEPS improved from 69 points preoperatively to 87 points at the final follow-up evaluation ( The main lesions responsible for the development of stiffness were identified as mechanical block from heterotopic ossification or excessive callus in 11 patients. Excessive callus or spur was found at olecranon fossa, coronoid fossa, or fracture site in 6 patients. Heterotopic ossification was identified at olecranon fossa, posteromedial portion of the trochlea, or posterior and superior to the radiocapitellar joint in 5 patients. Implant for fracture fixation and some osteophyte formation was suspected to block the motion in addition to capsular fibrosis and adhesion in 2 patients. All patients with mechanical block were also regarded as having capsular fibrosis and scar adhesion. Capsular fibrosis and scar adhesion was considered as the pathology of contracture in the remaining patients who had no structures blocking motion. When we compared the mean final motion arc and MEPS between the patients with mechanical block and capsular contracture, no significant difference was noted (105° vs 104° and 86 vs 89, respectively). Among 16 patients who underwent concomitant implant removal during the contracture release, refracture occurred in 4 patients during physical therapy involving passive ROM exercises. Three patients had a refracture at the initial fracture site and 1 patient had a refracture at the site of olecranon osteotomy, which had been performed during the initial fracture surgery. Immediate surgery was performed to fix the refracture, and ROM exercise was restarted. Details of the patients with refracture are summarized in Our series showed that contracture release in patients with elbow stiffness after ORIF for an intercondylar fracture of the distal humerus resulted in significant improvement of the total arc of motion in most patients. This result is consistent with the observations in previous studies reporting the results of surgical release of stiff elbows. Several factors contribute to the development of postoperative contracture, including the extent of associated soft tissue injury, the timing of the ORIF, the presence of heterotopic ossification, and patient participation in and compliance with the postoperative rehabilitation program. When contracture release is planned, whether the hardware will be removed or kept in place during the operation should be considered. In our study, the implant was removed in 16 of 24 patients during the contracture release. Implant removal was indicated when there had been sufficient time for the initial fracture to heal, radiographic evaluation showed fracture healing, and the patient wanted the implant removed; however, refracture occurred 4 patients after implant removal. Three refractures developed at the initial fracture site during the postoperative ROM exercises. Although the removal of implants is sometimes more challenging and prone to complications than the initial surgery, there seems to be no consensus among surgeons about the appropriate guidelines for implant removal. Busam et al The most indisputable method to prevent refracture would be to leave the implants in place. Whenever there is a suspicion about the union of the fracture or the mechanical strength of distal metaphysis of humerus after removal of the implants, retaining the implants would be better. Even if one could sure that the implant could be removed without risk of refracture, it would be better to remove the implant after the completion of contracture release and manipulation, and only the screw and plate restricting motion should be removed. Another refracture occurred at the olecranon osteotomy site during postoperative physical therapy. In this patient, a tension band wire was removed during the release operation at 7 months after the initial fracture surgery. That might have been too early to remove the tension band wire. Because delayed healing of the olecranon osteotomy is known to be one of the complications of intercondylar fracture The data in this report should be interpreted in light of the shortcomings of the study. Our study has the inherent weakness of a retrospective cases series. The small sample size and short clinical follow-up are other limitations. Moreover, our inability to measure the final ROM in 16 of 24 patients, who stated in telephone interviews that the ROM had not essentially changed since the last clinical visit, is another limitation. For these patients, we defined the final ROM as the motion arc measured at the last follow-up, according to the observation that the ROM endures with time once it reaches a plateau. Contracture release of stiff elbow that developed after treatment with ORIF for intercondylar fracture resulted in significant improvements in total ROM. However, the potential risk of refracture should be considered in determining whether to remove the hardware in this situation. The authors, their immediate families, and any research foundations with which they are affiliated have not received any financial payments or other benefits from any commercial entity related to the subject of this article.