Agglomeration is commonly used for processing clay-rich ores in order to prevent undesirable effects, especially the risks of plugging or preferential channelling within the heap leaching piles. As the mechanical and chemical stability of the agglomerates is of crucial importance for the behaviour of the pile, a detailed characterization of the structure and porosity of agglomerates seems necessary. In the present study, uranium-bearing clay rich ore was agglomerated and agglomerates were studied before as well as after 10days of leaching. A multi-analytical approach (by X-ray tomography, SEM, XRD and MIP analyses) was used for the study of the mineralogy, porosity distribution and textures of the agglomerates. X-ray tomography and SEM images showed that agglomerates were the result of coalescence and layering of micro-agglomerates where each one in turn was composed of a nucleus embedded within phyllosilicates and an aluminous silicate matrix. MIP analyses highlighted that unleached agglomerates had a low connected porosity (between 3 and 7%). During the 24 first hours of process, the connected porosity increased by a factor 2 because of the leaching of the aluminous silicate matrix and about 60% of the uranium was recovered. During the next 9days, the formation of a secondary aluminous silicate matrix derived from the dissolution of illites resulted in the plugging of mesopores and therefore led to a decrease of porosity and uranium extraction extent.Heap leaching is a common industrial mining technique consisting of percolating a leaching solution through an ore pile of 4 to 10 To enhance the leaching of low grade ores containing clays and fine particles, nickel, copper and uranium ores are agglomerated ( For heap leaching, agglomerates are formed by the adhesion of ore particles mixed water within a rotation drum. Several consecutives steps can be identified during agglomerate formation ( However, even with agglomeration, plugging can occur during leaching. This issue, which causes lower leaching efficiency, is related to agglomerate properties. Important efforts have been made to investigate these properties and improve the agglomeration process. As a result, it is now recognized that the operating parameters such as the agglomeration time within the rotation drum, the nature and the rate of the binder and the liquid/solid ratio during agglomeration influence agglomerate morphology and size distribution ( Agglomerate morphology may influence heap leaching efficiency. Numerous tests, such as soaking, permeability, size distribution, conductivity, and strength, have been performed to control agglomerate morphology ( Apart from When reviewing the work produced so far, however, all the previous studies on microstructure focused only on nickel laterite or copper-ore agglomerates. To the best our knowledge, no publication has previously examined the specific behaviour of uranium-ore agglomerates in spite of their mineralogical and chemical differences with nickel laterite or copper ores. Few studies have investigated the evolution of agglomerate structure during leaching. Thus, our work aims at analysing uranium-ore agglomerates and beginning to shed light on the agglomerate microstructure and its related properties. For this purpose, a multi-analytical approach (e.g. X-ray Computed Tomography (CT), SEM analyses, mercury intrusion porosimetry (MIP) and X-ray diffraction (XRD)) has been adopted. Since MIP and X-ray CT reveal information about the pore distribution and connectivity and microscopy analysis gives an insight on pore geometry and mineralogy, a combination of these techniques was ideal for obtaining a complete picture of agglomerate structure. The influence of sulfuric acid as a binder on agglomerate architecture and porosity has also been studied. Agglomerates were produced from clay sandstone containing about 900 The ore was agglomerated with water and sulfuric acid, at a ratio of 25 A particle size analysis of the raw ore was conducted, highlighting particles ranging from < A representative batch of 10-mm-diameter agglomerates was leached in a column over 10 At the end of leaching, agglomerates rested in the open air for 1 A multi-analysis approach was used to study agglomerate structure and porosity before and after leaching. These analyses were done on both unleached and 10 Wet agglomerates of each batch of agglomerates were firstly analysed by X-ray tomography with a Mercury intrusion porosimetry (MIP) measurements on freeze-dried agglomerates were done with a Three sizes of acid-bound agglomerates of 5, 10 and 20 SEM analysis showed that the 10 Similar egg-shaped structures were observed in the 10-mm water-bound agglomerates. No aluminous silicate matrix phase or gypsum minerals were found. These agglomerates contained chlorites and uranium minerals, such as coffinite or U-Ti oxides, in addition to the other minerals also found in acid-bound agglomerates. This comparison suggests that the aluminous silicate matrix of acid-bound agglomerates resulted from the degradation of clay minerals such as chlorites and uranium minerals by sulfuric acid added during agglomeration. Sulfuric acid likely induced the dissolution of carbonates (e.g. calcite). Thus, the released calcium subsequently precipitated with the sulfate ions from sulfuric acid, forming gypsum crystals within acid-bound agglomerates. XRD analysis of fine fractions (smaller than 2  the connected porosity decreases with increasing acid-bound agglomerate size, the connected porosity value is quite low, between 2 and 7%, depending of the size of the agglomerates, compared to a total porosity of about 18%. These results might seem surprising, especially for ore destinated to heap leach process. Nevertheless, such a pore size distribution ( the non-connected pores have a radius from 0.01 and 5 Such low connected porosity for acid-bound agglomerates could be problematic for leaching, as good quality agglomerates are defined as strong and porous at the same time. Porosity analysis of 10 All together, these analyses improved our understanding of uranium ore agglomerates structure and formation. They demonstrate that agglomerates are heterogeneous structures composed by the coalescence and layering of egg-shaped structures composed of a nucleus (quartz, feldspar, lithoclast or other micro-agglomerate) embedded by clay layers. Such structure is consistent with the growth mechanisms proposed by Acid-bound and water-bound leached for 10 In addition, a new secondary aluminous silicate matrix containing partially-dissolved minerals was also observed within the acid-bound agglomerates ( A similar, new, aluminous silicate matrix was also observed in the 10-days leached water-bound agglomerates. However, unlike acid-bound agglomerates, two distinct areas could be identified, as shown in Considering the structural change of acid-bound agglomerates due to leaching, an increase of porosity was expected. MIP analyses on agglomerates leached for 2, 5, 7 and 10 Results in X-ray tomography confirmed that 10-days leached agglomerates were more porous than non-leached agglomerates ( After 10 After 10 Potassium and silicon present quasi linear extraction extents with time. The slight extractions of Si and K, illustrated in Aluminum, iron, magnesium, sodium and uranium showed similar dissolution pattern. In the case of acid-bound agglomerates, dissolution was fast during the first 24 In order to understand the minerals involved in the formation of the second aluminous silicate matrix phase, the molar ratios in which Al and Si reported to the solution were analysed, as per After leaching, about 75% of the uranium was leached. However, > Calcium is present in small quantities in the raw ore (about 0.29% of CaO) and this element is mostly hosted in carbonates (mainly calcite and a bit of dolomite). After 10 After 24 The present paper focused on the main mechanisms involved during agglomeration and leaching of uranium-ore agglomerates. Different analytical methods examined the physical properties of uranium-ore agglomerates with special attention to their microstructure and their change during leaching. Agglomerates were found to be an assemblage, by coalescence or layering, of micro agglomerates, which were made of a nucleus (a lithoclast, a mineral or a smaller micro agglomerate) coated by phyllosilicates, such as muscovite, kaolinite or illites, and a primary aluminous silicate matrix. This matrix was formed during agglomeration and was the result of the degradation of chlorites and uranium minerals, such as coffinite. Small amounts of gypsum were precipitated after the dissolution of calcite. Agglomerate growth mechanisms explained the low porosity of acid-bound agglomerates. Given that the primary matrix was located around micro agglomerates, it occupied the mesopores, resulting in low-connected porosity for un-leached acid-bound agglomerates. In the case of water-bound agglomerates, the connected porosity value was higher, due to the absence of this primary matrix. There were two distinct leaching for acid-bound agglomerates: For 48 The second stage involved the formation of a secondary aluminous silicate matrix created by elements released from the dissolution of the remaining illites by the leaching solution. The new connected pores formed previously were plugged and agglomerate structure was gradually degraded. These results provide a reference for future comparison with other uranium-ore agglomerates to study the influence of various agglomeration parameters (as L/S ratio or binder nature) or leaching parameters (as agglomerate size, leaching solution flow, or its sulfuric acid content) on agglomerate structure or leaching response. Moreover, an understanding of agglomerate evolution during leaching provides a good basis for understanding more about the processes involved during heap leaching and can also assist in improving leaching efficiency at heap scale. For instance, the use of acid as a binder during agglomeration allowed pre-dissolution of uranium minerals. Following further column leaching tests we expect to be able to apply the present results at commercial heap scale, in order to help optimize the microstructure of the agglomerates to ensure optimal structural or functional properties during heap leaching. The authors gratefully acknowledge the financial support of