Solvent extraction of Cu and Zn from spent brass pickle liquor has been carried out using LIX 984N as an extractant. Very high difference in ΔpH1/2 value for the two metals during the extraction indicates the ease of separating them under the appropriate conditions. Based on the bench scale results, metals were separated in a continuous mode using a laboratory scale mixer settler unit from the spent brass pickling solution containing 35kg/m3 Cu, 30kg/m3 Zn, 1.5kg/m3 Fe, 0.75kg/m3 Cr, 0.03kg/m3 Ni and 70kg/m3 H2SO4 with 30% LIX 984N in kerosene. High copper extraction (99.9%) at the phase ratio (O/A) of 2/1 was obtained at the equilibrium pH of 2.5 in a two-stage counter-current extraction process, leaving behind Zn, Cr and Ni in the raffinate. Zinc from the chromium free solution was then quantitatively extracted in three counter-current extraction stages at pH5.5 and O/A=2/1 with negligible co-extraction of nickel. From the respective loaded organic phases, copper and zinc were completely stripped off using 150kg/m3 H2SO4. The stripped solutions of Cu and Zn were utilized for the synthesis of high pure Cu metal powder and ZnO particles by the hydrothermal reduction/precipitation processes. Copper powder was synthesised in an autoclave at 20bar H2 pressure and 423K in 2h. On the other hand ZnO powder (4bar) was prepared from zinc striped solution at pH12 in an autoclave under autogenous pressure at 423K in 2h. The purity and morphology of the as-prepared powders were determined by chemical analysis, XRD and SEM-EDS studies.Industrial wastes generated in metallic industries are generally laden with heavy metals. Brass pickle liquor is also a kind of industrial waste generated during cleaning of the brass surface which tends to build up a black coating by prolonged exposure to the air. The cleaning process involves removal of the oxide layer by dipping the material in dilute sulphuric acid bath, which is usually reused quite a few times before its disposal as a waste. As a result the solution is loaded up with pollutant material such as chromium and high concentration of copper and zinc. Due to its environmentally hazardous and acidic nature it cannot be disposed off without pretreatment. The general treatment of this kind of liquid effluent includes the neutralization by lime. However, this process requires a large amount of alkali/lime resulting in the loss of metal values as well. For the disposal of such industrial wastes, alternate options are increasingly being applied which involves the recovery of the heavy metals as value added products by hydrometallurgical methods in recent years. Recovery of heavy metals as valuable products not only reduces the toxicity of the waste to be disposed off but also conserves natural resources in terms of resource recovery from the waste streams ( A number of studies have been reported on the recovery of heavy metals from various waste/secondary resources such as pickle liquors, spent electrolytes, industrial effluents, and brass ash leach liquor. ( Oxime extractants of LIX series are considered to be among the best reagents for the extraction of base metals because of their performance such as excellent phase separation, low entrainment loss to the raffinate, rapid metal transfer kinetics and high extractive strength. Besides, they do not promote excessive crud formation. The LIX reagents have therefore, been extensively applied for copper extraction in the moderately acidic conditions ( Nano-materials/powders have gained considerable attention due to their unique properties and wide application area. Among various nanoparticles, metallic Cu powder and ZnO nanoparticles are extensively popular, which may be due to their excellent optical, electrical and thermal properties, catalytic activities as well as cost effectiveness. Various chemical, physical, and electrochemical methods such as, hydrothermal/solvothermal synthesis, sol–gel, microwave/ultrasound-assisted synthesis, thermal decomposition, electrodeposition, and chemical vapour deposition process, have been applied for the synthesis of Cu/ZnO nanomaterials ( It is observed from the literature survey ( Spent brass pickle liquor containing 35 Solvent extraction experiments were carried out by equilibrating equal volumes (except for the construction of McCabe–Thiele diagram) of aqueous solution and the extractant, LIX 984N of known concentration in a stoppered vial using rotospin shaker at 50 The high purity copper powder was prepared by the hydrogen reduction of stripped copper solution in an autoclave (titanium vessel-1 In order to prepare the high purity zinc oxide powder, pH of the stripped solution containing zinc was increased by adding 1 The as-prepared copper metal powder and zinc oxide particles were characterized by chemical analysis, XRD and SEM-EDS studies. The XRD data were recorded (Bruker D8-discover) using CuKα radiation in the 2θ range of 10–90 In order to remove/recover acid from the pickle liquor the model solution containing 35 Acid and iron depleted brass pickle liquor contained 35 The saturation loading capacity of LIX 984N for Cu (at equilibrium pH Stripping of copper/zinc was carried out using meal saturated/loaded LIX 984N containing 34.95 The extraction isotherm for copper was obtained by contacting a mixed solution containing 35 Using the extraction data obtained from the phase ratio variation, McCabe–Thiele diagram was drawn to determine the number of theoretical counter-current stages required for complete extraction of copper and zinc. It was found from this diagram that two counter-current extraction stages were sufficient for complete extraction of copper with 1 The above optimized conditions were applied to separate copper and zinc from the spent brass pickle liquor [35 The high loading of copper and zinc in the two streams of the extractants, is beneficial for the synthesis of the value added products from the respective stripped solutions of high metal concentration. The results show that copper and zinc were completely stripped with 150 The purified copper and zinc solutions generated in the processing of spent brass pickle liquor by solvent extraction with LIX 984N as discussed above, were used for the synthesis of high purity copper metal powder and zinc oxide particles. Copper powder was produced by the reduction of Cu The annealed copper powder was characterized by SEM and XRD. The XRD pattern ( In order to synthesize the ZnO powder, the pH of the purified solution containing 14.99 At the highly basic conditions, Zn(OH) The ZnO powder produced was then characterized by SEM and XRD. The sharp X-ray diffraction peaks of hydrothermally prepared powder confirmed that the synthesized ZnO-material was pure and had good crystallinity. All diffraction peaks in the XRD pattern of as-prepared zinc oxide agreed well with the reported data (JCPDS file No. 05–0664) for pure ZnO of hexagonal wurtzite structure ( A complete process has been developed to separate and recover copper and zinc from the spent brass pickle liquor by solvent extraction followed by hydrothermal reduction/precipitation route to produce value added products. A process flow-sheet has been worked out to recover metal values ( The following conclusions have been drawn: LIX 984N was found to be selective for copper extraction at lower pH (ΔpH The number of counter-current stages for extraction of copper and zinc was determined from the McCabe–Thiele plots. Copper was completely extracted in two counter-current stages in a laboratory scale mixer settler unit using 1 Zinc was extracted from the copper free raffinate followed by chromium removal, in three counter-current stages using 1 From the respective metal loaded organics, copper and zinc were stripped with 150 High pure zinc oxide particles of rice grain shape (0.5–1 Authors are thankful to the Director of the CSIR-National Metallurgical Laboratory (NML), Jamshedpur, India for giving permission to publish the paper. Thanks are also due to