In this work, DEM results and experimental data from a specially designed circularly vibrating screening model are compared quantitatively under a range of operating conditions. The validation is carried out in two aspects. First, the motion of tracked particles is recorded using high-speed dynamic analysis system and their velocities are compared with DEM results. Second, the total screening performance indexes are compared to those predicted by DEM. Overall agreements for both spherical and non-spherical particle models are observed in both the motion of individual particles and the screening performance quantities. Generally, better agreements are found for non-spherical particle model with the particle shape reasonably considered. Quantitatively, spherical particle model is less accurate because the simplification of particle shape leads to good mobility and over-prediction of velocity and screening efficiency. The validity of the DEM model of the screening process is hence approved. The validated DEM model can be applied to perform extensive numerical studies to achieve optimal performance and better operation of such complicated and important processes in mineral processing.Screening is an important approach of size classification for granular or particulate materials. It is a complex process due to the collision between particles, the comprehensive effects of various operational parameters on particle motion and the size distribution of particles. Discrete particle motion has crucial effects on the screening process including segregation and passing of undersize particles through apertures. Most of the current mathematical models of screening processes are phenomenological models, which lack insightful understanding of screening processes and fail to account for the effect of the surrounding particles on the processes To date, there are increasing reports of DEM simulation of screening processes in the literature. The initial studies were carried out with two-dimensional (2D) DEM to investigate the particle motion in the screening process Then, three-dimensional (3D) DEM models were developed to simulate several industrial granular flows, including particle size separation by a simple one level of vibrating screen DEM is becoming a popular method for the study of vibrating screening processes. However, most of previous studies mainly conducted DEM simulations without detailed discussion of the reliability of the models. There were a few validation studies of DEM simulations for the screening processes. The early validations of 2D DEM simulations were carried out by Li et al. In this work, we employ both spherical and non-spherical particle models to simulate the circular screening process. The corresponding laboratory-scale experiments with irregular rock particles are conducted using a specially designed circularly vibrating screening model. DEM simulation results and experimental data are compared quantitatively under a range of operating conditions. The validation is carried out in two aspects. First, the motion information of tracked particles is recorded using high-speed dynamic analysis system and their velocities are compared with DEM results. Second, the total screening performance indexes are compared to those predicted by DEM. Good agreement is observed in both the motion of individual particles and the screening performance quantities. The relative error caused by particle shapes is also discussed. This work validates the current DEM screening model and provides a concrete base for further development and study. A specially designed laboratory scale circularly vibrating screen was constructed, allowing the observation of the motion of particles during the screening process and precise control of the parameters of vibration. Generic rock particles with clearly non-spherical shape (   The VFD connected to the vibration motor is used for changing the vibration frequency of the model screen (see   The DEM has proved as a powerful approach for investigating granular processes as it can provide precise description of both particle–particle and particle–wall interactions by tracing the motion of individual particles The contact model considers the force of gravity and the normal and tangential forces acting on a particle during the screening process. In addition, two torques that produced by a tangential force and a rolling friction force are also considered to act on the particles. In the present model, the motion of individual particles is calculated by the Newton's laws of motion, the translational and rotational motions of particle A CAD model of the screen used in the simulations was constructed, which exactly matches the structure of the laboratory-scale device shown in The DEM model for the screening process with a circular vibration motion is established and a series of simulations are conducted with the same conditions to those of laboratory experiments as listed in  In The simulation for non-spherical particles shows similar distributions for both the velocity and the size fraction of particles (see In the present work, five oversize particles (P1 to P5) are coloured and mixed with the feeding materials, which are more visible during the screening process and easily tracked. The reference point shown in The particle position relative to the reference point is measured from the snapshots taken by the high-speed camera. It is clear from The relative positions and corresponding average velocities of the five particles during each time step are shown in The results for the 16 Cases are shown in The average velocities of each case from DEM simulations show almost exactly the same trend with the laboratory-scale tests for both the spherical and non-spherical particle models. Furthermore, in most cases, the velocities predicted by simulations with spherical particle model are higher than those with non-spherical particle model. This tendency can be explained by the different motion mechanisms for different particle shapes. For non-spherical particles, part of the contacting forces from surrounded particles or vibrated deck can be converted to rotation motion while such effect is less significant for spherical particles. This mechanical characteristic might reduce the conveying velocity of the non-spherical particles. But in Cases 5, 7 and 13, the values for non-spherical particle model are about 0.009  For the spherical particles, the largest relative error occurs in case 1 with the value being about 87.9% when the values of particle speeds are very small. There are another five cases that the relative error values are over 20% (Cases 3, 4, 5, 8, and 12), and seven cases that are between 10% and 20% (Cases 2, 10, 11, 13, 14, 15, and 16), and the rest four are under 10%, in which the values of Cases 7 and 13 are just about 2.3% and 1.0%, respectively. For most cases, the absolute values of relative errors for the non-spherical particles are smaller than those of spherical particles. The largest relative error is observed in case 5 with the value being about 36.9%, which is about 8.3% larger than that of spherical particles. There are only another two cases that the absolute values are over 20% (Cases 4 and 12), and there are nine cases with the errors under 10%, in which the absolute values for Cases 6, 9, 14, 15 and 16 are less than 5%. The characteristics of particle flow on the screen deck result from the collisions between particles and between particles and screen deck, which is dominated by the combination of various operational parameters and the microstructure of particle materials. The segregation of materials, the trapping effect of intermediate size particles and the passing through motion of fine particles in the screening process also play an important role of particle flow on the deck. So the particle motion in the screening process is a highly fluctuating process and it is very difficult to carry out insight study with physical experiment while the DEM has a great advantage of conducting such researches. The mismatch between simulations and tests mainly comes from the simplification of particle models, the errors of physical parameters of particles, the idealisation of vibration motion. Furthermore, the average velocity of oversize particles is only presented here, which are used to present entire particle flow on the deck to some extent, more detail information about the velocities of each size fraction is not analysed in this work. The comparison of total screening efficiency for each case between the experiments and simulations is shown in For experimental results, Case 1 has the highest screening efficiency of about 87%, in which case the average velocity of particles has the lowest value and there is the longest residence time for the percolation of particles. As the velocity of particles increases, the screening efficiency rapidly decreases and fluctuates at around 42% for Cases 3 and 4. The screening efficiency levels off at about 58% for Cases 5 and 6, and then plummets to the lowest point and then levels off at about 28% for Cases 7 and 8 with particle velocity being relatively high. From Case 9 to Case 16, the efficiencies experience a fluctuation trend but more modest peaking at about 63% in Case 11. For the simulation results, the total screening efficiency of each case shows almost exactly the same trend to the experiments for both the spherical and non-spherical particles models, but the results of simulations with spherical particles are much more over-predicted while those of non-spherical particles are much close to those of the tests. The quantitative relative errors of total screening efficiency for each case between the tests and simulations are shown in As noted above, DEM simulations can generally predict the screening performance with a reasonable accuracy when relative precise particle models are adopted. Using spherical particle model, the particles on the screen deck have high mobility and can be easily stratified and trapped by the screen apertures. In contrast, non-spherical particle model with the equivalent volume are not easy to percolate through to the apertures. So the chance of the non-spherical particles being trapped by the holes is lower than that of spherical ones, leading to a relative lower screening efficiency. The particle motion is also affected by the vibration parameters, and the complicated effects of those parameters on the screening efficiency will be analysed in detail in future work to select the optimal operating parameters. Both spherical and non-spherical particle models are employed to simulate circular screening processes using DEM. The corresponding laboratory-scale experiments with irregular rock materials are conducted. The simulation and experiment results are compared quantitatively under a range of operating conditions. The following conclusions can be drawn from the present study: By using orthogonal experimental method, the study of a series of independent cases with different operation parameters is performed in both experiments and simulations. The motion information of tracked particles obtained by high-speed dynamic analysis system can reveal the particle motion characteristic on the screen deck. The process information in terms of screening efficiency attained by measuring the mass of undersize in the collecting bins can be used for evaluating the screening performance. The average velocities of simulations with both spherical and non-spherical particle models in each case show similar trends with the tests. For most cases, the velocities of spherical particles are more highly over-predicted than those of non-spherical particles because of the simplification of particle shapes. In a few cases, the predicted results for non-spherical particles are under-predicted probably due to the complexity of particle shape and the randomness of particle motion. The trends of predicted screening efficiency for both spherical and non-spherical particle models are also very similar to those of corresponding experimental results. The predicted results for spherical particles are notably over-predicted while those of non-spherical particles are much close to experimental results. The general agreements observed in both the motion of individual particles and the screening performance quantities are evidence of the validity of the DEM model with spherical particles of a vibrating screening process. It can be used only for primary prediction of the screening process because of the noticeable errors induced by the simplification of particle shape. The validated DEM model based on multi-sphere particle model further demonstrates that it can be potentially used to probing optimal performance and better operation of such a complicated and important screening process in mineral processing with a precise particle shape model and realistic physical parameters. More detailed analysis of the particle flow both on and underneath the screen deck is non-trivial and will be carried out in terms of average particle velocity and screening efficiency of each size fraction of particles in future work. Furthermore, cohesive or capillary force models should be implemented for fine or wet particles in certain screening processes because these forces may significantly limit the motion of fine particles on the screen deck and hence reduce the screening efficiency. This work is financially supported by the