The Institute was involved in research and testing of field machines for crop tending and harvesting from its earliest foundation (e.g. hay making and the first imported combine harvester) through to its closure when an inter-row cultivator was developed for field vegetables and guided by computer vision. Some award winning machines were invented at Wrest Park; Wilf Klinner's contribution was especially noteworthy, achieved with the support of an enthusiastic team. Some of the accounts in this chapter have a narrative flavour to bring out the challenge and excitement of taking innovative engineering ideas and making them work.  “  Performance testing of field machinery was an important feature of the Institute's programme of work from the start (Chapter 1). Some of the testing was required by the MAF Agricultural Machinery Testing Committee, but testing of experimental or pre-production machines for manufacturers was also well established by the time the NIAE moved to Wrest Park. When NIAE transferred from MAF to Agricultural Research Council control in 1949 the tests for manufacturers continued, and in the two years up to September 1951, for example, the 140 machines (other than tractors) tested included grass and grain driers, ploughs, sugar beet harvesters, fertiliser distributors and potato planters. Only about 40 of these Test Reports were published, the rest being confidential to the customer. It was realised that published comparative test reports could be useful to farmers, and in 1955 “series tests”, which were evaluations carried out on a number of machines of the same type at the same time, were made available. In one year 14 forage harvesting, handling and transporting machines were tested on a farm close to Ivinghoe Beacon. Other series tests were carried out on slurry tankers, seed drills (11), fertilizer spreaders (16) and balers (8). Tests of three or four combine harvesters per year became a regular job. This system produced test reports for each individual machine and a comparative report. However, the Agricultural Engineers Association was concerned at this development. It had come to trust confidential NIAE advice sought by individual companies, but ‘this happy relationship was upset in the 1950s when the NIAE … launched a user-testing service for the assessment of machines and implements.’ (from In 1958 a Membership Scheme for farmers was introduced, one of the benefits being the receipt of the abridged test reports. Then in 1963 a more extensive Testing Scheme for Users was introduced, with reports on production machines made available to subscribers. There were over 4000 subscribers in the first year, and rather like the Consumers' Association, founded in 1957, the Test Reports for Users included the results of User Experience Surveys; these surveys were carried out with the help of the National Agricultural Advisory Service (NAAS). Through the late 1950s and the 1960s the NIAE Agricultural Testing Department carried out field and laboratory tests on a wide range of agricultural equipment ( In the late 1960s MAF took over the administration and financing of the Testing for Users scheme; NIAE's main responsibility was now ‘the professional engineering work of testing to sound standards.’ Testing for Users was formally terminated by MAF in 1971. Many of the test procedures of the 1960s were monotonous and time consuming. Fertilizer spreaders were tested with powders, crystals, granules and prills, for evenness of longitudinal and lateral distribution, and the effects of bout width, side slopes and depth of material in the hopper. The most important criteria were the width of spread from the spinning disc and the determination of the amount of overlap required to obtain an even distribution. Collecting trays were built measuring about four The slurry tanker testing gave all the expected dangers and aroma. The tankers used a vacuum pump to either suck the slurry in or spray the slurry out onto a plate which directed the jet upwards and outwards. The outlet nozzle was opened by a lever at the front that could be operated from the tractor seat (no cabs in those days) or by an alternative lever at the back. With lack of communication a person working at the rear had no way of stopping another person from opening the valve from the front. Yes, we did smell awful! For seed drills we had to check that the drilling rate chart was acceptably close to the actual delivery rate with a variety of different seeds of various bulk densities, and also check the consistency of the drilling depth. Some novel methods were tried: one involved the drilling of plastic seeds into an autumn seedbed, and going back in spring to dig them up, if we could find them, and measure the consistency of the depth of drilling. Another wonderful idea was the attachment of a small light bulb to the grain hopper lid and another light attached by a rigid connection to the drill coulter. Plots were marked out in a field and the centre line defined by two lights further down the field to give the driving line for the tractor, much like landing lights for an aeroplane. We then took the team out at about 11 p.m. and attached each drill to the tractor in turn and drove it at drilling speed down the plots, while a camera with an open shutter recorded the trace of the coulter movement relative to the ground undulations, as recorded by the light on the drill hopper. With 11 drills on test, we finished at about 3 a.m. The technique didn't catch on. The drills were also assessed indoors on a calibration bridge on which the drill's land wheels were driven by belts. The bridge was electrically powered and belt speed varied at first by a series of vehicle gear-boxes, but later by a variable V-belt drive. Application rates and evenness of spacing, and the effects of speed on these, were measured with different seeds. “  The Test Technique section designed and built much of the testing equipment. For combine testing it was necessary to measure the grain losses from the back of the combine together with a measurement of the grain and straw throughputs. In the early days of combine testing, a modified Massey 780 machine was used, but as the requirement for combine testing increased, a purpose built rethresher was designed and built at the Institute. There are three type of grain loss from combines, grain that fails to pass through the cleaning sieves, grain that doesn't get separated from the straw discharge and grain that isn't properly threshed from the ear. The discharge from the sieves and the straw shakers was collected on 50 yards of calico sheet and individually passed through the rethresher with the whole material being passed through a third time to obtain the amount of unthreshed grains. The new rethresher was a marriage of parts of a Claas Mercury and two International B64 combines, and collected the losses from each mechanism at the same time, reducing the work load so that much more data could be collected each day. This was probably the best combine rethresher in the world at that time. When implement testing at NIAE finally ceased, the rethresher was passed to an agricultural college where it was stored for years before finally being sold for scrap. Had we had a crystal ball, we would have kept it for research on the axial flow combines and the stripper harvester yet to come. Many other field machines were tested. Ground crop sprayers were tested for evenness of distribution and droplet size, and the effects of boom bounce and pump throughput; pressure and corrosion were also measured. Mowers – reciprocating knife, rotary and flail – were tested for power requirement in different grass crop conditions, and the drying rate of the cut crop and stubble regrowth were measured. For balers the peak power requirement was important, and the ability to work with a variety of straws and herbage. Bale density and moisture content were checked by cutting cylindrical cores from bales with a pto-mounted tubular cutter. For forage harvesters, flail durability in different crop conditions, and reliability of the trailer hitch were added to the standard measures such as power requirement. A particular concern for livestock farmers was contamination of the herbage by soil sucked up by the harvester, so samples of forage cut at different heights and in different soil conditions were ashed in a furnace to compare silica content. Forage crops, chiefly grass, are turned into animal feed by making hay or silage. Silage requires the least drying in the field and is therefore less sensitive to weather than is the making of hay. Before the Second World War, silage was less important than hay. In 1932, while at Oxford, the Institute imported the first pick-up hay baler from America and in its field studies demonstrated the method of use and potential of this machine. Many investigations were carried out on handling bales, but it was not until the late 1950s that a breakthrough was made when the Institute introduced the concept of carrying palletised loads on buckrakes mounted on the front and rear of a tractor. This coincided with the development of a trailed sledge behind the baler so that unit loads of 16 bales could be built manually for transporting by a tractor-mounted buckrake. The simple equipment built by the Institute was the fore-runner of many new ideas, and a few years later over 30 versions of bale gatherers and tractor-mounted unit load carriers were available. By 1943 the Institute was studying the handling of forage crops for silage. In the following year the work was extended to include measurements of the performance of cutter blowers. In 1950 a manufacturer's prototype of a small forage harvester for dairy farms, developed at NIAE, was a prize winner in an RASE (Royal Agricultural Society of England) competition. In the 1950s and early 1960s the Institute began to look for ways to increase the drying rate of grass forage to improve hay quality. There were extensive field experiments led by Gordon Shepperson to compare the effects on hay drying rate of various mowing, tedding and conditioning treatments which bruised or crushed the crop (Chapter 7). The results showed that improvements were possible, and the development of an efficient mower conditioner, that would impart a simultaneous conditioning treatment during cutting, started in the late 1960s. By 1972 a Subject Day on combined mowing and conditioning was being organised for farmers and industry. The research team led by Wilf Klinner looked for a mechanism that would remove at least some of the cuticular wax from the leaf surface, which is the main barrier to moisture loss, without causing too much damage to the leaf and risking loss of nutrients. After two or three years of laboratory rigs and field work with experimental machines, we concluded that the most effective mechanism was a rotating rotor carrying steel “V” tines, attached to the rotor shaft by a flexible mounting in case of impact with large stones ( An alternative system was developed using plastic brushes to increase the abrasive action of the elements. The conditioning rotor had the same dimensions as the steel “V” spoked system, but the conditioning elements were formed of six lengths of clover-leaf shaped polyurethane (to keep a sharp edge as they wore down) bent into a “U” and inserted into a plastic tube and then bolted onto the angle-iron ribs of the rotor core. The surrounding hood was much the same as for the “V” spoked rotor but modified to accept different rotor configurations. The lighter brush rotor made it possible to add additional abrasive elements to the system. Four systems were assessed. The first had additional stationary elements which were added to force the grass material deeper into the conditioning rotor at the inlet. The others had a second rotor fitted above the first. One system had a counter rotating brush, the second was a co-rotating brush and the third had twin intermeshing brushes. This forced the grass into each rotor and increased the abrasion of the top of the swath as it passed through. The intermeshing brush rotors were the most effective and reliable layout. The brush conditioner was put into production by two British companies and one US manufacturer. Much of the experience gained in this development was also applied to the grain stripping rotor of the stripper harvester described below. NIAE mower conditioner concepts were the source of many patents from 1969 onwards. The Institute gained a Queens Award for Technological Achievement in the mid-1980s for grass conditioning, and in 1985 the Institute, and Wilf Klinner and his team responsible for the invention, received the MacRobert Award from the Royal Academy of Engineering, given “ As farmers switched to conserving grass as silage rather than hay, to achieve more consistent forage quality, it became necessary to reduce the energy consumption for the silage-making process; the typical dairy farmer's tractor was not large enough to satisfy the power demand of most forage choppers, and in the 1970s the fuel crisis made this more urgent. One idea was to use a slicing action rather than chopping. A valuable laboratory tool was developed by Gerald ‘Gusty’ Gale for analysis of the comminuted grass length – it evaluated a sample of approximately 2000 particles in 20 The novel slicing approach involved inducing relative movement between the slowly moving knives and stationary crop, somewhat similar to slicing meat or bread, as opposed to the high speed and repeated compaction and shearing action of forage choppers. Using laboratory and field rigs Andy Knight developed the technique, first with reciprocating knives, and later using rotary slicing discs. A ‘Silsoe’ field rig requiring approximately 50% of the energy demand of a conventional forage harvester was demonstrated at the National Grassland Demonstration. A development prototype was constructed for us by the Howard Machinery Co. However, the advent of farm contractor services alleviated the requirement for the smaller scale dairy farmers to make their own silage and the development did not reach commercial viability. In a completely different approach to field drying of forage, we tried mat making, the compaction of grass into a thin layer, achieving cell rupture. Small scale field trials with different treatments (severity of cell rupture and mat thickness) were conducted to evaluate the feasibility under typical UK climatic conditions. Philippe Savoie, a visiting scientist from Canada, demonstrated that grass can be dried from 90% to 60% moisture content in as little as 2 From the earliest days of harvesting cereals the straw has been cut and the grain separated as a subsequent operation. But yields have increased many times over, leading, in today's mechanized world, to ever larger machines. Successful use of plastic materials in the processing of grass in the 1970s, by means of a rotating drum of teeth, gave us the idea that something similar could remove the seed bearing parts of combinable crops without requiring the combine to handle large quantities of straw. Earlier attempts at stripping grain have all used steel tines or brushes of various designs (although the Romans did try stripping the grain from straw with wooden tines, according to Pliny). In 1984 we first heard about Wilf Klinner's preliminary ideas on rotor teeth for grain stripping. We decided to try one of these, which we called the ‘keyhole’: a pointed tooth with a hole at the base between it and the next tooth. The converging edges of the teeth did the stripping, and the hole, which turned out to be an essential feature, allowed the straw to escape and stripped the last remaining grains from the rearward edge of the ear. To make a demonstration machine to convince our Director John Matthews that this was an idea worth pursuing, we adapted a 1.5 Within two months the first trials were held in a barley crop. A procedure for measuring the losses caused by the stripping teeth, using collecting trays placed between the rows of stems, enabled us to compare results from the different teeth forms. These early tests and demonstrations were impressive and led to a formal research project being agreed. During the winter we measured losses, using a laboratory rig in which two rows of crop on a carriage could be passed under a stripping rotor mounted above. High speed photography was used and a wide range of parameters were compared to build up a picture of important features. The next step was to construct the first working stripper header. Once preliminary patents were filed, a manufacturer of combine pick-up headers, Shelbourne Reynolds, was brought into discussions and we purchased a 3.6 As the stripper leaves 60–80% of the straw standing in the field, it would be necessary to utilize the straw or incorporate it into the soil (Chapter 5). Direct ploughing was particularly successful, as the attached straws folded into the furrow smoothly. Disking or incorporating machines worked satisfactorily, or the straw could be recovered by cutting with a swather and baling. “  By the end of the season we had established that a given combine fitted with a stripper header could double its grain throughput at similar grain loss levels in ideal crop conditions. With these positive though limited results, and Wilf Klinner's imminent retirement, the stripper header was entered for The Prince of Wales Award for Industrial Innovation 1986. It was selected as one of six finalists, and a trip to Highgrove House ensued where the machine was demonstrated to H.R.H. and filmed by the BBC – good publicity though it did not receive the award. The Mark 2 header that was demonstrated had many of the features developed from the first season's trials: hydraulic adjustment of the rotor hood, a ‘ski slope’ between rotor and auger, ability to change rotor speed and an adjustable nose to the hood. By this time Shelbourne Reynolds had a patent licence and had built two prototype headers, one with a ski slope and the other with a short canvas conveyor to deliver stripped material to the auger. Information exchange between the Institute and Shelbourne Reynolds teams aided development ( As the combine operator sat above the header it was difficult for him to determine the best setting for the nose of the stripper hood. To overcome this difficulty, a device with two small sensing flaps was developed to control the hydraulic valve operating the hood. With the lower flap closed by the crop, the nose was static; if the upper flap closed the nose rose, or if the lower flap opened the nose dropped, until status quo was reached. A patent was taken out on this device. With the basic principles established, we now broadened our horizons, looking for other crops and circumstances where a stripper could give benefit. Much of the later development at Silsoe was carried out with a multi-cylinder type combine separator, and axial flow machines were also used successfully. Funding from the British Technology Group (BTG) helped in the dissemination of information and the co-operation with manufacturers. Kidd Farm Machinery was interested in our ideas, and built a prototype trailed stripper combine having a 2.4 Shelbourne Reynolds began selling headers in 1987, and their use for harvesting linseed was the major success story. Conservative British farmers were reluctant to use strippers, as collecting the straw was perceived as a difficulty. However, when the first machines were exported to the USA, farmers hailed their arrival for two crops – rice and ‘double crop’ wheat. With a crop of rice, when the seed is ripe the straw can still be green; with a stripper header, the combine only has to separate the grain from the drier part of the straw. The term ‘double crop’ wheat refers to the practice of leaving the straw standing to protect the following soya bean crop; the ability to strip the grain efficiently from the standing straw has obvious advantages. The successes in rice led to members of the team visiting the USA, Russia, Italy and the International Rice Research Institute (IRRI) in the Philippines. At IRRI a pedestrian controlled machine was developed for use in the small Asian paddy fields (Chapter 12). Back at home, Colman's of Norwich, who market herbs and mustards, asked if we could help them harvest mint. Trials with the tractor-mounted rig were successful and we were contracted to build a mint harvester. This machine consisted of a stripping rotor delivering on to a cross conveyor, feeding the stripped material into a fan which blew it into a following trailer, as in a forage harvester. In the 1990s a major combine manufacturer in Canada – Western Combines, who manufactured for Massey Ferguson – bought a licence to build strippers and developed their own prototype along the lines of the information that we supplied to them. This success story could be subtitled ‘ The official reception at Buckingham Palace was attended by Brian Legg, Mike Neale and Norris Hobson, along with Keith Shelbourne representing his company. The following year Shelbourne Reynolds received the Queen's Award for Export. By the early 1970s the first generation of large balers was becoming established; for example the Howard square baler and large round balers were on the market. However, the density of the bales produced was much the same as conventional small bales at around 100 The Institute therefore began to investigate how bale densities could be increased using a secondary process. For large round bales, a hydraulic press with platens 2 Conventional small bales formed in a chamber of 0.35 In 1983 Mike Neale began work on a contract with Bamford International to build a high density baler using Silsoe patents. The earlier machines were resurrected and a few conventional size bales made. Using the large press, multiples of small bales were compressed to measure the forces needed. However, this wasn't close enough to the proposed bale size of 1.2 by 0.6 by 0.4 The resulting prototype baler was an inline machine with full width pick-up followed by a centre delivery auger. A reciprocating packer forced the straw into the 2.4 From the experience gained with the first prototype, Bamfords went on to build two more prototypes. Sadly commercial pressures intervened and the company was sold on, with no further work being done. Five years later we purchased the original prototype as a test bed for a rotary compactor we had been developing, hoping to replace the reciprocating packers. However the success of commercial large square balers rendered this research purely academic. To form a higher density package than the straw bale, we tried compressing small samples of straw in an enclosed cell by a materials testing press. The aim was to investigate the forces involved and the resilience of the package produced; these packages were defined as ‘wafers’ and had a relaxed density of around 600 Having defined the basic forces and sizes we made a rotary waferer. Two 1-m diameter rollers with cells formed in their peripheries were geared together and driven by hydraulic motors. One roller had the horizontal cell divisions and the other the vertical ones. Subsequent trials showed that as the rollers opened after compressing the straw, the wafer tended to extrude from the rollers destroying its integrity. It was overcome by fitting vertical dividers on both rollers. This laboratory machine was fed with segments from small bales that passed through a tapered pre-compressor before entering the nip of the rollers. To further understand the physics of straw compression a device was assembled in which a 5 The Department of Energy's Energy Technology Support Unit (ETSU) took an early interest in this work and funded the design and manufacture of a field wafering machine in the Institute workshops. This machine incorporated the mechanisms studied at laboratory scale: a rotary compactor compressed the incoming swath into a 0.5 Besides our machine, ETSU was involved with a British Sugar machine. Subsequently we all collaborated with Bangor University to try and understand why we were having problems with wafer integrity. The outcome was that straw doesn't have any inherent properties that will cause it to stick together in wafering machines. The feed mechanisms of both machines tended to align the straws in one direction, and if the Silsoe rotary compactor and the British Sugar reciprocating packer were combined, sufficient straws perpendicular to the nip of the wafer cells could provide enough fibre interlock to form stable wafers. A 1993 report for ETSU concluded that changes in the economics of power generation meant that straw wafers could no longer compete as a fuel, though high density bales were considered to have more future, being a well established technology, cheaper to produce and easier to store outdoors. However, it was suggested that the wafering process could be suitable for preparing many types of biomass for gasification, though a static wafering process rather than a mobile field machine would then be appropriate. In the mid 1990s, with increasing demand for alternative raw materials and the introduction of a ban on field burning of straw, we collaborated with several industry sectors to investigate the feasibility of utilising wheat straw in the production of paper pulp and as an alternative power station energy source. The rotary slicing approach to comminution was adapted for straw and incorporated in an EU-funded project with St Regis Paper Company, to complement their existing soft wood and recycled card material sources. A pilot straw preparation and pulping facility was commissioned and used for proving and demonstration trials. We contributed technical expertise for the Sutton (Ely) straw fuelled power station, where monitoring of moisture content was critical at harvest and during combustion. The effects of straw characteristics and compaction density were evaluated and a special calibration developed for commonly used moisture metres. It was clear that straw quality, in terms of moisture content and physical constituents, was important for most industrial applications. Further research, with joint industry and government funding, investigated methods of storing straw to inhibit moisture ingress and to restrict degradation due to excessive moisture. Also, fractionation of the constituent components was demonstrated to be both feasible and of value, due to the longest fibres being in the stems whereas the leaf fraction has higher nutritional value and could be marketed as an animal feed. Research on sugar beet drying featured in the Institute's first years at Oxford, and during the 1940s there was interest in harvesting, supported by the Sugar Beet Research and Education Committee (SBREC) of the Ministry of Agriculture and Food (Chapter 1). In the early 1950s growing sugar beet was still very labour intensive, particularly in the spring. Crops were sown with seed clusters containing several viable seeds (multi-germ seed) to produce a continuous row of seedlings. Men were employed, usually on a piece-work basis, principally to reduce these seedlings to a more or less regular distribution of single plants about 10–12 inches apart along the row, but also to remove weeds. Around this time the Institute began looking at a machine to reduce hand work, and in 1952 began a specific programme for the mechanization of the sugar beet crop, once again supported by the SBREC, which funded research through a levy on sugar beet growers. The Committee sponsored national demonstrations on farms in the spring and autumn each year at which the Institute showed its new machines and techniques. Experiments with mechanical thinners in Wrest Park were supported by large scale farm trials in the 1950s. “  The mechanical thinners used in these trials were built at the Institute and eventually several manufacturers produced machines of their own. Best results were achieved on level seedbeds produced by using one-way ploughs and Dutch harrows to give a suitable tilth in which to sow the seed. A land-leveller of a type used in a sugar beet growing area of the USA was imported for trial and some similar models were made under licence by a UK manufacturer. The imported leveller was also used in autumn 1954 to give the finishing touches to the grass verges of the Wrest Park drive before the planting of the present avenue of horse chestnut trees. It became standard practice when sowing the seed to provide weed control by applying a herbicide simultaneously in a narrow band along the row. At the Institute, by the early 1970s we had developed the band-spraying idea into an electronically-controlled selective chemical thinner, applying herbicide in a gel that could be interrupted to leave unsprayed seedlings at selected intervals. One manufacturer produced a model based on this thinner. The Institute also trialled a German-made electronically-controlled mechanical thinner based on an earlier French patent, but this did not become widely used. During the course of this work other people were, of course, working to improve the various aspects of growing sugar beet. Plant breeders enhanced seed germination and made a major step forward with the development of mono-germ seed. This meant that improved spacing drills could sow seed at given intervals, and no longer was it necessary to employ men to separate emerged seedlings and remove weeds; thus the need for mechanical or chemical thinners evaporated. In the 1970s Les Bufton developed techniques for the precision sowing of sugar beet and field vegetable crops with small seeds. The resulting two-stage drill metered and delivered the seed in independent processes. Improved soil working components were added and the drill was taken up commercially. “  In the 1960s a sugar beet harvester was modified to incorporate automatic depth and steering control of the root lifting elements, and these attributes were gradually taken up by manufacturers. At this time, too, research by Peter Billington on the dynamics of sugar beet topping mechanisms led to a lightweight topper that reduced wastage. By the 1980s the skew-bar topper had been devised to remove only the parts of the beet which contained the most impurities – the leaf petiole and five The Institute undertook some work on the mechanisation of the potato crop from the 1940s, but only up to 1968, when all engineering research on growing potatoes transferred to the Scottish Station (later the Scottish Institute of Agricultural Engineering). One of the successful developments was a harvester, which was marketed commercially from 1959 and at one time gained at least 40% of the market for potato harvesters in the UK. Research on horticultural field crops began in 1960 with the concept of a universal root and vegetable harvester. Multi-stage harvesting by hand had long been the most labour intensive and expensive stage of production, and there was pressure to mechanise as labour became scarce. Plant breeders wanted to understand what crop qualities would be needed for successful mechanisation, in view of the usual 10–15 year length of a breeding and selection programme. The idea for a universal machine was to provide a range of attachments for a basic tractor-mounted machine. By 1967 the vegetable crops successfully harvested with the appropriate attachment included Brussels sprouts, cabbages, spring greens, celery, onions, beetroot and carrots; in addition, nursery root stocks, forest tree seedlings and Christmas trees could be handled. These results proved that once-over harvesting was practical, and led to an emphasis on breeding crop varieties that reached maturity uniformly, rather than requiring multiple harvests. In the early 1980s a high speed ‘bandolier’ transplanter was developed and manufactured commercially. It handled transplants raised in linked blocks of growing medium, required one operator for four rows, and could compensate automatically when a plant was missing from a block. Also in the 1980s the Agricultural Development and Advisory Service (ADAS) brought the Institute the problem of damage to cauliflowers caused principally by soil dropped from the wheels of harvesting equipment during multi-pass harvesting. This spoiling by soil made the cauliflowers unacceptable to supermarkets. Access to the crop by heavy machinery was frequently difficult and damaging, as the harvesting takes place on silt land during the wet part of the year. Existing tractor-mounted or self-propelled equipment required wheel tracks to be left at frequent intervals across the field. As a solution, a nine-m span gantry was designed and constructed ( Using this gantry, the land devoted to access was very much reduced, and there were no problems with crop soiling, or with travel in difficult soil conditions. Movement from one bout to another was achieved by pivoting the gantry on the headland through 90°. The gantry then moved along the headland and turned through a further 90° when in line with the next strip. Crop could be grown in most of the headland area. A major benefit was the improved access to the crop in unfavourable conditions. A Lancashire grower had a gantry constructed, with design input from the Institute. It had an enclosed packhouse on the beam, an elevating cup conveyor on one side, and forks to support a trailer on the other. He ran this machine for many years without trouble, and found he could harvest crop when other growers were unable to get on the land, giving him an important commercial advantage. Other gantries were made by the same manufacturer for use in Kent. Other Institute research on gantries is described in Chapters 3 and 5. With the withdrawal of a number of agrochemicals formerly used to control weeds in horticultural row crops, there has been renewed interest in mechanical weed control, but operating inter-row cultivation equipment at high work rates is a demanding task, because of the need to maintain very accurate alignment. The Institute began to look at the possibility of using image analysis for guiding a vehicle in row crops early in the 1990s; the result, a system for spot treating plants with a sprayer, was a worthwhile scientific advance but not robust or cheap enough for commercial development ( However, as the cost of high performance cameras and computers went down, Tony Hague and Nick Tillett continued their research until they were able to demonstrate a practical affordable system for video camera based precision guidance, which has been further developed in collaboration with two companies and launched commercially. The video camera takes 20 Precision agriculture as a crop management concept arose in the 1980s with the realisation that the spatial variability of many parameters in the field, for example soil moisture and tilth, weeds and crop condition, could be sensed and mapped and the information then used to moderate field operations such as fertiliser and herbicide application ( Precision agriculture is ‘information-intense’ and so, as well as developing sensing systems, the research team became involved in positioning technologies, data transfer standardisation and interpretation of data gathered in the field – converting data into useful information. The multi-disciplinary nature of precision agriculture necessitated collaboration with soil scientists, crop scientists, agronomists and information scientists. We worked with other research groups in the UK and several EU countries. We took the lead in initiating the series of European Conferences on Precision Agriculture which started at Warwick University in September 1997, and have continued in a different European country every two years. Rapid mapping of soil moisture would be very useful because water availability is critical to the growing crop, and can vary significantly across a single field due to varying soil type and depth. A review by John Stafford in 1988 revealed the application of many different techniques, and he undertook a development program with Richard Whalley using capacitance and microwave methods. Probes were integrated into cultivator tines to rapidly map soil moisture variation. Characterising soil tilth quantitatively to monitor variability was a challenge to which Barry Ambler applied image analysis techniques. Good seed germination and crop establishment are dependent on a fine and uniform soil tilth in the seedbed, a condition that is difficult to achieve across a whole field. A line scan camera mounted above a seedbed cultivator generated data which were analysed online to produce a characterising function which could be used to control the fineness of the seedbed. If the occurrence of weeds in fields could be mapped, treatment maps could be prepared to control variable rate herbicide application. Combining Institute expertise in sensing and in chemical applications, and working with a visiting US scientist, we sought automated means of weed detection to produce field weed maps. The work was mainly based on image capture and analysis techniques, capturing images using cameras mounted on field vehicles and in radio-controlled model planes. The spectral reflectance characteristics of various weed and crop species were studied by Christine Bull in attempts to discriminate, with acceptable precision, between weed and crop. This proved an almost intractable problem and so parallel work was undertaken to develop ‘machine-assisted’ manual survey methods for generating weed maps. If the condition of the crop at critical points in the growing season could be mapped across a field, then nutrients could be applied differentially according to crop requirement. Spot spectral characteristics had been researched for some time, and various ‘vegetation indices’ were derived, the most useful of which was the normalised difference vegetation index (NDVI) based on reflectance measurements either side of the ‘red edge’. A scanning system was designed for mounting on a tractor in which radiometers were mounted on a boom spanning the crop. Data were sampled and processed in real time to generate an ‘NDVI map’. A parallel system was devised using a radio-controlled model plane on which was mounted a video camera with appropriate filters. The systems were also used to generate application maps for fungicide, where the application rate depended on the crop density. The crop scanning system, originally developed by John Stafford and Barry Ambler, was enhanced by Ian Scotford by adding an ultra-sonic distance measuring system to map crop height. Position fixing within a field is an essential element of precision agriculture. After reviewing various location techniques we initiated a collaborative research project on a laser-based system with the Polytechnic of East London. However, because the US Global Positioning System (GPS) was being applied increasingly in the civil sector, its potential for agricultural application was also assessed to determine its accuracy, repeatability and reliability. The use of a ground reference station (differential GPS) was essential to obtain the required accuracy (about one metre) for yield mapping and other precision applications, as ‘selective availability’ was still being applied by the US military throughout the 1990s. Some precision operations require higher accuracy and so we developed combination positioning systems, augmenting GPS with odometry and gyros. An early approach to assessing spatial variability in a field was to derive a map of yield variation of combinable crops – on the basis that crop yield integrates the effects of all relevant factors. Previous attempts elsewhere had been based on indirect methods such as measuring the variation in forces and torques as the combine traversed the field. We decided to measure grain flow directly as it flowed into the combine holding tank. The sensor developed by John Stafford and Barry Ambler used electrical capacitance techniques to measure the dielectric constant of the grain flowing through the sensor. After several prototype designs, a successful sensor was produced which measured flow rate to sufficient accuracy. This was mounted in a combine harvester and, together with a GPS unit to provide position information, was used to map yield variation on several Institute fields over several years. Cashmore Field was used as a ‘test bed’ for precision agriculture. It was spatially variable in a number of relevant parameters including soil type, soil moisture content, slope and aspect. It was cropped with winter barley for at least 10 consecutive years and yield mapped each year. The yield maps, together with soil maps, digital elevation maps and other information provided a very comprehensive inventory of data for precision agriculture projects. The series of yield maps showed in particular how yield was both spatially and temporally variable. A project was initiated to develop analysis techniques for yield maps to gain some meaningful interpretation of yield variation that could be useful for crop management. Following on from John Stafford's extensive monitoring and analysis of yield variation, a ‘fuzzy clustering’ technique was developed by Murray Lark using yield map data over several years to define and delineate regions of a field which required different crop management approaches. Thus, in Cashmore Field, areas which yielded consistently high or low or were highly dependant on precipitation rates were identified. The technique was applied to a number of fields, and it was found that in many cases the regions identified corresponded closely to soil type boundaries. Yield mapping was taken up by an increasing number of commercial farmers, and a later study used yield map data from a large number of commercial production fields to define management zones in each field. The case for varying herbicide rate and type across a field was clear from the start of precision agriculture studies. The spatial variability or ‘patchiness’ of weeds within a field – both in density and species – was obvious to all who would look! Thus, the concept of patch spraying was developed whereby weed distribution within a field would be mapped and converted into a ‘treatment map’ which would then be used to control a herbicide sprayer. GPS would be used to continually update the sprayer controller with the sprayer position within the field. Algorithms were developed to convert weed maps (however derived) into treatment maps, and a spray control and delivery system were produced by Paul Miller and his team to apply herbicide according to requirement. The result was the Silsoe patch sprayer, based on an injection metering system and a boom split into separately controllable sections so that a spatial resolution of 2 Precision agriculture is all about more precise management of the cropping process and it relies heavily on information derived from many different data sources. Standardising data format and transfer from sensors and equipment from different manufacturers is essential if rational information is to be derived and used. Working with BSI and then with ISO we developed a data bus standard based on the CAN developed by Bosch for mobile field equipment ( In the course of the Institute's presence at Wrest Park many pieces, or parts, of field machinery came down the drive, on the backs of transporters (sometimes under wraps from competitors' eyes) to be tested, adapted, or modified, and generally put through their paces in order to create efficient and practical machines for the needs of the farmers of the day. Prototypes and novel machines similarly left our workshops to go off in search of marketing, funding or commercial exploitation in different parts of the UK and overseas. No other organization in the UK has handled and tested such a wide range of field machinery from quaint and forgotten names such as the “Salopian sweeplift crop collector” and the “Wolseley bell shape electric fencer and strip grazing equipment” of the 1950s to the sophisticated Garford Farm Machinery's Robocrop vision guidance system and the Micron PatchSpray Controller for the 21st century.