The Siah Bishe pumped storage project is now under construction. The investigation results, the stability analysis and the support concept for the displacement chamber are discussed in this paper. The geometry of the transversal section and optimum maintenance system have been designed with respect to the unique geological and shear zone conditions encountered in Siah Bishe. The displacement chamber is arranged in sedimentary and volcanic rocks of Triasic and Jurasic ages. Length of the chamber is 50m and the height is 10m with relatively north–south trend. The results of geo-engineering surveys and statistical joint-graphics of stereograms reveal at least three discontinuity systems in the rock mass. The transversal section along the chamber was studied to analyze the stability of rock wedges inside the chamber. The frequency and width of bedding parallel shear zones determined the final support concept. Special attention was paid to the design of the transversal section so as to minimize the stress concentration in the critical regions of the wall, bottom of the chamber and corners. The results of analyses show that the chamber is stable in static and dynamic condition with 20cm thickness of reinforced shotcrete, fully bonded rock bolt with 35mm diameter, 3.5m length and steel frame with 82kg/m I section with 0.85m spacing.Iran Water and Power Resources Development Company was entrusted in 1983 with the design of Siah Bishe pumped storage scheme. The waterways of the plant are now under construction (see The pumped storage plant is situated in layers of the Jurassic Shemshak, Triassic Elika and in the strata of Permian age called Dorud, Ruteh and Nessen formation. The Garmrudbar thrust fault separates the Jurassic Formation from the Triassic one. The displacement chamber with the approximate dimensions of L: 50 The results of geo-engineering surveys and statistical joint-graphics of stereograms reveal at least three discontinuity systems in the rock mass. The transversal section along the chamber was studied to analyze the stability of rock wedges inside the chamber. The frequency and width of bedding parallel shear zones determined the final support concept. Using laboratory and in situ tests, rock mass classification and joint set statistical analysis the geomechanical parameters are obtained. The transversal section along the chamber was studied to analyze the stability of rock wedges inside the chamber. The frequency and width of bedding parallel shear zones determined the final support concept. In this paper, with repetitive modeling an optimum maintenance system consisting of reinforced shotcrete and steel frame suitable for dynamic conditions is achieved. The whole formation is folded and forms the southern flank of an anticline. The folding process caused a shearing of incompetent layers such as thin layers of beds but also between siltstones with different content of fines like clay or fine sand. The area of the underground displacement chamber was investigated by the excavation of two test adits in total 320 The displacement chamber with a length of about 50 The roof of the displacement chamber exposed a rock sequence with a mean dip and dip direction of bedding planes of N105/50NE up to station (50 The rock sequence over the first 20 The sedimentary rocks are well stratified having an average thickness of 22    Bedding parallel shearing of strata is a common phenomenon over the whole sedimentary rock sequence ( The spacing and thickness of the individual zones were measured in detail and evaluated for the determination of initial and permanent support measure. The average thickness revealed is The extension of these zones is unknown and may differ strongly. A conservative assumption is that the extension should not be taken less than 35% of the displacement chamber width. The exposed strata along the displacement chamber walls and roof are moderately jointed, i.e. a spacing of 0.3–1.0 According to the stereographic projection of measured joints, two major joint sets could be established: Longitudinal joints running parallel to the strike of the beds and transversal joints. The longitudinal joints have a mean orientation of N98E/58E. This joint set shows however a wide range of scatters of ±40 in regard to the strike. The joint sets J2 should be considered as diagonally orientated joints to the longitudinal joint set J1. The distribution of these joints is irregular over the length of the chamber. From station 8 to 35 The transversal joints are less distinctly developed in comparison to the longitudinal joints. Their mean orientation is N172E/90. The spatial distribution from 10 to 26 According to the exposure of all discontinuities of the rock mass, their spatial distribution (    The different rock types to be expected during excavation of the chamber have been tested in the laboratory using NX-size cores from the various drillings and also in situ by the performance of dilatometer tests and large flat jack tests. The average results are listed in The shear strength parameters for the discontinuities were established as are given in The lateral load factor without the consideration of tectonic stresses will be at least 100% higher perpendicular to bedding than parallel to bedding. To investigate the sensitivity of displacement chamber stability and support to the scatter of geotechnical conditions the following variations were made in finite element analyses: Lateral safety factor is between 0.67 and 0.73, most probable is a factor of 1.0. Different bedding parallel shear plane strength according to the thickness smaller or larger than 1 The displacement chamber is located on a shear zone. The upper layer of the shear zone is Elika formation and the lower layer is Shemshak formation. Critical section of the displacement chamber occurs when all of the overburden is located on the shear zone. Therefore this section has been simulated by well-known finite element software that is named Phase Dip and dip direction of the fault, joints, bedding and displacement chamber are as follows: Fault: N110/55NE Joints: J Bedding: N105/50NE Displacement chamber: N357/0 Appearance dip in the section plane is calculated as follows: Therefore, appearance dip and dip direction are as follows:  J   Geological strength index (GSI) in the shear zone and Shemshak formation is 15, 38, respectively. Shear modulus and normal and shear stiffness are as follows ( Dilation angle for rock mass is calculated by Sh. Arshadnejad formula ( Using finite element method (Phase  The results ( Maximum support pressure (bearing capacity) for the steel frame determined by Hoek formula ( In dynamic condition related acceleration is 0.35 It should be noted that the rock mass is crushed and the minimum thickness of 20 Details of the investigation, rock mass parameters determination, stability analysis and support systems design for the Siah Bishe displacement chamber are discussed in this paper. The chamber is situated in sedimentary and volcanic rocks. The folding and thrust faulting of the rock sequence caused shearing of weak sedimentary layers. These observed shear planes defined the amount of systematic chamber support consisting of shotcrete, fully bonded rock bolts and steel frame. Simulations by computer show that the chamber is stable in static and dynamic conditions with 20 The chamber axis is oriented in such a way to minimize the unfavorable effects of bedding parallel shear planes, longitudinal joints, major in situ stress and nearby valley slope.