The size distribution of microbubbles generated for the dissolved air flotation process could be assessed on a fast and reliable way by the application of laser diffraction technique. The bubble generation step could therefore be optimized, in order to decrease the size of the bubbles. Increasing air saturation pressure had a positive effect on bubble size, up to 400kPa; higher pressures, however, had no effect. Surfactants (Flotigam and sodium oleate) significantly inhibited bubble coalescence, and higher concentrations of the reagents decrease the bubble size distribution, up to the critical micelle concentration. The mode of conditioning also had an important effect on bubble size improvement, by adding the surfactant into the pressure vessel. Overall median bubble size decreased 35% over the size distribution obtained without addition of reagent and conditioning.As smaller sizes lead to an increase of the interfacial area, improving the process efficiency, bubble size distribution is of uttermost importance for the flotation process ( DAF has been widely studied over the last twenty years, and is now a proven technology in water treatment plants and contaminant removal in industry wastewater ( Developments on DAF processes require rapid and accurate measurement of bubble size distribution. Various methods have been used to assess bubble size, such as X-ray attenuation, laser-based techniques, empirical or semi empirical correlations based on fluid dynamics (including the Stokes’ Law), electroresistivity measurements and image analysis ( Image analysis is reported as the most widely used, however it has some disadvantages, like requiring transparent walls for the image acquisition, low bubble concentration and complicated experimental set-up. It is also time-consuming, despite modern high-speed CCD cameras ( As laser-based methods, The optical counters differ from laser diffractometers by counting and measuring sizes from signals (electric pulses) generated by individual particles, whereas the laser diffraction measurement provides the particle size distribution from a population of several particles that scatter the light ( The laser diffraction, or low angle laser light scattering (LALLS) technique, was introduced in the mid-1970’s, but its instrumentation had a strong development in the past two decades. This method is classified as non-destructive and non-intrusive and relies on the fact that laser diffraction angle is inversely proportional to particle size ( Laser diffraction-based size distribution can be assessed in seconds, and a complete analysis run in less than 1 Laser diffraction results are calculated as volume-equivalent spherical diameter (ESD). As the micro-bubbles (with diameter less than 100 μm) are considered rigid spheres ( In fact, the laser diffraction technique was previously used on micro-bubble size measurements of colloidal gas aphrons (CGA), a type of foam usual on separation process ( This work presents a new methodology for characterization of micro-bubble size distribution in the DAF process by the laser diffraction technique. The availability of fast and reliable measurements of bubble size distribution allowed for the optimization of the bubble generation step, aiming at fine particles recovery. The influence of key parameters on the micro-bubble size, like air saturation pressure, type and concentration of reagents and chemical conditioning step was investigated. Reagents used in this study were: Clariant‘s Flotigam Micro-bubbles were generated from a 4 In order to compare results from different technical approaches, the micro-bubble mean diameter ( Variables The size distribution of micro-bubbles generated for dissolved air flotation experiments (DAF) was determined with Mastersizer 2000SM For the bubble size distributions analysis, the air-saturated liquid was released into the analysis beaker, where non-pressurized liquid was already being pumped through the analytical cell. A picture in Pumping speed was kept low (1000 Surface tension was measured through the ring method at 23  The results obtained by the two techniques correlate quite well, considering the limitations of the fluid dynamic measurements, and that actually very different physical phenomena are being measured. Both datasets support the reduction in mean bubble size with increasing saturation air pressure from 300 to 400 The fluid dynamic method allows only for an estimate of the mean bubble diameter, although simple and representative. The following tests were all conducted with the bubble size distributions assessed by light scattering. Air saturation pressure was kept at 400 Coalescence of smaller bubbles, to form larger ones, reduces the surface area for bubble-particle contact, therefore decreasing flotation efficiency. The influence of chemical additives to inhibit bubble coalescence, keeping its size as low as possible, was evaluated. In the first step, the reagents were added to the non-pressurized liquid in the analysis beaker, before the air-saturated water was injected. The effect of the reagents Flotigam and sodium oleate on the bubble size distribution can be observed in Higher concentrations of the reagents Flotigam and sodium oleate significantly decrease the bubble size distribution (curves shifted to the left side). This can be linked to the inhibition of bubble coalescence, as the surface tension drops due to these reagents, shown in Even low concentrations of solute are capable of reducing bubble sizes, in conventional flotation cells ( The reagent aluminium sulphate (a classical coagulant) does not influence the bubble size distribution, as shown in In a further step, the additives Flotigam and sodium oleate were selected to evaluate the effects of a previous conditioning of the water in the air saturation tank, as it sports the highest influence on bubble size distribution among the employed additives. The size distribution of the micro-bubbles was measured by laser diffraction, and the results are presented in In  Eq. Reducing the surface tension generates smaller bubbles, for the same volume of air-saturated liquid. As related by Eq. Reliable and reproducible assay of the bubble size distribution was achieved by laser diffraction, thus enabling a quick and simple technique for control e characterization of bubble size for the dissolved air flotation (DAF) process. Smallest bubble size distributions were attained at air pressures starting at 400 The authors wish to express appreciation to the Brazilian National Council for Scientific and Technologic Development (CNPq), to FINEP (grant 01.04.0615.00), and to CETEM/MCT – Centre for Mineral Technology for financial support and opportunity to develop the project. The comments of an anonymous reviewer improved the paper.