Metal matrix composite coatings with potential self-lubricating properties were produced on plain steel substrates using the plasma transferred arc technique (PTA). Layers of approximately 1mm thickness and with various compositions were obtained with additions of MoS2 and MnS compounds, which are known to act as solid lubricants in a number of applications. Following the microstructural characterization, the tribological behavior of the coatings was investigated using pin-on-disk experiments. Experimental results indicated that the addition of MnS was effective in reducing the friction coefficient and the wear rate of the coatings in comparison to the steel substrate, whereas the MoS2 was ineffective, due to its instability and subsequent redistribution of Mo and S elements during the solidification process.The use of arc techniques for producing of metal matrix composite coatings with special properties has known a great interest in the last decades Two series of composite coatings were prepared, based either on MoS The covered samples were thereafter heated up to 60 After the treatment, the microstructure of the composite layers was characterized using optical and scanning electron microscopy (SEM) associated with EDS microanalysis. X-ray diffraction was performed using a diffractometer with a monochromated Cu-Ka radiation. The tribological behavior of the coatings was investigated on a pin-on-disk testing device. The tests were operated in air with a relative humidity of 15–20% at 293–295 The coatings have a thickness of about 1000  Using both EDS and WDS microanalysis and X-ray diffraction, The coatings with MnS addition have a thickness of about 1200  The hardness of all the coatings is shown in In the case of the MnS-series coatings, the hardness increases slightly with increasing Mn/S atomic ratio, but it remains lower than the hardness of the steel substrate, since the sulphides are relatively soft compounds. The friction coefficient of the coatings against an Al The friction coefficient of coatings MoS   The wear track of Composite coatings with additions of both MoS Experimental results showed that the addition of MoS In the opposite, MnS was effective in reducing the friction coefficient and the wear rate of the coatings in comparison to the steel substrate, despite their low hardness. The best results were obtained with Mn/S atomic ratios higher than unity, since, in that case, all sulfur was bound to manganese in the form of globular sulfides and no FeS was present. The lubricating property of the MnS should be probably attributed to the formation of a thin continuous layer of MnS on the contact surface. P. Skarvelis would like to thank the Hellenic State Scholarship Foundation (IKY) for the financial support of his scientific research.