Comminution, particularly milling, is on average the largest consumer of energy in mining. Actual comminution circuits consist in most of the cases in coarse crushing, SAG milling, pebble crushing and secondary ball milling. In these circuits the SAG mill is the largest energy consumer. In many engineering projects either a power equation and/or a specific energy equation are used for the designing of these mills but not always with acceptable results. In general these equations are used to predict power consumption as a function of mill size, level and density of the internal charge and % of critical speed. Almost none of these equations (with the notable exception of the Morrell’s model) consider explicitly the effect that the feed particle size has on the mill performance, particularly on the power and on the specific energy consumption of the mill. To address this fact new models are developed in this work able to predict power or specific energy consumption, including the usual design variables, but adding a variable that represents the feed size distribution. Operational data from 4 grinding circuits corresponding to 3 Chilean copper concentration plants are used and the % −6″ +1″ (−152 +25mm) is selected as independent variable. The results indicate that both models are able to estimate the required variables for all data sets. In the first model (power equation) the average error obtained was 3.7% and in the second model (specific energy) the average error was 6.8%. These models would be useful for performance optimisation of the test case mills and should be fitted (parameters values) again for other mills.Comminution, especially milling, is the most important operation in mineral processing, both for its relevance to the downstream processes as well as for the high costs associated with the energy consumption. Comminution is generally the single largest consumer of energy on a mine site, accounting for an average of a 53% ( Usually, tumbling mills power equations have been derivate from mechanics as the product of torque and rotational speed. Models for the prediction of the power drawn by ball, semi-autogenous and fully autogenous mills have been developed and cited in the technical literature ( The feed size distribution is also the implicit result of the ore competence (affecting blasting and crushing performance). This distribution affects the SAG mill load and the load affects directly the mill power and the efficiency of the mill operation ( The main objective of this work is the development of mathematical models able to be used as predictive tools to optimise power consumption and/or specific energy in actual SAG mills, assuming that the ore competence was already included in the basic design of the mills (for example using DW Operational data from 4 grinding circuits corresponding to 3 Chilean copper concentration plants, all of them treating copper sulphide ores, are used in this work. A simplified grinding flow sheet, generic in the sense that represents all circuits considered in this work, is presented in The lever arm is the basis for the power models. The power is usually calculated as torque multiplied by the rotational speed and torque is equal to the force applied multiplied by the lever arm. Besides being a function of the geometric variables, such as mill diameter, mill length, grates openings, and pebble ports size; the power equation is also function of all the operational variables selected for this study. The applied force is a function of the mass inside the mill and it is composed of balls, ore and water. The ball charge is a function of the bulk fraction of the SAG mill volume ( As was mentioned before, the main objective of this work is the development of mathematical models able to be used as predictive tools to optimise power consumption and/or specific energy in operating SAG mills (it is not intended for design, but could help with it). Even if the mill total load is a key variable and can be indirectly measured with bearing pressure measurements, it was decided to discard it as an input variable. The main reason is that this kind of model must be useful to relate independent input variables with the dependent variables SAG mill power and specific energy, to assure models with fixed parameters. The total load it is not an input, in the sense that cannot be directly modified at will, it is the result of changes in other really independent variables such as the ball charge, the feed rate, the feed size distribution, the mill velocity and the % solids. So if a model is developed to be used as a tool to decide operating conditions and also to explicitly include the feed size as a model input it is necessary to avoid variables too correlated between them so that any change could be identified to its effects, without the need to fit new model’s parameters every time. Since the total load is a function of the above mentioned independent variables (besides other mill characteristics as the discharge system for example), to make evident the effect of these variables they should not go together with the total load which is related to them, to avoid affecting the robustness of the models. For a given mill to have a combination of feed size, ball load, mill speed and % solids will represent the total load. In fact the later can be modelled as a function of the others. Additionally, as has been shown by The mills used in the grinding circuits considered in this study, named GC1 to GC4, are shown in The data collected during periods of time of: a year (GC1), four months (GC2 and GC3) and two weeks (GC4); was analysed and filtered to remove outliers, periods where the sensors were out of order, maintenance campaigns, periods where the throughput was affected by problems corresponding to other unit operations of each concentration plant (flotation, solid/liquid separation, etc.) or by problems inherent to the mining operation and so on. In To analyse the experimental data and in order to show the effect of the fresh feed size, % −6″ +1″ (−152 +25 In It is important to notice that the behaviour shown in As can be seen in From Usual minimisation software (mean square of residuals) was used to determine the best estimator for a common slope ( Using the common slope value and replacing Eq.  As can be seen in From In Using the common slope value and replacing Eq. The quality of the models presented in the previous chapter is tested in terms of their goodness of fit and their predictive capability. For the goodness of fit the relation between modelled and experimental data is shown comparing with the identity line. For the predictive quality, some data not used for the model parameter estimation procedure has been predicted with the models and compared with the actual data (measured but not used). The goodness of fit of the specific energy model (Eq. As can be observed in The predictive capability is tested using the model to estimate values that were not used for the parameter estimation procedure. This testing was done with data in the medium as well as in the high specific energy levels and not in the low specific energy ranges where there is not enough data to do it so. The predictive results shown in The goodness of fit of the power model (Eq. As can be observed in After analysing the results of this work it can be observed that the specific energy model is not good enough due to the variability, intrinsic to the feed rate variability, as was discussed previously. The use of experimentally determined specific energy indices such as SPI or Axb or DW On the other hand, the power model developed in this work presents a quite good estimation capability and has the possibility to be used for many applications, but not for designing as was previously indicated. As an example, it has the potential to be used for grinding optimisation associated with mine to mill type of studies or for the implementation of pre crushing or for the expansion of a grinding plant in terms of t/h treated. In the Chilean copper concentrators the tendency has been to increase the balls charge ( For SAG mill design, this model could help by generating a correction factor over the power (kW) calculated in the usual way by multiplying the specific energy in kW Two new SAG milling models are developed in this work, able to predict power or specific energy consumption, including the usual design variables such as mill size; balls charge level, solids concentration in the SAG mill feed and % of critical speed, but adding a variable that represents the feed size distribution. The −6″ +1″ (−152 +25 Operational data from 4 grinding circuits corresponding to 3 Chilean copper concentration plants are used to both: modelling and testing their predictive capabilities. The results indicate that both models are able to estimate the required variables for all data sets. In the first model (power equation) the average error obtained was 3.7% and in the second model (specific energy) was 6.8%. The power model developed in this work (Eq. The authors would like to thank