The high price of cobalt is the reason for the necessity of its recovery from recycled cutting tools, catalysts and so forth. In this research, the effect of frequency and duty cycle in pulse electrowinning of cobalt from WC–Co scraps has been studied. The scraps was first dissolved in a solution containing 1N hydrochloric acid and 0.1M citric acid in anodic potential in the range of 0.05–0.3 V
                     Ag/AgCl so that a solution with 22gL−1 cobalt was acquired. Electrodeposition was performed on a stainless steel cathode in frequencies of 30, 50, 70, 100 and 135Hz; duty cycles of 10%, 30% and 50%; and peak current density of 250Am−2; and electrolyte temperature of 60°C. The surface of the deposits was observed with SEM and its purity was measured using the ICP method. The studies showed that increased frequency reduces the crystal size and the purity of the deposit increases up to 99.1wt% under the same conditions. Increasing the duty cycle raises the cobalt crystal size and the highest purity of deposit is obtained at a duty cycle of 30%. The optimum conditions in terms of economics and purity involve electrodeposition at a frequency of 70Hz and duty cycle of 30%, where deposits with a purity of 94.13wt% are obtainable.Cobalt is widely used in refractory alloys in gas turbines, airplane engines, erosion resistant alloys, magnets, cutting tools, catalysts and so forth due to its magnetic properties, corrosion resistance and high temperature erosion resistance ( Its reasonable price and its broad application are amongst the most important reasons for the recovery of cobalt from used catalysts, alloy scraps, batteries, effluents from electroplating shops, etc. It is worthwhile to express that the successive recovery of cobalt from industrial scraps is of significant importance, both from environmental and economic points of view ( Cobalt is applied as a binder in cemented tungsten carbide cutting tools and wear-resistant coatings. It should be stated that the recycling of cobalt from the above-mentioned sources has been under consideration from the time of their appearance. Electrowinning, dissolution extraction and ionic exchange are the main methods by which cobalt is recovered from its sources. However, the cobalt recovered through electrochemical techniques is more pure than that recovered using other methods (   In recent years, pulse electrodeposition has been introduced to the electroplating industry due to several advantages of the method. It produces a deposit with low hydrogen content and subsequently compact coating ( Overall, it can be claimed that no research has used pulse electrodeposition for recovery of metals by the electrowinning process. Recently, the above-mentioned benefits of pulse electrodeposition have motivated authors to study the effect of pulse electrodeposition parameters in the recovery of cobalt from WC–Co scraps. In the current paper, the effects of frequency and duty cycle on purity (the cobalt content in the obtained deposit) and morphology of the recovered deposit have been studied. Other parameters, such as electrolyte temperature and electrodeposition peak current density, will be discussed in the author’s subsequent papers. WC–9.5%Co scrap (As cutting tools) was used as the sample for recovery of cobalt in this research. The solution for dissolving of the sample contained 1 The samples in a titanium basket were exposed to the above-determined optimum anodic potential in the mentioned solution in order to obtain a cobalt-containing solution. This treatment was continued for approximately 24 A 40V/10A pulse-generating transformer rectifier was utilized for electrodeposition of cobalt on an AISI 304 stainless steel cathode with a surface area of 4.59 Electrodeposition was performed at frequencies of 30, 50, 70, 100 and 135 The surface morphology of the deposit was characterized using a Philips-XL30 scanning electron microscope (SEM). The purity of the deposits and cobalt concentration in the solution were measured using a Perkin–Elmer ICP-AES, model Optima 5300 DV spectrometer.  It is notable that cobalt dissolves into ions inside the solution which includes in chloride ion too. Citric acid acts as an activating agent in the solution. Lack of citric acid causes tungsten oxide to form on the sample while it is polarized anodically. However citric acid produces a complex which enhanced the efficiency of sample dissolving in the solution. Thus, after 24  It can be observed that cobalt crystallites, electrodeposited at all frequencies, have a petal-like morphology. However, the crystal size decreases when the frequency is increased. Moreover, the deposit, which is obtained on the cathode, can be easily detached from the surface of the cathode without much cracking ( Increasing the frequency has three effects on the deposit. One of the effects is to decrease the crystal size, while others increase it. These effects are described as follows: Increasing the pulse electrodeposition frequency and subsequently decreasing the As mentioned above, In which As noted above, increasing of the frequency can reduce the evolution of hydrogen. It should be expressed that the observations demonstrate that this happens up to frequencies of 70 Up to this point, it seems that the increasing of frequency creates a more ductile deposit with fine crystals at a frequency of 130  This table indicates that the weight of cobalt-containing deposit rises by increasing the frequency up to 70 The results of  As mentioned in Section  Visual observation of the deposit showed that it is brittle and disbands from the cathode surface, and is then poured into the solution during electrodeposition at high duty cycles, while the deposit obtained at low duty cycles is ductile (as exposed in On the basis of Eq.   At low duty cycles (which are defined in Eq. (1)), the time for deposition is short. Therefore, the impurities, such as carbon compounds and tungsten, might be trapped in the deposit during electrodeposition. By increasing the duty cycle up to 30%, there is enough time for both cobalt and impurities to enter the deposit. Besides, The EDS analysis of the deposit obtained by pulse electrodeposition was provided in The ICP analysis of cobalt in the deposit obtained by continuous DC electrodeposition showed that the purity of the deposit is approximately78.15%, which is close to the results obtained by EDS analysis in The main reason for higher purity of the deposit obtained in pulse electrowinning is the opportunity of the deposit for dissolving the impurities, such as tungsten and carbon containing compounds in  The obtained results showed that the best conditions for anodic dissolution of WC–Co scraps are their anodic polarization in the potential range of 0.05–0.3 There are various effective parameters in the electrodeposition of cobalt from the solution on the cathode surface, such as efficiency, deposit purity (cobalt content in the deposit) and easy detachment of the deposit from the cathode surface. With reference to the results, it was realized that electrodeposition at a frequency of 70 It is worth stating that the authors have also studied other electrodeposition parameters, such as peak current density and electrolyte temperature. These findings indicate that a purity of 99.78% in the deposit was obtained. These results will be published in their future papers.