The degradation of nineteen low-molecular-weight phenolates, polyalcohols and selected aliphatic and aromatic carboxylates of relevance to the Bayer process has been studied in 6molkg−1 NaOH(aq) at 90°C for up to 36days, and (for some species) at 180°C for up to 12days, using HPLC and 13C NMR spectroscopy. Aliphatic polyalcohols degraded readily at 90°C to lactate, oxalate, acetate, and formate. As observed previously, aliphatic carboxylates with hydroxyl groups also degraded readily at 90°C but there is evidence that the position of the hydroxyl group may be important. The observed degradation products for most, but not all, of these species can be explained in terms of well-known organic reaction mechanisms. Phenolate and 5-hydroxyisophthalate were stable at 180°C but other phenolic species degraded partially at 90°C. However, the reaction products could not be identified and no trends in reactivity were discernible. Consistent with previous studies both aliphatic and aromatic carboxylates without hydroxyl groups were generally stable in NaOH(aq) even at 180°C.It is widely recognised in the alumina-refining industry that the presence of even relatively small amounts of organic matter in bauxite ores can result in quite high levels of organic species accumulating in Bayer process solutions. Australian bauxites, for example, which typically have total organic carbon (TOC) levels of 0.05–0.5 While some qualitative information is available regarding the identity of the organic species present in Bayer liquors (BLs), it is only recently that studies on the reactivity and possible degradation mechanisms of specific substances have appeared in the open literature ( The present paper reports the behaviour in hot concentrated caustic solution of representative polyalcohols and phenolates as well as some additional carboxylates. Nineteen organic species were selected for study on the basis of their known or potential relevance to Bayer liquors, as shown in All substrates were of analytical grade, purchased from Sigma-Aldrich (USA), Acros (USA), Univar (Australia), or TCI (Japan), and were used as received. Their degradation behaviour was examined in 6 Reactions at 90 All solvents for chromatography were of HPLC grade (Lab-Scan, Thailand) and were filtered (0.2 Structures and Spectra were obtained using either a Bruker Avance DPX 300 ( Where possible, the identities of degradation products were verified by comparison with standards for HPLC retention times ( The most common degradation products observed for aliphatic species were oxalate and acetate ( The present results accord with previous observations ( The conversion of citrate to oxalate and acetate (as the only products detected in solution) can be accounted for in a similar manner ( The degradation of fumarate was of particular interest because it was observed as a product in the degradation of malate ( At first glance it may appear that benzilate should be classified as an aromatic compound. However, it is the position of the hydroxyl and carboxyl groups that is important in the current context. In benzilate both are located on the aliphatic portion of the molecule that links the two phenyl groups. Hence benzilate has been classified as an aliphatic compound, whereas 3-hydroxybenzoate ( In contrast with benzilate, tricarballylate ( Both the epimeric polyalcohols Amongst the limited number of aliphatic species studied at 180 While the presence of hydroxyl substituents in aliphatic species, with the exception of benzilate (see above), favours reactivity in NaOH(aq), no such uniform effect was observed for hydroxylated aromatics. Thus resorcinate, 2,4-dimethylphenolate, 3-hydroxybenzoate and vanillate degraded in NaOH(aq) at 90 All investigated aromatic anions possessing only carboxylate substituents were found to be stable in 6 Identification of the degradation products of the present aromatic anions was problematic. Where decomposition occurred, HPLC analysis of the reaction mixtures exhibited decreases in the peak area of the parent compound ( The present results for the interaction of nineteen organic species with hot concentrated NaOH(aq) extend the breadth of our previous observations ( The authors thank the anonymous referees for suggesting various improvements to this manuscript. This work was funded by