The surface films of high Cr-Ni ferritic and austenitic stainless steels, which have 21–39wt.% chromium and 5–28wt.% nickel, after grinding with SiC paper down to grit 1200, ultrasonic cleaning in acetone and 24h exposure in a dessicator, were investigated by the XPS technique. The surface films were composed of chromium hydroxide at the top surface and chromium oxide at the bottom surface. The chromium oxide layer was considered to be divided into two sublayers, which are the layer of chromium oxide and iron oxide containing iron and nickel (depending on the nickel content; “Layer A”) and the layer of chromium oxide containing chromium, iron and nickel (Layer “B”). When the contents of chromium and nickel in the alloy increase, the thickness of the chromium oxide layer decreases. However, the thickness of Layer A increases. The thickness of Layer A in relation to chromium and nickel contents shows a S-shaped curve similar to the plot between pitting potentials and the contents of chromium and nickel. The influences of the thickness and nickel content of Layer A on the pitting corrosion resistance of the tested alloys are discussed. If nickel content in alloys is high, it may be found in Layer A and may increase the pitting corrosion resistance of the tested alloys.It is well known that stainless steels exhibit good corrosion resistance because of a passive film on the surface. Many works reported that the passive film of austenitic The purpose of this study is to explain the results reported in previous work The tested samples were prepared as described in a previous report The XPS spectra of the tested alloy films were similar to those reported in the literature From the XPS spectra results for surface films on all samples, we can schematically sketch the passive film model as shown in The thickness of the chromium oxide layer decreased when the chromium and nickel contents of alloy increased as shown in In our previous work The atomic percent profiles of oxygen, chromium, iron and nickel in the films were determined. All tested alloys had similar profiles. The surface films of high Cr-Ni ferritic and austenitic stainless steels, which have 21–39 The authors would like to express their sincere thanks to the Thailand Research Fund, for the financial support the Faculty of Engineering, Chulalongkorn University, Bangkok, Thailand and Prof. Dr. -Ing.H. Hoffmeister at the Institute for Failure Analysis and Failure Prevention, University of the Federal Armed Forces, Hamburg, Germany, for the facilities.