The primary sulfide minerals of copper have been difficult to leach for the purpose of direct copper extraction. In particular, chalcopyrite has been observed to undergo a type of “passivation” under a variety of oxidative leaching conditions.
                  Over the last 10–15 years, a variety of biological and chemical leaching processes have emerged for overcoming the passivation of chalcopyrite. A number of these processes are now entering commercial production or are approaching this status. The BIOCOP™ process of BHP Billiton has now been commercialized at the Alliance Copper plant in Chile. The Total Pressure Oxidation technology has been implemented by Phelps Dodge at Bagdad, Arizona. The Mt. Gordon copper process and the Sepon copper process both use autoclave processes in the overall metallurgical circuit. In the Mt. Gordon circuit, the autoclave was used to leach copper while at Sepon the autoclave is used to produce acid and ferric sulfate to meet the requirements of an atmospheric leach. CESL and CVRD have completed a feasibility study to apply the CESL copper process in Brazil. PLATSOL™ technology for copper, nickel, cobalt and precious metal recovery is now under final feasibility study for application by PolyMet Mining at the NorthMet deposit in Minnesota, USA.
                  The number of available options for copper recovery from primary sulfides is multiplying. In addition to the above options utilizing stirred reactor leaching, a number of heap leach options for primary sulfides are also emerging. For this paper, the various processes for copper extraction from concentrate were reviewed, including the underlying mechanisms of leaching, followed by a comparison of the advantages and disadvantages of selected process options.The treatment of copper concentrates by smelting – converting and electrorefining has dominated the copper industry since the 1800s. Research and development in searching for hydrometallurgical alternatives to traditional pyrometallurgy processes has intensified in recent years. A whole range of chemical and biological processes for copper recovery from concentrates have emerged The processes under development can be divided into predominantly sulfate and chloride processes. Within the sulfate grouping, processes can be sub-grouped as either atmospheric or super-atmospheric in pressure and chemical or biological in the leaching process. There are a large number of reasons for pursuing alternatives to conventional processing. Capital Cost. The capital cost of smelter and refinery complexes is very high. The typical range of cost is $3000–$5000 (USD) investment per annual tonne of copper production (e.g. $900 Million to $1.5 Billion for 300,000 tpy Cu production). Impurity Tolerance. Smelters are limited in ability to treat concentrates that contain high levels of deleterious impurities. Copper–Gold Concentrates. Gold is frequently associated with copper concentrates. In some cases, high recovery of gold by flotation is accompanied by high levels of pyrite flotation resulting in a low grade copper concentrate for treatment. Mine to Market Optimization. It may make sense to the overall economics of a mining operation to account for (1) production of a lower grade concentrate with higher overall recovery of copper from the mine, (2) treatment of the lower grade copper concentrate at the minesite to make copper metal and; (3) use of by-product weak acid from the copper recovery process as a reagent to leach and recover copper at the Minesite. The overall economics to be achieved using this approach may give an advantage to an alternative to smelting. Recovery of Valuable By-Products. Copper concentrates may often contain significant levels of base and precious metal by-products. Copper smelters are efficient at recovery of gold, silver and PGM's but often pay poorly and with much delay for these elements. Use of Existing Capital. In selected cases, copper heap leach-SX/EW process plants are running out of ore feed. These plants have fully functional SX/EW plants available for further copper recovery as electrowon cathode. In this case, it may make sense to adopt a copper concentrate hydrometallurgy process as the “front end” of the process plant and further utilize existing capital. Economics. Smelter economics are more scale sensitive than hydrometallurgical alternatives. Hydrometallurgical plants may be more suited to application of modular incremental project development if required. Copper hydrometallurgy has been extensively studied as an alternative route to chalcopyrite concentrate treatment. The challenge of process development for chalcopyrite leaching in sulfate media is generally to leach chalcopyrite quickly and completely with high yield of elemental sulfur. A high yield of elemental sulfur leads to reduced costs for oxygen or air for mineral leaching and reduced neutralization/acid disposal costs. To overcome the slow and incomplete leaching of chalcopyrite at lower temperature, the two problems of (1) passive films on the chalcopyrite surface and (2) the potential blocking and wetting of chalcopyrite by liquid elemental sulfur must be addressed. Historically, a large number of hydrometallurgical treatment processes have been developed to treat copper concentrates. These processes have all failed to achieve sustained commercial production due to one or more of the following list of challenges: Low copper recovery in the primary leach step. Copper loss due to copper co-precipitation with iron hydrolysis products. Difficult or incomplete precious metal recovery from leach residue. Unconventional and difficult electrolysis step. Difficult elemental sulfur recovery step from leach residue. Excessive corrosion (especially chloride circuits). Difficulty in fixing toxic by-products in a stable waste product. Large energy requirements for mixing and oxygen dispersion. Poor quality copper product that requires electrorefining. Additional factors are often involved in preventing advancement of new technologies. These include: New technology risk. Many of the new processes have unique chemistry, processing conditions or equipment. These processes have not had adequate commercial demonstration to mitigate risk. Cost of licensing. The potential cost of licensing new technology while also assuming the risk of being first to commercially practice can mitigate against new technology selection. Against this backdrop, significant advances have been made over the last few years in advancing the use of hydrometallurgy for copper ore and concentrate treatment. The historical and current developments are discussed in references At least four separate sulfate-based commercial plants have started or are under construction for copper recovery. These include the Mt. Gordon Copper Process The Mt. Gordon Copper Process was developed to treat chalcocite ores from the historic Gunpowder deposit in Northern Queensland, Australia. The process uses low temperature pressure oxidation to directly leach copper from the ore followed by SX/EW of copper from the resulting leach solution. The plant operation achieved an annualized copper production of 50,000 tonnes Cu as LME grade cathode in 2002. The choice of pressure oxidation for this application was driven by necessity. Flotation of the ore to produce high-grade concentrates was trialed but was unsuccessful due to very close association between copper and barren pyrites in the ore. Heap leaching was rejected due to expected lower recoveries (compared to agitation leach) and concern about oxidation of the barren pyrite with resulting formation of large excesses of acid. Atmospheric ferric sulfate leaching was rejected due to concerns about ferric regeneration and the inefficiency of oxygen/air use in atmospheric processing. In this process, chalcocite first leaches to form a covellite reaction product and then the covellite product leaches to form soluble copper and elemental sulfur. Ferric ion is regenerated by oxygen in situ in the autoclave. Other copper minerals will also leach with oxygen in the presence of a ferric/ferrous solution. In addition to the reactions involving the copper minerals, pyrite in the ore will also oxidize to a limited extent (2–3%). This minor oxidation is beneficial in regenerating soluble iron and acid for the leach system. The leached copper sulfate is forwarded to solvent extraction and electrowinning of copper cathode. Crushed and milled ore is delivered in the form of a thickened slurry to the plant, where it is dewatered on an 80 m Filter cake is re-pulped and the resulting slurry is pumped into two parallel duplex stainless steel autoclaves each of 180 m Oxygen is supplied from two BOC VSA oxygen plants of total 80 tpd capacity at 93% O Typical plant feed rates are 76 tph of solids at 8.8% Cu. Raffinate flows are 240 m Autoclave residence time is about 60 minutes. Leach slurry is discharged from the autoclave via two small letdown pots and then flows through to four atmospheric leach tanks each of 300 m The transfer of iron to the copper electrowinning circuit by entrainment through SX necessitates bleeding of EW electrolyte and costs for acid and cobalt sulfate makeup and neutralization of excess acid. A Fenix Iron Removal system The capital cost of the plant was $112.7 Million AUD (or $57.5 Million USD at 0.51 exchange rate). The site operating cost for ore through to metal were reported to be $0.31 USD/lb of copper, one of the lowest cost operations in the world. The Mt. Gordon copper leach and process plant was shut down in 2004 due to change of ore type (no longer Esperanza chalcocite/pyrite) and corporate change of ownership to the Birla company from India. The total pressure oxidation process uses high temperature and pressure oxidation conditions to oxidize all sulfide minerals to sulfates and sulfuric acid. Conveniently, total pressure oxidation also results in iron precipitation as hematite. Total pressure oxidation plants operated in the US in the 1950s for recovery of copper, cobalt and nickel from complex ores Phelps Dodge has now revitalized the large-scale application of total pressure oxidation at the Bagdad plant in Arizona. At this facility approximately 16,000 tpa of Cu can be recovered from concentrates that previously were sent to a smelter facility. Under total oxidation conditions, 140 short tons of acid are produced per day for application to the stockpile leach operation at Bagdad. In this way, an acid credit is derived. A single autoclave is used to leach the concentrates which then proceed to flashing (to return the slurry to atmospheric pressure), slurry cooling, CCD washing and then copper SX/EW. The autoclave stream is merged with the stockpile leach solution stream to provide a combined PLS feed to the SX/EW facility. The acid from the autoclave process is then recycled in the SX raffinate back to the stockpile leach. The washed autoclave residue is neutralized with lime in 4 stages. If precious metals were present (very low precious metals in the Bagdad concentrate), the neutralized residue could be cyanide leached. The total pressure oxidation process is very suitable for application where the acid from pressure leaching can be used beneficially. The process has been commercially demonstrated at a large-scale and could easily be scaled up to larger size if required. Total pressure oxidation for copper concentrate treatment should now be regarded as “proven” technology. The BIOCOP™ process was developed by the BHP Billiton biotechnologies group based in Johannesburg, South Africa. The process uses thermophile bacteria to oxidize and leach copper from sulfide concentrates. The thermophile bacteria oxidize sulfide minerals to metal sulfates and sulfuric acid at temperatures of 65–80 °C. The BIOCOP™ flow sheet has a number of interesting features: Oxygen is used for bioleaching. This necessitates the provision of an oxygen plant. Previously, bioleach plants for gold and base metal applications were operated with air blowers. pH control is necessary during leaching to prevent too low a pH level in leaching Arsenic may be removed in a separate step to produce a residue for disposal. Copper may be recovered by SX/EW. Excess acid may be used in heap leaching if appropriate. The Alliance Copper joint venture group (BHP Billiton and Codelco) have commercialized the process in Chile. A 20,000 tpa Cu plant has been built close to Chuquicamata with the long term goal of treating arsenical concentrates from the Mansa Mina deposit. The plant is integrated with a heap leach circuit to allow for an acid credit back to the bioleach plant. The BIOCOP™ process is therefore similar to the Total Pressure Oxidation Process described above in that high copper extractions are achieved under total oxidation conditions (to sulfates). The major difference seems to be in the availability of acid after copper solvent extraction. In the bioleach process, partial acid neutralization is practiced in the two-stage bioleach using limestone addition to the bioleach slurry. This neutralization incurs an operating cost that is not present in total oxidation and effectively reduces the available acid credit from the bioleach process. Nevertheless, for specific applications, the bioleach approach may be favoured relative to pressure leaching. Clearly, the successful startup of the Alliance Copper project in Chile has validated the technology at a significant scale. Bioleaching of copper concentrates is now regarded as a proven technology. The Sepon Copper Process was developed for the recovery of copper from the Sepon copper deposit in Laos. The mineralogy of Sepon is complex. Copper is present mainly as chalcocite with pyrite and a large component of clay mineralization. The flow sheet involves atmospheric acid ferric sulfate leaching of copper followed by residue washing (first in raffinate and then in water) and pyrite/elemental sulfur flotation. The key development in this flow sheet is the autoclave treatment of the flotation concentrate containing pyrite and elemental sulfur. The autoclave process produces a basic ferric sulfate product (as opposed to the usual hematite product). The basic ferric sulfate product can then be re-leached to produce a strong ferric sulfate solution for application to atmospheric leaching. The other benefit of the Sepon process is the possibility of scavenging any remaining copper minerals in the pyrite float concentrate (that were not leached in the atmospheric leach). These copper minerals would be expected to leach under the total oxidation conditions employed, thus increasing overall copper recovery from the Sepon ore. The Sepon copper plant has started up successfully in March of 2005. The initial plant capacity is set for 60,000 tpa of copper. The autoclave oxidation of pyrite/sulfur will provide virtually all acid and ferric sulfate (and heat) required for the copper leaching process. The process can be considered a “hybrid” of a copper leach and pyrite oxidation process. The Anglo American Corp./University of British Columbia (AAC/UBC) Copper Process is a medium-temperature leaching process for chalcopyrite concentrates. The concentrate is reground to fine size (P The AAC/UBC process was recently evaluated in a continuous, fully integrated pilot-plant trial. The flow sheet comprised fine grinding of the concentrate, pressure leaching, thickening and filtration, copper SX/EW, with a bleed circuit to recover valuable base metal co-products. Gold was recovered from the autoclave residue by direct cyanidation. Copper and zinc extractions above 95% and elemental sulfur yields of 60% were achieved at 150 °C in a 2-h residence time. The presence of surfactants did not affect the extraction of copper or the phase separation in the SX process. Gold extraction exceeded 80%. The process is ready for industrial application and is expected to be highly competitive with other hydrometallurgical copper processes under commercial development. The chemical and biological processes for chalcopyrite treatment are linked together by common elements of process design. The sulfate-based processes involve copper leaching, solid–liquid separation and residue washing, copper SX/EW and raffinate management. The raffinate management can involve partial recycle and neutralization (for acid and copper recovery) or partial recycle and bleed to an acid-consuming heap. Copper leaching (primary leaching processes using chemical or biological oxidation) Fe–Cu Precipitate Releach (redissolve precipitated copper and zinc from scavenger step) Cu SX/EW (conventional recovery method for copper) Acid neutralization (precipitate gypsum and small amount of iron and copper) Fe/Cu removal (precipitate for copper recovery and recycle) Basic zinc sulfate precipitation (secondary element recovery in a potentially saleable form) A copper concentrate of 27.5% copper was used as an input to detailed heat and material balances for four different processes; AAC–UBC, Bactech, BIOCOP™ and Total Pressure Oxidation. The copper mineralogy was predominantly chalcopyrite and bornite with minor enargite, chalcocite and covellite. The modelling was done by choosing reasonable process design criteria for each step of the process using either flow sheet 1 or 2. Each of the processes was assumed to give high overall copper extraction. The results of the modelling are summarized in The biological leaching processes (Bactech and BIOCOP™) consume limestone during leaching and require indirect cooling of the bioreactors. The chemical processes (AAC–UBC and TPOX) do not require indirect cooling (cooling is provided by direct injection of cool solutions) and do not consume limestone during leaching. The use of limestone in the AAC–UBC and TPOX process relates to the neutralization of excess acid and the precipitation of copper and iron. The relative amount of limestone for AAC–UBC is much lower due to much lower sulfate formation during the primary leach step. The consumption of oxygen is highest for BIOCOP™, and lower for TPOX and AAC–UBC. This result is a function of total oxidation of sulfur to sulfate assumed for BIOCOP™ and TPOX and partial oxidation of sulfide to sulfate (balance is elemental sulfur) for AAC–UBC. BIOCOP™ was assumed to have a lower oxygen utilization due to atmospheric tankage for leaching. The Bactech process consumes air, not oxygen in leaching. The production of acid for the processes that bleed to the heap ( A further calculation can be made to compare the relative economics of the various scenarios using only the cost of consumables. The cost of consumables (and the value of by-product acid) can vary widely but for the purpose of this analysis costs/values of $50/t for oxygen, $8/t for air, $30/t for limestone, $100/t for lime and $100/t for acid. The results of the analysis are very striking. For the processes without a bleed to the heap, the AAC–UBC process has the lowest unit cost due to less oxidation of sulfur to sulfate and hence lower oxygen and limestone costs. The Bactech, BIOCOP™ and TPOX processes are all very close together in cost (within 3 cents/lb). For the processes that have a bleed to the heap, the net cost for AAC–UBC is virtually zero, indicating that the acid credit offsets the cost of oxygen for pressure oxidation. The net cost for TPOX is NEGATIVE 8 cents/lb indicating that the value of the by-product acid (under the assumed economic conditions) is greater than the cost of oxygen, even for full oxidation. In contrast the costs for the Bactech and BIOCOP™ processes range from net values of about 4 to 8 cents per lb of Cu. These results indicate some factors that will influence use of different technologies under different circumstances. For simple copper leaching from chalcopyrite concentrates where no heap leach exists, one might choose a process such as AAC–UBC (or similar processes with reference to Of course there could be other technical, economic or environmental reasons for choosing one process over another for treatment of copper concentrates. It is the author's opinion that the treatment of arsenical copper–gold concentrates are ideally suited to biological treatment (as has been demonstrated in BIOCOP™ testing) and that TPOX may have limited utility due to formation of complex basic copper arsenates under TPOX conditions. The formation of complex basic arsenates limits copper extraction and inhibits gold recovery. Hydrometallurgical treatment of copper concentrates using chemical and biological leaching is making inroads to the field traditionally dominated by smelting and refining. The field has tended to advance thus far by necessity or unique opportunity. The Mt. Gordon and Sepon processes were developed to recover copper from ores that were not easily amenable to conventional flotation. The total pressure oxidation process has been commercialized by Phelps Dodge where the acid from the total oxidation autoclave can be beneficially used in the stockpile leach process at Bagdad. The BIOCOP™ process has been applied to a unique opportunity at the Chuquicamata complex in Chile. It is predicted that further niche applications of hydrometallurgy for concentrate treatment will continue into the future. However, the industry is still waiting for a technology that can compete on a total operating cost/total capital cost and metal recovery basis with the conventional smelting/refining process. In this paper, selected examples of chemical and biological processes in the sulfate system were compared and contrasted. Model flow sheets and simplified heat/mass balances for a typical copper concentrate were developed for cases with and without bleeding of electrolyte to a heap leach for use of by-product acid. The two chemical processes (AAC–UBC) and TPOX were distinguished by whether sulfur was partially or fully oxidized to sulfate and sulfuric acid. Both the biological alternatives (Bactech and BIOCOP™) fully oxidized sulfur to sulfate. Where acid from the copper leach was to be neutralized (no heap), the AAC–UBC process had a clear advantage over TPOX and the biological alternatives. For the model cases where acid was a valuable by-product, the chemical alternatives were superior to the biological processes due to higher acid consumption (per unit of sulfur oxidized to sulfate) as the biological processes require limestone addition for pH control in leaching. The limestone addition, neutralizes a portion of the acid formed, limiting the value of the acid by-product. The biological processes seem to have unique application for copper–gold concentrates where there is no heap leach available to consume excess acid and/or where the copper concentrates contain higher levels of arsenic (for example, enargite mineral). In summary, each process, whether chemical or biological will have unique features and potential advantages for each situation. The goal of this paper was to highlight the quantitative analytical tools required to compare and contrast these processes in order to make an informed selection for a particular application.