Shipping is an essential link in the mining industry production chain. Seaborne ore cargo transportation is internationally regulated by the International Maritime Organization (IMO), whose regulatory framework includes laws that aim to ensure the safety and security of shipping. Some wet mineral cargoes may liquefy during passage under certain conditions. This phenomenon can shift the cargo and put the vessel and its crew at risk. According to the IMO regulations, in order to ship these cargoes, the moisture content shall be lower than the so-called Transportable Moisture Limit (TML), a regulatory parameter determined by laboratory tests. Iron ore fines with goethite content <35% are susceptible to liquefaction, and its TML can be obtained through the Modified Proctor/Fagerberg Test for Iron Ore Fines (PFD80), a compaction test that consists in compacting ore samples at several different moisture contents, the TML being the moisture content at which the material reaches 80% saturation. Since 2017, iron ore fines shippers from IMO Member States shall determine the TML of their cargoes preferably using this method, when applicable, which is obviously being included in the scope of ore characterization laboratories. This paper presents a novel empirical model that allows estimating the iron ore fines TML from a single PFD80 compaction point, the first prediction model in the literature related to this test. The method is a useful auxiliary tool for research and control of this parameter, which reduces the response time and the amount of sample required for testing. A performance evaluation conducted for 62 new samples, including other authors' data, showed good fit between observed and predicted TML, validating the proposed model.Iron ore is the solid bulk cargo with the largest trading volume per year, totalling 1.41 billion tones transported by sea in 2016, mainly from Australia (54%) and Brazil (27%) to China (70%) [ Vessels carrying solid bulk cargoes are subject to particular risks due to the possibility of cargo shifting inside the cargo holds, which may cause loss of stability [ In case of ore cargoes liquefaction inside a vessel's hold, the liquefied material will constitute a moving free surface, and a phase lag may happen between the liquefied cargo and the vessel's roll motion [ According to the International Association of Dry Cargo Shipowners (Intercargo), 337 bulk carrier incidents due to various causes were recorded in 2017 [ As a measure to mitigate the liquefaction risk, the IMO established in the 1960s the Transportable Moisture Limit (TML), the maximum moisture content of a Group A cargo which is considered safe for carriage in ships. The TML is determined through laboratory tests described in the IMSBC Code: the Flow Table test, the Penetration test, the Proctor/Fagerberg test and the Modified Proctor/Fagerberg Test for Iron Ore Fines. Each method is applicable to specific materials, and each one has a different TML definition. Among other provisions that will not be detailed in this paper, before every Group A cargo shipment, the moisture content of the cargo shall be determined and compared to the material's TML. The cargo can be loaded and carried only if the moisture content is below the TML, unless the ship is specially constructed for confining cargo shift. The TML of a mineral product is valid for 6 months, or until a variation on the product is reasonably assumed to have taken place [ After the casualties involving Indian IOF liquefaction, in 2012, the IMO stablished the Iron Ore Fines Technical Working Group (TWG), a research group with the aim of studying the hazards associated with this cargo and developing a test method for determining a TML for this material, as it was not listed in the IMSBC Code. The TWG concluded that IOF with goethite content <35% are liable to liquefy considering the levels of cyclic loadings to which the cargo may be submitted during a sea voyage. Considering the sequence of IMO publications related to the TWG and its member Nations, new IOF liquefaction prevention tests proposals were submitted to the IMO in 2012 following two approaches. The first one was the calibration of one of the existing TML test methods (Proctor/Fagerberg), following the current IMO philosophy of determining a moisture content limit through a simple test method. The second approach consisted in the development of a testing protocol based on cyclic triaxial tests, a typical approach of geotechnical liquefaction studies [ The first approach has prevailed in the IMO, culminating in the development of the Modified Proctor/Fagerberg Test for Iron Ore Fines (PFD80) in 2013 [ PFD80 is a dynamic compaction test. This type of test is based on Proctor [ The compaction curve says much about granular materials behaviour related to moisture content. Despite the fact that compaction tests do not take into account changes to which soils are susceptible in the field after compaction, due to subsequent wetting and drying events, or due to different types of loads, they are a useful tool for characterizing different states of granular materials when associated with strength tests, like simple shear and triaxial compression tests. In this regard, soil mechanics researchers have been studying the strength properties variation over the compaction curves, connecting compaction and strength tests, and applying unsaturated soil mechanics concepts to evaluate the material behaviour after compaction [ In the 1960s, Bengt Fagerberg and his research team adapted the Proctor compaction test for determining a TML for mineral concentrates [ To understand the rationale considered by Fagerberg and the TWG for using compaction tests to determine a safe moisture content for seaborne transportation of mineral cargoes, it is necessary to understand the compaction curves. Proctor/Fagerberg compaction curves for IOF show typically the shape exemplified in Granular materials as IOF are composed of three phases: solids, water and air. The compaction curve shows that at low moisture contents (point A to point B) the void ratio increases (the density decreases) as more water is added. This fact is due to capillary forces caused by the thin film of water formed around the grains, which resists rearrangements of the solid particles, a phenomenon known as bulking. In this stage, the air phase is continuous, and if the material is loaded, air is easily expelled and significant pore water pressures will not be generated. At higher moisture contents (point B to point OMC), the menisci are broken reducing the soil strength and allowing the grains to reach a more compact arrangement, leading to a decrease in the void ratio. In this stage, the air phase is still continuous, and so is the water phase. If the material is loaded, the air, which is connected to the atmosphere along numerous paths, is easily expelled, and significant high pore water pressures cannot be induced [ At the OMC the air phase is occluded and discontinuous, while the water phase is continuous. A relatively incompressible water-air mixture fills the pore volume, therefore, loading of the material will generate positive pore water pressures [ As previously stated, the IMO liquefaction prevention protocol for Group A cargoes is based mainly on limiting the cargoes moisture content. Therefore, for using a compaction test for establishing a TML, Fagerberg calibrated the compaction energy to represent the as loaded bulk density achieved in actual mineral concentrates heaps after being piled up inside the cargo holds, and considered the OMC as the boundary related to the risk of excess pore water pressure generation in case of loading. For applying and validating Fagerberg's method for IOF, the TWG calibrated the compaction energy to represent the average as loaded bulk density for this cargo, concluding that 27.59 kJ/m In addition to the cyclic triaxial tests, the TWG conducted small-scale physical model tests in simulators with pore water pressure monitoring, in which the materials have not shown signs of liquefaction when tested at the TML and submitted to cyclic loadings equivalent to different sea states. The study has shown that some IOF have characteristics that allow moisture to drain, possessing sufficient permeability that water can migrate within the cargo, saturating some portions of the heap. To consider this for the PFD80 TML validation the TWG used numerical modelling. The results have shown that if the cargo is loaded at the TML, the eventual water migration will not form a saturated basis high enough to compromise the stability of the cargo or the intact stability of the vessel [ As previously mentioned, the TWG tests have shown that IOF where the total goethite content is 35% or more by mass are not prone to liquefaction considering the maximum levels of cyclic loadings to which the material may be submitted during maritime transportation, therefore this type of IOF is considered as a Group C cargo in the IMSBC Code. Thus, from the PFD80 test definition, the IOF TML corresponds to the moisture content at which the material reaches 80% saturation when compacted under 27.59 kJ/m Other studies have supported the TWG results [ TML is a relevant parameter for the mining industry, firstly for ensuring safety for the crew, vessel and cargo, and for being a possible technical/regulatory barrier for exportation. Failure to comply with TML can legally interrupt an ore shipment or even an entire operation. This situation may require product changes or the implementation or improvement of moisture reduction processes, but the additional costs can make this option economically unfeasible. Considering the above mentioned, knowledge related to the Transportable Moisture Limit has become essential for mineral cargoes shippers. It is relevant to study how each intrinsic characteristic of the mineral products can influence this parameter, besides the monitoring of the TML in the operations routine. However, TML determination through the PFD80 test takes up to 2 days and the complete test requires a minimum of 50 kg from each IOF sample to be tested. Thus, the above-mentioned initiatives would require a considerable effort on test work and considerable amount of samples. In this context, the possibility of estimating the TML from a rapid test associated with a regression model would be advantageous. This paper proposes a novel method for estimating the iron ore fines PFD80 Transportable Moisture Limit, using a single point compaction test associated with an empirical prediction model. Initially 30 IOF samples were collected. Empirical prediction modelling is benefited by the database variability. Considering that the characteristics of the collected samples do not vary so much, new artificial samples were formed aiming to increase the amplitude of some features of the ore samples to be used for modelling. For this, the original samples were divided and some of the obtained subsamples were split into several sizes. After this process, 119 new artificial samples were obtained from blending the size fractions with each other and with the original samples, increasing the amount of fine or coarse particles. To characterize the 119 samples, the size distribution was determined by wet sieving and laser diffraction of the material finer than 0.045 mm using a Malvern® Mastersizer diffractometer, and the modal mineralogical composition was determined by reflected light microscopy. The solids density ( The PFD80 method was used for TML determination, following the procedures described in the IMSBC Code [ From the results, the graph It can be shown that Eq. Where V For multiple regression analysis, the open source statistical software R was used [  One option for estimating the TML using a rapid method would be calculating its value from a single PFD80 compaction point, i.e., conducting one compaction test at a certain moisture content, and calculating the TML from the obtained void ratio using an empirical model. For this, it is necessary to set the moisture content to be fixed for compaction, and evaluate if the void ratio reached at this specified moisture content relates to the TML using statistical regression analysis. The value for fixing the moisture content was chosen considering practical criteria. The value should be low enough to allow obtaining the void ratio preferably on the dry side of optimum, avoiding points above the OMC which are more difficult to test and more susceptible to deviations due to the high degree of saturation. On the other hand, the moisture content to be fixed should be as high as possible to minimize drying the material to be tested when using the model for new samples. Therefore, the best option would be setting the value around the minimum OMC of the database samples. Evaluating the compaction curves of the 119 samples used for modelling, it was found that 9% moisture would be an adequate choice, as only one sample has the OMC below this value, as depicted in  As the solids density plays an important role in the TML calculation (Eq. Before starting the statistical analysis on the interdependence between the TML and the potential independent variables From Eq. The theoretical definition of the TML shows that this parameter is directly proportional to the void ratio at 80% saturation ( One factor that may influence this possible relationship between The TML,  The analysis of variance (ANOVA) of the model equation coefficients has shown that For validating the proposed model, 58 new samples were tested. The TML and The proposed model refers to the Modified Proctor/Fagerberg Test for Iron Ore Fines TML regulatory concept, and therefore should be applied only to this test and only to this type of material. In addition, there is no evidence that the model represents IOF with characteristics outside the limits established by the database used in this study. The solids density used for modelling was determined by gas pycnometry according to ASTM D5550. The application of the model using solids density obtained by other methods can lead to deviations. It should be noted that the purpose of this study is to provide an auxiliary tool for TML research and monitoring. The model shall not be used under any circumstances for cargo certification, which obviously shall be done in accordance with the IMSBC Code using the complete PFD80 test method. The proposed empirical regression model makes it possible to estimate the iron ore fines Transportable Moisture Limit from the solids density and the void ratio obtained in a single PFD80 compaction test conducted at 9% moisture, saving time, labour and samples quantity in studies that require a large number of tests. The procedure consists of determining the solids density by gas pycnometry, determining the initial moisture content of the sample, adjusting the moisture content to 9% by adding water or drying (air drying or oven drying at 60 °C, according to IMSBC Code guidance), conducting compaction using the standard PFD80 test apparatus, drying the compacted sample, calculating the void ratio and submitting The IMSBC Code requires 5 to 10 compaction points for determining the PFD80 TML for one sample. The typical daily productivity of the complete PFD80 test per executant person is one up to two samples, the result being obtained the next day. Using the proposed model, it is possible to test up to 10 samples per day, considering the solids density determination by gas pycnometry, and the TML can be obtained on the same day for most samples. The required amount for each sample can be reduced from 50 kg to approximately 5 kg. The proposed method is useful for monitoring the TML at ports, for evaluating different product blending scenarios, for long-term variability studies and for other research purposes. The regression model has been validated for a statistically representative number of new samples, including other authors' data. It may be valid only for IOF that shows characteristics that match the ranges considered in the database used, and considering the same method used for determining the solids density. It is worth pointing out that the proposed model shall not be used for certifying the TML of IOF cargoes for shipping in any instance. For this purpose, the IMSBC Code guidance shall be followed. The authors believe that the concept that supports the proposed method, that is, to estimate the TML from a single point of the compaction test, can be applied to the other Group A mineral cargoes whose TML is determined by the original Proctor/Fagerberg method and its modified versions (mineral concentrates, manganese ore fines, bauxite, nickel ore, coal, etc.) provided that a new regression model is drawn up on the basis of results obtained for the respective material type and for the respective compaction test. This study also demonstrated that the concept of Transportable Moisture Limit associated with the Proctor/Fagerberg method is directly associated with the volume of voids of the compacted material, and thus the understanding of the void ratio variations is essential for understanding the TML. The opinions, findings and conclusions in this paper are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily represent the views of any institution. The authors are grateful to