This work sought to integrate bioleaching and chemical leaching as a cost-effective process to treat zinc sulphides. The continuous bioleaching of a sphalerite concentrate, assaying 51.4% Zn, 1.9% Pb, 31.8% S and 9.0% Fe with mesophile iron and sulphur-oxidizing bacteria followed by chemical leaching of the bioleaching residue were assessed. In the bioleaching step, the first reactor was used to produce Fe(III) concentrations as high as 20g/L. This solution was fed to the subsequent bioleaching reactors to oxidize sphalerite. It was possible to achieve 30% zinc extraction for 70h residence time. In chemical leaching experiments, carried out with the residue of the bioleaching step, the effects Fetotal and acidity on zinc extraction were studied. It was noticed that Fe(III) concentrations over 12g/L did not affect zinc recoveries. Furthermore, the higher the acidity, the larger the zinc recovery, for experiments carried out up to 181g/L sulphuric acid. The results have demonstrated that it is possible to devise a new process capable of achieving 96% zinc extraction, similarly to the conventional roasting–leaching–electrolysis process.Primary zinc production can be carried out by basically two different routes: (i) the hydrometallurgical process proposed in 1916 and (ii) the imperial smelting process first introduced in Swansea (UK) in the 1960s. The hydrometallurgical process accounts for some 85% of the primary zinc production. Conversely, the imperial smelting process currently represents less than 15% of the world’s zinc production and has been progressively abandoned. Other technologies include zinc pressure leaching (Cominco Trail, Flin Flon and Kidd Creek), atmospheric direct leaching (Outokumpu Kokkola and Onsan Korea Zinc), the integrated sulphide–silicate process (Votorantim Zinc) and the solvent extraction process (Skorpion Zinc) ( The traditional hydrometallurgical production of zinc from its sulphides comprises roasting, leaching and electrolysis ( As far as alternative technologies are concerned, two similar routes have been proposed in the 1970s to leach zinc sulphides: (i) ZnS leaching by Fe(III) can be represented as follows: Bioleaching can also be utilized to oxidize zinc sulphides ( Continuous bioleaching experiments were carried out in a series of three bioreactors (R2, R3 and R4), the first one with a 20 The microorganisms studied were isolated from the Morro Agudo Mine (Votorantim Zinc) and are currently being characterized using molecular biology techniques. They were cultured aerobically in a selective medium for at least 4 years in the presence of both Fe(II) and zinc sulphide, at 307 The zinc concentrate assayed 51.4% Zn, 1.9% Pb, 31.8% S and 9.0% Fe and with sphalerite accounting for 95% of the mineralogical phase present in the solids. Particle size was 100% −44 Throughout the experiments, a pulp with 10% solids was fed to reactor R2. This solid percentage remained fairly constant throughout the reactors. The pulp was aerated with oil-free compressed air by ceramic bubblers. During the experiments, there was a progressive blockage of these bubblers. The dissolved oxygen concentration (dissolved oxygen meter, During the continuous experiments, zinc extractions were determined by Eq. Chemical leaching studies were carried out batchwise, at 368 Concentrate samples were dissolved by treating 0.25 The morphological features of the concentrate, the leach residues and the reaction products formed during bioleaching were studied by SEM-EDS. The particles investigated were filtered and observed as powder or mounted in epoxy resin and then polished to a flat, mirrored surface. Afterwards, samples were carbon coated and then examined with a JEOL JSM 501 SEM microscope. Energy dispersive X-ray spectroscopy (EDS) was used for elemental analysis. The concept adopted in the present work was to biologically oxidize Fe(II) and to feed the Fe(III) produced solution along with the iron oxidizing bacteria to the bioreactors i.e., the first reactor (R1) was used to biologically oxidize Fe(II) while the subsequent reactors, to bioleach zinc sulphide. In reactor R1, a constant bacterial population (around 4  While Fe(II) is a substrate for bacterial growth, it has been suggested that Fe(III) concentrations above 10 Reactors R2, R3 and R4 were fed (through reactor R2, Unlike the reactor where Fe(II) was oxidized, the zinc sulphide bioleaching reactors (R2, R3 and R4) show different behaviour regarding iron concentrations. Zinc concentration in reactors R2, R3 and R4 is presented in One advantage of bioleaching is that the microorganisms are usually able to oxidize the elemental sulphur produced during ZnS oxidation (Eq. (2)) and therefore sulphate ions instead of elemental sulphur is produced during bioleaching. As a result, the latter does not cover the unleached ZnS particles. This can be observed in Despite microorganism’s ability to oxidise elemental sulphur (the direct mechanism), Fe(II) biooxidation should not be overlooked. The indirect mechanism is very important during sphalerite bioleaching ( The chemical leaching step can be described by Eqs. The effect of the iron content of the process’s leaching solution on the zinc extraction from the partially bioleached material is presented in Fe(II) is also a product of the chemical dissolution of ZnS as shown by Eq. As acid can leach sphalerite, the effect of the initial acidity on zinc dissolution is presented in Summarizing, Considering bioleaching and chemical leaching as integrated processes, the overall leaching time is reduced as compared to that observed by A new process comprising sphalerite bioleaching with mesophile microorganisms along with the chemical leaching of the zinc sulphide residue of the bioleaching step has been proposed. In the continuous bioleaching experiments with a 10% solids slurry, 30% zinc extractions could be achieved for 70 The financial support for this work from “FINACIADORA DE ESTUDOS E PROJETOS – FINEP” and Votorantim Metais is gratefully appreciated. The “Conselho Nacional de Pesquisas – CNPq” scholarship to P.S. Pina is also acknowledged.