An asymmetric, Margules-type, solid solution model was used to model the mixing behavior of Fe-Zn sphalerites. The model is based on an analysis of experimental results from fifteen independent data sources. After a careful, stepwise, analysis of the available runs, the solid solution model was constrained using a refined experimental database of 279 experiments which were simultaneously regressed to obtain the excess parameters and a general geobarometric equation. The model indicates that, when pressures are low, the value of γFeS
                     Sph, which is always greater than one, is higher at low FeS contents and an increase in temperature causes it to decline. However, for certain compositions γFeS
                     Sph values might be slightly less at low T than at high T. This behavior is corrected when pressure increases, regardless of the composition. The excess Gibbs free energy has positive values at any P&T while it is asymmetric. Pressure increases the value of the excess free energy. On the other hand, the Gibbs free energy of mixing is always negative, with a single minimum that tends to move towards Fe-poorer compositions as the pressure goes up. An increase in temperature leads to a more negative Gibbs free energy mixing function suggesting that increasingly Fe-poorer sphalerite would be expected at high temperatures and pressures. The application of the solid solution model to a selection of case-studies provided results which are consistent with independent pressure estimates. However, the pressure determinations for sphalerite + pyrite + pyrrhotite and sphalerite + pyrrhotite assemblages are very sensitive to uncertainties in the composition of the phases involved and, to a lesser extent, to temperature. The results of the application of the model to a field case (scheelite-mineralized Hercynian veins from the Central Pyrenees) were also consistent when compared with independent pressure-constraining silicate assemblages. Thus, the solid solution model described in this paper provides a workable framework with which to compute the pressures of the formation of rocks over a wide range of geological conditions.Nearly 40 yr ago, in keeping with experimental evidence, In this paper the standard states for component FeS in sphalerite and pyrrhotite are the pure hypothetical FeS, at any pressure and temperature, with the structures of sphalerite and pyrrhotite, respectively. Similarly, the hypothetical pyrrhotite phase with unit activity will be referred to hereinafter as troilite and the standard temperature and pressure correspond to the conventional values of 298.15 K and 1 bar (10 The composition of sphalerite in equilibrium with pyrrhotite changes as a function of T, P, the activity of FeS in pyrrhotite (a The coexistence of iron-bearing sphalerite and pyrrhotite is determined by the net transport reaction Based on the standard state defined by     CVM models are widely recognized as accurate and flexible tools for the description of the configurational thermodynamics of solid solutions. However, they require a detailed structural knowledge and a complex numerical treatment which, in the case of the sphalerite solid solution at least, must rely on the same experimental measurements conducive to use with other more classical approaches in macroscopic thermodynamics. Our preferred representation of the mixing properties of sphalerite is based on an asymmetric activity model which, in fact, is the same one The basic thermodynamic equation formulated in Eqn. Experimental runs provide us with T, P, the composition of sphalerite and, in many cases, that of pyrrhotite. On the other hand, a To model Δ Each one of the The computation of the solid solution model requires information on the experimental conditions for each experiment (P&T), mineral assemblages and their corresponding compositions. For most of the runs all the necessary information had already been published although, in some cases, the composition of pyrrhotite was not measured according to its buffering with pyrite (a After conducting an in-depth survey of the literature, we have compiled sixteen independent publications where information relative to experiments within the Fe-Zn-S system is detailed: Not all the remaining experiments fulfill the same quality standards. To identify and discard experiments with low reliability, we performed a preliminary screening based on different complementary criteria: 1) data assessment done by the experimenters; 2) data assessment published by earlier authors; 3) completeness of the published experimental documentation and/or characterization of the starting/run products and 4) other effects (i.e., phase transitions, presence of a melt phase; In the preliminary analysis all the experiments by Additional experiments ruled out in the preliminary assessment included runs 12, 17R (done by According to the sources, our working database is a large collection of experiments performed over a wide range of P&T conditions: ∼300 to ∼850°C, 1 to ∼ 10,000 bars and, taken as a whole, the experiments represent equilibrium or nearly equilibrium conditions. Therefore, if our thermodynamic model is sufficient to describe the mixing properties of sphalerite, we should obtain a consistent set of numerical parameters describing the solid solution behavior within the realm of: a) the uncertainty of the experimental conditions (±P, ±T) and b) the uncertainty of the methods employed in the chemical characterization of the run products (XRD, EPMA). Both types of uncertainties can be taken into account through an adequate weighting scheme. Not all the authors reporting experiments with the assemblage sph + py + po have documented the composition of associated pyrrhotite. Because this is an important aspect of the solid solution model, we decided to compute the corresponding values from the py-po equilibrium at the temperature of each run. This is the case of experiments made by In the previous screening we discarded some runs which had already been identified elsewhere as notoriously problematic. However, we cannot preclude that, in the working database there are other outliers resulting from an incomplete reaction or as a result of a variety of experimental artifacts. Hence, we followed a stepwise approach by fitting a preliminary model in which outliers are identified through an adequate descriptor. Assuming that incremental pressures, ΔP (≡|P The preliminary regression resulted in a σ The standard deviation obtained for this data set was ±606 bars ( Some of the runs carried out by The standard deviation of this data set is ∼640 bars ( The standard deviation of this data set is the greatest among the different sources studied (∼1700 bars; Runs 23R and 25 do not fulfill the 2σ The standard deviation of this data set is high (∼950 bars; The standard deviation of this data set is ∼950 bars ( Runs 30B, 31A and 31B also produced a poor preliminary fit that may be improved considering the analytical uncertainties. In fact, given that the starting material was an Fe-rich sphalerite (38% FeS) and acknowledging the observations of The preliminary analysis of the reliable experiments performed at temperatures higher that ∼300°C resulted in a standard deviation of ∼700 bars ( Lastly, compared to other runs performed under similar P&T conditions (i.e., 204, 206 and 606), run 604R is Fe-enriched while the Fe content of pyrrhotite is lower than expected in equilibrium with pyrite. This run used Fe-rich sphalerite (∼38% FeS) as a starting product. In these cases None of the runs reported in the works by any of these authors violated the 2σ The fitting of the model was performed using 279 experiments (refined database) associated with thirteen independent sources. Finally, it is interesting to stress that the statistics of the model fitted could have been significantly improved by further reducing the refined database by using different statistical schemes for the identification of outliers (i.e., Q-test, Chauvenet’s criterion, Grubs’ method, etc.). However, we preferred to stick as much as possible to a more phenomenological approach. Some inferences about the model’s applicability to lower and higher temperatures would seem to be warranted. We estimate a lower limit of applicability of ∼275°C based on Finally, in the derivation of our solid solution model we did not consider the experimental data of Sphalerite geobarometry is based on the association of this iron-bearing mineral with other phases along the univariant reactions Step 1. Given T and P, reactions Step 2. Once a  Finally, the series C plots in At this point it is interesting to compare our results with the ones obtained with the CVM model of The utility of the solid solution model has been tested against well-documented, published case studies. In the selection, we preferred those where, apart from the availability of the relevant information on chemical composition and phase assemblages, independent estimates of pressure and temperature are given. In the absence of information on the composition of pyrrhotite and when the corresponding authors describe unequivocal equilibrium relationships between this mineral and pyrite, we computed its composition based on the theoretical Fe content according to the py-po solvus. Our selected case studies cover a wide range of crustal conditions (both in terms of P&T) and include mineral assemblages relevant to our analysis (sph + py + po, sph + po and sph + tro + Fe). We have based the interpretation of the results on the direct comparison between reported and modeled pressures. Hence, when both data result in consistent values (within the range of reported uncertainties) we considered that our solid solution model can be applied in the P-T range of the corresponding case study. On the other hand, the evaluation of the usefulness of our model to meteorites is not straightforward due to the absence of independent pressure constraints. In these cases, the success in the application of our model has been tested against the results obtained with other calibrations of the cosmobarometer (  Similarly, the formation pressures of meteorite parent bodies predicted by our model are slightly higher than the ones obtained with the model of Other interesting observations derived from the application of our model to the different case studies are related to the effect of the uncertainties in temperature and composition on the geobarometric computations. In a final test, we studied a field-case to analyze the workability of the model when applied to a nonbibliographic source. The regional geology of the field area has been described by Contact metamorphism silicate assemblages (garnet-biotite and garnet-ilmenite geothermometry coupled with garnet-plagioclase-biotite-muscovite-quartz geobarometry) allowed Vein mineralization took place following two main stages with a fracturing episode at the end of the second one. In the first episode, quartz appears as the main mineral and it is accompanied by chlorite, dravite, muscovite, calcite, ilmenite, pyrrhotite and scheelite. Sulfide minerals predominate in the second stage and they include löllingite, galena, arsenopyrite, chalcopyrite, pyrite, pyrrhotite, sphalerite, native bismuth and Bi-Pb-Ag sulfosalts. Scheelite, quartz, calcite, chlorite and muscovite are still present throughout this episode. Textural observations indicate that part of the arsenopyrite might be the reaction product of an earlier löllingite + pyrrhotite assemblage and sphalerite has been observed to be associated with the latest arsenopyrite crystals. Besides, sphalerite is commonly associated with pyrrhotite and scheelite, the latter including pyrrhotite and/or pyrite grains. The sequence of sulfide minerals led Arsenopyrite geothermometry ( Microprobe analyses of sphalerite crystals (X Extending the observation of Assuming that there is equilibrium between sphalerite and pyrrhotite, for an average formation temperature of 370°C and our best-guess pyrrhotite composition, the formation pressure of the veins was 3.4 ± 0.4 kbar. This result is reasonably consistent, within the range of uncertainty, with the pressures obtained using independent silicate geobarometers. Therefore, our field-case and the selected case studies demonstrate the ability of our computed solid solution model to estimate the pressure of the formation of rocks containing sphalerite plus different mineral assemblages of the Fe-S system. Earlier versions of this manuscript were greatly improved by the helpful comments and suggestions of S. Galí, N. Cuéllar and three GCA anonymous reviewers. Special thanks go to associate editor Dr. D. J. Vaughan. Worksheets and tables with the experimental data used in this study are available upon request from the first author. This research has been partly funded with grants REN2001-032 (Delgado) and AMB93-0326 (Soler) of the Spanish government (CICYT). Supplementary data associated with this article can be found, in the online version, at doi:10.1016/j.gca.2004.08.009. 