This work describes a novel fabrication technique to prepare yttria-stabilized zirconia (YSZ) thin films by electrostatic spray deposition (ESD) from suspension. A detailed discussion on the formulation of colloidally stable suspension to prepare dense and uniform YSZ thin films is presented in this study. X-ray diffraction (XRD) and scanning electron microscopy (SEM) are used to analyze the structure and morphology of the YSZ thin films. The results show that a mixture of acetylacetone and ethanol in a ratio of 1:1 by volume is an effective suspension medium for YSZ fine particles to produce colloidally stable suspension, and the YSZ thin films with uniform in thickness about 2 μm and densely packed can be obtained by ESD from the suspension.At present, efforts are focused on lowering the operating temperature of solid oxide fuel cells (SOFC) from 1000 °C down to 600–800 °C. A key requirement for the intermediate temperature SOFC (IT-SOFC) is the reduction of ohmic losses. These occur across mixed ionic–electronic conducting electrodes as well as ionic conducting electrolyte, but the main contribution is from the electrolyte, hence reduction of its thickness is most effective. Yttria-stabilized zirconia (YSZ) has been used as the electrolyte because of its chemical stability and strength properties, but even at 1000 °C the specific ionic conductivity is relatively low (0.1 Ω The electrostatic spray deposition (ESD) technique provides the potential to produce a large variety of ceramic thin films. As compared to the other spray deposition techniques, ESD is particularly advantageous in tailoring the film morphology. Additionally, the technique offers the advantages of simple and cheap equipment, high deposition efficiency, easy composition control, and ambient atmosphere operation Up to now, YSZ thin films prepared by ESD are obtained by using a precursor solution to deposit the film on a heated substrate In this study, YSZ fine powder (containing 8 mol% of yttria, Mandoval Ltd, UK) with an average particle size of 0.1 μm was used to produce suspension. Organic solvents used as suspension media were ethanol (AR, Duksan Pure Chemical Co., Korea), acetone (AR, Duksan Pure Chemical Co., Korea), isopropyl alcohol (AR, Junsei Chemical Co., Japan), acetylacetone (AR, Avocado Research Chemicals Ltd., US), and acetic anhydride (AR, Alfa Aesar Co., US). The content of YSZ powder in suspension was 10 g/l. All suspensions were subjected to ultrasonic agitation and electrical stirring with a magnetic bar for 24 h before use. A schematic diagram of the ESD system is illustrated in The crystal structure of the YSZ thin film was characterized by X-ray diffraction patterns using Cu Kα radiation in a Rigaku diffractometer (RINT/DMAX-2500, Japan). Scanning electron microscope (SEM) (Hitachi S2700, Japan) was used for examining the surface and cross-section morphologies and evaluating the thickness of the thin film. The preparation of colloidally stable suspension is the key stage for using the novel fabrication technique to deposit YSZ thin films. Solvents in suspension function as a medium to suspend and disperse the fine particles. The choice of solvents is important in order to disperse YSZ fine particles effectively and to produce colloidally stable suspension. In order to select the suitable suspension medium to produce colloidally stable suspension for YSZ fine particles, a series of solvents were used. In The effectiveness of the mixture of acetylacetone and ethanol for the deposition of YSZ thin films can be attributed to the presence of protons in the form of CH The deposition parameters, such as applied voltage, suspension flow rate, deposition time, substrate temperature, distance between the nozzle and the substrate, could influence the morphology of the deposit thin films. The thickness, density and uniformity of YSZ thin films can be controlled through the optimization of these parameters. Based on a series of experimental results, the deposition parameters are optimized as applied voltages of 6.0–8.0 kV, suspension flow rates of 1.0–2.0 ml/h, deposition times of 0.5–1.0 h, the nozzle to substrate distance of 3 cm, and the substrate temperature of 400 °C during deposition.  The ESD technique has been successfully developed to generate fine droplets of suspension containing YSZ fine particles and to deposit YSZ thin films. It is found that a mixture of acetylacetone and ethanol in a ratio of 1:1 by volume is a suitable suspension medium to effectively disperse YSZ particles and form colloidally stable suspension. The thickness, density and uniformity of the thin films can be controlled through the choice of suspension medium and the optimization of deposition parameters. The novel fabrication technique developed in this study has significant potential for the economic preparation of uniform and dense YSZ thin films in a controllable way, which could find a wide range of industrial applications such as in IT-SOFC and solid-state microbatteries. One of the authors, Dr. Zhou-Cheng Wang, thanks for the financial support from the Natural Science Foundation of China (Grant No. 20573086) and Korea Institute S&T Evaluation and Planning (KISTEP).