In response to injury, pulp precursor cells can differentiate into odontoblast-like cells that produce reparative dentine. In culture, pulp cells form mineralizing nodules, but the characteristics of the cells involved in this process are still not fully known. Human pulp cells for culture were obtained from coronal pulp isolated from non-erupted molars, and were maintained in RPMI 1640 medium supplemented with fetal calf serum. Nodules were forming in all human pulp primary cultures (HPPc) and human pulp subcultures observed until their fifth passage (HPSc<5). Mineralization of the nodules was confirmed by the presence of calcium and phosphate that were quantified by X-ray microanalysis. Specific immunolabeling revealed α-smooth muscle actin and vimentin in both HPPc and HPSc<5 cells. Cells positive for α-smooth muscle actin were either isolated or gathered together in the nodules. Under transmission electron microscopy, some cells in primary pulp cultures exhibited features typical of myofibroblasts or pericytes, such as stress fibers, fibronexus, indented nuclei and gap-junctions. These cells were frequently in close contact with mineral deposits. This work demonstrates for the first time the presence of pericytes or myofibroblasts in mineralized human pulp cultures, but further investigation is required to determine their origin, role and degree of differentiation.Under certain conditions, the dental pulp produces reparative dentine. The cells responsible for the formation of this mineralized matrix (referred to as odontoblast-like cells, osteo-odontoblasts or second-generation odontoblasts) are derived from pulp cells in response to an appropriate stimulus ( Human pulp-cell cultures are currently used to investigate of reparative dentinogenesis ( Our aims now were, firstly, to standardize a model of human pulp culture in which mineralization of nodules occurred, and secondly to investigate the presence of pericytes or myofibroblasts in association with such nodules. Primary human pulp cultures were obtained from non-erupted, caries-free third molars at the three-quarter root development stage, which were extracted for clinical reasons, under general anesthesia from healthy young people (18–25 years of age) who gave their informed consent, as described by Mineralized deposits in the fifth-passage subcultures were analyzed by scanning electron microscopy using back-scattered electrons and by energy-dispersive X-ray microanalysis. After 1 month in culture in plastic wells, cells with nodules were fixed in situ in 2% glutaraldehyde solution for 20 min at room temperature. Cells were then thoroughly washed in Ca On day 10, after being seeded on coverslips, subcultured cells (fifth-passage pulp cells and fibroblastic control pulp cells) were washed twice with Ca After 2 months in culture, primary cells were washed with 0.2 M cacodylate buffer solution (pH 7.2), fixed in situ for 20 min with 3% glutaraldehyde–0.2-M cacodylate buffer, washed three times for 5 min with 0.2 M cacodylate buffer and postfixed in 2% osmium tetroxide–0.2 M cacodylate buffer for 10 min at room temperature. After thorough washing in cacodylate buffer solution and dehydration through a series of progressively increasing concentrations of ethanol, primary cultures were embedded in situ in Epon 812. Ultrathin sections of zones with nodules were cut with a diamond knife, stained with uranyl acetate and lead citrate, and examined in a transmission electron microscope (Jeol 200 CX). After 40 days in primary culture, some cells gradually became multilayered and formed nodules ( In similar dark nodules observed by scanning electron microscopy in fifth-passage subcultured cells after 1 month in culture, back-scattered electrons revealed mineral deposition ( In order to detect the presence of pericytes or myofibroblasts in our cultures, fifth-passage subcultures containing mineralized nodules and fibroblastic pulp-cell controls were tested for immunolabeling with monoclonal antibodies to α-smooth muscle actin and vimentin. In the fifth-passage subcultures, some cells showed strong reactivity to anti-α-smooth muscle actin monoclonal antibodies. These positive cells were either isolated ( In mineralized nodules from the primary pulp cultures ( Cells in culture provide a useful model for studying the cellular and molecular events that occur in the dental pulp ( As pericytes have the potential to differentiate into secondary odontoblasts during dentinal repair ( On this evidence, it is likely that pericytes or myofibroblasts are present in our human pulp cultures with mineralized nodules, but a study of cell ultrastructure was needed to confirm this hypothesis ( Pericytes extracted from bovine brains ( Another hypothesis is that α-smooth muscle actin-positive cells are myofibroblasts differentiated from smooth muscle cells, pericytes and/or fibroblasts present in the explants from which the culture was produced ( Some components of serum, such as growth factors, whether combined or not with the extracellular matrix, are also well known to be responsible for the differentiation of pericytes or myofibroblasts. Among the factors that induce α-smooth muscle actin, TGFβ is probably the most important ( It is difficult to distinguish between pericytes and myofibroblasts in culture. In vivo, the criteria for their identification are based on their origin, their localization, their morphology and their physiological behavior. However, the distinction between pericytes and myofibroblasts is complicated by the fact that these two cells are a single cell type at different stages of differentiation ( However, as In conclusion, we report what is, to the best of our knowledge, the first identification of pericytes or myofibroblasts in mineralized human pulp cultures. Insight into the potential role of these cells in the pulp healing process will require further investigation of their origin in culture and of the direct or indirect part they may play in the mineralization process. We wish to thank M. Goldberg (Paris, France) and G. Pradal (Nantes, France) for their constructive discussions with us and M. Cottrel (Laboratory of Calcified Tissues, Nantes, France) and I. Barbieux (INSERM U419, Nantes, France) for their excellent technical assistance.