Maturation of epiphyseal growth plate chondrocytes plays an important role in endochondral bone formation. Previously, we demonstrated that retinoic acid (RA) treatment stimulated annexin-mediated Ca2+ influx into growth plate chondrocytes leading to a significant increase in cytosolic Ca2+, whereas K-201, a specific annexin Ca2+channel blocker, inhibited this increase markedly. The present study addressed the hypothesis that annexin-mediated Ca2+ influx into growth plate chondrocytes is a major regulator of terminal differentiation, mineralization, and apoptosis of these cells. We found that K-201 significantly reduced up-regulation of expression of terminal differentiation marker genes, such as cbfa1, alkaline phosphatase (APase), osteocalcin, and type I collagen in RA-treated cultures. Furthermore, K-201 inhibited up-regulation of annexin II, V, and VI gene expression in these cells. RA-treated chondrocytes released mineralization-competent matrix vesicles, which contained significantly higher amounts of annexins II, V, and VI as well as APase activity than vesicles isolated from untreated or RA/K-201-treated cultures. Consistently, only RA-treated cultures showed significant mineralization. RA treatment stimulated the whole sequence of terminal differentiation events, including apoptosis as the final event. After a 6-day treatment gene expression ofbcl-2, an anti-apoptotic protein, was down-regulated, whereas caspase-3 activity and the percentage of TUNEL-positive cells were significantly increased in RA-treated cultures compared with untreated cultures. Interestingly, the cytosolic calcium chelator BAPTA-AM and K-201 protected RA-treated chondrocytes from undergoing apoptotic changes, as indicated by higher bcl-2 gene expression, reduced caspase-3 activity, and the percentage of TUNEL-positive cells. In conclusion, annexin-mediated Ca2+influx into growth plate chondrocytes is a positive regulator of terminal differentiation, mineralization, and apoptosis events in growth plate chondrocytes.retinoic acid alkaline phosphatase activity retinoic acid receptor phosphate-buffered saline 1,2-bis(2-aminophenoxy)ethane- terminal deoxynucleotidyltransferase-mediated dUTP nick end labeling Maturation of epiphyseal growth plate chondrocytes, which plays an important role during endochondral ossification, is accompanied by major changes of chondrocyte morphology, biosynthetic activities, and energy metabolism. These processes involve an ordered progression of various cell differentiation stages, including proliferation, hypertrophic differentiation, terminal differentiation, and ultimately programmed cell death (apoptosis) (  Chondrocyte hypertrophy and terminal differentiation are accompanied by an increase in cytosolic calcium, [Ca Annexins II, V, and VI, which are highly expressed in hypertrophic and mineralizing growth plate cartilage, are major components of matrix vesicles ( Careful studies have provided evidence that apoptosis is the final fate of terminally differentiated growth plate chondrocytes. Chondrocyte apoptosis in the growth plate is centered at the site of the transition of cartilage to bone ( We have provided evidence that RA promotes annexin channel formation in growth plate chondrocytes and that annexin-mediated Ca Chondrocytes were isolated from the hypertrophic zone of day 19 embryonic chick tibia growth plate cartilage as described previously ( Total RNA was isolated from untreated, RA-treated, RA/K-201-treated, and RA/BAPTA-treated chondrocyte cultures after 1-, 3-, 5-day treatments using RNeasy Mini Kit (Qiagen, Stanford, CA). 1 μg of RNA was reverse-transcribed using Ominiscript RT Kit (Qiagen). A 1:100 dilution of the resulting cDNA was used as the template to quantify the relative content of mRNA by real time PCR (ABI PRISM 7700 sequence detection system) using respective primers and SYBR Green. The following primers for real time PCR were designed using Primer Express software. Annexin II: forward primer, 5′-CATGCCTATCTGCTCTTCGTT-3′; reverse primer, 5′-AGCCACCACACCGTCCATAA-3′; annexin V: forward primer, 5′-AGAGACATCAGGCCATTTTCAGA-3′; reverse primer, 5′-CTGCCATCAGGATCTCTATTTGC-3′; annexin VI: forward primer, 5′-GCGGCTGATTGTAAGCTTGAT-3′; reverse primer, 5′-GTCGGTGGTCCAGCACTTA-3′; type I collagen (α1(I)): forward primer, 5′-CAGCCGCTTCACCTACAGC-3′; reverse primer, 5′-TTTTGTATTCAATCACTGTCTTGCC-3′; type II collagen: forward primer, 5′-GGCAATAGCAGGTTCACGTAC-3′; reverse primer, 5′-CGATAACAGTCTTGCCCCACTT-3′; type X collagen: forward primer, 5′-AGTGCTGTCATTGATCTCATGGA-3′; reverse primer, 5′-TCAGAGGAATAGAGACCATTGGATT-3′; Matrix vesicles were isolated from chondrocyte cultures after a 6-day treatment by enzymatic digestion and ultracentrifugation as described previously ( APase activity was measured using To determine the amounts of annexin II, V, and VI in matrix vesicles, vesicle fractions (total protein of 30 μg) were subjected to SDS-PAGE and immunoblotted with primary antibodies specific for annexins II, V, and VI. Samples were dissolved in 4× NuPAGE SDS sample buffer (Invitrogen). Prior to electrophoresis, the reducing reagent was added to the sample solution, denatured at 70 °C for 10 min, and analyzed by electrophoresis in 10% Bis-Tris gels following the NuPAGE electrophoresis protocols. Samples were electroblotted onto nitrocellulose filters after electrophoresis. After blocking with a solution of low fat milk protein, blotted proteins were immunostained with primary antibodies followed by peroxidase-conjugated secondary antibody, and the signal was detected by enhanced chemiluminescene (Pierce). To determine the degree of mineralization chondrocyte cultures were stained with alizarin red S after a 6-day treatment as described previously ( Caspase-3 activity was determined using the ApoAlert caspase fluorescent assay kit (Clontech) following the manufacturer's protocol. Briefly, after a 6-day treatment chondrocyte cultures were washed twice with ice-cold phosphate-buffered saline (PBS), scraped into tubes, and centrifuged at 1500 rpm for 10 min. Cell pellets were washed one more time with ice-cold PBS and centrifuged again. Then air-dried cell pellets were resuspended in 60 μl of chilled cell lysis buffer and incubated on ice for 10 min. Cellular debris was removed by centrifugation, and 50 μl of 2 × reaction buffer/dithiothreitol mixture and 5 μl of 1 m Apoptotic chondrocytes in day 6 chondrocyte cultures were detected using ApopTag Numerical data are presented as mean ± S.D. ( Treatment of hypertrophic growth plate chondrocytes with RA induced terminal differentiation of these cells, as indicated by up-regulation of terminal differentiation marker genes, including RA treatment also up-regulated annexin II, V, and VI gene expression. K-201 significantly reduced the up-regulation of annexin II, V, and VI gene expression in RA-treated cultures to levels similar to untreated cultures (Fig. We have demonstrated that RA treatment led to the release of mineralization-competent APase and annexin II-, V-, and VI-containing matrix vesicles, whereas untreated chondrocytes released vesicles that contain no or little APase activity and annexins II, V, and VI (16; see also Fig. It is now well established that the final fate of terminally differentiated chondrocytes is apoptosis ( In this study we show that RA triggers a whole series of terminal differentiation events, including up-regulation of terminal differentiation marker genes (APase, RA is known to regulate transcription after binding to the retinoic acid receptor complex. Three RA receptors have been identified, retinoic acid receptors α, β, and γ. RA binds to one of these receptors, and this receptor complex then dimerizes with another receptor, retinoid X receptor (RXR). These receptor complexes then directly activate gene expression of transcription factors and other genes ( It is not clear how RA induces annexin channel formation. However, several possibilities can be envisioned. RA may bind to membrane receptors yet to be discovered. This binding activates an initial increase in cytosolic calcium concentration. Annexins require a certain Ca RA up-regulates gene expression of Terminal differentiation is also accompanied by extracellular matrix remodeling and alteration of collagen gene expression. When chondrocytes undergo hypertrophic changes they turn on type X collagen gene expression and down-regulate type II collagen synthesis ( Annexin-mediated alteration of Ca RA does not only induce mineralization of growth plate chondrocytes, but it triggers the whole cascade of terminal differentiation events, including apoptosis. Apoptosis, or programmed cell death, has been shown to be the final event of chondrocyte differentiation ( Annexin V has also been shown to mediate Ca Hypertrophic and terminally differentiated growth plate chondrocytes express three annexins (annexins II, V, and VI). Previous studies have shown that all three annexins can form Ca Previous studies from our and other laboratories have shown the expression of hypertrophic and terminal differentiation markers, including annexins II, V, and VI, APase, osteopontin, osteocalcin, and type X collagen in osteoarthritic cartilage (