Injuries to the elbow are commonly encountered in orthopaedic practice. They range from low energy, simple isolated fractures, to high energy complex fracture dislocations with severe ligamentous disruption. Recognising the precise pattern of injury is critical in restoring elbow function and preventing chronic instability, pain and weakness. This article discusses the important osseous and ligamentous stabilisers of the elbow joint and provides management protocols for the common patterns of complex injury encountered by the practising surgeon. Complex elbow instability (CEI) is a term used to describe elbow dislocation in the presence of a fracture There are many possible permutations of injury that may occur resulting in the clinical entity of CEI, but for the purpose of this review we will discuss the management of 4 broad categories in the context of this injury: Transolecranon fracture dislocations Elbow dislocation with concomitant fracture of the coronoid Elbow dislocation in the presence of radial head fracture Elbow dislocation with coronoid and radial head fracture (the terrible triad) However, to appreciate the role of each of the above in the setting of instability, the relevant anatomy and their contributions to the normal stability will be discussed first. The elbow joint is a trochoginglymoid joint capable of flexion/extension and supination/pronation (2 degrees of freedom) Primary stabilisers anterior bundle of the medial collateral ligament (MCL) ulnohumeral joint intricate congruency lateral collateral ligament (LCL) complex Secondary stabilisers anterior joint capsule forearm musculature radial head The LCL is a complex of ligaments, often subdivided into 4 distinct structures: the annular ligament, radial collateral ligament (RCL), accessory lateral collateral ligament and lateral ulnar collateral ligament (LUCL) The MCL (also known as the ulnar collateral ligament) is made up of anterior, posterior and transverse bundles The anterior portion of the joint capsule has been shown to provide much of the resistance to varus and valgus stress with the elbow in extension, however, this role diminishes significantly at 90° of flexion Giannicola et al. have recently investigated the prevalence of soft tissue injuries in the setting of complex elbow instability The articular elements considered to be the key osseous constraints of the elbow are the olecranon, coronoid and radial head Several studies have investigated the effect of resection of the olecranon on elbow stability The flexor and extensor muscles crossing the elbow have a resultant force vector, which displaces the forearm posteriorly. In this regard, the coronoid is thought to be the most significant determinant of stability of the ulnohumeral joint, owing to its role as a buttress to posterior displacement of the elbow The relationship between the radial head and the coronoid was studied in further detail by Scheenberger et al. Fracture of the radial head in isolation is common and rarely results in any significant clinical instability At the limits of extension, locking of the olecranon in the olecranon fossa further adds to the coronal plane stability. Similarly, in a fully flexed elbow the “keying-in” of the radial head and in particular the coronoid into their fossae on the anterior surface of the humerus provide further stability in this plane. CEI most commonly occurs following a fall from standing height onto an outstretched hand or the elbow directly, however less frequently it happens as a result of a high energy injury. O’Driscoll and Morrey Initial evaluation in the emergency department (ED) should follow ATLS principles for trauma patients, and in others, there must be a low threshold of suspicion for accompanying injuries, specifically in the setting of a high energy injury. Patients often present with pain and gross swelling around the elbow joint with the inability to carry out active movement. Examination of the distal neurovascular status is mandatory, however the incidence of vascular compromise is low in the setting of a closed low energy injury In most cases, prompt closed reduction in the ED should be attempted, and in particular, if there may be a delay in sending the patient to the operating theatre. This will reduce pressure on the soft tissues and thus decrease the chance of subsequent secondary neurovascular compromise or compartment syndrome. However, depending on the pattern of injury, closed reduction may be difficult, and so we advise limited attempts by an experienced clinician. Lack of sufficient pain relief and muscle relaxation in the ED setting could potentially make the reduction difficult. If a congruent reduction cannot be obtained, the patient should be taken to theatre for reduction under general anaesthesia, proceeding with open techniques if required. Computer Tomography (CT) scanning is a useful adjunct to assessment of CEI. We recommend its use to delineate complex fracture patterns and to assist in surgical planning. Magnetic Resonance Imaging (MRI) is also useful in this respect, and provides further information regarding the soft tissues. However, in the acute setting, image resolution is limited by post-traumatic oedema and the authors own view is that a detailed understanding of the anatomy of the injury combined with clinical examination and exploration at the time of surgery is usually more than adequate to define the extent of the soft tissue injuries. In most cases surgical management provides the best prospect for the restoration of normal anatomy and function, however, certain individuals may benefit from non-operative treatment. Patient factors are paramount, and the operating surgeon should exercise discretion when considering the surgical insult and anaesthetic burden on patients who have severe co-morbidities. In such cases, provided that the joint is reduced, a suitable strategy is to manage the patient in a sling for a short period of time (this will vary based on the extent bony involvement) followed by mobilisation as pain allows. In the case of small isolated coronoid tip fractures, a non-operative approach with early gentle rehabilitation is beneficial provided that the joint remains stable following reduction. In our practice hinged elbow braces have limited applicability, as they rarely fit the patients’ anatomy perfectly, and are consequently prone to “distal slip”. When this occurs, the hinge of the brace situates distal to the centre of rotation of the elbow joint, and will therefore act as a distractor through the range of movement and incline the elbow to further instability. A suitable alternative would be a custom thermoplastic splint which allows for easy immobilisation of the elbow in the position of rest (or neutral), and facilitate rehabilitation in the so called “over the head” position. Gravity will thereby help to keep the ulnohumeral and radiocapitellar joints reduced throughout the arc of movement. Surgical management should take place as soon as the: patient is stable surgical expertise is available required information has been acquired from relevant imaging swelling from the injury does not pose any risk to the soft tissues post operatively Definitive surgical management of CEI can be challenging, and we urge caution for clinicians who are unfamiliar with this injury. Where suitable expertise is not available, the application of temporary stabilising methods (e.g. external fixation) and early referral to specialist centre is recommended. The Mayo classification proposed by Morrey There are few large case series in the literature for this type of injury as it is uncommon and often misidentified as a variant of the Monteggia fracture pattern Recommendations for management: Stable anatomic fixation with restoration of the trochlear notch width Contoured anatomical olecranon plates Fixation of concomitant coronoid process fracture Attempt preservation of the olecranon tip (attachment of triceps) even if significant comminution Early postoperative mobilisation Fractures of the coronoid rarely happen in isolation, however, their stabilising influence to the ulnohumeral articulation is significant, and therefore their management often takes priority. The first classification system for fractures of the coronoid was proposed by Regan and Morrey Coronoid tip fractures were at first thought to be an avulsion fracture of the brachialis, but have recently been noted to be fully intra articular and devoid of any muscle attachments We present our recommendations based on the O’Driscoll classification system, as we believe it to be the most useful in guiding our current practise:  Suture fixation if fragment size amenable to repair (and larger than 10% of coronoid height) via a lateral approach Repair of any existing MCL lesion through a medial approach if fragment is small (<10% coronoid height) if the elbow joint remains unstable following the initial reduction Arthroscopic removal for previously unaddressed fragments which are symptomatic and acting as a “loose body”  Open reduction and internal fixation with repair of deficient ligamentous complexes Medial exposure Application of a pre-contoured buttress plate Screw fixation (without plating) in the posterior-anterior direction Reconstruction with bone graft Subtype I Open reduction internal fixation using dorsal/volar placed screws or application a contoured coronoid plate through a medial approach Subtype II Further intra-operative assessment of coronoid through olecranon fragment Fixation of transverse coronoid fragment with sutures engaging capsule Stable anatomic fixation of olecranon Use of two plate technique; dorsal plate for olecranon and second contoured plate to act either as a buttress on the front of coronoid or a medial “coronoid plate” There are relatively few studies which review radial head fracture in isolation following a dislocation, thereby hinting at the relatively rarity of this injury without concomitant fractures Josefsson et al. Several authors have noted the importance of the ligamentous injury with radial head fracture which accompanies the dislocation. Josefsson Recommendations for management: Preservation of the radial head Reconstruction if minimal fragmentation Replacement by metallic prosthesis if not reconstructible Repair of the LCL as part of radial head replacement or reconstruction if the elbow joint remains unstable Suture anchors for avulsions at the origin Repair/reconstruction of MCL if lateral soft tissue repair does not restore stability Protect ligament and/or radial head reconstruction with hinged external fixator if persistent instability despite best surgical efforts Avoid prolonged immobility in brace On occasion, dislocation of the elbow will result in fractures of the radial head and coronoid with disruption of the MCL complex in a combination termed the “terrible” or “unhappy triad”. The foundations for this negative expression are the historically poor outcomes following treatment of this injury, chiefly as a result of an under appreciation of the importance of retaining the radial head or neglect of the coronoid fragment Fern et al. Lateral ligament disruption has been shown to be prevalent in terrible triad injury Recommendations for management: Osteosythesis of the radial head and coronoid Repair of LCL complex Repair of the MCL if elbow instability persists after structures in 1 In particular for throwing athletes Hinged external fixation if elbow remains unstable intraoperatively after 1,2 This article has provided an overview of the common patterns of injury encountered in elbow fracture dislocations. It can be seen from the complex relationship between the primary and secondary anatomical restraints of the elbow that disruption of these crucial structures correlates with the severity of the injury. Through understanding the interplay of both bony and soft tissue constructs it is possible to gain insight into the spectrum of injuries that can affect the adult elbow and hence plan anatomical reconstruction – which is key to restoring this complex joint to an acceptable level of function. None.  The questions follow each featured article with 5 response choices, of which 1 is correct. The Injury CME program fulfills the British Orthopaedic Association essentials. The BOA is accredited to sponsor continuing medical education for physicians. You can earn one CPD point using Injury CME Online, at Log on to Injury CME Online:   Injury Editorial Office   In elbow dislocations, the terrible triad consists of: fracture of the proximal ulna, capitellum and radial head. fracture of the radial head, proximal ulna and dislocation of the proximal ulnohumeral joint. fracture of the coronoid, proximal ulna and disruption of the lateral collateral ligament. fracture of the radial head and coronoid with disruption of the medial collateral ligament. dislocation of the ulnohumeral, proximal radioulnar and distal radioulnar joints. The medial collateral ligament consists of two distinct bands. the anterior bundle is taut from full extension to 90 degrees of flexion. provides resistance to valgus loads throughout the elbow arc of motion. is composed predominantly of type II collagen. has a higher proportion of sharpeys fibres than the lateral collateral ligament, increasing its resistance to failure. The lateral collateral ligament is an important secondary stabilizer of the ulnohumeral joint. is thought to play an important role in posterolateral rotatory instability. is unlikely to require operative reconstruction if disrupted. Is disrupted in the terrible triad. consists of three separate bands. Transolecranon fracture dislocations are a variant of the simple olecranon fracture. are signified by posterior translation of the forearm relative to the humerus. can be regarded as a variant of the monteggia fracture pattern. have optimal outcomes when treated with resection of the proximal ulna and triceps advancement. benefit from anatomical reconstruction and early active mobilization. Regarding the osseous contributions to elbow stability The radial head acts as a primary stabilizer of the ulnohumeral joint. There is no clear correlation between the amount of bone loss from the olecranon and subsequent stability. Up to 75% of the coronoid can be lost before the stability is affected. Isolated radial head fracture often results in latent dynamic instability in high level throwing athletes. It is better to resect and replace the radial head than to accept a suboptimal reconstruction.