In the HemiDiHydrate (HDH) phosphoric acid production processes, calcium sulfate hemihydrate (HH) is formed from the reaction of fluoroapatite ore with sulfuric acid, after which it is recrystallized into calcium sulfate dihydrate (DH, gypsum). Some impurities from the feedstock are incorporated in the HH during the first reaction and finally end up mainly in the sparingly soluble gypsum.
                  By introducing ion exchange resin during the phosphoric acid-mediated recrystallization, lanthanides that are dissolved from the HH can be removed from the acid before they become incorporated again in the gypsum. With 250 g resin/kg phosphoric acid slurry, lanthanides were removed to up to 53% of the input. The resulting decrease of the lanthanide concentration in the gypsum is lower, up to 34%. The extraction efficiency is influenced by the recrystallization reaction. Lanthanides that are most readily taken up by the gypsum are extracted least. Although the sulfonic acid resin has a preference for the trivalent lanthanides, calcium ions are also extracted.Phosphoric acid is mostly produced from fluoroapatite ore and sulfuric acid Dependent on the process conditions, such as the temperature and the acid concentration, either calcium sulfate hemihydrate ( Due to the recrystallization step, the phosphate efficiency is high, >98%. After the first reaction, the HH solids are recrystallized to gypsum in the recrystallization section by reducing the temperature of the slurry. Subsequently, gypsum is filtered from the product acid and repulped in water. In the hydrocyclone of the ProGips® process, a small amount of contaminated fines is separated from the gypsum. In another HDH process, the Norsk Hydro HDH process, the recrystallization is not only effected by decreasing the temperature, but also by contacting the HH solids with a less acidic “recrystallization” acid. Consequently, the HH solids are filtered from the product acid before entering the recrystallization section. The fluoroapatite ores contain a relatively high amount of lanthanides, as is shown in Due to the fact that gypsum is only slightly soluble (2.4 g/l in cold water), it is not feasible to dissolve the gypsum and remove the lanthanides after dissolution by, for example, ion exchange or solvent extraction. Therefore, possibilities are investigated to remove the lanthanides in-line, either during the reaction of the ore with sulfuric acid or during the recrystallization step. During these steps, the solids in which the lanthanides are incorporated, in the ore in the case of the first step and in the HH in the recrystallization step, dissolve. During dissolution, the lanthanides also dissolve and they may be removed before they are incorporated again in the newly formed solid phase. We have chosen the recrystallization step for the extraction of the lanthanides, because the process conditions are milder during this step compared to the digestion step. The recrystallization with simultaneous extraction is schematically presented in The treatment of slurry streams by ion exchange cannot be performed in packed columns, because the solid particles would clog the column. Several techniques have been developed to overcome the problem of clogging, such as fluid bed ion exchange and resin-in-pulp contactors As a first option, extraction is performed during the recrystallization reaction by adding ion exchange resin beads to the stirred vessel in which the recrystallization is performed. In this way, the extraction during recrystallization can be investigated relatively quickly. Since the commercial recrystallization process is also performed in stirred vessels, the laboratory experiments will also give a good indication of the possibilities of ion exchange extraction in the commercial processes. In this paper, the term “extraction” denotes the uptake of ions by the ion exchange resin, whereas “uptake” is solely used for the uptake of the lanthanide ions by the calcium sulfate crystals. Both the uptake by the newly formed gypsum crystals as well as the extraction by the resin depend on the concentration of the cations in the phosphoric acid. The uptake of impurity ion A by the crystals is described by the distribution coefficient, It is also important to keep in mind that only the surface of the crystals is in contact with the acid. Impurities that are already overgrown by a new layer of calcium sulfate are incorporated and cannot diffuse out of the crystal anymore. During a batch recrystallization, the concentration of impurities in the acid increases due to dissolution of the impurities from the HH crystals. Every newly formed gypsum layer will have a higher concentration of impurities than the former layers and a concentration gradient will occur in the gypsum crystals. Due to this, a calculated The concentration in the ion exchange resin depends on the concentration in the phosphoric acid. The extraction is described by the distribution coefficient, The influence of the uptake by the gypsum crystals on the extraction efficiency depends on the difference in the distribution coefficients. If With the distribution The extraction is also influenced by kinetics. In ion exchange extraction, the rate determining step is particle or film diffusion The industrial phosphoric acid and HH were obtained from a Norsk Hydro HDH process using either a mixture of 50% Jordan and 50% Kovdor ore, or just using Jordan ore. The phosphoric acid approximately contains 0.8 mol/kg H The DOWEX C-500 ion exchange resin (Fluka) is a strongly acidic cation exchange resin with 4.9 meq/g of sulfonic acid functional groups. The spherical wet beads have a size of 465–635 μm. To determine The batch recrystallization experiments were started by heating the phosphoric acid. After the phosphoric acid reached the temperature of 80°C, gypsum seeds, HH, and DOWEX C-500 resin (only for the experiments with ion exchange resin) were added. During the recrystallization, samples of the slurry were taken regularly. The resin and calcium sulfate solids were separated from the phosphoric acid by filtration and were washed twice with a hot saturated solution of chemically pure gypsum to remove the acid and subsequently twice with acetone (Merck) to facilitate drying of the crystals. The calcium sulfate particles are approximately 100 μm, and are separated easily from the dry resin beads by sieving with a 300-μm sieve. After completion of the recrystallization, the ion exchange resin was recovered from the slurry by sieving. To separate the resin beads, tap water was used to wash away the wet calcium sulfate solids. The resin was regenerated by contacting it in a stirred vessel with 55 g/l hydrochloric acid until equilibrium was reached. It was assumed that all ions present on the resin were taken up by the hydrochloric acid solution. From the amount in the stripping solution and the input amounts, the extraction efficiency, To analyze the calcium sulfate crystals, they were dissolved in a solution of aqua regia using a microwave digestion system (Milestone). The concentrations of the lanthanides were either determined by High Resolution Inductively Coupled Plasma-Mass Spectrometry (HR ICP-MS, Finnigan) or by Inductively Coupled Plasma-Atomic Emission Spectroscopy (ICP-AES, Spectro). The concentrations of Ca, SO The conversion degree of the recrystallization was determined through the measurement of the percentage of gypsum in the calcium sulfate phase. Calcium sulfate was heated in an oven at 400°C to remove the water in the crystal. The fraction of gypsum was calculated from the weight difference by The The Although the sulfonic acid ion exchange resin has a preference for the trivalent lanthanides, it also extracts bivalent cations, like the calcium ion, which is present in the phosphoric acid in relatively high concentrations, 1 g Ca/kg acid compared to e.g., 18 mg Ce/kg acid. The affinity sequence of the ion exchange resin is influenced by the amount of resin that is added to the slurry due to competition effects in this multi-component system Using the calculation shown in During a batch recrystallization, the addition of only 50 g resin/kg phosphoric acid slurry resulted in an extraction efficiency of up to 21% for a single lanthanide ion, as is shown in As already discussed, the resin does not only extract the trivalent lanthanides, but also the bivalent calcium ions. For this experiment, the extraction efficiency of calcium was 3.2%. Although the ion exchange resin is by far more selective for the lanthanides, it is calculated that 33% of the theoretical capacity of the ion exchange resin is occupied by calcium ions due to its much higher input amount (1.2 mol/kg).  The differences between the predicted extraction efficiency and the experimentally found value are due to changes in the Comparison of the extraction efficiencies presented in On adding 250 g resin/kg phosphoric acid slurry, the extraction efficiency of lanthanides increased significantly. This is shown in With 250 g resin/kg phosphoric acid slurry, lanthanides can be removed during the recrystallization of HH to gypsum to up to 53% for europium. Due to the fact that the distribution The distribution coefficient Although the sulfonic acid ion exchange resin used has a preference for the lanthanides, it also extracts bivalent cations such as calcium. To gain a pure lanthanide product, either the lanthanides or calcium should be selectively extracted or precipitated from concentrated hydrochloric or nitric acid solutions. The authors would like to thank Kemira Agro Pernis and Hydro Agri Rotterdam for their financial support.