The adsorption of nickel, cobalt, copper and zinc onto microcapsules containing 2-ethylhexylphosphonic acid mono-2-ethylhexyl ester (EHPNA) was investigated. Through scanning electron microscopy imaging of the microcapsule-surface and neutralization titration estimation of the amount of EHPNA extractant remaining in the microcapsule, the microencapsulated extractant was characterized. The equilibrium of adsorption for each of the metals was measured and applied to a Langmuir adsorption isotherm, and from this and the metal adsorption rates, it was estimated that both the formation of a metal complex and its diffusion through the pores of the microcapsule contribute to the overall adsorption rate of the metals. Furthermore, the separation ability of the metals was found to be enhanced by reducing the flow rate of the feed solution or increasing the height of the packed column. By repeating the adsorption–desorption of a Ni–Co mixture five times, the Ni and Co were effectively separated.There has been a recent increase in demand for a number of valuable metals such as nickel and cobalt that are commonly used in materials such as electronic devices and lithium ion battery electrodes, but which cannot be obtained as a raw material in Japan. This has therefore created a growing need to separate and recover such metals from waste water and recycled materials. In the case of industrial waste treatment, only very dilute aqueous solutions of valuable metals are obtained, which requires new technology to be developed. Various methods already exist for the recovery of metals from aqueous solutions, with liquid–liquid extraction methods having been the most commonly employed so far ( Over the last several decades, alternative techniques for the solvent extraction of metals from dilute solutions have been developed, with typical examples including: supported liquid membranes ( The metal extractant used in this study was 2-ethylhexylphosphonic acid mono-2-ethylhexyl ester (abbreviated as EHPNA hereafter), which was kindly supplied by Daihachi Chemical Industry Co. Ltd., Osaka, Japan and was used without further purification. The monomer used to make the polymer matrix of the microcapsules was divinylbenzene (DVB), with 2, 2′-Azobis(2, 4-dimethylvaleronitrile) (ADVN) used as the polymerization initiator and toluene employed as a DVB diluent. All chemicals used were JIS special grade reagents. For the metal source, JIS special grade NiCl The reactor used for the preparation of the microcapsules is shown in The amount of extractant encapsulated in each of the microcapsules was measured as follows: First, 0.1 A 10 The initial concentration of all metals in the solution was adjusted to 0.0025 In addition, the phosphorus concentration in the solution after equilibrium was also measured using ICPS to assess the extent of the extractant leakage from the microcapsules. A shallow bed reactor, as shown in For each metal, the initial concentration was varied from 0.001 to 0.01 The experimental procedure used to assess the effect of temperature was largely the same as that described in The aqueous solution containing the four dissolved metal salts was adjusted to various pH values using the aforementioned pH-adjusting solution. These metal-ion feed solutions were then passed through a microcapsule-packed column (inner diameter Desorption solutions with various pH values were passed through the packed column, specifically the one used for adsorbing metals from a pH Each metal salt was dissolved in aqueous solutions adjusted to pHs of 4.0, 4.5 and 5.0. These feed solutions were then passed through the packed column (inner diameter Both metal salts were dissolved in an aqueous solution adjusted to a pH of 5.0, with the initial concentration of each metal adjusted to 0.005 Following metal adsorption at pH  With all of the metals tested, the amount adsorbed was found to increase with pH value. The reason for this can be explained by the extraction equilibrium of metals for EHPNA ( The adsorption isotherms for each metal are shown in The relationship between the extent of metal adsorbed and the equilibrium pH for a mixed-metal system shown in The rate of metal ion adsorption onto the microcapsule was analyzed using Eq. When log The relationship between In Using this, it was found that the apparent activation energy of Ni, Co, Cu, and Zn is about 17.2, 26.7, 55.2 and 23.9 From the results of examining the dependency of adsorption rate on metal concentration and temperature, it is believed that is both the formation of a metal complex, and its diffusion through the pores in the microcapsule, that determine the overall adsorption rate of the metals. By varying the flow rate of the feed solution and the height of the packed column, it was found that the separation of the metals was enhanced by increasing the retention time of the feed solution in the column. In the adsorption breakthrough curves obtained through these This reveals that metal breakthrough took place in the order of Ni, Co, Cu, and Zn, or more specifically, was dependent on the extractant's affinity for the metal ion. Thus, the separation of Ni and Co from the other metals was relatively easy, but separating the two from each other proved difficult at a pH of 4.0. Similarly, the separation of Ni and Cu–Zn group was easy, but the separation of Co from Cu–Zn group was difficult under conditions of pH In Separation during desorption was also examined, the results of which are shown in The adsorption breakthrough curves for Ni and Co at pHs of 4.0, 4.5 and 5.0 ( To separate two metals, the adsorption operation should generally be stopped just before the breakthrough point of the metal ion that has the higher affinity with the adsorbent. However, this is often quite difficult to predict in advance, and so the adsorption–desorption step in this study was repeated several times. The adsorption breakthrough curve of a Ni–Co mixture system (285 From The adsorption and separation of nickel, cobalt, copper and zinc by microcapsules (138 These results were subsequently adapted to the separation of nickel and cobalt from a Ni–Co–Cu–Zn solution using a column packed with these microcapsules, in which it was found that the separation of the metals was enhanced by either reducing the flow rate of the feed solution or increasing the height of the column. The separation of Ni and Co from a Ni–Co solution was then examined, with effective separation of both metals achieved within five repetitions of the adsorption–desorption step. The potential for separating Ni and Co in the desorption step alone was also identified, and thus the information obtained in this study sheds new light upon potential techniques for the separation of valuable metals from other base metals in hydrometallurgical operations, or in the recycling of waste materials. The authors wish to express their thanks to Daihachi Chemical Industry Co., Ltd. for providing the EHPNA used in this study.