Microwave-induced rock fracturing technology is considered as a promising method for rock fragmentation and mineral processing. The borehole fracturing technology for hard rocks may be used to relieve stress on rock masses encountered in deep underground engineering works and prevent geological disasters triggered by high stress concentration. However, owing to microwaves causing selective heating, different types of rocks show different heating effects. Based on microwave heating experiments on multiple types of rocks, three typical rocks with different heating effects were investigated. According to X-ray diffraction (XRD) patterns and microscope images, the primary mineral compositions of rocks and microstructures of minerals were determined. By employing an infrared thermal imager, the distribution of surface temperature of samples were measured. Afterwards, according to sensitivity to microwaves and thermal expansion of rock-forming minerals, the mechanism whereby different types of rocks show different heating effects was analysed. Chifeng basalt contains both minerals (pyroxene) sensitive to microwaves and minerals (olivine) with a high coefficient of thermal expansion, mainly manifesting itself as rock fracturing during microwave heating. As only minerals (pyroxene) sensitive to microwaves, while no minerals with high coefficients of thermal expansion were found in Anshan gabbro, the rock was mainly molten during microwave heating. Neither minerals sensitive to microwaves, nor minerals with a high coefficient of thermal expansion were contained in the Beishan granite, so these samples underwent no significant change before, or after, microwave irradiationMicrowave-induced rock fracturing technology is regarded as a promising microwave-assisted mechanical rock breakage technology for mining and mineral processing ( During tunnelling, TBMs and shield tunnelling machines have been used increasingly widely: when excavating hard rock tunnels by TBM, disc cutters become worn, which calls for frequent tool changes, more maintenance expenditure, and significantly influences the schedule of construction ( Some scholars have carried out numerous experiments and numerical research into the mechanism governing the microwave-induced fracturing of rocks (or ores) and the influence of microwave treatment on mechanical properties of rocks (or ores) ( At present, the mechanism whereby microwaves exhibit different heating effects on different types of rocks is not clarified. Based on microwave heating tests on multiple types of rocks, three typical rocks taken from different regions in China, including Chifeng basalt (Inner Mongolia), Anshan gabbro (Liaoning Province), and Beishan granite (Gansu Province) with different microwave heating effects were explored. By applying XRD patterns and microscope images, the main mineral compositions and microstructures of rocks were determined. By utilising a multi-mode cavity working at a frequency of 2.45 GHz, microwave heating experiments were conducted on three types of rocks and also the heating characteristics of the three types of rocks were investigated by employing an infrared thermal imager. However, owing to microwaves causing selective heating, different types of rocks exhibit different microwave heating effects. Some rocks are cracked and broken, some rocks are molten, while some other rocks undergo no significant change. According to their sensitivity to microwaves and thermal expansion of rock-forming minerals, the mechanism whereby different types of rocks have different microwave heating effects was analysed. A material that is able to store electric energy when subjected to an external electric field is called a dielectric material. When a dielectric material is subjected to an alternating current, it absorbs electrical energy, which is dissipated in the form of heat (the dielectric loss). The dielectric constant of a material is composed of a real part and an imaginary part as follows ( The loss tangent (tan The absorption capability of a dielectric material for microwaves is related to its dielectric properties. The microwave heating mechanism of minerals and rocks in electromagnetic fields is often expressed as a power density and can be represented by the following equation ( Where, The energy absorbed by the material causes the temperature of the material to increase ( By combining Eqs. An increase in material temperature causes the volume of the material to increase ( After being irradiated by microwaves, rocks absorb energy generated by microwaves and turn the energy into thermal energy, causing the temperature rising of rocks. After the temeprature of rocks increases, mineral compositions in rocks are subejcted to volume expansion, consequently causing that damage and fracture appear in rocks. Different mineral compositions exhibit diverse sensitivities to microwaves owing to their different dielectric properties. Moreover, different rocks are subejcted to differing amounts of thermal expansion because different mineral compositions have different coefficients of thermal expansion. Therefore, due to the difference in sensitivity to microwaves and the coefficient of thermal expansion of minerals in rocks, different types of rocks show different heating charcteristics and fracturing effects. To explain why different types of rocks show different effects of microwave heating, three types of rocks (including Chifeng basalt, Anshan gabbro, and Beishan granite) were separately used for the experiment. Each of the core samples for the three types of rocks was sampled from the same rock block. The upper and lower end faces of samples were polished and the samples used in the experiment were cylinders measuring By conducting XRD test and microscope examination, the mineral compositions and microstructures of the three types of rocks were determined. The XRD patterns ( Microwave heating experiments were carried out using a multi-mode cavity with continuous waves (CW) working at a frequency of 2.45 GHz, for which the power is adjustable within the range from 0 to 6 kW ( By using an R500EX-Pro infrared camera (temperature measurement range: −40 °C to 2000 °C and a frame frequency of 30 Hz) produced by NEC Avio Company, Japan, the surface temperature distribution of samples was measured. The method for microwave heating and measurement of temperature distribution is illustrated as follows: in each experiment, a sample was placed on the approximate centre of the microwave cavity and then heated according to preset power and irradiation time. After microwave heating, the door of the furnace in the microwave cavity was immediately opened for infrared measurement, then the cylindrical sample ( The techniques used when measuring the dielectric properties of materials include coaxial probe techniques, transmission line techniques, free space techniques, resonant cavity perturbation techniques, and so on. Each method has its inherent advantages and disadvantages and corresponding applicability. The transmission line technique includes coaxial and waveguide transmission line techniques. Owing to rocks being solid materials with a wide range of dielectric properties (including high- and low-loss materials), a coaxial transmission line technique was used to measure the dielectric properties of these rocks. The experiment was carried out by using a Keysight E5063A Vector Network Analyzer (with a frequency in the range of 0.5 GHz to 18 GHz), with corresponding clamps (on the coaxial airline), and allied software. The rocks were formed into circular samples (with the outer diameter, inner diameter and length of 7, 3, and 10 mm, respectively) and mounted at the coaxial airline, used for further testing at room temperature and normal pressure. The heating effects of the three types of rocks through microwave irradiation at the power of 5 kW are shown in No significant breakage was shown in Anshan gabbro after microwave irradiation for 180 s and the heating effect mainly appeared as rock melting. After being irradiated by microwaves for 30 and 60 s, the sample surface showed a significant crack. After microwave irradiation for 60 s, molten magma was found flowing from the previous crack. The longer the irradiation time, the more molten magma flowed from the cracks and the lighter its colour. After being irradiated by microwaves for 180 s, the lower parts of the samples appeared red and molten and were significantly fractured. The fracture appeared in the samples because melting at such a high temperature changed the microstructure of the rocks, thus depriving them of their bearing capacity. When the samples were cooled to room temperature, the magma appeared as black vitreous material. After Beishan granite was irradiated at 5 kW, no significant fractures were found in six samples ( After the samples were exposed to microwave irradiation, the temperature on each sample surface was non-uniform ( During the first 60 s of microwave irradiation, the highest and average temperatures of Anshan gabbro also showed an approximately linear increasing relationship with increasing irradiation time. Anshan gabbro was molten when being irradiated by microwaves for 90 s. In this case, the highest temperature of Anshan gabbro increased sharply (from 349.6 °C at 60 s to 737.3 °C at 90 s), which was because molten magma flowed from cracks and therefore the surface temperature of this molten magma was detected when using the infrared sensor. The heat was mainly concentrated in the lower part of samples, where samples were more likely to be molten. With increasing irradiation time, the temperature of samples constantly increased and it reached 807.8 °C in 180 s. The average temperature of Anshan gabbro increased uniformly and reached 554.3 °C in 180 s. It is worth noting that the heating rates of the highest and average temperatures of Anshan gabbro within the first 60 s (irradiation time) were slightly lower than those of Chifeng basalt ( Beishan granite showed a poor microwave heating effect and its highest and average temperatures both increased in a quasi-linear manner with increasing irradiation time. After samples were irradiated by microwaves for 180 s, the highest and average temperatures of Beishan granite samples were 59.5 °C and 55.8 °C, respectively. After microwave irradiation for 180 s, the highest and average temperatures of samples rose by 39.5 °C and 35.8 °C, with heating rates of 0.22 °C/s and 0.21 °C/s, respectively ( The results ( Anshan gabbro was mainly composed of plagioclase, pyroxene and quartz, as well as a small amount of hornblende and serpentine. The TG curve ( The main minerals of Beishan granite were quartz, feldspar and mica. The TG curve ( The main rock-forming minerals making up rocks exhibit different sensitivities to microwaves in which pyroxene is classified as a minerals with a strong absorption capacity for microwaves while a majority of minerals (including quartz, calcite, feldspar, and mica) are minerals with a weak absorption capacity for microwaves ( As the main minerals in Chifeng basalt and Anshan gabbro containing pyroxene (a mineral with a strong absorption capacity for microwaves), Chifeng basalt and Anshan gabbro show a strong sensitivity to microwave irradiation. Thus, after being irradiated by microwaves, Chifeng basalt and Anshan gabbro exhibited a high heating rate (separately, 5.5 °C/s and 4.6 °C/s). Chifeng basalt was broken and split under the effects of high temperatures while Anshan gabbro melted owing to temperatures exceeding its melting point. Beishan granite included quartz, plagioclase, and alkali feldspar (minerals with a weak absorption capacity for microwaves), therefore, Beishan granite showed a weak absorption capacity for microwaves. After undergoing microwave irradiation, Beishan granite showed weak heating characteristics (0.2 °C/s). After samples were irradiated by microwaves for 180 s at 5 kW, the temperature of Beishan granite rose by about 30 °C. Thermal parameters of many rock-forming minerals were measured by high-temperature XRD techniques. According to measured data, it can be seen that different rock-forming minerals have different coefficients of volumetric thermal expansion ( Anshan gabbro contains plagioclase, pyroxene, and quartz and the coefficients of volumetric thermal expansion of all three minerals were all low, therefore, although the temperature in Anshan gabbro rose significantly (samples melted after microwave irradiation), no significant breakage of rocks occurred. By using a microscope, the microstructures of minerals contained in Anshan gabbro before, and after, being subjected to microwave irradiation were observed. At 60 s when samples were irradiated by microwaves (before melting), many transgranular fractures were generated in the pyroxene therein. The reason for this was that the heat was mainly accumulated in the interior of the pyroxene particles, which changed the mineral structure thereof. Beishan granite includes quartz, plagioclase, and alkali feldspar (all minerals with a weak absorption capacity for microwaves and with low volume expansion). As a result, after being irradiated by microwaves, Beishan granite showed a low heating rate and was not subject to significant fracturing. Overall, owing to different rock-forming minerals show different sensitivities to microwaves and undergoing different amounts of thermal expansion, different types of rocks produced different heating effects after microwave irradiation. When rocks contained minerals sensitive to microwaves and those with a high coefficient of thermal expansion, the rocks were fractured (broken) upon microwave irradiation. When only minerals sensitive to microwaves are found, without those having a high coefficient of thermal expansion, the rock melted upon microwave irradiation. When rocks contain no minerals sensitive to microwaves and minerals with a high coefficient of thermal expansion, the rocks are not subjected to significant fracturing after exposing to microwave irradiation. Containing minerals sensitive to microwaves is the fundamental condition governing whether, or not, a rock can be heated by microwave irradiation. The dielectric properties (dielectric constant and loss factor) of Chifeng basalt, Anshan gabbro, and Beishan granite measured by using coaxial transmission line method are displayed in It can be seen from The loss factor measures the capacity of a material to transform microwave energy into heat. Rocks having a high loss factor are able to transform a great amount of microwave energies into heat. Afterwards, rocks absorb energy causing their temperature to increase. Temperature rise is considered a fundamental condition for rocks to be fractured under microwave irradiation. When rocks contain minerals with a high coefficient of thermal expansion, rocks are mainly fractured under the heating effect thereof. When rocks do not contain minerals with a high coefficient of thermal expansion, they tend to melt under microwave irradiation. Furthermore, the dielectric properties of rock reflect the microwave absorption capacity of rock, thus affecting the microwave thermal effect of rock. The stronger the dielectric property of the rock, the higher the heating rate and the better the fracturing effect of the rock, resulting in the greater decrease of the uniaxial compressive strength. For example, Chifeng basalt has the highest dielectric properties and the greatest reduction in uniaxial compressive strength. Granite has the lowest dielectric property and the smallest reduction of the uniaxial compressive strength ( A uniaxial compressive strength test was separately carried out on the three types of rocks before, and after, being irradiated by microwaves. The results are summarised in The uniaxial compressive strengths of Chifeng basalt and Anshan gabbro decreased in a quasi-linear manner with increasing exposure time to microwave irradiation ( Microwave-induced fracturing effects on rocks can be divided into fracturing (breaking), melting, and an absence of macro-fractures, which are related to sensitivity to microwaves and thermal expansion of minerals in the rocks. The sensitivity of minerals to microwaves determines the heating characteristics of rocks: rocks containing minerals sensitive to microwaves exhibit a high heating rate. The surface temperature of samples approximately shows a linear increasing relationship with microwave irradiation time. After samples are broken or molten, the surface temperature of samples suddenly rises, implying that the internal temperature of samples is higher than their surface temperature. The thermal expansion of minerals determines the extent of damage suffered: when being heated, minerals with a high coefficient of thermal expansion cause rock fracturing. Otherwise, rocks are molten after being heated to their melting point. Therefore, microwave-induced rock fracturing occurs under conditions governed by the presence of two types of minerals: those sensitive to microwaves and those with a high coefficient of thermal expansion. Minerals sensitive to microwaves cause the temperature rise observed in rocks and minerals with a high coefficient of thermal expansion and this further leads to rock fracturing. Different rock-forming minerals show different sensitivities to microwaves and thermal expansion and therefore different types of rocks exhibit different microwave-induced fracturing effects. When a rock contains both minerals sensitive to microwaves and minerals with a high coefficient of thermal expansion, the rock is mainly fractured (broken) under the heating effect of microwave irradiation. When a rock only contains those minerals sensitive to microwaves while does not contain minerals with a high coefficient of thermal expansion, the rock will generally melt under the effects of microwave irradiation. When a rock does not contain minerals sensitive to microwaves or those with a high coefficient of thermal expansion, it does not undergo significant fracturing after exposure to microwave irradiation. The uniaxial compressive strength of rocks exhibited a quasi-linear reduction with increasing exposure time to microwave irradiation. The rate of reduction of the uniaxial compressive strength of rocks containing minerals with a high coefficient of thermal expansion is greater. Microwave-induced rock fracturing technology is an extremely promising microwave-assisted mechanical rock breakage technology, however, for different types of rocks, there are significant differences in terms of microwave-induced fracturing effect. Therefore, it is necessary to treat each case on its own merits in terms of rock properties and geological conditions. The authors declare that no conflict of interest exists. This work was supported by the