The present study reports a mechanochemical (MC) process for effective recovery of copper (Cu) and precious metals (i.e. Pd and Ag) from e-waste scraps. Results indicated that the mixture of K2S2O8 and NaCl (abbreviated as K2S2O8/NaCl hereafter) was the most effective co-milling reagents in terms of high recovery rate. After co-milling with K2S2O8/NaCl, soluble metallic compounds were produced and consequently benefit the subsequent leaching process. 99.9% of Cu and 95.5% of Pd in the e-waste particles could be recovered in 0.5mol/L diluted HCl in 15min. Ag was concentrated in the leaching residue as AgCl and then recovered in 1mol/L NH3 solution. XRD and XPS analysis indicated that elemental metals in the raw materials were transformed into their corresponding oxidation state during ball milling process at low temperature, implying that solid–solid phase reactions is the reaction mechanism. Based on the results and thermodynamic parameters of the probable reactions, possible reaction pathways during ball milling were proposed. Suggestion on category of e-waste for ball milling process was put forward according to the experiment results. The designed metal recovery process of this study has the advantages of highly recovery rate and quick leaching speed. Thus, this study offers a promising and environmentally friendly method for recovering valuable metals from e-waste.Recycling of e-waste is an important subject not only from the point of waste treatment but also from the recovery aspect of valuable materials ( In the past decades, many techniques for recovering valuable metals from e-waste have been developed such as gravity separation, magnetic separation and electrostatic separation, ( Recently, mechanochemical (MC) technology has been widely applied in extractive metallurgy, waste treatment, crystal engineering and material engineering ( In this study, a new ball milling method was attempted for Cu and precious metal recovery from e-waste. The specialty of this study was aimed to produce soluble metallic compound after treatment with dry ball milling and consequently benefit the subsequent leaching process. The mechanism of the ball milling process used in our study is different from the existing MC leaching process. MC induced solid-state reaction is essential for the ball milling process. New co-milling reagents need to be selected and optimized. In this study, we used dry MC process to recover valuable metals from e-waste scraps by co-milling with different reagents. After milling, metal recovery with dilute HCl was studied. Separation of Pd from the leaching solution and selective recovery of Ag from the indissoluble solid residue were investigated. The characteristics of samples after milling were studied and the mechanism of MC induced solid-state reaction was proposed. E-waste scraps used in this work were supplied by XIAMEN OASIS Sources CO. Ltd., which were mainly composed of multi-layer ceramic capacitors (MLCCs) and waste PCBsPCBs. Almost all of the components (relays, capacitors, etc.) were disassembled from the PCBs when we received these materials. The bare PCBs were pretreated with a thermal shock process and crushed in a hammer crusher. Then, a centrifugal air separator was used to obtain the metallic components ( A planetary ball mill (QM-3SP2, Nanjing University Instrument Corporation, China) was used in the experiments. During the ball milling process, co-milling reagents and e-waste particles were put together into a 250 After milling, the ground sample was mixed in 0.5 The chemical composition changes and morphology information of the solid samples during the ball milling process were characterized. The crystalline phases of the samples before and after ball milling were characterized by X-ray diffraction spectroscopy (XRD, Rigaku D/max 2500) using Cu Kα radiation (γ It is known that Cu could not be leached with dilute HCl under room temperature without oxidant. As can be seen from It is interesting to note that the mixture of the NaCl and K It can also be seen from According to the above analysis, after MC treatment, there’s no significant difference in different co-milling reagents with the recovery of Zn and Ag. Recovery efficiency of Cu and Pd achieved the highest level of 99.6% and 87.5%, respectively, under K To better understand the mechanism during ball milling process, characterization of the e-waste scraps before and after ball milling was studied. As shown in To confirm the speculation, the chemical composition of the milled sample was further investigated by XPS spectra. The wide-scan XPS spectrum and deconvoluted XPS spectra are presented in  To further understand the MC reactions occurred during ball milling process, the probable MC reactions are listed in Base on the above analysis, a possible reaction mechanism is proposed to explain the MC reactions. Under the activation of ball milling process, K  If M If M If M During the ball milling process, there are many factors affecting the MC reaction performance and metal recovery efficiency. Therefore, a series of experiments were further conducted to optimize the ball milling parameters and the results are shown in  According to where  Pd recovery from the leaching solution was carried out by solvent extraction according to our previous study ( XRF data ( Results indicate that the metals in the residue were almost insoluble except Ag during the leaching process ( According to the above discussion, Cu, Pd and Ag could be successfully recovered from the e-waste scraps and Pd, Ag were separated from base metals during the process. However, this study has raised important questions about e-waste recovery with ball milling process. It can be seen from According to our measurement, precious metals are mainly exists in the electron components, such as IC, Contacts, MLCCs and thin film chip resistors. The bare mobile phone PCBs also contains high content of Ag and Au. These components were classify as precious metal containing category. Main metal elements in TV bare PCBs, PC bare PCBs and Relays are Cu, followed by Tin and Lead, which are classify as Cu rich category. USB frame, CPU frame, Line interface frame contains Fe and Al, which are classified as frames category. Besides, batteries should collected individually. The category suggestion is shown in The present study successfully developed an integrated MC process for valuable metals recovery from e-waste. Soluble metallic compounds were produces after treatment with dry ball milling and consequently benefit the subsequent leaching process. Based on the XRD, XPS results and thermodynamic parameters of the probable reactions, possible reaction pathways during ball milling were proposed. This process has the advantages of highly efficient and quick leaching speed. Remarkably, the process can avoid the use of nitric acid or mixture of nitric acid with hydrochloric acid or sulfuric acid, which is commonly used in the recovery of Cu, Ag and Pd, and consequently avoid the release of gaseous pollutants, such as NO This work was supported by the Supplementary data associated with this article can be found, in the online version, at 