In the present study, the photocatalytic degradation of acephate (O,S-dimethyl acetyl phosphoramidothioate ((CH3O)(CH3S)P(O)NHCOCH3)) in aqueous TiO2 suspensions is extensively investigated, pertaining to the concentration of photocatalyst and substrate on degradation rate of acephate. It is found that the acephate can be degradated and mineralized. The high-degradation rate is obtained with 4g/L concentration of TiO2. Moreover, Langmuir–Hinshelowood rate expression is employed for the degradation of acephate with adsorption constant and rate constant, i.e., 2.0L/mmol and 0.6mmol/(minL), respectively. The main target is to identify the products by a number of analytical techniques, such as HPLC, IC, ESR and GC–MS. Under acidic condition, the primary products are phosphorothioic acid, O,O′,S-trimethyl ester (CH3O(CH3S)P(O)OCH3) and phosphoramidothioic acid, O,S-dimethyl ester (CH3O(CH3S)P(O)NH2), etc. It indicates that the decomposition of acephate begin from the destruction of C–N and P–N bonds. Subsequently, the P–S, P–O, P–C bonds may be oxidized gradually or simultaneously, and the final products such as CO2, H3PO4, were formed. About 100% sulfur atoms are transformed into SO4
                     2− in 180min, however; only 3% nitrogen atoms and 2% phosphorus atoms were transformed into NO3
                     − and PO4
                     3−.Organophosphorous pesticide pollutant of waste water is a common problem around the world, and leads to considerable research interests Malato et al. Acephate Only limited published work has been found about the degradation of acephate in aqueous solution by UV irradiation in the presence of TiO In this paper, we utilize nano-TiO TiO HPLC analyses were performed on a Varian-5000A instrument equipped with a Spectra 100 UV–vis detector and a stainless ODS C18 column (4.6 Quantification of inorganic anions was performed on a ZIP-3 ion chromatograph (Qingdao Analysis Instrumental Company, Shandong Province, China), which consisted of a conductivity detector and an YSA anion column. The eluent, injected 20 The products of acephate destruction in the aqueous solutions were detected by GC–MS system (HP 6890 GC-5972 MSD, with a HP-5 column 0.25 The electron spin resonance signals of radicals spin trapped by DMPO were detected on a Brucker ESP 300E spectrometer, the irradiation source was a Quanta-Ray Nd:YAG pulsed laser system ( TiO Magnetically stirred reaction mixtures in Pyrex tubes were irradiated in a NDC-3 photocatalytic reactor The reactive gas was passed through the reaction vessel into a saturated solution of Ca(OH) In order to detect the intermediate products, 500 Mass spectra of products were searched in the NIST 98 library and the Wiley Registry of Mass Spectral Data (7th edition). The spectra were assigned to the corresponding products if they had at least 90% similarity to the relative library spectra. The determination of NO ESR experiments had commonly been used to confirm the production of *OH radicals in the photocatalytic reaction. The characteristic ESR signal of DMPO–OH was four peaks with an intensity ratio of 1:2:2:1. It is obvious that the conversion of acephate increases with time under all our experimental conditions in The influence of catalyst concentration on the acephate degradation is investigated with different concentrations of TiO Acephate is stable in an acidic medium, because it is difficult to be hydrolyzed The relationship of concentration of acephate ranging from 22 to 228 It is observed that the concentration curves in So, the Langmuir–Hinshelwood equation with competitive adsorption of substrate and oxygen on the same type of catalytic sites was applied to describe the photocatalytic degradation kinetics of acephate  The rate constant Actually, adsorption of reagents on the photocatalyst surface is considered to be critical for the reaction rate in common photocatalytic reaction Firstly, acephate would be protonated into (CH Secondly, it is usually believed that the reaction of the *OH radical with OPCs is the control step in the photocatalysis degradation reaction Although the decomposed reaction of acephate is different from conventional photocatalytic reactions which need specific adsorption modes or sites. The L–H model could still be employed to describe the kinetic rule. It suggests that the electrons excitated by UV light may transfer and react at some places relatively far away from the surface of TiO It is critical to understand the reactive processes and pathways by detected active radicals under UV irradiation. *OH is considered as the main oxidizing agents in photocatalysis. The electron spin trapping technique is an effective method in identification of active radicals. In this work, DMPO is chosen as the scavenger of OH radicals. The result that no signals are detected without irradiation is shown in The properties of intermediate and mineralization products are an important aspect to research photocatalytic technique to clean up contaminated water in the practical applications. It was essential to ascertain, on the basis of the experimentally identified intermediate species, a suitable reaction pathway for the degradation of acephate. Carbon dioxide is detected by solid CaCO The changes of sulfate concentration, nitrate concentration, phosphate concentration and pH during photocatalytic degradation of acephate are shown in Based on the results aforementioned, reaction mechanism of photocatalytic degradation acephate is presented in The photoexcitation of TiO Both the sulfur and the nitrogen in acephate are potential sites for oxidation. Only limited published work could be found on this subject. Yang The C–N bond in protonated acephate favorably breaks by the electrophilic OH radicals attacked under acidic condition, and the main reaction products are CH CH Subsequently, C atom in CH In addition, CH Further, when P–N bond broke, NH Finally, the carbon atom in acephate can react with *OH and be oxidized, forming final products, such as, (COOH) The photocatalytic degradation of acephate ( The main products are identified by HPLC, IC, ESR and GC–MS. The primary products are phosphorothioic acid, The work described here is financially supported by the National Natural Science Foundation of China (Nos. 20473113). The authors appreciate the assistance of Prof. Zhao J.C. Supplementary data associated with this article can be found, in the online version, at 