Treatment of radial head fractures centers around the distinction of stable, nondisplaced or minimally displaced fractures, and those with significant displacement, which are usually part of a greater pattern of injury. Treatment of stable injuries is aimed at achieving osseous union while preventing stiffness and can usually be accomplished with nonoperative means. Operative treatment of isolated radial head fractures is indicated if significant displacement or mechanical block to motion is observed. Options for surgical treatment include open or arthroscopic techniques as well as a myriad of other options including fragment or whole-head excision, internal fixation with headless compression screws, or plate-and-screw constructs as well as prosthetic replacement. Treatment of displaced or unstable fractures centers on restoration of the radiocapitellar contact and repairing other soft tissue injuries, which are necessary to stabilize the elbow. Radial head arthroplasty should be considered in situations where 3 or more fragments of the radial head exist, with the use of various intraoperative methods to ensure restoration of the lateral elbow anatomy.Despite recent advances in our understanding of patterns of injury, as well as improved fixation and prosthetic devices, radial head fractures still pose a difficult undertaking for the orthopaedic surgeon. In addition, controversies exist regarding the optimal treatment of such fractures. The classification of radial head fractures was originally defined by Mason in his 1954 article where he distinguished nondisplaced fractures (type I) from displaced partial head fractures (type II) and displaced fractures involving the entire radial head (type III). Fractures of the radial head account for approximately 4% of all fractures. The radial head articulates with the distal humerus at the capitellum laterally and with the radial fossa at high flexion angles. It can be palpated just below the antecubital crease with the elbow flexed. It forms an inverted equidistant triangle with the olecranon and lateral epicondyle, which serves as a key landmark for gaining access to elbow joint in arthroscopy and arthrocentesis. Multiple studies have demonstrated that the radial head is not perfectly circular in nature and it is concave to its articulation with the capitellum, forming a slight depression in its midportion. Ligamentous anatomy as it pertains to the lateral side of the elbow is variable in nature. Classically, Morrey defined 4 discrete ligaments including the lateral ulnar collateral, radial collateral, accessory lateral collateral, and annular ligaments. The neurovascular anatomy of the elbow is complex. Regarding the vasculature, the lateral aspect of the elbow is relatively safe, consisting only of the anastomosis of the radial collateral artery (profunda artery) and the radial recurrent artery (radial artery) at the level of the lateral epicondyle. Furthermore, the radial recurrent artery may be sacrificed as it traverses the supinator muscle traveling proximally near the radial head. The radial head functions biomechanically as a secondary stabilizer to valgus stress about the elbow and in the longitudinal stability of the forearm. In his classic study, Morrey et al Standard radiographic examination of the elbow consists of anteroposterior and lateral views of the elbow; if a radial head fracture is suspected or diagnosed, further radiographs of the forearm and wrist are obtained. In addition to the fracture, the examiner should pay special attention on the anteroposterior view to the radiocapitellar and ulnohumeral joint lines to assess for symmetry, as well as degenerative changes that may preclude fixation. Moreover, on this view, the common fracture line across the anterolateral aspect of the radial head may be discernible. On the lateral view, the presence and concentricity of the 3 arcs should be present, indicating a true lateral. Some authors have assessed the use of a computed tomography scan or magnetic resonance imaging when evaluating fractures about the elbow owing to its complex osseous anatomy. Probably the most crucial aspect in the diagnostic evaluation of radial head fractures is for the evaluator to be aware of certain patterns of injury that masquerade as simple fractures but are really just the tip of a more complex pattern of injury. Specifically, posterior transolecranon fracture dislocations of the elbow or the classic “terrible triad” injuries (consisting of fracture of the radial head and coronoid as well as disruption of the LCL complex) are patterns of elbow instability that may at first glance appear as an isolated fracture of the radial head. Classically, Essex-Lopresti fractures have been described as a fracture at the wrist with subsequent longitudinal instability of the forearm, because of injury to the interosseous membrane. In recent years, however, there have been reports of fractures of the radial head that were treated as isolated injuries and subsequently went on to develop severe radiocapitellar wear because of longitudinal instability. Because of the constraining capsuloligamentous structures that surround the radial head, the great majority of fractures occurring from low-energy, simple mechanisms, are nondisplaced. Given that most fractures of the radial head are impaction fractures resulting from axial loads and are not part of a larger, more complex injury pattern, most can be treated nonoperatively with radiographic and clinical union expected, and good long-term results can be achieved. The main sequela of nonsurgical treatment of radial head fractures is stiffness. In our practice, patients are generally immobilized in either a sugar tong splint or a standard sling, depending on their presentation, pain, and soft tissue swelling. Patients in the sling are encouraged to start performing gentle ROM of the elbow in all arcs of motion after 1 or 2 days, with patients in a splint are encouraged to do so after the splint is discontinued at 1 week. The early ROM of nondisplaced radial head fractures is supported by clinical trials where patients with early ROM were compared with short-term immobilization and had superior comfort, flexion, supination strength, and elbow function at 7 days after the injury. Nonsurgical treatment of nondisplaced or minimally displaced fractures of the radial head has endured a long history of excellent results, and this is backed up by the literature. Akesson et al Indications for operative treatment of radial head fractures are in evolution and expanding as techniques, instrumentation, and our understanding of injury patterns grows. Presently, our indications for operative fixation include displaced fragments, mechanical blocks to rotation, comminuted fractures, and fractures that are part of a more complex injury or instability pattern. Classically, the definition for displaced fracture fragments has been >2 Before any procedure on the radial head is done, a fluoroscopic examination of the elbow under anesthesia is performed to help diagnose subtle soft tissue injuries and complex patterns of injury that masquerade as simple fractures. Although traditionally the radial head has been approached surgically through the interval of Kocher between the internervous plane of the anconeus (radial nerve) and the extensor carpi ulnaris (PIN), our preferred operative approach for addressing radial head fractures is through the interval of Kaplan, between the extensor digitorum communis and the extensor carpi radialis brevis. Before the development of headless compression screws, anatomically designed plate-and-screw constructs, and radial head replacement systems, comminuted fractures involving the radial head were treated with techniques such as fragment excision and resection arthroplasty. In recent years, however, biomechanical studies have brought to the forefront the role the radial head plays in varus, valgus, axial, and posterolateral rotatory stability of the elbow, and therefore, a shift toward maintaining the radiocapitellar articulation has followed. Total excision of the radial head, like any resection arthroplasty, has inherent problems with instability of the resected articulation after this is performed. In addition, biomechanical studies have demonstrated concerning alterations in the ulnohumeral articulation after radial head excision. In moving away from resection arthroplasty, one of the key decision making points in the surgical treatment of radial head fractures is whether to perform internal fixation of the fragments or radial head arthroplasty. Ring et al Once internal fixation has been chosen as the means of stabilization, the decision as to whether to use a plate-and-screw construct or countersunk headless screws is made based on the pattern of the fracture. Although plate-and-screw constructs afford greater biomechanical stability, they have been shown to be more likely to violate the pericervical blood supply, more likely to cause postoperative stiffness and have high rates of hardware removal. Surgical fixation of radial head fractures can result in excellent clinical outcomes. Lindenhovius et al Although arthroscopic assessment of isolated radial head fractures seems straightforward, authors have cautioned against doing so in certain cases, especially when the fracture fragments are displaced anteriorly. Arthroscopic assessment of radial head fractures begins with placement of the arthroscope into the proximal anteromedial portal or posterolateral portal for visualization; if arthroscopic internal fixation is planned, authors have advocated the posterolateral portal be used, because along with the use of a 70° scope, it allows the best visualization of the fracture. Numerous authors have published their experience with arthroscopic reduction of radial head fractures. When osteosynthesis cannot be achieved owing to extensive comminution, significant impaction compromising the articular cartilage, or when >3 fragments are present, radial head arthroplasty offers the most predictable treatment. An even more significant problem with radial head replacement centers on the estimation of the correct length of the prosthesis and prevention of overstuffing the joint. To replicate the normal anatomy of the radial head, certain authors have suggested using the PRUJ as the more accurate means for restoration of radial length. Normally, the proximal extent of the PRUJ lies 2 Inherent problems with hemiarthroplasty of the radiocapitellar joint exist and are similar to other joints where a metal on cartilage articulation exists and overtime may lead to chondral erosion and pain ( The goal with both operative and nonoperative treatment of radial head fractures is early motion while protecting the integrity of the fracture, ligament repair, or fixation. When in doubt, motion can be delayed giving priority to stability over motion. It is preferable to treat a stiff well-reduced joint vs one that is chronically subluxated or dislocated. If the LCL complex has been repaired, it is important to protect it from varus stress. In these cases, we often use an articulated brace with a small pillow to minimize the varus stress for 4-6 weeks and still allowing flexion-extension and pronation-supination movement. By 4-6 weeks, the protection can be eliminated allowing full passive ROM, active assistive ROM, and active AROM. Stressful activities and strengthening are delayed for at least 3 months after fracture. In simple fracture patterns with no instability and good passive motion, we use nonoperative management with early ROM. In simple displaced fractures of the radial head, we prefer to use cannulated headless compression screws to achieve fracture stability. When radial head replacement is indicated, we prefer an uncemented, monopolar design and use the proximal radial ulnar joint to judge length of the radial head. The trial prosthesis is taken through a ROM to ensure that it does not asymmetrically articulate with the capitellum, and intraoperative fluoroscopy is used to ensure the prosthesis does not articulate with the lateral trochlea. We typically reserve radial head excision for cases of failed fixation or replacement ( To manage radial head fractures adequately, the treating physician must understand the mechanisms and radiographic signs that comprise a greater pattern of injury so that these patients can be managed with appropriate surgical strategies. Fortunately, most radial head fractures are simple in nature and nonoperative measures constitute the mainstay of treatment. Unfortunately, for fractures that meet the indications for surgical intervention, there are a myriad of fixation devices and implants at the surgeon’s disposal with little evidence to suggest that one treatment, technique, or implant is superior to another.