Grinding mills are commonly used in the Florida phosphate industry to reduce particle size. The corrosion of metallic grinding media and mill liner is a very serious problem, particularly under acidic conditions as encountered in the Florida phosphate fertilizer industry. A statistical Box–Behnken Design (BBD) of experiments was performed to evaluate the effects of individual operating variables and their interactions on the wear rate of high chromium alloy during phosphate grinding. The variables examined in this study included grinding time, solution pH, rotation speed, mill crop load, and solids percentage. The wear tests were conducted using a specially designed grinding mill whose electrochemical potential can be controlled. The most significant variables and optimum conditions were identified from statistical analysis of the experimental results using response surface methodology (RSM). It has been shown that solution pH had the most significant effect on the wear rate. The optimum process parameters for minimum wear rate were solution pH at 8.7, rotation speed at 61rpm, solid percentage at 65% and crop load at 58%.The United States is the largest phosphate rock producer in the world, responsible for about 30% of the world phosphate output ( Grinding mills are commonly used in the Florida phosphate industry to reduce particle size. The corrosion of metallic grinding media and mill liner is a very serious problem under acidic conditions as encountered in the Florida phosphate fertilizer industry (pH 2–4). At acidic pHs, protective passivation films of metal oxides and/or hydroxides do not exist on the surface of balls and liners, exposing fresh metal surface that is more susceptible to corrosion. It is known that the corrosive wear of grinding mill leads to an increase in operating cost and plant downtime, a loss of process efficiency, and product contamination. The direct operating costs in grinding are mainly the energy consumed and the metal lost through wear and corrosion ( As part of a research project that was established to develop an effective cathodic protection process to minimize the corrosive wear of the mill liner and grinding media, the present study was conducted to determine the most significant grinding process variables, investigate the interactions between different variables, and identify optimum conditions for minimum wear rate. Unlike earlier mill corrosion studies that used devices that merely simulated mill motion, the present study utilized a specially designed ball mill whose electrochemical potential can be controlled under operating conditions ( The phosphate samples and pond water used in this study were acquired from Florida CF Industries, Plant City, Florida. The phosphate sample was thoroughly mixed and wet screened into seven different size fractions for size distribution analysis and the results are shown in The Box–Behnken experimental design was performed using Design-Expert 6.8 software acquired from Stat-Ease Inc., Minneapolis, MN. The software offers multilevel factorial screening designs to identify the critical process factors and provides in-depth analyses of process variables to determine optimum process parameters. It also offers rotatable 3D plots to help visualize the response surface. The 2D contours can be explored with setting flags to identify coordinates and predict responses. The effects of individual variables on the total wear rate of chromium alloy were investigated using the specially designed grinding mill. The operating parameters studied included grinding time, solution pH, rotation speed, feed solids percentage, and mill crop load. The effects of grinding time on the wear rate were investigated by performed grinding tests for 0.5, 1, 2, 3, and 4  The speed of rotation necessary to achieve most effective grinding has been considered to be that which generates enough centrifugal force to lift the balls on the shell lining to a height of about two-thirds of the diameter of the shell with least sliding and cascading ( The effects of rotation speed ranging from 30 to 80  Feed solids percentage is another important factor that affects metal loss in comminution operations and the experimental results are shown in The Box–Behnken Design (BBD) of fractional factorial experiment was conducted to determine the most significant variables and their interactions between different variables and identify the optimum condition. The fractional factorial design is particularly useful for screening a large number of variables to identify the most significant parameters and optimum condition with a small number of experiments ( Design-Expert 6.8 program was used to analyze the response of each factor to the regression model using the following methodology: (a) analysis of variance (ANOVA) was conducted to determine the adequacy of linear, quadratic and cubic models; (b) one model was then chosen for an in-depth regression analysis; (c) diagnostic evaluation of the robustness of the model was determined; and (d) response surface analysis was conducted to optimize the wear rate. The lack of fit tests and model summary statistics for the wear rate of high chromium alloy showed that The ANOVA calculations were conducted and results are shown in The fact that the linear regression model was chosen for this design indicates that the interactions between different variables on the wear rate of high chromium alloy were not significant. Therefore, variable interactions were excluded from the model. As shown in Diagnostic evaluation of the robustness of this model was also conducted with graphical means. The most important diagnostic is studentized residuals, which is illustrated in Numerical optimization was used to determine the optimum process parameters for minimum wear rate. In simultaneous numerical optimization, wear rate was used as the objective function which was zero outside of the limits and one at the goal. The desirability function indicates how well the goal was met. In order to find the optimum conditions in a wide range, the solution pH range varied between 1 and 12, rotation speed 50–90 Based on the above results, the following conclusions can be drawn: There is a linear relationship between the weight loss of high chromium alloy and the grinding time. Solution pH had the most significant effect on the wear rate. The significance of process variables to the wear rate was in the order of solution pH The wear rate regression equation was: The optimum process parameters for minimum wear rate were solution pH at 8.7, rotation speed at 61 The authors would like to acknowledge the financial support of the Florida Industry of Phosphate Research (FIPR) Grant Number 00-01-170. Special thanks are given to IMC Phosphate, CF Industry, and Magotteaux, Inc, for supplying phosphate and grinding media specimens.