Lower extraction of silver than gold in conventional cyanidation process has been commonly observed in practice. Acanthite (Ag2S) is one of the typical silver minerals with low solubility in aqueous cyanide medium, which contributes to low overall silver extraction. The performance of different auxiliary oxidants, including hydrogen peroxide (H2O2), calcium peroxide (CaO2), and LeachWELL™, in cyanidation of synthetic silver sulfide has been investigated with the purpose of increasing the rate and extent of silver extraction. The addition of H2O2 does not only promote cyanidation of silver sulfide, but also increases the consumption of cyanide and hydroxide. Comparatively, the addition of CaO2 exhibits less impact on silver extraction under the experimental conditions. LeachWELL™ has a better performance than H2O2 and CaO2 in terms of increasing silver extraction and reducing cyanide and alkaline consumptions. The slurry pH exhibits insignificant effect on the performance of LeachWELL™ during leaching of silver sulfide. Similar performance of LeachWELL™ and lead nitrate on cyanidation of silver sulfide indicates that Pb(NO3)2 acts as the main active component in cyanidation process. Leaching of natural lead-bearing acanthite sample without auxiliary oxidant results in higher silver extraction compared to leaching of synthetic Ag2S. Addition of H2O2 or CaO2 during leaching of lead-bearing acanthite can promote silver extraction while the addition of LeachWELL™ exhibits little effect.Silver is usually recovered along with gold from gold ore or concentrate through cyanidation which involves gold/silver dissolution in aerated cyanide solution to form gold and silver cyanide complexes. The Elsner equation reveals the stoichiometry of the reaction as the following ( However, the mineralogy difference between silver and gold leads to the variation of their final extractions ( The dissolution of silver sulfide in the absence of oxygen in cyanide solution is governed by the following reaction ( The equilibrium constant of the dissolution of silver sulfide in cyanide to form silver–cyanide complexes and sulfide anion is too low to guarantee satisfactory silver extraction. Therefore, the sulfide in acanthite needs to be oxidized during cyanidation to get better silver extraction. During cyanidation, sulfide ions may be oxidized in the presence of oxygen ( The stoichiometric relation of the leaching reaction during silver sulfide cyanidation has been investigated and a model to simulate the silver sulfide dissolution with different cyanide and oxygen concentrations has been established by The negative value of ΔG indicates that the reaction should be spontaneous from left to right, thus they believed that thermodynamically the dissolution of silver sulfide would proceed to the right in the presence of oxygen. There is the possibility that thiocyanate ion be further oxidized to form S Therefore, the dissolution of silver sulfide in cyanide solution with the presence of only oxygen as oxidant maybe limited by the dissolution extent of Ag To accelerate the leaching rate and improve the efficiency of the silver sulfide cyanidation process, Hydrogen peroxide (H Calcium peroxide (CaO LeachWELL™ is a reagent grade catalyst formulated for fast cyanide leaching of gold, silver and other cyanide leachable metals. It was initially developed by David Menne and marketed by an Australian company named Mineral Process Control. It is indicated by its supplier that when used with 5% cyanide, the dissolution rate of gold, copper and silver is increased more than sixty fold ( Lead nitrate (Pb(NO  In sulfide mineral cyanide leaching systems,  In this research, hydrogen peroxide (H A 99.998% synthetic silver sulfide (particle size P The natural acanthite sample was provided by Mineralogical Research Company with a content of approximately 38% Ag Lead nitrate (> The leaching tests were conducted in 2L PYREX glass beakers with rubber stoppers. There were several openings not only for exposure to air, but also for the overhead agitator, reagent injection, sampling tubes and Eh/pH probes. An automatic motor connected with stainless impellers agitated the solution to provide mixing to the leaching system. The calculated amount of chemicals such as NaCN, auxiliary additives and sulfide minerals, were added into the agitated sodium hydroxide solution at the beginning of each test. Each test lasted 60 Each solution sample was titrated by standardized silver nitrate as soon as possible to detect the concentration of free cyanide in the solution and supplementary NaCN solid were added into the leach system. The amount of NaCN after each sample was recorded, with the total addition reported as the consumption of NaCN. For clear comparison between these additives' performance in leaching, a new indicator was developed named NaCN utilization efficiency. The calculation formula of NaCN utilization efficiency is the following: NaCN utilization efficiency From the above we can indicate that the higher NaCN utilization is, the lower NaCN consumption the leaching system need. The atomic absorption spectrophotometer (AAS) instrument was used to measure the concentrations of silver and other metal ions in samples taken from the leaching tests. The natural acanthite mineral was analyzed using inductively coupled plasma (ICP) and Fire Assay, conducted by Inspectorate, a certificate assayer in Richmond, BC. Free cyanide in solution was determined by titration with standard silver nitrate solution. Leaching of synthetic silver sulfide in aerated solution without the addition of other oxidants was performed twice to show the repeatability of the applied apparatus and procedure. The leaching conditions were described in The silver extraction from synthetic Ag These two experiments also provided the baseline for the consumption of NaCN and NaOH in synthetic silver sulfide leaching process ( Synthetic silver sulfide leaching experiments were conducted with different additions of H H CaO LeachWELL™: 0.2 Except for the presence of auxiliary oxidants, these leaching tests were conducted under the same conditions as the baseline tests ( As suggested by The consumption of NaCN and NaOH also increased with H The silver extraction curves in CaO One possible explanation could be due to the solubility of Ca(OH) Low solubility of Ca(OH) Similar to the trend of silver extraction, NaCN consumption also increased up to 0.72 In the presence of CaO The final Ag extraction, NaCN consumption and NaOH consumption are shown in The performance of LeachWELL™ on improving silver extraction was significant when compared with the baseline results. With the addition of 0.2 Comparing H From Based on the initial comparison between supplemental oxidants, LeachWELL™ had superior performance to H pH: 10.5, 11.0, 11.5, 12.0 Temperature: 17 NaCN concentration: 0.25 Unless otherwise noted, these leaching tests were conducted under the same conditions as baseline test ( Considering that industrial cyanide leaching may be performed in the open air and the plant location may vary from warm to cold climates, tests at three different temperatures, 17 As indicated in The LeachWELL™ assisted cyanidation was examined in the pH range from 10.5 to 12.0 at which the conventional cyanidation processes were usually performed. From In this series tests, high pH solution consumed less supplementary NaCN. This trend confirmed that the hydrolysis of cyanide decreased with the increase of pH. The effect of NaCN concentration on the LeachWELL™ assisted leaching system was determined in the range from 0.25 Apparently silver sulfide will somewhat dissolve in cyanide solution even without any oxidant. However, oxidation is a means of sequestering the sulfide to drive the reaction to dissolution. The cyanide utilization efficiency in these series of tests were calculated and shown in For the LeachWELL™–cyanide system, another two blank experiments were conducted. One was for blank NaCN volatilization loss and the other one was for NaCN loss caused by LeachWELL™. Both tests were conducted in a 1 The results indicated that the consumption of NaOH were almost the same between these two blank tests (0.49 Cyanide was consumed in three ways: complexing with silver/sulfur species, hydrolysis and volatilization of HCN, and oxidation by oxidants. In these two tests, the factor of complexing with silver/sulfur was eliminated. Hydrolysis and volatilization of HCN were considered to be equal since the pH and NaOH consumption were the same in these two tests. Therefore it can be concluded that the loss of free cyanide by reacting with LeachWELL™ was insignificant in this system. Furthermore, LeachWELL™ is known as a mixture of 2% of lead nitrate and 98% of mild organic oxidant. Equivalent amount of Pb(NO In this test a similar result to that of At the pH of 11, LeachWELL™ and Pb(NO The natural acanthite sample was leached under similar conditions outlined in H CaO LeachWELL™: 0.2  One possible explanation for the improvement was that the presence of lead in the sample provided enough dissolved lead ion which was beneficial to silver sulfide oxidation. 3.4 With 0.5 From the consumption of NaCN and NaOH presented in From the results of these cyanidation tests on natural acanthite, it is clear that the presence of lead in the mineral results in rapid dissolution of Ag Three oxidants have been selected to study their performance in promoting the cyanidation process of silver sulfide. The silver extraction from the synthetic acanthite in cyanide solution in the absence of supplemental oxidants was only about 5%. The addition of H The authors are thankful to Dr. Bé Wassink and Dr. Jianming Lu for their kind help on the experiments. The assistance of Zhenghui Wu and Joon Lee with the interpretation of the results is also appreciated. Financial support by