To remove lizardite slimes from pyrite surface in pyrite-lizardite system, 2-phosphonobutane-1,2,4-tricarboxylic acid (PBTCA) was introduced as a possible depressant for lizardite slimes. Micro-flotation test results showed that PBTCA can remove lizardite slimes from pyrite surface and the floatability of pyrite was restored. Zeta potential measurements indicated that the surface charge of lizardite transformed from positive to strongly negative values by the addition of PBTCA because of the adsorption of PBTCA at lizardite surface. As a result, the interaction of pyrite and lizardite converted from electrosteric attraction to electrosteric repulsion, and therefore the SBX adsorption at pyrite surface was promoted and the floatability of pyrite was restored.Lizardite is a Mg-bearing silicate mineral, which is usually associated with sulphide minerals in ore deposits [ Previous research showed that sodium hexametaphosphate, quartz, graphene oxide, carboxymethyl cellulose (CMC), and special ions are used to remove lizardite slimes from sulfide surfaces [ PBTCA is a water treatment reagent which is synthesized by the main resources of dialkylphosphate, dialkyl maleate and alkyl acrylate in industry. Currently, PBTCA has been widely applied in corrosion field due to its carboxyl and phosphate groups which can interact with metal ions (copper ions and magnesium ions etc.). For example, Wen et al.(2014) indicated that PBTCA has a strong chelate ability with magnesium ions [ Therefore, the objective of this work is to determine if PBTCA can be used as a potential depressant to prevent the adverse effect of lizardite slimes on the flotation of pyrite. This was accomplished by methods including micro-flotation, adsorption and zeta-potential measurements. Lizardite and pyrite samples were obtained from Shaoguang, Guangdong, China, and Lianyungang, Jiangsu, China, respectively. The samples were crushed to −1 mm and then ground by agate mortar. The pyrite with a size fraction of -74 + 38 μm were utilized for the flotation and adsorption tests, and lizardite with size fractions of -150 μm + 74 μm, -74 + 38 μm and −10 μm were prepared as gangue mineral in pyrite flotation. The BET surface area of pyrite (-74 + 37 μm) was 1.86m Collector sodium butyl xanthate (SBX) (the purity is 88%) is commercial grade and was used as received. PBTCA was utilized as depressants and the purity is 50% wt. methyl isobutyl carbinol (MIBC) was analytical-grade and it was used as the frother. The molecular formula of PBTCA is showed in The flotation tests were performed in a XFGC-1600 flotation machine, which was mentioned in our previous study [ SBX adsorption on pyrite surface tests are prepared as follows: the SBX solution with a desired concentration was mixed with 1 g pyrite, and when required, 5 g/L lizardite was add into the pyrite pulp in the presence and absence of PBTCA with a desired concentration. The total volume was 40 mL and the pulp was adjusted at a desired pH value. The pulp was stirred for 20 min, after which the adsorption equilibrium was achieved. Afterwards, the suspension was filtered, and the filtrate of SBX concentration was measured using UV spectrophotometer, and the related data was calculated by the SBX standard curve. The amount of SBX adsorption was calculated by use of the reduction of initial and residual concentration of SBX. Zeta potentials were conducted using a Malvern Zetasizer Zeta-Nano-ZS90 analyzer instrument in a 1 × 10 The flotation performance of pyrite in the presence and absence of lizardite as a function of pH is presented in According to the results from The effect of PBTCA concentration on the flotation separation performance for mixed pyrite and lizardite are shown in  Zeta potentials of lizardite and pyrite in the presence and absence of PBTCA are presented in In the molecule structure of PBTCA ( The work indicated that the lizardite particle size is a crucial factor to be considered in pyrite flotation. The micro-flotation tests showed that at pH 8.5, the finer the lizardite particles size was, the lower the floatability of pyrite would be. The floatability of pyrite was restored when the PBTCA depressant was used in pyrite-lizardite system. Adsorption results showed that lizardite did not interfere with SBX adsorption at the pyrite surface when the PBTCA was added. Zeta potential results showed that the surface charge for bare lizardite was positive while became strongly negative after PBTCA adsorption. In the presence of PBTCA, hetero-dispersion occurred between pyrite and lizardite particles, and then the flotation performance of pyrite was improved. The authors acknowledge the support of the