We have assessed a number of ballistic fracture classifications but were unable to identify one that could adequately grade the severity of the injury, assist in determining the optimal treatment or predict outcome. Many of the existing classifications are based on experimental studies or radiological appearance and do not take into account the soft tissue injury, which is usually the main prognostic indicator. In addition few differentiated between different bones, and some were specific to only one bone. We would suggest that ballistic fractures are treated on an individual basis, specifically considering the soft tissue injury, the anatomical location of the injury and any involvement of joints. The specific weapon or muzzle velocity are not of prime importance, and classifications should not be based on these.Orthopaedic surgeons are being exposed to an increasing incidence of ballistic trauma as a part of their normal civilian practice. In addition to the increasing use of guns by criminals, recent global events have demonstrated only too well, the requirement for all surgeons to be prepared to deal with the results of international terrorist action. At the same time, with the reduction of British military medical resources, there are no longer any UK military hospitals, casualties from combat and peacekeeping operations overseas being evacuated directly into the civilian hospital system for definitive management. It is, therefore, important that all surgeons be familiar with the nature and management of ballistic injuries. Several classifications have been proposed for ballistic fractures Based on our experience in both Gulf Wars, the Balkans conflicts and Afghanistan, as well as treating victims of terrorist action in Northern Ireland, we have found that not a single classification system has been particularly useful in the assessment, or management, of missile injuries, although some could be used for retrospective audit purposes. Various systems have been developed using cadaveric and animal studies, as well as studies based on ballistic models consisting of a composite of bone and tissue encased in standardised gelatin blocks Other experimental models have looked at the number and size of bone fragments produced, and then related this to the amount of energy transferred On a radiological basis, fractures following gunshot injury can be divided into complete or incomplete, depending on whether some bony continuity is maintained. Incomplete fractures can be further subdivided into ‘drill hole’ type where a channel is created through the bone, and a ‘divot’ or ‘chip’ type where part of the cortex is removed, but no channel exists The weakness of all exclusively radiological studies is their failure to take account of either the soft-tissue injury, or the ‘personality’ of an individual bone. For example the prognosis for open fractures of the tibia is generally worse than that of many other long bones. The primacy of the soft-tissue injury is true for both civilian The most useful system to codify the fracture anatomy is probably the Müller-AO classification In civilian practice, the most commonly used classification for open fractures is that proposed by Gustilo, Mendoza and Williams. This has proven useful as it is the extent of the associated soft-tissue injury that appears to be the major determinant of the infection risk and the time for bony union Using the Gustilo system, high-energy ballistic fractures are all type III and, in the absence of a vascular injury-requiring repair, only two subdivisions remain. This reduces the value of this classification when trying to identify differences within this grouping of severe injuries and the classification, thereby, is not sufficiently sensitive. However, its familiarity to a civilian surgeon does allow a comparison with his/her normal trauma practice and emphasises the severity of high-energy ballistic wounds. For wound severity, we found that the International Committee of the Red Cross (ICRC) wound score was better, as more information is recorded and it is more relevant to ballistic trauma A number of scoring systems, which are in essence forms of classifications, has been developed to guide the treatment of high-energy limb injuries. A recent review has cast doubts on the value of all of these in predicting the need for amputation and, therefore, these are also of limited use in severe ballistic injuries These are usually retrospective studies with a bias towards the low-energy transfer wounds caused by handguns common in American civilian experience. Treatment has mostly been at dedicated trauma centres, following minimal delay, thereby reducing the risk of infection in contaminated wounds, as well as providing good treatment resources. When evaluating the civilian-based classifications, the first problem that the authors encountered was that a significant number of wounds were not classifiable, as no provision is made for fragment injuries Gagula Similarly, the femoral classification of Long Ballistic injuries around joints were more problematic and led to a corresponding increase in morbidity. None of the existing classifications adequately allows for the presence of a joint injury. Ganocy looked at joint injuries caused by low-energy weapons, with or without retained fragments Our experience has been that the existing classification systems of ballistic injuries are inadequate. A classification must take into account prognostic factors, such as the anatomical location of the injury, its position within the bone and any involvement of joints. Additional information is required in order to evaluate the soft-tissue injury and any such classification would risk becoming too complex and unwieldy to use in the field, or in the absence of full radiological support. Since the authors were unable to identify any one classification that could adequately guide all aspects of management, they would recommend that fractures be treated according to the individual ‘personality’ of the fracture, taking into account the soft-tissue injury, the bone involved, any associated joint involvement, or bone defect, and the energy transferred to the wound. Any treatment must be carried out with a full understanding of the nature of ballistic wounds. In addition, the authors suggest that no classification should include an estimation of the muzzle velocity of the weapon, as this will encourage preconceived ideas of treatment to persist in the absence of any supporting clinical evidence. Data should be recorded for audit and the authors suggest the use of the ICRC wound score for this purpose. With experience, it was found that this could guide treatment of the soft-tissue wound and was the most useful for audit purposes. The most useful for grading the fracture was the Müller-AO classification