Objectives
                  Mid shaft clavicle fractures have traditionally been treated by conservative means with good outcome. ORIF with plating is an upcoming option to improve outcome further. Aim of this study is to compare the outcome of anterosuperior plating with conservative treatment.
               
                  Methods
                  The study was conducted over a period of one year, with 50 skeletally mature closed mid shaft fractures included. Alternate patients were operated using a 3.5mm anterosuperior LCP. The functional outcome was evaluated by the Constant and Murley score at the end of 3 months from injury. The fracture union time and associated problems were also compared.
               
                  Results
                  In the operative group, 19 patients (76%) had excellent functional outcome, 4 patients (16%) had good functional outcome and 2 patients (8%) had fair functional outcome. In the operated group, 2 patients (8%) had hypertrophic skin scar and in 2 patients (8%) plate prominence occurred. In 1 patient (4%), infection (superficial) occurred. In 1 patient (4%), plate loosening occurred. In 2 patients (8%), delayed union occurred which went for malunion and in 1 patient (4%), plate breakage occurred.
                  In the non-operative group, 7 patients (28%) had good functional outcome, 8 patients (32%) had fair functional outcome and 10 patients (40%) had poor functional outcome.
               
                  Conclusion
                  In this study, early primary plate fixation of comminuted mid shaft clavicular fractures results in improved patient-oriented outcomes, improved surgeon-oriented outcomes, earlier return to function and decreased rates of non-union and malunion.Clavicle fracture is a common traumatic injury around shoulder girdle due to their subcutaneous position. It is caused by either low-energy or high-energy impact. Fracture of the clavicle accounts for approximately 5–10% of all fractures and up to 44% of injuries to the shoulder girdle. About 70–80% of these fractures are in the middle third of the bone and less often in the lateral third (12–15%) and medial third (5–8%). Fractures of the clavicle have been traditionally treated non-operatively. Although many methods of closed reduction have been described, it is recognised that reduction is practically impossible to maintain and a certain amount of deformity and disability is expected in adults. The proponents of early fixation of fresh clavicular fractures to prevent complications like malunion and non-union emphasise the value of accurate reduction and rigid fixation in affording quick pain relief and promoting early functional recovery. Recent studies in the adult literature have shown a higher prevalence of symptomatic malunion, non-union and poor functional outcome after non-operative treatment of comminuted mid shaft clavicle fractures. The purpose of this study was to compare operative versus non-operative treatment of comminuted mid shaft clavicle fractures. The present study was carried out from July 2013 to Sept. 2014 at Orthopaedics Department in J.A. Group of Hospitals, G.R. Medical College, Gwalior. During this period, 50 patients of comminuted mid shaft clavicle fracture were included in the study, where 25 were treated surgically (LCP) and 25 were patients treated conservatively (figure of 8 brace and sling). Inclusion criteria were: patients aged 16–60 years, no medical contraindication for anaesthesia provided and informed consent from both males and female. Exclusion criteria were skeletally immature patient, fracture associated with any pathological and open fractures. General information like name, age, sex, occupation and address were noted. Then, a detailed history was elicited regarding mode of injury like fall on the shoulder, road traffic accident, direct injury to shoulder and fall on outstretched hand. Enquiry was made to note site of pain and swelling over the affected clavicle. Past medical illness and family history were also recorded. Plain radiograph of clavicle with shoulder in anteroposterior view was taken to assess the site of fracture and the fracture type (displacement and comminution). The fractures were classified according to Robinson's classification. Patients in operative group were operated as early as possible once the general condition of the patients was stable and the patients were fit for surgery as assessed by the physician. Instruments used for plate fixation: 3.5 Fracture fragments were reduced and plate was applied over the superior aspect of the clavicle. The plate was fixed to the medial and lateral fragment with 3.5 The operated upper limb was immobilised in an arm pouch. Check X-rays were taken to study the alignment of fracture fragments. The wound was inspected at 3rd or 4th postoperative day. Suture removal was done on 10th postoperative day. Patients were discharged with the arm pouch. Rehabilitation of the affected arm was started at the end of 2 weeks. Gentle pendulum exercises to the shoulder in the arm pouch were allowed. At 4–6 weeks, gentle active range of motion of the shoulder was allowed but abduction in limited to 80°. At 6–8 weeks, active range of motion in all planes was allowed. Regular follow-up for every 4 weeks was done. Patients were followed up till radiological union. The functional outcome was assessed by Constant and Murley score. All the patients were available for follow-up and they were followed every 4 weeks. In our series, direct injury occurred in 48 patients (96%); among them, 14 patients (28%) were due to fall on shoulder from two wheeler, 32 patients (64%) were due to road traffic accident and in 2 patients (4%), it was due to assault. Indirect injury occurred in 2 patients (4%) due to fall on outstretched hand. A total of 21 patients (42%) were in the age group of 18–28 years. The youngest patient was 18 years and oldest patient was 56 years. The average patient age was 33 years. The majority were males, i.e. 45 patients (90%) and 5 patients were females (10%). A total of 28 patients (56%) had left-sided fracture and 22 patients (44%) had right-sided fracture. A total of 5 patients (10%) had associated injuries; among them, 2 patients (4%) had scapular body fracture, 1 patient (2%) had femur fracture and another 2 patients (4%) had glenoid fossa and acromion process fracture. In the present study, there were 50 patients of comminuted mid shaft clavicle fracture, where Robinson 2B1 (simple or single butterfly fragment) occurred in 32 patients (64%) and Robinson 2B2 (comminuted or segmental) in 18 patients (36%). In our series, 23 (92%) patients were operated in the first week and 2 patients (8%) were operated in the second week due to fixed OT days in hospital. The fracture was considered to be united when clinically there was no tenderness, radiologically the fracture line was not visible and full-unprotected function of the limb was possible. Of the 25 patients (100%) treated surgically, 23 patients (92%) united at the end of 12 weeks. In 2 patients (8%), delayed union occurred. Of the 25 patients (100%) treated conservatively, 18 patients (72%) united at the end of 18 weeks, in 4 patients (16%) delayed union occurred and 3 patients (12%) had non-union. A complication requiring inpatient treatment and resulting in an additional morbidity of 2 months or more was regarded as a major complication. In the operated group, 2 patients (8%) had hypertrophic skin scar and in 2 patients (8%) plate prominence occurred. In 1 patient (4%), infection (superficial) occurred. In 1 patient (4%), plate loosening occurred. In 2 patients (8%), delayed union occurred which went for malunion and in 1 patient (4%) plate breakage occurred. In 25 patients treated with figure of 8 brace and sling, 4 patients (16%) had delayed union, 2 patients (8%) had malunion, 3 patients (12%) had non-union and 4 patients (16%) had restricted shoulder motion and pain. The functional outcome was assessed by Constant and Murley score. In the operative group, 19 patients (76%) had excellent functional outcome, 4 patients (16%) had good functional outcome and 2 patients (8%) had fair functional outcome. In the non-operative group, 7 patients (28%) had good functional outcome, 8 patients (32%) had fair functional outcome and 10 patients (40%) had poor functional outcome. Clavicle fractures are usually treated conservatively. In a study conducted to analyse the results of conservative treatment, Hill et al. The present study of patients with middle third clavicle fractures is compared with Bostman et al. In this study, in the patients with comminuted mid shaft clavicle fractures, direct injury occurred in 48 patients (96%); among them, 14 patients (28%) were due to fall on shoulder from two wheeler, 32 patients (64%) were due to road traffic accident and in 2 patients (4%), it was due to assault. Indirect injury occurred in 2 patients (4%) due to fall on outstretched hand. In Bostman et al. In this study, majority of the patients were with comminuted mid shaft clavicle fracture, i.e. 21 patients (42%) were in the age group of 18–28 years. The youngest patient was 18 years and oldest patient was 56 years. The average patient age was 33 years. In Bostman et al. In this study, in the patients with comminuted mid shaft clavicle fracture, the majority were males, i.e. 45 patients (90%) and 5 patients were females (10%). In Bostman et al. In this study, in the patients with comminuted mid shaft clavicle fracture, 5 (10%) had associated injuries; among them, 2 patients (4%) had scapular body fracture, 1 patient (2%) had femur fracture and another 2 patients (4%) had glenoid fossa and acromion process fracture. In Bostman et al. In this study, all patients with comminuted mid shaft clavicle fractures were of closed type; this is comparable to Bostman et al. In Kao et al. In the present study, there were 50 patients (100%) of comminuted mid shaft clavicle fracture where Robinson 2B1 (simple or single butterfly fragment) occurred in 32 patients (64%) and Robinson 2B2 (comminuted or segmental) in 18 patients (36%). In Bostman et al. study also, Robinson type-2B1 was common in 81 patients (78.64%). Robinson type-2B2 occurred only in 22 patients (21.36%). In this study, 25 patients were with comminuted mid shaft clavicle fracture (100%), where 23 (92%) patients were operated in the first week and 2 patients (8%) were operated in the second week due to fixed OT days in hospital. In Bostman et al. In the present study, 25 patients with comminuted mid shaft clavicle fracture (100%) were treated surgically, 23 patients (92%) united at the end of 12 weeks ( In comminuted mid shaft clavicle fracture, 25 patients (100%) were treated conservatively, 18 patients (72%) united at the end of 18 weeks, in 4 patients (16%) delayed union occurred and in 3 patients (12%) non-union ( Lazarus One patient (4%) plated with reconstruction plate for Robinson's type-2B2 (displaced and comminuted) was broken at 8 weeks postoperatively ( In Bostman et al. Delayed union occurred in 2 patients (8%). In one patient (5%), there was a large butterfly fragment in the inferior aspect of clavicle, which went on to unite with the main fragments at the end of 14 weeks. In another 1 patient (4%), delayed union occurred due to plate breakage at 8 weeks postoperatively. Replating with bone grafting was done and it went on to unite at the end of 20 weeks postoperatively. In 25 patients treated with figure of 8 brace and sling, 4 patients (16%) had delayed union, 2 patients (8%) had malunion, 3 patients (12%) had nonunion and 4 patients (16%) had restricted shoulder motion and pain. In Bostman et al. There was cosmetically unacceptable hypertrophic skin scar in 2 patients (8%). Plate prominence through the skin was reported in 2 patients (8%). The total complication in this study was 20% excluding skin-related minor complications. The total complication rate of Bostman et al. In this study, 1 patient (4%) had superficial infection in the immediate postoperative period, which was controlled with antibiotics for another 5 days. In comparison with Kao et al. In this study, early primary plate fixation of comminuted mid shaft clavicular fractures results in improved patient-oriented outcomes, improved surgeon-oriented outcomes, earlier return to function and decreased rates of non-union and malunion. The authors have none to declare.