Low-cost zeolitic rocks are promising substitutes for feldspathic fluxes in ceramic bodies, since their fusibility, modest hardness and high cation exchange capacity (CEC) should improve grinding and sintering. Five large-scale Italian deposits of natural zeolites with different mineralogy were characterised and tested in porcelain stoneware bodies. Their behaviour during processing was appraised and compared with that of zeolite-free bodies. Zeolites increased the slip viscosity during wet grinding, causing a coarser grain size distribution and consequently some drawbacks in both unfired and fired tiles. After overcoming this hindrance by dry grinding of zeolite rocks, the technological behaviour of zeolite-bearing tiles appear to be similar to that of current porcelain stoneware, though with larger firing shrinkage and residual closed porosity.Over the last decade, the Italian ceramic tile industry has progressively shifted its production toward new materials with excellent technical properties, i.e. porcelain stoneware tiles. The high price of these raw materials has a remarkable impact on the cost of the end-product, making Italian tile manufacture disadvantaged in competition with that of other tilemaking countries where production costs are lower. This fact drove the Italian industry to a continuous search for cheap raw materials able to replace the traditional fluxes without altering the process and product characteristics. Zeolite-rich rocks could effectively represent suitable low-cost materials, since large deposits of natural zeolites occur in Italy. This study is aimed at assessing the influence of zeolites on both the technological behaviour during processing and the technical performances of porcelain stoneware tiles. A wide spectrum of naturally-occurring zeolitized materials was taken into account, in order to evaluate the effect of different zeolites (chabazite, analcite, phillipsite, clinoptilolite) and chemico-physical properties (specific surface, cation exchange capacity). The experimental approach consisted in a laboratory simulation of the tilemaking process carried out by replacing conventional fluxes (sodic feldspar and potassic aplite) with zeolitic rocks in typical porcelain stoneware bodies. The characteristics of both semi-finished and finished products were appraised comparing zeolite-bearing formulations with a reference zeolite-free body. Five large-scale deposits of zeolite-rich rocks (ignimbrites, tuffs, epiclastites) were taken into consideration, sampling covering of the following geological units in Central and Southern Italy: the Sorano Formation (IS), the Neapolitan yellow tuff (TGN), the Campanian ignimbrite (IC), the Borvituile (LB) and Sa Contra (ESC) sediments. The The Neapolitan yellow tuff is the product of a huge eruption that took place about 12,000 years ago within the volcanic area of Campi Flegrei. The total zeolite content is almost always higher than 50%, with the phillipsite content much higher than chabazite and analcime. The Campanian Ignimbrite is the product of another eruption of Campi Flegrei (37,000 years ago) which gave rise to two different lithofacies, Both Bortivuile and Sa Contra epiclastites, outcropping in northern-central Sardinia, belong to a fluvio-lacustrine sedimentary deposit affected by secondary mineralization processes which led to the formation of zeolite, opal-CT and smectite. In the laboratory trials, typical porcelain stoneware bodies The mineralogy of the zeolitic rocks was investigated by X-ray powder diffraction (XRPD, Philips, PW 1730/3710, Cu The following properties of the zeolitic materials were determined: cation exchange capacity by ICP-OES after exchange with ammonium chloride; The technological behaviour of ceramic bodies was assessed by simulating, at a laboratory scale, the tilemaking process and by characterizing both the semi-finished and finished products. The porcelain stoneware bodies were designed by replacing two conventional feldspathic fluxes (10% each of potassic aplite and sodium feldspar) with 20% zeolitic rock ( the raw materials of bodies NZ, Z1, Z2, Z3, Z4 and Z7 were mixed and wet ground all together in a porcelain jar with dense alumina grinding media (18 h); the ball clays and quartz-feldspathic fluxes of bodies Z0, Z5 and Z6 were wet ground as above, while the zeolitic rock was dry ground separately (under 0.25 mm in hammer mill) and successively added to the slip. The slips were dried in an oven (105±5 °C), then the powders were deagglomerated by hammer milling and pelletized after adding water (5–7% wt.). After adequate storage, 110·55·5 mm The particle size distribution of the slips was analysed by photosedimentation (ASTM C 958). Working moisture (ASTM C 324) and compressibility (mould depth/tile thickness ratio) were determined on the powders. Green and dry tiles were characterized by measuring pressing expansion, drying shrinkage (ASTM C 326) and modulus of rupture (ISO 10545-4). Firing shrinkage (ASTM C 326), water absorption, open porosity and bulk density (ASTM C 373), and 3-points modulus of rupture (ISO 10545-4) were measured on fired tiles. Closed porosity was determined by the ratio between bulk density and specific weight of the ceramic material (ASTM C 329). The quantitative phase composition of fired tiles was determined by XRPD (Rigaku, Miniflex, Cu The zeolitic rocks taken into account present different chemical features, particularly samples IS, TGN and IC on one side and samples LB and ESC on the other side. The former are characterized by a low SiO Zeolites are the major components, ranging between 55% and 66%, excluding sample ESC. Different zeolites characterize every material: chabazite (IS), chabazite+phillipsite (IC), clinoptilolite (LB and ESC), phillipsite+chabazite+analcime (TGN). Furthermore, sample ESC is characterized by a high feldspar content. Opal, smectite and volcanic glass are sometimes present in noteworthy quantities ( The values of specific surface (38–225 m These zeolitic rocks are more easily fusible than most quartz-feldspathic fluxes: softening ( The introduction of zeolites in porcelain stoneware bodies brought about a relevant variation in slip rheology, causing a considerable increase of viscosity and consequently a proportional decrease of grinding efficiency. Wet ground zeolite-bearing bodies (Z1, Z2, Z3 and Z4) have a clearly different particle size distribution in respect of the reference body (NZ) with the exception of sample Z7. As a matter of fact: the higher the values of specific surface of the zeolitite added, the coarser the particle size of the ceramic body ( The grinding performance was affected also by the zeolite type, as can be appreciated by ordering the wet ground samples in decreasing mean particle size: IS (chabazite), IC (chabazite > phillipsite), TGN (phillipsite > chabazite), LB (clinoptilolite > feldspar), ESC (clinoptilolite ∼ feldspar). This behaviour depends on the CEC and probably on a complex balance between the exchangeable alkaline and alkaline-earth elements, the latter having a well known effect on slip viscosity. In order to avoid any interference of the zeolites on wet grinding, a second series of porcelain stoneware bodies was prepared by milling separately the zeolitic raw material and the rest of the body (Z0, Z5 and Z6), getting a suitable particle size distribution, though still slightly rich in the coarser fraction (approximately 7% >63 μm). No particular problem occurred during the pressing and drying stages: the presence of zeolites did not change significantly either the pressing expansion or the drying shrinkage, while the modulus of rupture is generally increased, especially in the case of green tiles, notwithstanding the different particle size distribution ( The relatively coarse granulometry of the wet ground zeolite-bearing bodies (Z1, Z2, Z3 and Z4) deeply affected their firing behaviour, producing clearly lower values of linear shrinkage and mechanical strength as well as larger values of porosity with respect to the reference body NZ. The ranking of bodies corresponds well to their particle size distribution, with those containing the chabazite-rich zeolitites more distant from the reference ( A more significant comparison is made possible by considering the samples with particle size distributions analogous to those of industrial porcelain stoneware bodies (i.e. Z0, Z5, Z6 and Z7). In this case, bodies Z5 and Z6 contain more zeolites (11% and 13% respectively) than body Z7 (approximately 7%) and they exhibit a different behaviour ( clearly higher firing shrinkage, for the same porosity; lower bulk density, for the same water absorption; significant amounts of closed porosity; lower modulus of rupture. The persistence of closed porosity in sintered tiles can to a large extent explain the lower values of bulk density and mechanical strength in respect of the reference body. On the other hand, the body Z7 is characterized by values of bulk density, modulus of rupture, open and closed porosity absolutely comparable with those of industrially manufactured tiles. The replacement of zeolites for feldspathic fluxes produced a noticeable change in the phase composition of porcelain stoneware tiles ( smaller amounts of residual quartz and feldspar, slower dissolution rates of quartz and plagioclase in the 1120–1180 °C range, larger amount of mullite, though the differences are generally within the error of measurements, larger quantity of glassy phase. The chemical composition of this glassy phase changed continuously with the increasing firing temperature ( All these chemical fluctuations affected the most important physical factors controlling the sintering rate, i.e. viscosity and surface tension of the liquid phase ( viscosity decreased with a faster rate in the zeolite-free body in respect to zeolite-bearing ones, due to the different alkali content and SiO surface tension had negligible variations in all samples. Zeolitized volcanoclastic and epiclastic deposits represent an important raw material for diverse application in different technological sectors, a major advantage being the low costs. Many deposits are exploited as sources of building materials either as cut stones or as additives in pozzolanic cements or special plasters. This large utilization brings about the production of a large amount of by-products, mainly deriving by quarrying operations. This quarry dust could find a profitable application as a ceramic raw material, substituting for traditional fluxes, because of its fusibility, modest hardness and low cost. However, limits for this application concern: the high specific surface and CEC (that cause a worsening of the rheological behaviour of slips), the high Fe the high loss on ignition (that brings about a larger firing shrinkage), the different chemico-physical features of the liquid phase at sintering temperature, which can explain the larger amounts of residual closed porosity. Rocks containing zeolites and feldspars in similar amounts (such as ESC epiclastite) represent a promising compromise, that do not suffer many of the drawbacks of zeolite-rich materials.