Hydrothermal alteration related to Sb-Au mineralization is widespread in the Variscan Armorican Massif, but mineral replacement reactions are not well characterized, in particular the hydrothermal breakdown of ilmenite-titanohematite. Based on petrography, electron probe micro-analyzer and laser ablation-inductively coupled plasma-mass spectrometer analyses, we document mineralogical change at rock- and mineral-scale and the redistribution of Sb and others trace elements during the recrystallization of ilmenite-titanohematite to hydrothermal rutile. Hydrothermal alteration is mainly potassic with associated carbonation. The replacement mechanism is interpreted to be an interface-coupled dissolution-reprecipitation process. Results show that Mn, Zn, Co, Ni, Sn, Mo and U are released during hydrothermal alteration, whereas Sb and W are incorporated in newly-formed hydrothermal rutile from the hydrothermal fluid. Furthermore, the concentration of Sb evolves through time suggesting a change in fluid composition likely related to an enrichment of fluid in Sb during rutile crystallization. Considering that Fe-Ti oxides breakdown during hydrothermal alteration is common within epithermal and mesothermal/orogenic Au-Sb mineralizing systems, results report in this study yield important constraints about metal mobility and exchanges in hydrothermal gold systems.Understanding trace element behavior and redistribution processes is a fundamental step with respect to large-scale transport of heat and chemical elements in the crust. Consequently, it is a critical process in the formation of various types of mineral deposits. Fluid-assisted mineral replacement reactions can release chemical elements into the fluid, or incorporate some elements in the fluid into the newly-formed phase, such that it is possible to trace some specific mineral reactions from which metals are released from crustal rocks ( The Variscan Armorican Massif (France) is a metallogenic province characterized by several types of mineral deposits ( A significant part of French Sb-deposits are located in the Armorican Massif, in western France ( The stibnite-gold quartz veins are generally considered to belong to a late Variscan hydrothermal event ( The Le Semnon Sb-Au district ( Five gabbro samples have been selected for characterizing the trace element geochemistry of Fe-Ti oxides: three unaltered gabbro samples were collected from the same dyke swarm (BAN1, TOU1, and MF1; To investigate the geochemical variations and to quantify the metasomatic change of whole rock, we collected two additional samples of the hydrothermally altered gabbro from the Le Semnon mine to address primary magmatic heterogeneity. Both samples represent the core (SEM2) and the rim (SEM12) of the least and the more altered gabbro dyke, respectively. The sedimentary host rocks were not studied because of the difficulty establishing the protolith composition of the detrital host rocks. The least altered gabbro dyke samples (BAN1, TOU1, and MF1) have a porphyritic and doleritic texture in which the principal mineral assemblage ( In contrast, the primary magmatic texture is not preserved in hydrothermally altered gabbro. The alteration variably affects gabbro along, and across, dykes. Plagioclase and clinopyroxene are totally altered into sericite, chlorite, carbonate and quartz and the initial shape of the phenocrysts is hardly recognizable ( Samples were crushed and powdered in an agate mortar. Major and trace elements analyses were performed using by inductively coupled plasma optical emission spectrometry (ICP-OES) and mass spectrometry (ICP-MS) by the SARM (CRPG-CNRS, Nancy) and following standard analytical procedures ( Fe-Ti oxides and pyrite from hydrothermally altered gabbro were examined in polished thin-sections using reflected-light optical and scanning electron microscopes. Minerals were analyzed using Cameca SX-100 electron probe micro-analyzers at IFREMER (Brest, France) and at Université Laval (Québec, Canada). The major and minor elements analyzed are Fe, Mg, Mn, Ti, V, Cr, Ca, Al, Ni, Si for Fe-Ti oxides and Fe, S, As, Sb, Au, Zn, Cu, Ni, Co for pyrite and arsenopyrite. Analyses were performed using a 3 µm diameter beam, a 15 kV accelerating voltage, a beam current of 20 nA and a counting time of 20 s on peak. Analytical conditions and calibration are detailed in Trace and selected major element concentrations were determined by laser ablation-inductively coupled plasma-mass spectrometer (LA-ICP-MS) at LabMaTer in the Université du Québec à Chicoutimi (UQAC, Canada). Selected elements and isotopes for Fe-Ti oxides and pyrite analyses are listed in The LA-ICP-MS system used at UQAC consists of a RESOlution (ASI) 193 nm excimer laser equipped with a S155 ablation cell (Laurin Technic) and coupled to a quadrupole Agilent 7900 ICP-MS. Ablation is carried out using a He carrier gas, mixed with Ar and N Iron ( For pyrite, calibration of PGE and Au was performed using reference material po-727 (a synthetic FeS doped in PGE and Au, provided by Memorial University of Newfoundland). For the remaining elements, MASS-1 (a ZnFeCuS pressed pellet doped in trace elements, provided by the USGS) was used for calibration. The calibration was monitored using JBMSS-5 (synthetic FeS sulfide doped in trace elements, provided by Prof. James Brenan). Analyses are in good agreement within the analytical error with a RD and RSD <10% for GSE-1g except for Cd, Sn, Ir and Tl. For the in-house monitor JB-MSS5, the accuracy of analyses are relatively good with a RD <15% and a RSD <10%, except for Co and Re ( The magmatic Fe-Ti oxides mainly consist of ilmenite and titanohematite ( These two types of Fe-Ti oxides are frequently in a closely associated mineral assemblage of ilmenite and titanohematite ( One of the main textural characteristics of altered dykes is the replacement of primary ilmenite-titanohematite by rutile. According to its grain size, rutile can be divided in two types: coarse grained (CG) rutile and fine grained (FG) rutile ( Selected X-ray chemical maps of the two types of rutile are displayed in Compositions of arsenopyrite and pyrite show that they contain Sb in minor and trace proportions, respectively ( Distribution of trace elements in ilmenite, titanohematite, CG and FG rutile are summarized in Coarse grained rutile displays a homogeneous trace element composition with the exception of Mn, Co, Ni, As, Sb and W, which show variations in composition between individual grains. Compared to ilmenite and titanohematite, Mn, Co and Ni are depleted, and Sb and W are enriched ( The trace element patterns reveal that the main changes in composition between ilmenite-hematite and rutile are the depletion in Zn, and the enrichment in Sb and W in rutile. High field strength elements (HFSE) appear to be immobile through the transformation. Partitioning behavior of several trace elements between ilmenite and melt ( Hydrothermal alteration associated with Sb mineralization causes metasomatic change of the gabbro dyke composition consistent with the mineralogical transformations previously described. These geochemical variations are displayed in From petrographic observations, we infer that rutile grew during hydrothermal alteration of the dykes, concomitant with breakdown of ilmenite. Numerous natural and experimental studies show that the recrystallization of ilmenite to rutile typically occurs via pseudomorphic replacement ( The other model proposed as an alternative to the classical solid-state transformation, consists of the direct transformation of ilmenite to rutile via an interface-coupled dissolution-precipitation process ( Our textural observations and chemical analyses are consistent with the breakdown of ilmenite-titanohematite being via interface-coupled dissolution-reprecipitation process. For example, direct recrystallization of ilmenite to rutile is strongly suggested by associated porosity, and by lack of intermediate products (pseudorutile). The newly formed rutile (i.e. CG and FG rutile) contains a strong interconnected network of µm-scale porosity. These pores are filled with later ankerite, calcite, quartz or illite (Figs. Volume reduction associated with the recrystallization of ilmenite to rutile has previously been calculated at 40% ( A mineral replacement process may facilitate incorporation of elements from an external source and/or release of some elements to others phases or fluids, and hence contribute to the redistribution of elements in the Earth’s crust and to mineralization processes ( The mineral assemblage composed of ilmenite and titanohematite is considered the precursor mineral because these two minerals are rarely found alone ( Using this concentration factor, we calculated the trace element composition of hydrothermal rutile using the average measured trace elements concentrations of precursor minerals, ilmenite and titanohematite ( The release of trace elements into fluids during the breakdown of ilmenite-titanohematite may constitute a potential, local source of elements for newly-formed phases, such as Zn for the sphalerite in mineralized veins, Co and Ni for pyrite and arsenopyrite, and Mn for ankerite in hydrothermally altered gabbro. In contrast, Sb cannot come from this mineral replacement reaction, as Sb has been largely added by an external source ( Although quantitative mass balance was not performed on FG rutile, it is important to note that most elements are enriched compared to CG rutile, particularly metals such as Zn, As, Sb, and W ( A model for the alteration process, and redistribution of elements in Fe-Ti oxides at the Le Semnon mine, is proposed for the early hydrothermal event prior to the main stage of Sb mineralization ( The breakdown of magmatic ilmenite-titanohematite to hydrothermal rutile is associated with a redistribution of trace elements. This reaction is mainly characterized by a release of Fe, Mg, Mn and Zn into hydrothermal fluids, and the incorporation of Sb and W into hydrothermal rutile. The mineral replacement reaction is not a potential source for the Sb mineralization, but likely contributes to the precipitation of sphalerite and ankerite. The hydrothermal fingerprint of rutile indicates a change of fluid composition during mineral replacement. Because rutile is a common accessory mineral in hydrothermal alteration and Sb is commonly associated with orogenic and subduction-related gold and base metal deposits, it appears fundamental to improve the knowledge of the behavior of Sb during fluid/rock interactions in order to characterize alteration, especially the partitioning between ilmenite-titanohematite assemblage, rutile, sulfides and hydrothermal fluids. New experimental data are necessary in order to better constrain the partitioning of Sb between these minerals, particularly at temperatures lower than 400 °C. This would provide quantitative information about the parameters which controls HFSE and chalcophile behavior of Sb in Ti-bearing hydrothermal systems. This work was funded by the Bureau de Recherches Géologiques et Minières (     Measured element: Cr Ka Overlapping element: V Kb 1 Used standard: V_SP055  Overlapping element: Ti Kb 3 Used standard: MnTiO   Forsterite = O: 43.66%, Mg: 30.4%, Si: 19.%, Fe: 6.7%, Ni: 0.24% Albite = Na: 8.52%, Mg: 0.09%, Al: 10.12%, Si: 31.94%, K: 0.18%, Ca: 0.45%, Fe: 0.05%, O: 48.65% Al Wollastonite = Si: 23.98%, Ca: 34.4%, Mn: 0.12%, Fe: 0.35%, O: 41.15% MnTiO V_SP055 = V: 100% Cr Andradite = Mg: 0.18%, Si: 16.36%, Ca: 23.84%, Fe: 21.89%, O: 37.73% NiO = Ni: 78.58%, O: 21.42% Beam size: 3 µm     Measured element: As La Overlapping element: Sb Lb 3 Used standard: Sb   Pyrite = S: 53.4%, Fe: 46.6% Au_SP055 = Au: 100% Co metal = Co: 100% Ni metal = Ni: 100% ZnS = Zn: 67.1%, S: 32.9% GaAs = Ga: 48.2%, As: 51.8% Sb2S3_Sulf = Sb: 71.68%, S: 28.32% Cu metal = Cu: 100% Beam size: 3 µm        