The goal of the present study was to perform a systematic review of the published data on talar neck fractures for a better understanding of the postoperative clinical outcomes using open reduction and internal fixation stratified by Hawkins type. A PubMed search was performed using the keywords “talar,” “neck,” and “fracture.” This search identified 209 potential studies, which were reviewed to yield 16 studies that met the criteria. The surgical outcomes of talar neck fractures stratified by the Hawkins classification analyzed in the present study were as follows: American Orthopaedic Foot and Ankle Society scale score was 77.00 for type I, 86.10 for type II, 68.30 for type III, 68.30 for type IV, and 76.50 for all talar neck fractures. Avascular necrosis presented in 0.00% of type I fractures, 15.91% of type II fractures, 38.89% of type III fractures, 55.00% of type IV fractures, and 26.47% of all fractures. Osteoarthritis presented in 25.00% of type I fractures, 41.33% of type II fractures, 54.23% of type III fractures, 72.73% of type IV fractures, and 51.69% of all fractures. Subtalar arthritis presented in 0.00% of type I fractures, 54.29% of type II fractures, 46.43% of type III fractures, 45.45% of type IV fractures, and 44.97% of all fractures. The malunion prevalence was 13.29% and the nonunion prevalence was 3.97% for all fractures. Type II fractures were the most common (50.88%) fracture type reported in the reports reviewed in the present study.Talar neck fractures are among some of the rarest and most challenging injuries for surgeons to repair The talus is the most superiorly located bone of the foot and is vital in maintaining ankle function and range of motion The most common mechanism of talar neck fractures is hyperdorsiflexion of the ankle, which often occurs in high-energy trauma to the ankle. In such cases, the posterior ligaments of the subtalar joint initially rupture and the talar neck contacts the leading anterior edge of the distal tibia, causing a fracture line. With continued force, the calcaneus and the rest of the foot, including the head of the talus, sublux anteriorly. At this point, concomitant eversion can cause lateral dislocation, and inversion can cause medial dislocation Fractures of the talar neck and body are commonly categorized using the Hawkins classification system, modified by Canale and Kelly A variety of complications, including avascular necrosis (AVN) and osteoarthritis (OA), are understood to be related to the initial fracture displacement. They result from the increased risk of trauma to the vascular blood supply of the talar body. Talar neck fractures with associated body fractures have had a greater prevalence of AVN than talar neck fractures without body injury. Talar body fractures are associated with weakening of the talar trochlea, which can subject the body to full collapse and subsequent degenerative changes Currently, multiple systematic reviews are available on fractures of the talar neck; however, minimal information has focused entirely on the outcomes of ORIF-treated fractures stratified by the Hawkins classification. The goal of the present study was to perform a systematic review of the available published data on talar neck fractures repaired using ORIF for a better understanding of the postoperative clinical outcomes and complications stratified by Hawkins classification type. A PubMed search was performed using the keywords “talar,” “neck,” and “fracture.” This search identified 209 studies, which were then reviewed. The exclusion criteria were studies reported in a language other than English, studies that did not use ORIF as the surgical method, and studies that did not use the Hawkins classification system ( When the studies included both talar neck fractures and other talus fractures (body), only the data referencing the talar neck fractures were extracted. This was the case for 3 of the 16 studies All the reviewed studies were retrospective. A total of 508 talar fractures were initially reported among the 16 examined reports. However, that was reduced to 340 fractures using our criteria and because some patients were lost during the follow-up period of the original retrospective studies. Of the 340 fractures, 10 (2.94%) were type I, 173 (50.88%) were type II, 116 (34.12%) were type III, and 41 (12.06%) were type IV. The demographic data for the patient population are listed in The average interval to surgery across 6 of the 16 reports Post-traumatic OA has been recognized as the most prevalent complication after talar neck fractures and has been listed as the primary cause of secondary reconstructive procedures The AOFAS scale scores of 74 patients Malunion and nonunion can result in incongruity and arthritis in the subtalar and tibiotalar joints and have been reported in ≤30% of cases Talar neck fractures are associated with multiple complications, including AVN, OA, subtalar arthritis, tibiotalar arthritis, malunion, and nonunion. Although ORIF is predominantly used for Hawkins types III and IV talar neck fractures, the method of treatment for types I and II depends on the severity of the injury, the associated injuries, and surgeon experience Although the talus possesses a large articulating surface, it has a limited vascular supply As such, an increased risk of AVN of the body and talar dome exists with neck fractures and associated dislocations. This likely explains the increasing AVN rates with increasing Hawkins classification type. Previous studies have reported the incidence of AVN after a talar neck fracture as follows: 14% for Hawkins type I, 20% to 50% for Hawkins type II, 80% to 100% for Hawkins type III, and approximately 100% for Hawkins type IV Malunion is another common complication arising from this type of fracture, with the most common type being varus malalignment Studies have linked the development of post-traumatic OA to malunion, nonunion, AVN, and cartilage damage resulting from the injury The present study has shown that the incidence of OA development is increased with more complicated joint fractures. Fournier et al Although the average interval to surgery was not analyzed with respect to the development of postoperative complications, Vallier et al The limitations of the present study included the relatively small sample size and the retrospective design of the reviewed data. This small sample size can be attributed to the rarity (<1% of foot fractures) of talar neck fractures and the lack of sufficient published data that met our specific criteria. Because the present review was aimed specifically at complications occurring after ORIF, many studies that did not distinguish the outcomes by ORIF and other treatment methods or that did not provide complete data according to our criteria could not be included. This further limited our sample size. In addition, any bias associated with these retrospective studies was inherently associated with our review. The studies reviewed did not use a standardized clinical follow-up protocol or assessment of complications, which prevented us from uniformly analyzing and manipulating the data more extensively. To eliminate this bias and perform statistical comparisons according to our specific criteria, a prospective study design with original patient data is needed. Alternatively, a cohort study could be performed. In conclusion, we found the average AOFAS scale score was 77.00 for type I, 86.10 for type II, 68.30 for type III, 68.30 for type IV, and 76.5 for all talar neck fractures. AVN presented in 0.00% of type I fractures, 15.91% of type II fractures, 38.89% of type III fractures, 55.00% of type IV fractures, and 26.47% of all fractures. OA presented in 25.00% of type I fractures, 41.33% of type II fractures, 54.24% of type III fractures, 72.73% of type IV fractures, and 51.69% of all fractures. Subtalar arthritis presented in 0.00% of type I fractures, 54.29% of type II fractures, 46.43% of type III fractures, 45.46% of type IV fractures, and 44.97% of all fractures. The malunion prevalence was 13.29% and the nonunion prevalence was 3.97% for all fractures. Type II fractures were the most common (50.88%) fracture type in the reports analyzed in the present study. Talar neck fractures represent only a small percentage of injuries that orthopedic surgeons treat; however, they present a large challenge owing to the postoperative complications that accompany them. Patients with talar neck fractures should be prepared for the greater likelihood of long-term complications and should be offered a low threshold for repeat contact with the surgeon. A deep understanding of the talar bone anatomy and preservation of its vasculature will continue to play critical roles in enhancing operative methods and postoperative outcomes. The results of the present investigation could be very useful in the development of prospective case-control studies to further analyze and discuss the postoperative outcomes of talar neck fractures.