Travertine has long been a popular material for stone tile flooring in many stages of construction projects due to having unique surface properties characterized by honeycomb structure. Significant differences may be observed in terms of both visual appearances on the rock surface and physical and mechanical behavior in the using area depending on the cutting direction.
                  In this study, different cutting directions were applied to travertine blocks and the effects of freezing–thawing and thermal shock cycles on the rock structure were experimentally investigated. The changes in the physical and mechanical properties of three different travertine types, such as uniaxial compressive strength, flexural strength, Bohme abrasion resistance, capillary water absorption and P-wave velocity values depending on the bedding direction were evaluated under the effect of freezing–thawing and thermal shock tests for 10, 20, 30, and 40 cycles. Qualitative results show that the freezing–thawing cycles have a more destructive effect on the mechanical properties in comparison to thermal-shock cycles through perpendicular loading conditions to the bedding planes in travertines.Travertine has been an important building material for monuments and civil constructions from ancient times until present all over the world. It has been used as structural stone and also in ornamental elements such as sculptures. Travertine is commonly seen in different sizes as façade material, wall cladding, and flooring tiles Travertine is being cut parallel or perpendicular to the bedding planes since it exhibits considerable visual variations depending on the cutting direction In most engineering structures with rock materials, temperature variation, water content, and fluid permeability are primarily responsible for rock deterioration. They may affect the microstructure properties of the rock by inducing new microcracks and cause some mineralogical changes in the material and so affect its physical and mechanical properties Material characteristics and engineering properties of travertines were investigated by a number of researchers García-del-Cura Goshtasbi et al. Despite the widely use of travertine in various architectural applications, very few studies have been performed to determine the effect of physical deterioration mechanism depend on the bedding orientation in this rock. Using of travertine stones without enough attention paid to the cutting directions may cause some unexpected deterioration rates such as abrasion and strength losses in practice. The determination of its long-term durability against physical weathering conditions such as F-T and T-S cycles has also crucial importance not only for the selection of an appropriate stone type for the application area, but also will help to use them in true orientation. Although both cutting directions are used in different applications by evaluating only visual preferences, changes in rock properties under the effect of atmospheric conditions also must be considered. Therefore, this study primarily investigates the effect of bedding direction on the rock properties under the effect of extreme temperature variations such as F-T and T-S cycles. Three different travertine types (white travertine “WT”, yellow travertine “YT” and red travertine “RT”) which are formed by calcite minerals dissolving in hot ground water and then being deposited on the earth’s surface by natural springs along an already existing fault-fracture were used ( The F-T test was carried out according to EN 12371 UCS tests were performed on the standard edge length of 70 FS (three point bending strength) tests were performed on prismatic test specimens having size of 25 Cube samples with an edge length of 71 CWA measurements were performed by the gravimetric sorption technique according to the procedure described in EN 1925 PWV of samples were measured on cubic samples having 70 All tested rocks were analyzed for testing in the laboratory to identify their mineralogical and petrographical features. Petrographical analyses were carried out according to standard TS EN 12407 The physical and mechanical properties of some travertine rocks were determined by means of laboratory tests to characterize the effect of orientations of the bedding planes. Tests were carried out on fresh and weathered specimens under simulated physical weathering conditions. During the weathering tests, natural stones were subjected to repeated 40 total cycles of F-T and T-S action in the laboratory as a simulation of the physical weathering process following the procedure suggested by standard methods. UCS, FS, BAR, CWA, and PWV values of rocks were identified for both fresh and weathered (10, 20, 30, and 40 weathering cycles) as perpendicular and parallel to lamination axis. Test results obtained for fresh and cyclically weathered state of each rock are summarized in For all tested fresh rocks, it can easily be seen from the figures that, higher UCS values were obtained through parallel loading conditions to the lamination axis than perpendicular loading conditions and the maximum strength value can reach up to 65 Based on the test results, weathering cycles cause a rapid decrease in UCS values for first 10 F-T cycles for almost all rock types especially for perpendicular in comparison to parallel loading conditions to the bedding planes ( Similarly, BAR values were also found to be affected by the loading orientation for almost all rock specimens through T-S and F-T cycles ( A testing procedure was implemented to perform the measurements in CWA with simulated physical weathering conditions such as F-T and T-S cycles. The research indicates that, WT rock shows the less susceptibility to water absorption with capillary action than YT and RT rocks under the effect of thermal changes ( The PWV was also observed for three selected travertine rocks before and after weathering treatment depend on the bedding direction. Although all rock types have highly heterogeneous structure due to their anisotropy, the change in PWV was obtained almost same for all directions for WT and YT rocks after the F-T and T-S cycles ( The changes in physical and mechanical properties of travertines against various environmental conditions were evaluated using several accelerated weathering tests depend on the orientations of the lamination axis. The results mainly indicate the adverse effect of freezing–thawing cycles on the UCS values of travertines in comparison to thermal shock cycles especially for perpendicular loading conditions to bedding orientation. For these conditions, the decrease in UCS values of F-T weathered samples may reach to a maximum of 40–50% of initial value after first 10 F-T cycles for almost all travertine samples. Porosity has a more noticeable effect on perpendicular loading conditions by lowering the UCS value. The pores on the surfaces of the travertines cut perpendicular to their bedding planes are seen to be more in number and larger in area, while those on the surfaces of travertines cut parallel to their bedding planes are less in number and smaller in area. For this reason, UCS and PWV values show a significant variation with increase in porosity and UCS losses are generally observed along the contours of the pores, and along the bedding planes since the thin walls between the pores may easily be cracked by applied loading. In addition, FS values of WT and YT rocks were found to be more affected by perpendicular loading conditions through both cycles. It was also found that, degree of porosity and bedding direction are the two key features that mainly control the durability of travertine under the effect of F-T and T-S cycles. T-S cycles have more notable effect than F-T cycles by means of BAR values and remarkable increases in BAR values were obtained specially for the parallel loading conditions to the bedding planes in each rock. Similarly, all rock types show higher capillary water uptakes for parallel than perpendicular orientation of the bedding planes. PWV values show tendency to decrease for all travertine samples by the same proportions at the end of F-T and T-S cycles through each bedding direction since the PWV values depend on the increasing number of pores in the material that obstruct the propagation of the waves. WT is better than other travertine types in terms of CWA and PWV after F-T and T-S cycles. The real cause of the observed behavior may be explained as bedding plane is the main weakness feature for travertines since the major fractures will occur through the layers after both F-T and T-S cycles.