Nano-sized graphite was used as a dopant for fabrication of ZrB2–SiC ceramic via spark plasma sintering at 1800 °C for 8 min under 35 MPa. As-sintered composite was characterized by XRD, SEM, EDS, STEM, TEM and nanoindentation in order to study the micro/nanostructure and mechanical properties of the sample. A near fully-dense ternary composite was obtained after densification process. In-situ formation of ZrC was attributed to the chemical reaction of graphite nano-flakes with ZrO2 nano-layers covered the surface of starting ZrB2 powders. Reactive role of graphite as an effective sintering aid, via removal of oxide impurities, was illustrated by TEM, as some ultrafine porosities were remained in the sintered bulk in graphite-free areas. The hardness and elastic modulus of the composite, obtained by the nanoindentation method, showed an excellent harmony with the reported data in the literature. The average hardness of 15.2, 18.3 and 10.7 GPa were achieved for ZrB2, SiC and ZrB2/SiC interface, respectively. Average Young's moduli of matrix and reinforcement phases were measured as 328 and 306 GPa, respectively, which showed favorable adaption in mechanical properties of composite components. The nano-indentational characteristics of composite, especially pop-ins in the load-displacement curves, were also discussed.Ultrahigh temperature ceramic matrix composites (UHTCMC) comprising binary ZrB Nevertheless several brilliant reports [ Spark plasma sintering (SPS) route is a modern densification methodology for manufacturing through powder metallurgy approach [ To the best of our understanding, there is no comprehensive report on the characterization of spark plasma sintered nano-graphite doped ZrB Available powders of zirconium diboride (particle size <2 μm, purity >99.8%) and silicon carbide (particle size <3 μm, purity >99.2%) as well as nano-flakes of graphite (thickness <100 nm, purity >99.5%) were purchased as raw materials from Chinese Xuzhou Hongwu company. The weights of starting materials were controlled to provide a mixture of ZrB Instrumented nano-indentation (Agilent G200, USA) was used to measure the mechanical properties of the achieved composite. Nano-indentation tests were carried out at 25 °C using a Berkovich indenter at maximum load of 400 mN. The loading process prolonged 10 s and then the indenter was hold at the maximum load for extra 5 s. More details about nano-indentation test can be found elsewhere [  X-ray diffraction patterns of the as-mixed powders/flakes of the starting materials and the as-sintered ZrB A high-magnification SEM micrograph of the as-sintered nanocomposite is shown in The presence of carbonaceous dopant in the form elemental graphite and/or new formed ZrC compound after sintering process, can be well-clarified through STEM investigation. Therefore, the STEM images of ZrB  As it can be obviously seen in The presence of few submicron pores, e.g. at the interface of ZrB Anyway, in comparison with pores marked in The positive role of nano-graphite addition as a sintering aid for the densification evolution of spark plasma densified ZrB  Load-displacement curves of ZrB As it can be clearly seen in According to The abovementioned discussions can be confirmed, if the load-displacement curves of the ZrB Also, the interfacial phases such as remained graphite, zirconium dioxide and possible glassy phases may affect the shape of load-displacement curves at interfaces, based on the volume fraction of the phases and location of indenter tip. SEM/AFM-equipped instrumented nano-indentation test can result in more accurate results, as the location of indent can be precisely determined. The conclusive nano-indentational response of several phases in ZrB ZrB