The proposal of hydrometallurgical routes for treating chalcopyrite has increased due to the environmental problems caused by pyrometallurgical processing. However, hydrometallurgical methods have not found widespread acceptance for chalcopyrite because the refractory nature of this mineral phase does not permit leaching under ambient conditions. Moderately high temperatures and pressures are required to break a protective passivation layer formed by intermediate oxidation products. As an alternative, the addition of catalysts, such as pyrite and/or silver ions, to the leach has shown some promise to modify this passivating film. However, the improvements have not been economically attractive, still requiring long processing times. On the other hand, the use of polar organic solvents, as part of the acid leaching solution, has been shown to offer a solution to the formation of the protective layer.
                  In the present investigation, chalcopyrite leaching in mixed polar organic/aqueous acid media is studied, varying the concentration and type of solvent, as well as the oxidant. The results show a beneficial effect of the solvents on copper and iron extractions, using different oxidants at relatively low temperatures, achieving high conversions in only 5h at 50°C.Chalcopyrite is of great economic importance since the majority of the world's copper reserves is present in this phase ( Other researchers have proved that passivation may be lessened to some extent through the use of catalysts, such as pyrite with or without pretreatment with silver ions ( To prevent the passive layer from forming, the present authors proposed the use of polar organic solvents in combination with the acid media ( The − Two types of experiments were performed: the first was cyclic voltammetry studies on chalcopyrite or concentrate carbon paste electrodes (CPE-Cp or CPE-CCp, respectively) and the second were leaching tests using both the concentrate and the pure sample. The chalcopyrite carbon paste electrodes were constructed using pure chalcopyrite or the concentrate (0.1 The experiments were carried out in two media, the first being only a H The second group of experiments was the leaching studies, which were carried out in a 1 The leaching solution was prepared by adding the oxidant to the sulfuric acid — organic solvent mixture and subsequently introducing either 10 In order to design a hydrometallurgical process, each step of the dissolution reactions should be understood ( Cyclic voltammetry was also performed on a pure chalcopyrite carbon paste electrode, in order to eliminate any response that could be attributed to the other minerals present in the copper concentrate. In Since the voltammograms displayed that the presence of acetone enhanced the electroactivity of the chalcopyrite in the concentrate at potentials above 0.45 The potential is a sensitive variable in chalcopyrite leaching and, for this reason, it was measured in all of the experiments. In Four concentrations of acetone in 1 Experiments were performed on 10 The initial peroxide concentration influences the redox potential of the leaching solution. For that reason, this set of experiments at 25 Recently several authors have focused on the relationship between chalcopyrite dissolution and the solution potential ( The phenomena that require explanation here are the unconventional behavior of the solution potential with time with the different H X-ray diffraction of the solid residue with the highest copper extraction (2.1 The presence of elemental sulfur is consistent with the findings of other authors, who concluded that this phase is formed in the potential range between 0.5 and 1.5 In the previous section, it was shown that the combination of acetone with hydrogen peroxide enhances chalcopyrite dissolution at near ambient conditions. However, this system has several serious drawbacks, such as the high reagent costs since both are consumed in the reaction, and the possible formation of a powerful explosive at long reaction times ( In The influence of the acid concentration, in the range of 0.5–2.5  As was mentioned previously, one of the disadvantages of hydrogen peroxide is its high cost. In the search for industrially viable alternative oxidants, cupric sulfate has shown reasonable activity in the presence of ligands that are capable of complexing it in its Cu(I) state ( The same experiments were performed using ethylene glycol instead of acetone, with similar results (not shown here). However, at the higher concentration, the reaction of the medium was so vigorous that the temperature was uncontrollable. More research in this area is required to find the most adequate organic solvent and conditions to minimize the reaction of the oxidant with the medium. The use of organic solvents, such as acetone and ethylene glycol, together with sulfuric acid solutions, was shown to favor the oxidative leaching of chalcopyrite, obtaining high copper extractions in relatively short times at near ambient conditions. The improvement in the kinetics is probably due to the decrease in passivation by non-stoichiometric phases that normally plague the leaching process in purely aqueous systems. Additionally, there is a possibility that copper might be stable as the cuprous ion in these media. Although the acid concentrations did not affect the kinetics, the oxidant concentrations and the temperature were found to greatly influence the copper and iron extractions. The present findings open a new direction of research oriented toward the development of a plausible low-temperature processing route for chalcopyrite leaching. The authors wish to thank the