An experimental study has been carried out on the ballistic performance of 95% and 99.5% alumina ceramic tiles backed by metal plates, when subjected to normal impact of hard steel 12.7mm armour piercing (AP) projectiles at velocities ranging from 500 to 830ms−1. Typical damaged targets and broken projectiles are presented. The depth of penetration is measured in all the experiments, and the ballistic efficiency factor of the ceramic plates are determined.
                  Results show that the efficiency factor increases with increase in projectile velocity. With the increase in thickness of the ceramic tile, the ballistic efficiency factor for a given velocity is observed to decrease in the case of 99.5% grade and increase in the case of 95% grade ceramic. The higher purity alumina (99.5%) shows higher ballistic performance when compared with the 95% alumina. The 99.5% alumina exhibited a predominantly transcrystalline fracture while the 95% alumina showed a less defined fracture surface.
                  Experiments on 7.62mm AP shots were also done keeping the (
                        
                           d
                           /
                           t
                        
                     ) ratio same as in 12.7mm AP experiments and results are presented.ballistic efficiency mass efficiency thickness efficiency reference penetration in Al-alloy residual penetration in backing plate thickness of ceramic tile impact velocity of the projectile density of backing Al-alloy plate density of ceramic target Response of ceramics to projectile impact has been the subject of many investigations in the past two decades. These studies have described various aspects of ceramic fracture both in compression and tension Evaluation of ballistic performance of ceramics has been a difficult task due to the number of variables, like the type of threat, projectile velocity, projectile geometry In the ballistic tests shown schematically in The ballistic efficiency factor has a significance for armour designers as this factor connects both the mass and the thickness efficiency factors. For example, values of 1.0 or above for Experiments were performed in a small arms range wherein spinning hardcore AP projectiles were fired using a standard rifle. The hardened steel core is covered with a copper sheath and has a diameter of 10.8 Alumina ceramic tiles of two grades backed by plates of 7017 aluminium alloy, a commonly used grade of armour in the light armoured vehicles, were used in the present experiments. The mechanical properties of the above alloy plates are given in In DOP measurements often the thicknesses of ceramics are so chosen as to leave a substantial residual penetration—typically of the order of 0.75–0.25 of the reference penetration. However, in this work we have chosen a configuration which we believe is closer to practical applications of futuristic thin skinned light vehicles wherein the residual DOP should be naturally lower than the thickness of the backing aluminium alloys used in the construction of the vehicles. For every thickness of the ceramic tile bonded to aluminium alloy plate, projectiles were fired at velocities ranging from 500 to 830 Wilkins In the present work, in order to study the nature of fracture and fragmentation, the target and projectile debris were collected during a few experiments. The debris collection was done by placing a closed box in front of the target and covering the front of the box with layers of polymer cloth. The projectile debris was then separated from the total debris through magnetic separation. It is found that as the velocity of the projectile is increased, both the projectile and the target break into a larger number of finer pieces, leading to more efficient energy absorption. To study the effect of thickness of the ceramic on the projectile erosion, debris of projectile was collected when the projectile was fired at about 830  Main results related to efficiency of energy absorption in ceramics are given in  From the results, it is observed that the mass efficiency increases by a factor of about 1.9 when velocity changes from 500 to 800 Similarly, Woodward and Baxter Murat Vural et al. In order to compare the effect of ballistic efficiency of ceramic against the two different projectiles, a study was carried out using 7.62 AP projectiles, which is also close to 0.30 AP projectiles. Experiments were conducted in such a way that the ratio of the diameter of projectile to tile thickness, (  This ‘thickness effect’ is actually a result of two distinct effects: (a) the free surface effect and (b) the velocity effect. The free surface at the top of the ceramic generates release waves, which cause cracking and reduced stresses, thereby decreasing the resistance. The effect of this on the overall performance diminishes with the increase of thickness of the ceramic giving rise to an apparent increase in the overall performance. The “velocity effect” is a consequence of the decreased performance with decrease in velocity. For any given incident velocity, there is a definite and strong gradient of velocity as the projectile moves from the top of the ceramic to the bottom. Essentially then, a thick ceramic tile can be considered to be made of elemental thicknesses, wherein each succeeding layer encounters the projectile at a lower velocity than at the previous layer and hence exhibits a corresponding lower efficiency. The average efficiency, being an average over the whole thickness, therefore decreases. The net effect due to the “free surface effect” and the “velocity effect” depends on which one between the two effects is dominant for any given ceramic. In the case of 99.5% grade, the velocity effect which is higher, apparently dominates and leads to a decrease in efficiency with an increase in tile thickness. In the case of 95% grade for which the velocity effect is only about 1/3rd as strong, the surface effect dominates, to create a mild increase in efficiency with increasing thickness. Ballistic tests were conducted on high purity alumina ceramic tiles backed by thick plates of Al-7017 aluminium alloy using the DOP method. Response of projectiles and the targets were studied, and the ballistic efficiency of the targets were determined. It was found that the efficiency factor is not constant but varies as a function of both thickness and velocity. The results indicated that the higher purity alumina (99.5%) shows higher ballistic performance in comparison with 95% alumina for any given thickness and velocity. In the case of high purity alumina, with increase in the thickness the ballistic efficiency factor decreases, while it increases for the lower purity alumina employed in the present tests. The authors thank the Director, DMRL, for permission to publish this work. The support of the staff of small arms range of DMRL in conducting the ballistic tests is also acknowledged.