Delay blasting with relatively long-delay intervals is widely used in mining engineering since the former detonated blast-holes can produce new free surfaces for the later detonated blast-holes. With the application of electronic detonators, which have a minimum delay and a delay accuracy of 1 ms, a new blasting pattern using short-delay intervals is proposed in the present study in order to improve rock breaking and control blast-induced vibrations in cutting blasting with single free surface in underground mines. Theoretical analyses are firstly conducted to investigate the mechanisms of blasting crater formation and vibration reduction of short-delay blasting. Then a series of blasting crater tests with different delay intervals are performed to compare the characteristics of blasting craters and blast-induced vibrations produced by short-delay and simultaneous blastings. The results of crater sizes show that it is possible to form a common blasting crater only when the delay intervals are shorter than the formation time of a new free surface. It is also found that the short-delay blasting can effectively reduce PPV compared with the simultaneous blasting, particularly in the near-field. Spectral analysis indicates that there is less energy in the low-frequency content in short-delay blasting than simultaneous blasting. The possibility and feasibility of reducing vibration via short-delay blasting in underground mines are also discussed in this study.The use of blasting for hard rock fragmentation is widely adopted in mining and quarrying engineering ( Rock blasting researchers have long tried to improve fragmentation via stress wave interaction between adjacent blast-holes in short-delay blasting. By constructing a 2D model, It is noted that most of the previous studies focused on short-delay blasting were based on the blasting model in open-pit mines. Unlike open-pit engineering, and limited by the terrain, blasting in underground mines often associates with the situation of only a single free surface. Therefore, in order to increase blasting efficiency, cutting blasting must be carried out to artificially create new free surfaces for subsequent blasts. A typical cutting blasting scheme in underground mines involves simultaneously initiating explosive columns in several blast-holes which are arranged in a This study focuses on short-delay blasting with a single free surface in underground mines. Theoretical analyses are firstly conducted to investigate the mechanisms of crater formation and vibration reduction in short-delay blasting. Subsequently, a series of blasting crater tests with single and multiple blast-holes are performed to compare the characteristics of blasting craters and blast-induced vibrations produced by short-delay and simultaneous blastings. According to There is a depth limit for the blasting crater of single-hole blasting, which means that when the charge depth is longer than the optimum depth, the blasting crater will not increase with the increase of the charge depth. Because of this limit, several blast-holes arranged in a The crater formation process of short-delay blasting is as follows ( Determining the delay intervals for short-delay blasting is the key factor in the formation of the common blasting crater. If the delay intervals are longer than the formation time of a new free surface, as shown in However, the determination of the formation time for a new free surface is still under discussion. There are a number of factors that affect blast-induced vibration. For cutting blasting with single free surface, two significant influencing factors are the number of free surface and the charge amount per delay. It is commonly believed that with the increase of free surfaces and the decrease of charge weight per delay, the amplitude of vibration wave decreases. Obviously, under a confined boundary condition, the charge amount per delay for the cutting blast-holes is very large since several blast-holes with one single free surface detonate at the same nominal delay. Therefore, cutting blasting induces intense vibration which may cause critical damage to nearby structures. Delay blasting can effectively control hazardous vibration as it reduces the charge weight per delay. In addition, the superposition of vibration waves produced by successively detonated blast-holes can be avoided and reduced via selecting optimum delay intervals ( The response of rock mass under blast loading is very complex due to the usual anisotropy and non-linear nature of the material, the variability of mechanical properties and the coexistence of the three phases: solid, liquid and gaseous ( The tests were carried out at Shaxi underground mine. It is a newly constructed copper mine of Tongling Nonferrous Metals Group Holdings Co Ltd and is located at Nihe village in the southeast of Hefei in China. The total reserves and resources of the mine are 80.9 million tons with 0.59% copper, and the designed annual ore quantity is 3300 kT. The ore bodies lie in porphyry rocks, with a buried depth of more than 900 m. There are two main ore blocks: the Tongquanshan ore block and the Fengtaishan ore block, as shown in As shown in The tests in the present study are carried out in a roadway at the −650 m level of the Fengtaishan ore block, as shown in As analysed in Section It is accepted that the crater mechanism is altered by gravitational effects ( There are three types of crater sizes to be measured: the crater radius, the crater volume and the crater depth. It is commonly accepted that the first two can well reflect the characteristics of a blasting crater ( Three-component seismic instruments, NUBOX-8016 produced by Sichuan Top Measurement and Control Technology Co., Ltd., are installed to monitor the ground vibrations induced by the test blasts. Six monitoring stations are placed on the floor of the roadway with 10–100 m distances from the blast sites ( For single-hole blasting, the depths of points at an interval of 0.2 m in every direction are measured, as shown in The crater radii and volumes for two holes blastings with different delays are plotted in The crater radii and volumes for four blast-holes blastings with different delay schemes are plotted in It is widely accepted that the Peak Particle Velocity (PPV) is the most appropriate and accurate measure of blast-induced vibration and possible damage ( For PPV determination, compared with the largest value of the vertical, radial, and transverse components, a true vector summation provides a more accurate measurement of particle velocity at each instant time by summing the three components of motion into an amplitude vector ( To get a clearer plot of the vibration data, Eq. In the present study, the PPV of the three components of particle velocity ( For simultaneous blasting, it is unquestionable that the increase of the blast-hole number leads to the increase of PPV, but how to add the contributions of the individual charge masses by separate blast-holes is still questionable ( Linear curves of the two and four blast-holes cases using a linear superposition model are also plotted in The PPVs of two holes blasts with different delay intervals and the regression curves and optimum equations are plotted in The PPVs of four holes blasts with different delay schemes are shown in It is critical to understand not only the PPV of the vibration signals but also the frequency band in which the PPV occurs. Although many powerful signal processing techniques, e.g., wavelet methods ( The MF of the amplitude–frequency spectrum is defined as (  We can see that there is no good regularity for the DF. This is due to the DF only reflects the frequency with the maximum peak of the amplitude, and the frequency banding is not obvious as there are not large number of blast-holes. Therefore, it is not strange that there is nearly no attenuation for DF. In addition, the MF has the best fit coefficient. Therefore, in this study the MF is used to investigate the frequency characteristics of the tested vibration signals. The MF values against the SD and the best linear fit curves for two holes blasts with different delay intervals are plotted in For delay blasting with delay intervals longer than the formation time of a new free surface, the number of free surfaces for the later detonated blast-hole increases, and the direction of the minimum burden changes compared with the simultaneous blasting, thus there is no interaction between the adjacent blast-holes. Therefore, it is possible to form a common blasting crater only when the delay intervals are less than the formation time of a new free surface. It is generally accepted that stress wave superposition occurs for extremely short-delay blasting and promotes fragmentation. However, even simultaneous blasting using electronic delays cannot ensure the superposition effect. Assuming that the stress wave superposition occurs in the simultaneous blasting (0 ms), the crater sizes obtained in our tests indicate that stress wave superposition does not contribute to the formation of the blasting crater. However, delayed blastings with longer delay intervals are considered to fundamentally promote the interaction of the stress wave induced by the later detonated blast-hole and the explosive gasses produced by the former detonated blast-hole. Our tests show that better craters are obtained for blasts with longer delay intervals compared with simultaneous blasting, which indicates that the interaction of stress wave and explosive gasses better promotes rock-breaking than does stress wave superposition. It is also found that the short-delay blasting can effectively reduce PPV compared with simultaneous blasting, particularly in the near-field. This is due to the reduction in the charge weight per delay from simultaneous blasting to short-delay blasting, which makes the release of explosive energy more dispersed rather than intensive. As noted by The tests in this study also show that there is less energy in the low-frequency content for short-delay blasting than there is in simultaneous blasting. The process of rock blasting with multiple blast-holes is complicated, since it involves the complex interactions between stress waves, between stress waves and explosive gasses, and between explosive gasses. Our study and understanding on the mechanisms of rock breaking and vibration reduction for short-delay blasting are still rudimentary, and further studies regarding this problem need to be conducted. The authors would like to acknowledge the financial support from the