Nanograined Ni-Co alloys with controlled composition were prepared by co-precipitate assisted hydrogen reducing method, and their crystal structure, morphology and magnetic properties were obtained. Effect of the Co content on magnetic properties of the Ni-Co alloy was discussed. Results show that the saturation magnetization increases with higher Co content, which reaches to 214.70emu/g when the Co content is 90%. The coercivity increases with increasing in the Co content to 70%, and then it decreases as the Co content further increases. The research reveals that the saturation magnetization is affected by the atomic magnetism moment and the magnitude of coercivity is affected by both the Co content and the grain size.Nanograined (NG) transition metals such as Ni, Co and Fe have attracted far-reaching attention because of their low cost and advantage of high magnetization. These materials have potential applications for photocopying, medical imaging, magnetic drug targeting and magnetic hyperthermia As one of the important transition metal alloys, Ni-Co alloys are of high mechanical strength Recently, revolution of nanotechnology has led to the development of alloy nanocrystallization, which has been used in the fabrication of transition metals. Micro- and nanoscale Ni-Co alloys have been prepared by many methods such as electrochemical reduction In this paper, NG Ni-Co alloys with coral-shaped were fabricated by using co-precipitate assisted hydrogen reducing method and their morphologies and the magnetic properties were characterized. We explored the effect of Co content on magnetic properties of NG coral-shaped Ni-Co alloys. NiCl Samples were prepared by co-precipitate assisted hydrogen reducing method. In a typical synthesis process of NG Ni-Co alloys, a certain amount of the mixed powder including NiCl The compositions of NG Ni-Co alloys were characterized by X-ray diffractometer (XRD-6000), at 40 kV and 30 mA with Cu Kα radiation and average crystallite size analysis of each sample was acquired. Field-emission scanning electron microscopy (FE-SEM, JEOL6700) was used to measure the morphologies of the NG Ni-Co alloys. SQUID magnetometer was used to measure the magnetic properties, and the magnetic hysteresis loops were measured by using the magnetic field from +20 kOe to −20 kOe at 300 K.   The lattice constants and average crystal size of all samples are shown in Parameter of alloy becomes larger due to distortion of lattice resulted from Ni atoms. It has been studied In addition, it can be observed that the crystal size decreases with increasing in the Co content at first and then it increases with higher Co content when the Co content reaches to 70%. Differences between grain sizes of samples can be explained by the growth mechanism: The driving force of grain boundary movement usually comes from the decreasing of the total interfacial energy. Factors influencing the movement of grain boundary may affect the growth of grains because that the grains grow through migration of large angle grain boundary. The ion Co For Ni  It is proposed that the growth mechanism for dendrite coral-shaped morphology is related to the inheritance of oxalate morphology. Jongen et al.  Magnetic moments are considered to be derived by orbital motion and spin motion of electrons. Because of producing closed loop current, the orbital motion and spin motion of electrons become the source of magnetic. Magnetic moment produced by nuclei can be negligible when atomic magnetic moments are taken account, because the magnetic moment from nuclei is quite small compared to that from electrons. According to energy band theory, electrons of outermost layer -4s layer in some atomics such as Fe and Ni constitute to energy band of 4s due to the free movement of electrons in 4s. Electrons in sub-outer layer 3d also trend out to constitute to energy band of 3d through it will be more difficulty to produce free electrons for 3d layer. When the quantity of the electrons in 4s +3d is beyond 8, atomic magnetic moment in metal or alloys () is normally considered to be in accordance with equation According to the Eq.  The HCP structure has large uniaxial magnetocrystalline anisotropy which provides high value of coercivity comparatively. Studies have shown that the dendrite morphology also exhibits shape anisotropy which contributes to coercivity  Nanograined Ni-Co alloys with different Co contents are prepared by co-precipitate assisted hydrogen reducing method. XRD patterns indicate that NG Ni-Co alloys have been successfully gained. The morphology of alloys is found to be coral-shaped. The saturation magnetization increases with increasing in Co content and rises up to 214.70emu/g when the Co content reaches to 90%. The relationship between coercivity of NG Ni-Co alloys and Co content is related to both anisotropy and grain size. This work was supported by the