Introduction
                  Ilio-sacral screw fixation has been used for sacral fractures and sacroiliac joint dislocations. However, it is associated with significant complications including screw loosening with backing-out and loss of reduction. Trans-sacral screw fixation is indicated for rigid fixation in specific circumstances including bilateral posterior ring injuries, osteoporotic bone, or to supplement other types of posterior ring fixation.
               
                  Hypothesis
                  The reformatting the CT scanning plane may distinguish sacral dysmorphism and predict the possibility of trans-sacral screw fixation by introducing the new indicator.
               
                  Material and methods
                  The CT data of 112 adult cadavers (61 males and 51 females) were imported into Mimics® software and a 7.0 mm-sized trans-sacral screw was virtually placed in the ideal position of S1. The osseous widths around screw in the axial images (AxWS1) were measured. By reformatting the CT scanning plane parallel to the superior endplate of S1, the AxWRS1 was measured and the height of elevated segment in the upper sacrum (elevated height) was assessed as a new preoperative indicator.
               
                  Results
                  Cortical violation around screw was detected in 26 models and was considered as sacral dysmorphism. The average AxWS1 was measured as 13.70±2.76mm in the non-dysmorphism group, and 5.81±2.19mm in the dysmorphism group, with statistical difference (p
                     <0.001). By reformatting the CT scanning plane, the average AxWRS1 increased to 16.61±2.79mm in the non-dysmorphism group, and 8.04±2.62 in the dysmorphism group, and the difference was statistically significant (p
                     <0.001). The elevated height was 3.29±4.19mm in the non-dysmorphism group, and 17.52±3.09mm in the dysmorphism group, and the differences were statistically significant (p
                     <0.001). Based on the ROC curve analysis, the cut-off value of elevated height was 12.90mm (sensitivity 1.0 and specificity 1.0).
               
                  Discussion
                  By reformatting the CT scanning plane, the osseous width around screw was widened, and the new preoperative indicator of elevated height could be introduced to predict the possibility of trans-sacral screw fixation into S1. If the elevated height exceeded 13mm, the pelvis was assigned to sacral dysmorphism and thus, could not apply the trans-sacral screw fixation into S1.
               
                  Level of evidence
                  III, controlled laboratory study.In unstable pelvic ring injuries, ilio-sacral (IS) screw fixation has been generally used as a minimally invasive method for posterior ring stabilization and applied to sacral fractures and sacroiliac joint dislocations. However, screw loosening and backing out may occur with or without loss of reduction. Kim et al. With the recognition of radiological markers to distinguish sacral dysmorphism, the incidence is not uncommon. The importance of preoperative identification lies in the recognition of sacral alar anatomy for more rigid fixation of IS screw and prevention of malposition Human body digital data were collected from the Korean Institute of Science and Technology Information and were used with permission. The cadavers of pelvic or adjacent joint problems were reviewed and excluded. Among them, 112 Korean cadavers (61 males and 51 females) were enrolled. The mean age of enrolled cadavers was 58.2 years (range, 21–86 years; SD, 13.9) and the mean height was 161.2 The CT data in the Digital Imaging and Communications in Medicine (DICOM) format were imported into Materialise Interactive Medical Image Control System (Mimics®) software (Materialise, Antwerp, Belgium) to reconstruct three-dimensional (3D) models of the pelvis including two iliac bones and sacrum. To assess the actual trans-osseous corridor for the safe placement of a trans-sacral screw, a virtual 7.0 The osseous width around the screw was measured in the pedicle area of conventional axial scan, which was the narrowest and defined as AxW The Statistical Package for Social Sciences Software (SPSS 22.0 for Windows, SPSS Inc., Chicago, IL, USA) was used for statistical analysis. According to the sacral dysmorphism, the variables of BW, BH, the boundary ratio of BW and BH (BW/BH), AxW In the conventional CT scanning, a total of 26 models were found to exhibit cortical violation in the axial scans. Based on the coronal scan, 19 models violated the cortex and 7 models were not identified. Thus, these 26 models (23.2%) were assigned to the sacral dysmorphism group. The remaining 86 models were assigned to sacral non-dysmorphism group. By reformatting the CT scanning plane, in the axial plane, the trans-sacral osseous corridor was straighter and wider, and the anterior sacral indentation was directly visualized without influencing the fixed trans-sacral screw. Thus, only 16 models of sacral dysmorphism group showed cortical violation and the other 10 models revealed intact cortex around the trans-sacral screw. However, all 26 models of sacral dysmorphism were identified clearly in the reformatted coronal scan. According to the CT scanning plane, none of the models was newly included in sacral dysmorphism group. However, the indicated image of cortical violation was altered from conventional axial images to reformatted coronal images in 10 models, which were considered as changeable models, since the axial width of trans-sacral corridor was wider according to the CT scanning plane ( All measurements of the anatomic variables are summarized in The osseous widths around screw are summarized in By reformatting the CT scanning plane, the relationship between the upper border of S Many recent studies the convenient variables were introduced without specific software or difficult procedure and located easily by most surgeons; the induced variable was entirely safe and based on preoperative planning methods to increase the accuracy of trans-sacral screw placement; using preoperative CT images, we selected accurate images to predict the possibility of trans-sacral screws into S In the present study, by simply reformatting the CT scanning plane, we reaffirmed the importance of well-known variables of BH and AxWR Multiple studies have used CT imaging to measure the safe zone for IS screw fixation In the conventional CT images, there was a discordance between scan plane and the true sacral axis, and thus, the coronal images were considered inappropriate for the measurement of osseous corridor around the trans-sacral screw. Therefore, some studies Compared with the reformatted CT scanning by McAndrew et al. However, our computational analysis has several fundamental limitations. First, since all measurements were based on normal sacrum, our results may only be useful in anatomically reduced fractures without comminution around the sacrum and are limited to application in cases of severe displacement. Second, since the variables related to trans-sacral osseous corridor were measured manually using the distance measurement tool in the Mimics® software, the possibility of intra-and inter-observer errors cannot be ruled out. Third, due to the small sample size, our results cannot be generalized to other populations or ethnicities. Nevertheless, our simple CT re-orientation technique for measurement of elevated height enables the prediction of safe trans-sacral screw fixation. Thus, we suggest that the CT scanning plane perpendicular and parallel to the superior endplate of S To preoperatively assess the possibility of trans-sacral screw fixation into S The authors declare that they have no competing interest. The authors, their immediate families, and any research foundation with which they are affiliated have not received any financial payments or other benefits from any commercial entity related to the subject of this article. H.J. Chung, J.S. Park performed data analysis and wrote the article. H.S. Sohn performed data analysis and G.H. Jung collected data and performed simulations and data analysis.