Studies have been carried out in the extraction of Cd(II) along with Al(III), Fe(III), In(III), Mn(II), Co(II), Ni(II), Cu(II), Zn(II), Hg(II) and Pb(II) from hydrochloric acid medium using Cyanex 923. The effect of different variables influencing the extraction of Cd(II) such as the concentration of acid, metal ion and extractant and the nature of the diluent has been investigated. The extracting species of Cd(II) is proposed. Based on the partition data, some binary separations of topical interest from Cd(II) have been achieved. The potential of the extractant for the recovery of pure cadmium from some zinc and copper matrices is assessed.Despite its toxicity, cadmium and its alloys find extensive applications in chemical, electronics and other industries. The purity of the metal is of paramount significance in various high-technology fields such as control rods in nuclear reactors. Cadmium is mainly obtained as a by-product in the metallurgical processing of other metals such as copper, zinc and lead. This necessitates the development of effective methods for the separation of cadmium from other commonly associated metals. Liquid–liquid extraction offers a convenient solution to the problem and has been widely used for the extraction and separation of cadmium. The various extractants used for the extraction of Cd(II) include amines The present work is aimed at exploring the potential of Cyanex 923 for the separation and recovery of Cd(II) from some natural matrices. With this objective, the extraction of some other associated metal ions such as Al(III), Fe(III), In(III), Mn(II), Co(II), Ni(II), Cu(II), Zn(II), Hg(II) and Pb(II) has also been investigated. The effect of different aqueous and organic phase variables on the extraction of Cd(II) has been studied. The composition of the extracted species is proposed. Based on the partition data, some binary separations of analytical significance have been achieved. The practical utility of the extractant is demonstrated by recovering pure Cd(II) from some zinc and copper matrices namely sphalerite, zinc plating mud and chalcopyrite. The loading and recycling capacity and the hydrolytic stability of the extractant are reported. Stock solutions of the metal ions were prepared by dissolving their nitrates/chlorides/sulfates in double-distilled water containing a minimum amount of the corresponding mineral acid and standardized by the usual complexometric titrations. The chemicals and organic solvents used were Analytical/Synthetic grade materials from Thomas Baker/E. Merck, Mumbai (India). Kerosene of the boiling fraction 160–200°C was used. Cyanex 923 was received as a gift sample from Cytec Ind., Niagara Falls, Ontario (Canada) and employed without further purification. Samples of sphalerite and zinc plating mud were obtained from Hindustan Zinc, Udaipur, Rajasthan (India) whereas chalcopyrite was procured from the Department of Earth Sciences, University of Roorkee, Roorkee, UP (India). An Atomic Absorption Spectrometer (Perkin Elmer, 3100) and an Inductively Coupled Plasma-Atomic Emission Spectrometer (Plasmalab, 8440) were used for the determination of concentration of metal ions for the distribution studies and the analysis of ores. For the partition studies equal volumes (10 mL) of the aqueous (metal ion solution in mineral acid) and organic phase (Cyanex 923 in an appropriate diluent) were shaken at room temperature (25±2°C) for 5 min to ensure complete equilibration. The two phases were separated and a suitable aliquot of the aqueous phase was assayed for the metal ion concentration. The experimental conditions for the various studies are mentioned with the corresponding data. Based on five observations, the value of percent extraction of Cd(II) at about 65% extraction exhibits a coefficient of variation of ±3%. Before subjecting the samples of sphalerite, zinc plating mud and chalcopyrite to the solvent extraction step, they were leached as follows: about 1 g of powdered sample was treated twice with 5 mL of concentrated HCl containing a few drops of concentrated HNO The extraction behaviour of Cd(II) and other commonly associated metal ions namely Al(III), Fe(III), In(III), Mn(II), Co(II), Ni(II), Cu(II), Zn(II), Hg(II) and Pb(II) [1.0×10 The effect of chloride ion concentration on the extraction of Cd(II) was also investigated using NaCl solution for adjusting Cl The percent of Cd(II) extraction using 0.1 M Cyanex 923 in different diluents of varying nature The effect of varying the concentration of Cyanex 923 (0.005–0.2 M) on the extraction of Cd(II) is shown in The effect of metal ion concentration on the extraction of Cd(II) (1×10 Various reagents were tested for the stripping of Cd(II) from the organic phase and it was observed that water/0.1 M HCl/1 M H Experiments were conducted to study the hydrolytic stability of a 0.2 M Cyanex 923 toluene solution against 5 M HCl. The extraction of Cd(II) was periodically checked after 5 days using the above Cyanex 923 solution. No decrease in the percent of Cd(II) extraction (92–91%) is observed even after a contact of 50 days. Successive extraction–stripping cycles were also carried out to study the recycling capacity of Cyanex 923. Cd(II) was first extracted by employing a 0.2 M Cyanex 923 toluene solution. Metal was stripped from the organic phase using two volumes of 0.1 M HCl. The organic phase after stripping was further washed with water until the washings were neutral. The recovery of each step was calculated from the amount of Cd(II) extracted in the organic phase in each particular cycle and it was observed that there is no appreciable change in the percent extraction (92–91%)/stripping (99–98%) of Cd(II) up to 15 cycles. Based on the partition data, some binary separations of Cd(II) from other associated metal ions have been achieved. Cd(II) was quantitatively extracted and separated from Al(III), Mn(II), Co(II), Ni(II), Cu(II), Hg(II) and Pb(II) by contacting the aqueous solution (2 M HCl) twice with 0.2 M Cyanex 923. It was stripped from the organic phase using two volumes of 0.1 M HCl. For the separation of Cd(II) from Fe(III)/In(III) and Zn(II), the aqueous phase was contacted twice with 0.2 M Cyanex 923 at 0.02, 0.5 and 0.5 M HCl, respectively. Fe(III)/In(III)/Zn(II) were quantitatively (>98%) extracted in the organic phase leaving Cd(II) in the raffinate. Results and the conditions of separations are given in 10 mL of A The present investigations highlight the utility of Cyanex 923 for achieving various topical separations from Cd(II). The separations are conveniently achieved without requiring any strict control on phase variables. The hydrolytic stability and the recycling capacity of the extractant is good. The loading of the metal is tractable and the phase separation fast. The study has been extended to separate and recover pure cadmium from some natural resources. The authors are grateful to Prof. S.N. Tandon, Emeritus Fellow for his valuable suggestions during the course of work. Thanks are due to Dr. W.A. Rickelton of Cytec Industries, Canada, for gifting the Cyanex 923 sample. The financial assistance of the Department of Science and Technology, New Delhi, India is acknowledged.