Metallic amorphous phase reinforced metal matrix composites were fabricated by using infiltration casting process. Due to the high thermal stability of amorphous Ni–20.6Nb–40.2Ta (wt.%) and good castability of Al–6.5Si–0.25Mg (wt.%) alloy, sound composite specimens without casting defects were fabricated.A tailored materials selection in fabricating composites has been a key step for designing structural composite systems with improved properties The objectives of this study are to present the possibility for the fabrication of a new type of hybrid material i.e. metallic glass reinforced Al alloy matrix composites using an infiltration casting technique and to investigate the microstructural and mechanical characteristics of the composites. For the ductile metallic matrix, Al–6.5Si–0.25Mg (wt.%) alloy has been selected due to its excellent castability enabling to fabricate sound composites without macro-scale casting defects during infiltration casting process. For the reinforcing amorphous phase, the Ni–20.6Nb–40.2Ta (wt.%) alloy has been selected due to its excellent thermal stability against crystallization. It has been reported that the crystallization onset temperature ( Ternary alloys with a nominal composition of Ni–20.6Nb–40.2Ta (wt.%) were prepared by arc melting Ni (99.99 wt.%), Nb (99.9 wt.%) and Ta (99.99 wt.%) under an Ar gas atmosphere. Amorphous ribbon specimens with about 30 μm in thickness and 1 mm in width were produced by melt spinning process. Details on the preparation of melt-spun ribbons have been reported elsewhere The experimental apparatus for infiltration casting process is shown schematically in     The present results indicate that metallic glass reinforced Al alloy matrix composites can be fabricated using an infiltration casting technique, showing a possibility for the fabrication of a new type of hybrid material i.e. metallic glass reinforced metal matrix composites with enhanced properties. For the successful fabrication of this type of material, it is essential that the glassy structure should be thermally stable to avoid from crystallization during the fabrication process. Another important factor for the successful fabrication of the composites is to form a stable interface between the reinforcing phase and the matrix. Conventional aluminum alloy matrix composites reinforced by SiC particles or whiskers can have several problems such as thermal expansion coefficient difference, interface bonding and recycling. But metallic glass reinforced composites are more favorable for those aspects because the reinforcing material is composed of metallic elements. The successful production of the sound metallic glass reinforced commercial Al alloy based matrix composite can be served as a concept in designing a new type of composites materials. By combining exotic mechanical properties of amorphous phase such as high strength, large elastic limit, high corrosion resistance and good wear resistance with ductile metal matrix new advanced structural hybrid materials can be fabricated. Metallic glass ribbon reinforced Al alloy matrix composites have been fabricated by infiltration casting process for the first time. The molten liquid of Al–6.5Si–0.25Mg alloy is infiltrated into the cylindrical-shaped porous pre-form of Ni–20.6Nb–40.2Ta metallic glass ribbon by an Ar gas pressure. Due to the high thermal stability of the Ni–Nb–Ta metallic glass, the melt-spun ribbon embedded in the Al alloy matrix retains an amorphous state. The Ni–20.6Nb–40.2Ta metallic glass ribbons are homogeneously distributed in the Al–6.5Si–0.25Mg alloy matrix consisted of primary α-Al dendrite and interdendritic eutectic phase. The composites exhibit enhanced yield and fracture strength when compared with those for the monolithic alloy. The application of metallic glass as a reinforcing phase in fabricating metal matrix composites would be helpful to design a new type of hybrid materials as well as to extend the application area of metallic amorphous phase. The authors are grateful for the financial support of the Creative Research Initiatives of the Korean Ministry of Science and Technology.