The Mn–Se interaction at the cathode interface during the electrolytic-manganese process was characterized by square-wave voltammetry and linear-sweep voltammetry. The mechanism of the effects of trace-amount SeO2 additive was analyzed. When SeO2 was added, α-MnSe was the only Mn–Se species that formed on the cathode surface. This species is critical to the activities of the cathode. During electrolysis, an electrochemical equilibrium exists among α-MnSe, Mn2+, and Se(IV). This equilibrium can be controlled by varying the concentrations of Mn2+ and SeO2, through which the electrolytic-manganese process can be improved.Aqueous electrolysis is a widely used metallurgical technology. In this process, some electrolytic additives often have significant effects even at trace concentrations. Electroanalysis is a direct method of analyzing the mechanism of electrolytic additives at the electrode interface ( Square-wave voltammetry (SWV), which combines the advantages of pulse voltammetry and cyclic voltammetry (CV), is a widely applied electroanalytical method ( In this wok, the interfacial Mn–Se interaction on the cathode was investigated via SWV and LSV. Interfacial reaction intermediates were analyzed based on their frequency-response properties, which provide some direct experimental evidence for the chemical mechanism at the cathode interface during the EM process. Purified water was prepared using a water purification system (HMC-WS10, Human, Korea). All reagents were analytical grade and purchased from Chongqing Boyi Chemical Reagent Co., Ltd., China. Unless otherwise specified, the electrolytes prepared had the following concentrations: Electrochemical experiments were performed on a CHI600B electrochemistry workstation (Shanghai Chenhua, China) using a three-electrode system. The working electrode was stainless steel (304 The appearance of Mn deposits was recorded by photography (Power Shot A640, Canon, Japan) and using an optical microscope (MIT300, Chongqing Optec Instrument Co., China). The samples were characterized by powder X-ray diffraction (XRD) (D/MAX-IIIC, Rigaku, Japan) with graphite-monochromatized Cu K In the EM process, three possible reactions can occur on the cathode: In practical EM processes, the electrode potential is   SWV was used to investigate the electrochemical properties of the electrolytes ( To determine the attribution of the other peaks on the SWV curve, the effects of Mn The change in the curve at around − The variation between − For the high-concentration electrolyte, the major reaction intermediate in the EDL that participated in the electron-exchange step is undoubtedly a Mn compound. As previously discussed, this Mn compound is α-MnSe when SeO When SeO SeO H HSeO Se(0) Se Se MnSe Repeat of steps 5 6 repeats. Reaction 3 is very fast because its redox equilibrium potential is considerably higher than that of the cathode potential in the practical EM process. The adsorption and reduction of Se(0) on the electrode surface can promote the accumulation and electroreduction of Mn H The Mn–Se interaction on the cathode during the EM process was analyzed by SWV and LSV. Additional information on the mechanism of action of the trace-amount SeO This work was supported by the