The crystallography of the Cu6Sn5 intermetallic that forms at the solder–substrate interface in many soldering operations can be influenced by Ni additions. It has been established that when Ni is present at 5–9 at%, the high-temperature hexagonal Cu6Sn5 (η) does not transition to the low-temperature monoclinic Cu6Sn5 (η′) at the equilibrium temperature of 186 °C. In fact, the hexagonal phase remains stable from room temperature to 250 °C. This paper shows the stabilising effect of Ni exists in the range of 4.6–17.2 at% Ni in stoichiometric samples, over the larger temperature range of −100 to 250 °C using synchrotron X-ray diffraction. The results are also used in combination with dilatometry experiments and show that Ni decreases the magnitude of thermal expansion, and prevents the discontinuity in expansion that occurs with the polymorphic transformation.The Cu The two main crystal structures of Cu The presence of Ni in (Cu,Ni) One physical property of Cu In this paper, we expand on our previous research by examining the effects of a wide range of Ni concentrations on the polymorphic transformation and thermal expansion of Cu To obtain the Cu The samples were crushed in an agate mortar to obtain powder for the XRD experiments. The samples were powdered and loaded into a quartz capillary (0.3 mm in diameter) in preparation for exposure to temperatures between −100 and 250 °C in-air using a Cyberstar hot-air blower, Oxford Cryosystems Cryostream Plus. High-resolution X-ray powder diffraction data were collected in the 2θ range 10–80° from prepared samples at temperatures of −100, −60, −40, −20, 0, 30, 170, 200, 220, and 250 °C with a cooling/heating rate of 6 °C/min on the Powder Diffraction beamline at the Australian Synchrotron using the Mythen-II detector with a beam between 15 and 16 keV. Once the desired temperature was reached, the sample was kept at that temperature for 11 min, with 1 min for thermal stabilisation and 10 min for data collection. All temperatures were calibrated using reference thermocouples and standard samples. A Si standard (NIST640C) was measured at room temperature for wavelength calibration. The density, unit cell volume and lattice parameters of samples were calculated using X-ray peak data obtained at each temperature using RIETAN-FP Rietveld analysis software For dilatometry measurements, the crushed IMCs were pressed into a rod shape in a die of 10 mm diameter. The linear thermal expansion of sample rods was measured using a NETZSCH 402-C dilatometer with a temperature range of 50–250 °C, a heating/cooling rate of 1 °C/min and 30 min holding time at the end of heating or cooling. In total, three thermal cycles were measured and the thermal dilations during the second and third cycles were used for analysis, using the NETZSCH Proteus software. In accordance with the NETZSCH 402-C user manual, thermal dilation during the first heating cycle was not used for analysis due to transient instabilities in the apparatus. The magnified XRD peak profiles between 15 and 24° in 2θ are shown in  To directly investigate the thermal expansion of the monoclinic and/or hexagonal Cu It has been reported that the high temperature hexagonal Cu The effects of a wide range of Ni concentrations on the polymorphic transformation and thermal expansion of Cu This research was conducted under an international cooperative research program between the 