Humic acids (HA), a major component of humus or soil, was explored as a selective depressant for molybdenite during the flotation separation of molybdenite and chalcopyrite. Microflotation tests on single minerals revealed that chalcopyrite flotation was not affected by HA from pH 3 to 11, while molybdenite was strongly depressed by HA in the same pH range. Microflotation tests on chalcopyrite-molybdenite mixtures proved that HA could selectively depress the molybdenite flotation without significantly affecting the flotation of chalcopyrite. Infrared spectroscopy revealed that HA strongly adsorbs on molybdenite surfaces while no detectable HA was observed on chalcopyrite surfaces after being wash thoroughly with Milli-Q water. In addition, the infrared spectroscopy also indicates the adsorption of HA on molybdenite (basal planes) is likely governed by hydrophobic interaction while chemical interaction is absent. However, the interactions between HA and chalcopyrite are most likely to be weak interactions such as electrostatic interaction etc., and the adsorbed HA are likely detached (or partially detached) after rinsing or xanthate addition. Our work showed that HA could be utilized as a promising depressant for molybdenite during the flotation separation of copper-molybdenum sulfides over a wide range of pH.The flotation separation of copper-molybdenum sulfides generally relies on the use of toxic and hazardous depressants such as cyanides, sodium sulfide/hydrosulfide, Noke’s reagent ( The high purity chalcopyrite (>90%, Ward’s Science, NY, USA) and molybdenite (>96%, Dayu, Jiangxi, China) lumps were hand-picked, crushed, dry ground, and then dry screened. The −150 + 74 μm size fraction was used for flotation tests, while the −37 μm fraction was used for DRIFT spectroscopy. Humic acids sodium salt or HA (Sigma-Aldrich, USA) was investigated as the depressant, purified potassium isobutyl xanthate or KIBX (C The flotation tests were performed in a custom-made Hallimond tube with a Siwek top ( Thereafter, KIBX was added to obtain a concentration of 20 ppm and the pulp was conditioned for 3 min. Then MIBC was injected to reach a concentration of 20 ppm and the slurry was further conditioned for 2 min. The conditioned pulp was then transferred to the Hallimond tube and floated for 2 min using compressed air at a flow rate of 20 cm In each test, 0.5 g of mineral particles (size fraction: −37 μm) were ground to ∼2 μm by agate mortar/pestle, then conditioned in 50 mL 0.001 M KCl solution with 500 ppm HA at pH 9 for 30 min. Thereafter, the conditioned mineral particles were filtered and washed three times with Milli-Q water, and dried prior to measurements. The as-received HA powder, HA-treated and untreated minerals particles, were mixed with potassium bromide (IR grade, ACROS Organics, USA) powder respectively. The DRIFT spectra of HA, untreated and treated mineral particles were then recorded against the KBr background using a Nicolet iS50 FT-IR spectrophotometer (Thermo Scientific, USA). The single minerals flotation tests were initially performed in 0.001 M KCl solutions at pH 9 with 20 ppm KIBX and MIBC under various concentrations of HA, to determine the proper HA concentration for the separation. The flotation response of molybdenite and chalcopyrite was then tested individually without and with 20 ppm HA at different pH conditions. As can be seen in However, after the addition of 20 ppm HA, the molybdenite recovery remained below 14% over the entire pH range tested. While chalcopyrite recovery remained above 90% under all pH conditions, and only decreased slightly with decreasing pH. Hence, a large separation window from pH 3 to 11 is observed in which molybdenite was effectively depressed by 20 ppm HA while chalcopyrite flotation was barely affected. The single mineral flotation tests revealed a large separation window from pH 3 to 11. Therefore, mixed minerals flotation tests were carried out to examine the selectivity of HA. It was also observed that chalcopyrite floats faster than molybdenite after the addition of xanthate, a better control of flotation time may increase the separation efficiency. Besides, heterocoagulation of chalcopyrite and molybdenite particles was observed during flotation, especially at pH  < 9, which is likely attributed to the electrostatic attractions, since molybdenite particles are typically negatively charged from pH 3 to 11 ( The DRIFT spectra of chalcopyrite and molybdenite before and after conditioning in 0.001 M KCl solutions with 500 ppm HA at pH 9 are shown in  However, The influence of humic acids (HA) on the flotation response of molybdenite and chalcopyrite was investigated in this work. The flotation tests on single minerals revealed that HA barely affects chalcopyrite flotation. However, the addition of HA could drastically reduce the molybdenite recovery even at a concentration of 20 ppm, regardless of the solution pH. The flotation tests on chalcopyrite-molybdenite mixtures confirmed that HA could selectively depress molybdenite flotation from pH 3 to 11 during the chalcopyrite-molybdenite separation. The DRIFT spectroscopy results revealed that the HA has adsorbed onto molybdenite surfaces and no detectable HA was observed on chalcopyrite surfaces after being washed thoroughly with Milli-Q water, implying that the interaction mechanisms between HA and these two minerals are different. It is suggested that chemical interaction is absent between HA and molybdenite basal planes, and the adsorption of HA on molybdenite basal planes is likely attributed to the hydrophobic interaction. In comparison, the interactions between HA and chalcopyrite are electrostatic in nature, since HA is typically negatively charged from pH 3 to 11 ( This work is supported by the Natural Sciences and Engineering Research Council (