The feasibility of the discrete element method to model the performance of a cone crusher comminution machine has been explored using the particle replacement method (PRM) to represent the size reduction of rocks experienced within a crusher chamber. In the application of PRM, the achievement of a critical octahedral shear stress induced in a particle was used to define the breakage criterion. The breakage criterion and the number and size of the post breakage progeny particles on the predicted failure of the parent particles were determined from the results of an analysis of the experimental data obtained from diametrical compression tests conducted on a series of granite ballast particles. The effects of the closed size setting (CSS) and eccentric speed settings on the predicted product size distribution compare favourably with the available data in the literature.The cone crusher is the most common type of mineral comminution machine that is used widely in mineral and aggregate extractive industries to crush medium or above medium sized rocks. Although the operational design of cone crushers has experienced a significant improvement since the first models were developed in the mid-1920s, further improvements to the development of crusher design to enhance performance have been restricted due to a number of factors. Firstly, it has been proven that it is difficult to successfully predict the size distribution and shape of the crusher product for a given feed stream. A number of researchers have proposed a series of iterative empirical models based on experimental observation  The width of feed entrance to the crusher chamber, The closed size setting (CSS): the smallest distance between concave and mantle. The throw The bite angle The cone angle The eccentric angle The parallel length of the cone ∆ Bottom diameter of the mantle D As the simulated operation of the DEM cone crusher with a real geometry is computationally too expensive, the performance of a small scale cone crusher was modelled in this study. The dimensions of the model parameters were determined based on the full scale cone crusher design geometry presented by Lang The mantle was modelled by a cylinder wall, and the concave was represented by two cylinder walls of which the lower one was used to model the part of the concave which is parallel to the mantle. The calculation procedures of geometrical parameters were listed in The proprietary DEM code PFC The PRM approach has recently been used by Lichter et al. The Weibull In order to calibrate the tensile strength, To quantify the ballast particle strengths using Weibull The Weibull modulus It is clear that the measured tensile strengths of the three tested size fractions of the ballast exhibit a Weibull distribution.  To select an appropriate breakage function for the construction of a PRM model to simulate the breakage behaviour experienced in a cone crusher chamber model, the size distribution of the daughter fragments resulting from the failure of the single parent particles was analysed. Twenty particles of a total of thirty particles of each size fraction were sieved. For each original parent particle, the daughter fragments were sized according to their sieve size and then the individual size fractions individually weighed. The minimum sieve size used was 8 A simple sphere was used to present the particle in this research. The contact model used here is the linear contact model  A typical value of the Young's modulus for the Glensanda granite ballast was determined to be 70 The Weibull modulus of particle strengths for a given size was set as the average value of the three size fractions: 2.95. The size effect factor Based on the size distributions of the broken rock particles produced by the laboratory diametrical compression tests described above, an original particle is assumed to split into three particles which individually represent 60%, 30% and 10% of the mass of the original particle. To conserve mass, the three progeny fragments were sufficiently overlapped to be contained within the bounding parent sphere. The axis joining the centres of the three new spheres was aligned along the direction of the minor principal stress, as shown in However, huge undesirable local pressure spikes were generated by the overlaps of fragments in the size distribution function. The imposed elastic energy caused by the overlap needs to be accommodated after every update of particle breakages. Otherwise, all the fragments will break infinitely under the artificially created huge pressure. In order to accommodate this problem, the author defined a ‘freeze state’ to release the artificial energy. The cone crusher model will be set into the freeze state once breakage occurs with the following assumptions: When new particles are generated, all other particles are initially given zero rotational and translational velocities. The locations of the boundaries (the walls of the crusher model) are fixed. In this state, all of the particles are temporarily assigned an artificially large mass (3 The new particles are given an artificially low stiffness (1 The viscous damping system is removed and a high local damping coefficient of 0.9 Gravity is removed. A flow chart illustrating the solution stages of the cone crusher model is shown in  200 particles are randomly generated inside an artificial cylinder wall (1), representing the feed bin (labelled in The spheres representing the feed material are deposited by the gravity into the feed bin. A flat artificial wall (2) (labelled in The flat artificial wall 2 is then deleted to let the particles flow under gravity through the top of the crusher chamber. A conical artificial wall (3) (labelled in The mantle is rotated. The influence of changing the CSS and eccentric speed on the size distribution of the products was first studied.  All the particle strengths are governed by the 37% strength,   A prototype DEM cone crusher model has been successfully modelled using the PRM approach and it has been validated against existing experimental data in the literature. The performance of these crusher models was assessed by examining the influence that changes to the CSS and eccentric speed settings have on the predicted cumulative product size distributions. It was found that either a decrease in the CSS or an increase in the eccentric rotational speed resulted in more computed breakage events within the crusher chamber, which is consistent with the experimental data in the literature. The breakage mechanism was also found to influence the cumulative size distribution of the products for smaller fragment sizes. Three parameters were identified as characterising the strength of particles: the 37% tensile strength