Several scenarios for ethanol production, methane production (by anaerobic digestion) and co-production of these, using autumn harvested hemp as substrate, were investigated and compared in terms of gross energy output. Steam pretreatment improved the methane production rate compared with mechanical grinding. The methane yield of steam pretreated stems was similar both with and without pre-hydrolysis with cellulolytic enzymes. Co-production of ethanol and methane from steam pretreated stems gave a high yield of transportation fuel, 11.1–11.7MJ/kg processed stem dry matter (DM); more than twice that of ethanol production alone from hexoses, 4.4–5.1MJ/kg processed stem DM. Co-production from the whole hemp plant would give 2600–3000L ethanol and 2800–2900m3 methane, in total 171–180GJper10,000m2 of agricultural land, based on a biomass yield of 16Mg DM. Of this, the yeast and enzymes from ethanol production were estimated to contribute 700m3 (27GJ) of methane.Fossil fuel reserves are becoming depleted and the demand for fuels from renewable energy sources is increasing. The dominating transportation fuels produced from renewable sources throughout the world today are ethanol and biodiesel (electricity not included). However, not only liquid but also gaseous fuels, such as methane and hydrogen produced from renewable substrates, are promising candidates as renewable transportation fuels. Although liquid fuels dominate for transportation purposes, fossil methane (natural gas) is used as transportation fuel in many countries and some, for example Sweden and Germany, distribute methane produced via anaerobic digestion (AD) of biomass from renewable sources as a fuel in the natural gas grid. The dominating substrates used for ethanol production today are either pure sugars, e.g. sucrose from sugar cane in Brazil, or easily degradable carbohydrates, e.g. starch, from corn in the USA, and from cereals in Europe. A shift to lignocellulosic plant material will make utilisation of other crops possible, and will also enable the production of transportation fuel from crop residues such as corn stover and cereal straw. Most microorganisms used for ethanol production cannot hydrolyse lignocellulose, which is composed of cellulose in association with hemicellulose and lignin. The conversion process therefore includes pretreatment, to make the cellulose accessible, and enzymatic hydrolysis with added enzymes to release the monomeric sugars ( A mixed, diverse microbial culture is commonly used for methane production by AD. Most compounds in lignocellulosic plant material can be degraded anaerobically, but the biological degradation of polymeric lignin is very poor, if occurring at all. Lignin can reduce both the degradation rate and the extent of degradation of other cell wall constituents, as well as intracellular content ( While methods of converting lignocellulosic plant material into transportation fuels are constantly improving, and are advancing towards economical feasibility, the search for high-yielding crops with low environmental impact is also ongoing. Recently, industrial hemp ( The conversion of hemp biomass (16 In the current study several scenarios for ethanol production, methane production and co-production of these, using autumn harvested dry hemp as substrate, were investigated and compared in terms of gross energy output. Ethanol was produced from hexoses of steam pretreated stems using SSF as described previously ( Methane and ethanol were produced by microbial fermentation of dry hemp in eight different scenarios, as illustrated in Industrial hemp ( Dry stems were chopped in a garden shredder to a length of 2–3 In Scenarios G and H the SP slurry was separated into SP solids and SP liquid with a manual hydraulic press (Sixten Torne AB, Malmö, Sweden). Part of the SP solids was used for SSF without prior washing (Scenarios G and H) and part was washed with distilled water prior to analysis of structural carbohydrates and lignin in the water-insoluble solids (WIS). The DM in the SP solids and SP liquid was determined. The SP liquid was used for AD in Scenario H, and the contents of soluble sugars, lactic acid, acetic acid, 5-hydroxymethylfurfural (HMF) and furfural were analysed. Steam pretreatment was performed at optimized conditions, as described by The enzymes added during enzymatic hydrolysis (Scenario D) and SSF (Scenarios E and F) were Celluclast 1.5L and Novozym 188 (Novozymes A/S, Bagsvaerd, Denmark). The cellulase activity of Celluclast 1.5L was 61 FPU/mL, measured according to Enzymatic hydrolysis of SP slurry was performed prior to AD to pre-hydrolyse cellulose (Scenario D). The substrate concentration was 7.5% WIS. The pH was set to 4.8 with 0.05 SSF was performed in Scenarios E and G using SP slurry and the SP solids, respectively, as described by Ethanol from the fermentation broth after SSF was removed by a modified (two vertical coolers) 20 The methane potential with AD was determined using a biochemical methane potential batch test. Each substrate was incubated in a 500 To each test flask 200 The amount and composition of the gas was measured every two days. The amount of methane produced was calculated as the amount accumulated in the gas-tight bag plus the increase in concentration of methane in the reactor headspace, when applicable. The amount of methane produced by the inoculum control was subtracted from the samples. The experiment was terminated after 30 The DM (which is the same as the total solids, TS) and VS were determined in duplicate using standard methods ( The nutrient composition of the anaerobic inoculum and the COD of the enzyme solutions, yeast and yeast extract were analysed using Dr. Lange test kits (COD – LCK114 and LCK914, ammonium – LCK303, potassium – LCK328 and ortho-phosphate – LCK348, Hach Lange GmbH, Düsseldorf, Germany). Ammonium, potassium and phosphate were analysed after filtration through 0.45 The measured content of structural hexoses (glucan, mannan and galactan) in hemp stems was 477 The concentrations of WIS and DM in SP slurry were 11% and 14% of the wet weight, respectively. One kg of stem DM gave 794 Separation of the SP slurry performed in Scenarios G and H gave 80% of the DM in the SP solids and 19% in the SP liquid. All WIS were found in the SP solids. The DM and WIS contents of the SP solids were 41% and 39% of the wet weight, respectively. The SP liquid had a DM content of 3.7%. One-fifth (20%) of the total soluble compounds was found in the SP solids, based on the assumption that soluble compounds were equally distributed in all liquid after steam pretreatment. The conversion of glucan (in WIS) to glucose was 70 SSF of SP slurry and SP solids was performed in a previous study ( In a full-scale process, distillation can be expected to give an ethanol recovery of above 99%. Under the laboratory-scale experimental conditions used in this study, distillation was less complete (86–88%) and an ethanol residue was left in the stillage: 20 There was no difference in methane yield between 24 The methane yield from ground stems (Scenario B) was 219 The methane yield from SP slurry (Scenario C) was 225 After 10 The methane production rate from EH SP slurry, Scenario D, seems higher than for SP slurry, Scenario C in The cellulose control reached 92% (383 As can be seen in When the degree of conversion of the energy in the substrate to energy carriers is shown, as in The energy yields for SP slurry (Scenario C) and EH SP slurry (Scenario D) were similar. As mentioned in Section In a previous study, the ethanol yield of SP solids was found to be higher than that following SSF of SP slurry ( The co-production of ethanol and methane from steam pretreated hemp stems gave about twice the energy yield than of ethanol production alone, both in Scenario F compared to Scenario E and in Scenario H compared to Scenario G. The total energy yield was higher in Scenario H than in Scenario F. Co-production also gave a higher energy yield than methane production alone (Scenario C). The differences in total energy yield in Scenario C, F and H are small however and are likely to fall within the experimental error. Co-production was even more beneficial when considering the practical yield without subtracting the potential contribution of methane from enzymes, yeast and yeast extract (including hatched bars in Lignin residues can be used for heat or heat and power generation. The acid-insoluble (polymeric) lignin of the stems was fully recovered after steam pretreatment and can probably be recovered after both ethanol production and AD since it is poorly degraded, if at all, under anaerobic conditions ( The energy yield of the transportation fuels together with the HHV of the solid lignin accounts for roughly 73–78% of the HHV of the original substrate, indicating that it may be possible to increase the yield of transportation fuel even more, for instance, by condensing and using the flash stream from steam pretreatment for AD. As can be seen in Bar 5 shows the practical results of combined ethanol, methane and hydrogen production from hydrothermally treated wheat straw ( The co-production of ethanol and methane from steam pretreated hemp stems gave more than twice the energy yield of transportation fuel than ethanol production from hexoses alone. One of the benefits of co-production is that enzymes and yeast added during ethanol production can be converted to methane. Steam pretreatment resulted in a higher methane production rate than mechanical grinding. It was found unnecessary to pre-hydrolyse the steam pretreated substrate with cellulases when using it solely for methane production. This study provides practical data needed for evaluation of which production pathways are the most beneficial from energy balance and economic perspectives. The Environmental Fund of Supplementary data associated with this article can be found, in the online version, at 