The aim of this study was to determine the effects of logging residues on C and N cycling in relation to abundant plant secondary compounds, terpenes and tannins in a Norway spruce clear-cut site. The study site was located in Southern Finland. After clear-cutting piles having 0, 10, 40kgm−2 of fresh Norway spruce logging residues were built and as additional treatment commercial wood ash was provided to study the possibilities for recycle of wood ash. Samples were taken from the organic layer and uppermost mineral soil layer five years after the treatments. Logging residues increased net N mineralization, especially net nitrification. Addition of wood ash also increased net nitrification. C mineralization, microbial biomass C and N were less affected by the treatments. Observed changes were more visible in organic layer than in mineral soil. Logging residues did not affect much tannin and terpene concentrations in the organic layer; however, we observed increase in terpene concentration in treatment with the highest amount of logging residues. In conclusions, on this study site logging residues did not affect much soil C cycling. However, logging residues and wood ash seemed to stimulate N cycling processes.The need to replace fossil fuels with renewable energy sources escalated interest in forest biomass for energy production. Therefore, traditional stem-only harvest (SOH) is often replaced by whole-tree harvest (WTH) in which not only tree stems but also logging residues, consisting of branches and stem tops with green needles are removed. Finland and Sweden have become leading countries in EU regarding the use of wood-based energy in 2000s ( As one may expect, intensive harvesting decrease soil nutrient pools (e.g. Logging residues are harvested from both, clear-cuttings and thinning stands. In Finland, 0.12 Logging residues with green branches are not only nutrient-rich, but also abundant in plant secondary metabolites, phenolic compounds and terpenes ( Our aim was to study the effects of logging residues on soil microbial processes related to C and N cycling 5 The study site was a Norway spruce stand in Anjalankoski, Southern Finland (60°N, 26°E), having podzolized soil, humus type mor, glaciofluvial parent material and soil texture sorted sand. After clear-cutting, piles having 0, 10, 40 Five years after the treatments, five soil cores (diameter 58 Soil water-holding capacity, pH (H Net N mineralization, C mineralization and net nitrification were determined in a 4-week soil incubation experiment ( Monoterpenes were measured from the organic layer as described by Sesqui-, di-, and triterpenes were determined as described previously ( Concentration of condensed tannins was determined from 0.5 Nitrification was studied in soil suspension experiments at constant shaking and with excess of NH Results were expressed on organic matter basis to describe the quality of organic matter. To compare organic layer and mineral soil, some results were expressed also on soil volume basis. Differences between means of nitrification potential in different treatments (control, logging residues 10 Logging residues significantly increased pH in the organic layer. 40 On organic matter basis logging residues or addition of ash did not affect significantly the amounts of C and N in microbial biomass in the organic layer ( In the organic layer, concentration of NH In the uppermost mineral soil NH On soil volume basis, 40 Studies on the net nitrification in soil suspension with excess of NH The sums of monoterpenes in the organic layer showed the highest values for control and 40 The mean sum of mono-, sesqui-, di- and triterpenes tend to increase from 0 to 40 Because of the large variation in concentration, condensed tannins in organic layer did not differ significantly between treatments, but highest results were observed for logging residues treatments, especially in higher dose ( In plant material (dried spruce needles and branches) monoterpenes, followed by diterpenes strongly dominated terpene profile ( Concentrations of different terpenes did not correlate significantly with microbial biomass C and N. C mineralization correlated negatively with concentration of triterpenes and beta-sitosterol, separately. Net N mineralization and net nitrification correlated positively with sesqui- and diterpenes ( As interest in forest bioenergy is increasing, we need to estimate all the ecological costs of forest bioenergy harvest. In the present paper we studied the response of soil C and N cycling processes to logging residues after clear-cutting. Based on litter decomposition studies ( Logging residues slightly increased C mineralization and microbial biomass C in soil organic layer, which is in accordance with previous studies ( Soil suspension experiments confirmed that net nitrification was most intensive in logging residues and ash treatments and also showed that it was pH dependent. Soil suspension under continuous shaking provides a stable and constant pH. Potential net nitrification at native pH was negligible in all treatments, but at pH 6 logging residues increased potential nitrification in organic layer. This means that intensive net nitrification occurs in soil in logging residues and ash treatments in microsites having higher than the average pH. Evidence that intensive nitrification really occurs in field conditions is provided by high nitrate concentrations in soil percolate water in the same treatments ( Wood ash contains all the major mineral nutrients present in plants except of N and is added to soil to counteract the effects of decreased amounts of nutrients due to logging residue harvest. Addition of wood ash to soil causes a long-term liming effect ( As mentioned already before, logging residues contain large amounts of plant secondary compounds, including terpenes ( Studies in laboratory conditions have shown that terpenes affect C and N cycling, e.g. by altering microbial biomass, N and C mineralization and decreasing the enzyme activities ( As 5 We used amount of logging residue and wood ash which are common in modern forest management, so the observed effects can definitely happen in forestry practice. In stem-only-harvest logging residues are not evenly distributed, and our results showed that this may cause large spatial variations in soil processes and properties. In conclusion, five years after clear-cutting logging residues increased net N mineralization and in particular, net nitrification in boreal forest soil. These results explain the increased amounts of NO We are grateful to Anneli Rautiainen for helping with the laboratory work. This study was funded by Supplementary data associated with this article can be found, in the online version, at 