Wetting behavior and wetting mechanism of wetting agents on low-energy surface (LES) are well investigated in this paper. Four wetting agents, namely Lignin sulfonate, Tannic acid, Methylcellulose and Triton X-100, were involved in our study. Wetting behavior was well examined through discussion of surface energy of LES, interfacial interaction and zeta potential of polymer resins. Experimental results demonstrate that adsorption of wetting agents changes the surface energy parameters of LES; interfacial free energy between wetting agent molecule and LES exhibits hydrophobic attraction between them fails to be the dominant driving force of adsorption; the effect of wetting agent on zeta potential of polymer illustrates electrostatic force is not the major factor of interfacial interaction between wetting agent molecule and LES. Based on wetting action of wetting agents, we discussed wetting mechanism of wetting agents on LES in detail, and an adsorption model was proposed. Adsorption of wetting agent on LES is achieved through hydration shell taken as mesophase, namely, hydrophobic attraction between LES and water molecule results in the formation of hydration shell, and wetting agents molecules approach to hydration shell under the effect of Lifshitz–van der Waals attraction and they adsorb on hydration shell through hydrogen bond. In terms of post-consumer plastics composed of polymer and additives, apart from hydrophobic attraction and hydrogen bond, wetting action depends also on chelating ability between wetting agent molecule and additive ions due to the chemical adsorption between wetting agent and additives. In addition, wetting ability, adsorption and selective desorption of wetting agents are well examined.Low-energy surface (LES) has received significant attention because of its technological importance Some strong hydrophilic substances such as Calcium lignosulphonate, Tannic acid, Methylcellulose and Triton X-100, have been used as wetting agents in flotation The aim of this study is to investigate wetting behavior and wetting mechanism of wetting agents on LES. Interesting conclusions on wetting behavior were achieved through discussion of surface energy and interfacial free energy. In terms of wetting mechanism of wetting agents on LES, we focus on how wetting agents adsorb on LES in this paper. Four wetting agents are involved in this paper, namely Lignin sulfonate (LS), Tannic acid (TA), Methylcellulose (MC) and Triton X-100 (TX-100). TA, MC and TX-100 are analytical pure, LS is industrial product, and they all were used as received. The test liquids for contact-angle measurements include distilled water, glycerol, formamide, diiodomethane and ethylene glycol (all are analytical purity). The used polymer resins are polrvinyl chloride (PVC) and polystyrene (PS) and they were purchased from China Petroleum & Chemical Corporation. Post-consumer plastics were purchased from a waste plastics market (Miluo, Hunan Province, China). The contact angle of liquids on the solid surface was measured by a JJC-I contact angle measuring instrument (Changchun Optical Instrument Factory, China). During the process of measurement, at the distance of 3 Determination of zeta potential was performed by Zeta Potential Analyzer (Brookhaven Instruments Corporation, America). KCl solution (1.0 The surface free energy of LES and wetting agents was calculated using the Lifshitz–van der Waals/acid–base approach TA (500 The results demonstrated in Based on the surface energy parameters of polymer resins and post-consumer plastics described in our previous paper These conclusions can be achieved from (1) In terms of macromolecule wetting agent whose nonpolar part is surrounded by polar one in the molecular structure, namely TA, LS, MC, there exists certain hydrophobic attraction between wetting agent and nonpolar or weakly polar polymer (such as PP, PE, PP-bar and PP-bot) whose surface energy is considerable weak. Furthermore, hydrophobic attraction is no longer dominant factor of interfacial interactions between wetting agents and surface of other polymers. (2) With respect to TX-100, which is surfactant-type wetting agent and whose nonpolar part and polar part are self-existent in the molecular structure, there exists certain hydrophobic attraction between TX-100 and LES. Similar to weak hydrophilic substances In conclusion, Lifshitz–van der Waals attraction offers the probability for wetting agent molecule approaching to LES during the process of adsorption. If hydrophobic attraction, resulted from Lewis acid–base interaction, leads to the formation of the adsorbed layer, wetting agents will have priority to adsorb on the LES that possesses larger hydrophobic attraction over the LES on which exists hydration repulsion. Obviously, it does not agree with flotation phenomenon and the results demonstrated in  As shown above, hydrophobic attraction, electrostatic force and van der Waals force are not the dominate factors of the interfacial interactions between wetting agents and LES. Thus hydrogen bond, which possesses saturability and directivity, may be responsible for the interfacial interactions. This understanding is spurred from two aspects. On one hand, wetting agent molecule approaches to LES owing to Lifshitz–van der Waals attraction, and its numerous hydroxyls offer enough hydrogen bonds to meet the saturability. On the other hand, due to the rotation of macromolecular chain of polymer, hydrogen donor, hydrogen atom and hydrogen acceptor can be collinear, and thus directivity of hydrogen bond can be achieved. However, simple adsorption model of hydrogen bond circumvents some problems to interpret the flotation phenomena. First, wetting agents fail to exhibit strong wetting action on the polymer resins whose hydrogen acceptors possess lone pair electrons, large electronegativity and small radius. Second, the small molecule compounds (such as tartaric acid and citric acid) do not affect the flotability of polymer resins. Therefore, wetting agent molecules do not interact indirectly with LES through hydrogen bond. Based on associated data in previous literature In the absence of frothers and bubbles, in terms of TA, LS and MC, apart from such nonpolar or weakly polar polymer materials as PP, PE, PP-bar and PE-bot, the attraction between wetting agent molecule and another polymer material is larger than that between wetting agent molecules, which indicates that the interfacial interaction between wetting agent molecule and LES is achieved by water taken as mesophase. With respect to TX-100, taking no account of the effect of water molecule on wetting agent, wetting agent molecule can just interact directly with nonpolar or weak polar polymer materials (such as PP, PE) by weak hydrophobic attraction, while interfacial interaction between wetting agent and other polymers can be achieved directly with water molecule as mesophase. Then we studied wetting agents in detail in terms of interfacial interaction. Based on experimental data in previous literature, Lewis acid–base free energy between wetting agent and other phases in aqueous medium is shown in As described above, such interaction forces as hydrophobic attraction, electrostatic force and van der Waals force are not the dominate factors of the interfacial interactions between wetting agents and LES. In addition, adsorption of wetting agents on LES is achieved through water molecules as a mesophase. Therefore, we propose an adsorption model with hydration shell as a mesophase to interpret the wetting mechanism of wetting agent on LES. The attraction between water and LES leads to the formation of hydration shell, and wetting agent molecule moves to LES as a result of Lifshitz–van der Waals attraction. If wetting agents are macromolecular compounds, similar to bubble in size, the hydration shell would be compressed into compact one; while wetting agents are small molecular compounds, they will approach loose area of hydration shell. The water molecules serving as the mesophase between wetting agent and LES must be the water molecules in the hydration shell. Polymer molecules make the water molecules on both sides of hydration shell locate and orient through hydrophobic attraction, i.e., hydration shell serves as the mesophase between wetting agent and LES, and thus adsorption of wetting agents on polymer resins occurs in the nearly ``cover'' form. The adsorption model of wetting agents on surface of polymer resins is shown in According to the adsorption model, wetting action of wetting agents on LES depends on the hydrophobic attraction between water molecule and LES as well as hydrogen bond between wetting molecule and water molecule. If there is no hydrophobic attraction, and the hydration shell would form only resulted from the Lifshitz–van der Waals attraction whose value is considerable small, wetting action of wetting agent on LES will not occur. The reasons involve two aspects: hydration shell is too thin to hold the polar groups of wetting agent molecule and thus hydrogen bond between them can not form; as the hydrogen bond between wetting molecule and water is stronger than the bond between hydration shell and LES, hydration shell will be destroyed by wetting agent, and hence LES can not be covered by wetting agent. Because hydrogen bond does not form directly between wetting agent molecule and LES, wetting agent will not have priority over polymer resins that possess a great number of hydrogen acceptors, and, inversely, strong wetting action may occur on the polymer resins (such as PVC) that there exist no or just weak hydrogen acceptors in their molecular chain. Wetting agents, especially for plastics flotation, should be strong hydrophilic and multi-hydrogen-bond macromolecular compounds. Such strong hydrophilic and multi-hydrogen-bond small-molecule compounds as tartaric acid and citric acid, cannot compress the hydration shell when they interact with LES, and then will not form stable hydration shell essential for adsorption, and thus these compounds cannot affect the flotability of polymer resins during the process of flotation. Unlike polymer resins, post-consumer plastics possess a quantity of additives, which have certain impact on wetting behavior of wetting agents. For example, the interfacial interaction between wetting agents and additives plays an important role in plastics flotation system. The associated research indicates that the reason tannic acid (TA) can be disincrustant, clarificant, antidote, as well as depressant of calcium and magnesium minerals, is due to the complexation between TA and various metal ions, in other words, complexation reaction between TA, serving as a multidentate ligand, and metal ions occurs Similar to the hydrophilic index described elsewhere The hydrogen bond between wetting agent molecule and water molecule in the hydration shell stems from the cooperative interaction of numerous hydrophilic groups in wetting agent molecule. Because bond energy of simple hydrogen bond is very weak, the wetting ability depends largely on the number of the hydrophilic groups that can form hydrogen bond with water molecules. Thus, the number of the hydrophilic groups stands for the wetting ability of wetting agent. In addition, if hydrogen bond is taken as one type of special interfacial interaction, Lewis acid–base free energy On the surface of polymer materials, physical adsorption intensity of wetting agents depends on hydrogen bond and hydrophobic attraction, while their significant parameter is Lewis acid–base free energy Comparing with chemical adsorption, the above physical adsorption between wetting agent molecule and polymer is not stable and suffers from such factors as turbulence of medium and aeration rate. Thus, the desired results cannot be achieved in traditional flotation equipments with respect to plastics flotation. In terms of flotation column in which the turbulence of medium is considerably weak, adsorption of wetting agents is also affected by bubbles. Unlike turbulence of medium, bubbles affect selectively adsorption of wetting agents, that is, wetting agent molecule desorbs selectively from LES due to the effect of bubbles. In the flotation system, as shown in The adsorption of LS on the surface of PS and PVE resins was taken as an example. Static adsorption of PS and PVC sheets (20 As demonstrated in Four wetting agents, namely LS, TA, MC and TX-100, were involved to investigate wetting behavior and wetting mechanism of wetting agents on LES. Wetting behavior was well examined through study of surface energy of LES, interfacial interaction and zeta potential of polymer resins. Experimental results demonstrate that adsorption of wetting agents changes the surface energy parameters; interfacial free energy between wetting agent molecule and LES exhibits hydrophobic attraction between them fails to be the dominant driving force of adsorption; the effect of wetting agent on zeta potential of polymer illustrates electrostatic force is not the major factor of interfacial interaction between wetting agent molecule and LES. Based on wetting behavior of wetting agents, wetting mechanism of wetting agents on LES is well discussed, and an adsorption model was proposed. Adsorption of wetting agent on LES is achieved through hydration shell taken as mesophase, which depends mainly on hydrophobic attraction and hydrogen bond. Hydration shell plays a significant role in the location of wetting agents on LES. In detail, hydrophobic attraction between LES and water molecule results in the formation of hydration shell, wetting agents molecules approach to hydration shell under the effect of Lifshitz–van der Waals attraction, and wetting agents adsorb on hydration shell through hydrogen bond. In terms of post-consumer plastics composed of polymer and additives, apart from hydrophobic attraction and hydrogen bond, wetting action depends also on chelating ability between wetting agent molecule and additive ions due to the chemical adsorption between wetting agent and additives. In addition, wetting ability, adsorption and selective desorption are well examined. Wetting index is considered to be a significant basis of wetting ability. The sum of The authors would like to gratefully acknowledge the financial support from the Project (2010CB630903) supported by the