The particle capture process of fibrous filter depends on not only filtration velocity, packing density of fibers, particle and fiber diameters, but also fiber arrangement (e.g. parallel model, staggered model, and separation ratio). In this work, the Lattice Boltzmann–Cellular Automata (LB–CA) probabilistic model for particle-laden flows was introduced to simulate the filtration process of multi-layer fiber filters with different fiber arrangement, and then the effects of the fiber arrangement on the capture efficiency, pressure drop, quality factor, and capture contribution were investigated. It was found that the staggered model performs better than the parallel model and its capture efficiency is higher than that of the parallel model. In addition, the capture efficiency and pressure drop both increase with the fiber separation ratio, while the quality factor decreases. With respect to the capture contributions of various rows of fibers in the steady and unsteady filtration processes, the fore fibers (especially the first row in the parallel model and the first two rows in the staggered model) play a more important role than the rear ones, especially when inertial impaction is predominant. Furthermore, the dynamic evolution of particle deposition patterns, pressure drop, capture efficiency, quality factor, and capture contribution due to different capture mechanisms in the particle loading of multi-fiber filters were investigated. The key factors to determine the dendritic structures are the shielding effect in the parallel model and the “river diversion” effect in the staggered model. Both the capture efficiency and pressure drop increases with the particle loading, however the pressure drop increases faster, resulting in the decrease of the quality factor. For the loading process of larger particles in the parallel model the pressure drop from the LB–CA model agree well with the predictions of the empirical model, and the interceptive capture efficiency predicted by the empirical model is also in good agreement with the LB–CA results. However, no model considers the fiber arrangement and different capture mechanisms. The LB–CA simulation provides good understanding in the dynamic filtration processes of multi-layer fibrous fibers, which is useful for filter design and arrangement optimization.packing density of fibers Reynolds number Kuwabara number Peclet number Stokes number interception parameter fiber diameter particle diameter total filter thickness pressure drop of fibrous filter dimensionless drag force acting on fibers mass of deposited particles in unit area particle deposition parameter filtration efficiency of filter single fiber capture efficiency diffusional capture efficiency of single fiber interception capture efficiency of single fiber inertial impaction capture efficiency of single fiber quality factor Lattice Boltzmann–Cellular Automata two dimensional and nine discrete velocities model Bhatnagar–Gross–Krook collision operator Filtration using fibrous filters provides a relatively inexpensive and simple while particularly efficient means for removing suspended submicron particles from the gas stream. Fiber filtration is widely applied in many fields, such as coal-fired power plants, chemical processes, food industries, cement industries, mining engineering and indoor air purification. The important collection mechanisms of solid particles are Brownian diffusion, interception, and inertial impaction, as well other mechanisms due to other external forces such as electrostatic forces and gravity. During the past fifty years, many researchers have investigated the filtration process through theoretical analysis ( As far as the multi-fiber filter, which consists of several rows of cylinders orientated across the flow direction, is considered, the filtration efficiency The steady-state filtration process means that particles do not accumulate on the fiber surface to form dendrite-like clusters which change the flow field and influence again the next particle deposition. The steady-state particle capture process occurs only in the very early stage of the filtration of clean fiber(s). Actually, during the deposition process of particles, the generated dendritic structure on the fiber acts as new collector for particles, leading to an increase of capture extent and packing density, and hence, an increase of capture efficiency and pressure drop ( However, the filtration kinetics of multi-fiber filters is more complicated than that of single fiber because the presence of other fibers in their vicinity will affect the deposition pattern, capture efficiency and pressure drop. Although there are many direct observations on the qualitative picture of structural growth, a few attempts were made to give mathematical and quantitative predictions for the dynamic filtration process of multi-fiber filters. Because of unsatisfactory models and limited measurements for the filtration kinetics of multi-fiber filters, numerical simulation as a quite promising way is widely utilized to attain the knowledge of a dynamics of dendrite growth, and then the time-dependent capture efficiency and pressure drop during particle clogging. The Euler–Lagrangian approach is the most common numerical method for the filtration process of both loaded and unloaded fibers ( The Lattice-Boltzmann method (LBM) provides a very promising numerical approach for the loading behavior prediction ( In this work, the LB–CA method is used to simulate the filtration process of the clear or loaded multi-fiber filters. The aims of this present study are to investigate the effect of fiber arrangement on deposition pattern, capture efficiency and pressure drop, to gain insights into the optimization of fiber arrangement of filters operating in the diffusional, interceptive, and inertial regimes, and to attain the quantitative picture of dendrite growth on multi-layer filters. Here two fiber arrangements are considered: parallel model and staggered model. The paper is organized as follows. First, the LB–CA probabilistic method for gas–solid flow was briefly introduced in The flow field is simulated by the Lattice Boltzmann method where fluid is assumed as fictitious fluid particles which collide with each other and migrate on the regular grid points. For simplicity and without loss of generality, we choose the two-dimensional square lattice with nine velocities Using Bhatnagar–Gross–Krook (BGK single-relaxation) collision operator ( In the existing CA model for particle motion ( The particle velocity and displacement can be explicitly calculated through integration of the motion equations over time  When the flow field achieves the stable state, particles injected into the flow field would be captured once they contact with the fibers. Capture efficiency of fibers can be calculated as follows: The dimensionless drag force It is noted that both the analytical expressions are independent of Reynolds number The capture efficiency of multi-fiber filter can be calculated by Eq.  In order to investigate the effects of fiber arrangement with different The simulation results are listed in A good fibrous filter should perform a high capture efficiency and a lower pressure drop. To compare different fibrous filters with different arrangements quantitatively, the concept of quality factor  In order to investigate the contributions of fibers in different positions in the filtration process, we propose the concept of capture contribution (   Complex dendritic structure is formed on the fiber surface because of successive particle deposition. The deposited particles act as new collectors, resulting in the increase of capture efficiency and pressure drop.  High-inertia particles are mainly deposited on the windward surface of fibers (see       In order to optimize fiber arrangement for filter design, it is important to understand the change in capture contribution of each fiber (row) during dust loading. Through carefully analyzing the difference of the capture contributions of each row of fibers due to three mechanisms, several conclusions can be drawn. (1) In general, for parallel cases the capture contribution of first row of fibers is always bigger than other rows whatever the dominated capture mechanism is. In addition, the capture proportion of the first row of fibers due to inertial impaction mechanism is the biggest (about 0.8, see This paper used the Lattice Boltzmann–Cellular Automata probabilistic (LB–CA) model for particle-laden flows to investigate the pressure drop and capture efficiency of the fibrous filter. The parallel and staggered models were considered. In the steady-state filtration of clean fibers, the results from the LB–CA simulation are in good agreement with these existing models. It was found that the staggered model is better than the parallel model from the point of view of the quality factor, because the former exhibits higher capture efficiency while nearly same pressure drop. A filter with a greater separation ratio ( The filtration process during particle loading was investigated be the help of intrinsic advantage of the LB simulation dealing with complex and dynamic boundary conditions in a simple way. Generally speaking, the deposition patterns of multi-layer filter due to different capture mechanisms are similar with those of the single fiber, especially for the fore fibers. The growth of dendritic structure expands the capture range of filters, resulting in the increases of capture efficiency and pressure drop. The increase rate of pressure drop is often greater than that of capture efficiency and then the quality factor of fibrous filter decreases gradually, especially when the clogging occurs in the staggered model collecting large particles due to initial impaction. The shielding effect in the parallel model determines smaller fraction of particles can be captured by the rear fibers especially when initial impaction is predominant, while the “river diversion” effect in the staggered model makes more particles be captured by the second fiber row than the first fiber row. This study was financially supported by “the