A large cartilage lesion of the tibial plateau with a deficient meniscus in a young patient is a challenging pathology for the orthopaedic surgeon due to the limited options available. While hemiarthroplasty procedures can be an option, the risk of revision in a young patient is high, and therefore a reconstructive procedure is advocated. The purpose of this Technical Note is to describe our technique for tibial plateau resurfacing, including the preparation and implantation of a medial tibial plateau and medial meniscal allograft, in a patient with a post-traumatic KD-4 knee dislocation with a medial tibial plateau rim fracture, medial meniscus deficiency, and medial tibiofemoral joint subluxation.Severe osteochondral defects, tibial plateau fractures, and concomitant soft-tissue injuries can occur following high-energy trauma or secondary to degenerative joint disease. Without intervention, patients will develop progressive pain, loss of function, and joint degeneration due to abnormal joint kinematics secondary to loss of the tibial buttress effect and meniscal function. Tibial plateau rim fractures, as in this case example, are almost always accompanied by significant collateral or cruciate ligament injury. Despite the growing body of literature supporting the use of tibial allograft transplantation to treat severe post-traumatic or degenerative osteochondral lesions, there is a relative paucity of literature reporting on its surgical technique. Therefore, the purpose of this paper is to describe our technique for medial tibial plateau resurfacing, including the preparation and implantation of a medial tibial plateau and medial meniscal allograft in a patient with a post-traumatic medial tibial plateau rim fracture and medial meniscus injury. The initial work-up of these lesions involves long-leg radiographs to assess the mechanical alignment of the involved extremity. If the patient is in varus or valgus alignment, a realignment osteotomy should be performed prior to or concurrent with a tibial resurfacing procedure. In addition, magnetic resonance imaging of the knee should be performed to assess the extent and degree of chondral injury, to evaluate the cruciate and collateral ligaments, to identify bony edema, and to identify the presence and extent of meniscal injury ( Fresh frozen, nonirradiated, or non-antigen-matched grafts are the preferred choice for tibial resurfacing. Graft sizing is fundamental for a successful outcome. The patient is placed in the supine position on the operating table ( Standard anterolateral and anteromedial portals are created adjacent to the patellar tendon, and the joint is visualized with a 30° arthroscope (Smith and Nephew, Andover, MA) while the knee is insufflated with normal saline ( A concomitant femoral osteochondral allograft may need to be performed, as in this case. A medial or lateral parapatellar arthrotomy is performed, depending on the location of the defect. The defect should be identified and templated. Next, a guide pin is placed in the center of the defect and the edges of the defect are scored. The defect is then reamed until bleeding, healthy bone is encountered, with care not to exceed a maximum of 7 to 8 mm of overall bone depth by frequently checking the calibrated coring reamer, along with a final measurement. While reaming, irrigation fluid at room temperature should be used to avoid heat necrosis of the surrounding articular cartilage and subchondral bone. The recipient site is then dilated with a smooth cylinder several times to facilitate insertion of the donor plug. In order to accomplish a perfect fit between the donor graft and the host socket, a compass reference is created on the prepared defect and measures are taken from each main coordinate (north/south/east/west). These measurements will be used later at the time of graft trimming. Next, the corresponding area on the femoral condyle allograft is outlined with a marking pen to match the dimensions of the defect on the donor knee. The whole donor specimen is then secured within an allograft workstation to ensure precision during harvest. The osteochondral donor plug is then harvested from the allograft with a coring reamer while using copious amounts of irrigation to prevent heat necrosis. The subchondral bone of the donor plug is then trimmed to match the corresponding depths of the host location, and the surfaces are smoothed with a rasp. Prior to implantation of the donor bone plug, the subchondral bone is subjected to pulse lavage with triple antibiotic solution to eradicate any remaining bone marrow elements to minimize the chance of immune reaction. The bone plug is then gently press-fit into the socket to match the exact height of the surrounding articular cartilage ( The affected hemiplateau is resected with a combination of an oscillating bone saw and osteotomes to a depth of 1 cm ( Four vertical mattress sutures (2-0 FiberWire Meniscus Repair Needles, small, Arthrex, Inc., Naples, FL) are placed through the posterior horn of the meniscal allograft for later repair to the capsule ( The posterior sutures are tied in a cross-matched fashion (i.e., one arm of the first suture with one arm of the second suture) to make a stronger construct. Anteriorly placed sutures (n = 3) are tied to the anterior capsule with a free needle. After surgery, the patient is placed in a knee immobilizer and is non–weight bearing for 8 weeks. Formal rehabilitation begins immediately postoperatively and focuses on restoration of patellofemoral range of motion, quadriceps activation, edema control, and pain management. Passive range of motion is initiated on the first day postoperatively and is gradually progressed to full range of motion as tolerated, with the goal of attaining at least 90° of knee flexion by 2 weeks postoperatively. During the first 8 weeks, the patient's primary exercises are patella and patellar tendon mobilizations, active and passive knee range of motion, and quadriceps activation exercises. A continuous passive motion machine is prescribed for home use 6 hours per day for the first 8 weeks. At 8 weeks, patients are permitted to gradually wean off crutches and begin spinning on a stationary bike with no resistance. The patients are cleared to be off crutches once they can fully ambulate without a limp and demonstrate adequate muscular control of their quadriceps. Once they are full weight bearing, patients begin closed chain strengthening exercises with training periodizations focused on first developing muscular endurance, followed by strength and power. Weight-bearing strengthening exercises are initiated after 10 weeks postoperatively, with limited leg presses to 70° of knee flexion allowed at 12 weeks. Deep squatting should be avoided until at least 6 months postoperatively. At 9 months postoperatively, the patient may return to low-impact activities like walking, swimming, and elliptical machines following completion of a functional sports test. High-impact activities are always discouraged, especially in patients with greater than grade I chondromalacia in the affected compartment. The most important finding of this report is that tibial allograft transplant offers a viable solution in patients with large osteochondral defects in the setting of ligament injuries. The literature regarding the techniques used and outcomes following tibial resurfacing is limited. More research has been published on osteochondral allograft transplantation (OAT) for focal chondral defects on the tibial plateau. In a 10-year follow-up study, 65 patients had an OAT to the tibial plateau following traumatic injury. Conversion to total knee arthroplasty was performed in 21/65 (32%) patients at a mean of 9.7 years. Osteochondral allograft survival rate in this cohort was 95% at 5 years, 80% at 10 years, and 65% at 15 years. The literature regarding outcomes of osteochondral allografts in young, athletic patients is very limited. However, a recent study by Krych et al. reported that 80% of patients had returned to their preinjury level of sport. Additionally, this study highlighted the risk factors for not returning to sport as age greater than 25 years and preoperative symptoms for longer than 3 months. Further studies reporting long-term outcomes following tibial osteochondral allograft transplant and tibial resurfacing are needed. Despite the paucity of available literature, we believe in the efficacy of tibial allograft transplantation for large tibial plateau chondral defects and encourage further studies to refine our described surgical technique. 