Purpose
                  This study introduces an updated Three-Column Concept for the classification and treatment of complex tibial plateau fractures. A combined preoperative assessment of fracture morphology and injury mechanism is utilized to determine surgical approach, implant placement and fixation sequence. The effectiveness of this updated concept is demonstrated through evaluation of both clinical and radiographic outcome measures.
               
                  Patients and methods
                  From 2008 to 2012, 355 tibial plateau fractures were treated using the updated Three-Column Concept. Standard radiographic and computed tomography imaging are used to systematically assess and classify fracture patterns as follows: (1) identify column(s) injured and locate associated articular depression or comminution, (2) determine injury mechanism including varus/valgus and flexion/extension forces, and (3) determine surgical approach(es) as well as the location and function of applied fixation. Quality and maintenance of reduction and alignment, fracture healing, complications, and functional outcomes were assessed.
               
                  Results
                  287 treated fractures were followed up for a mean period of 44.5 months (range: 22–96). The mean time to radiographic bony union and full weight-bearing was 13.5 weeks (range: 10–28) and 14.8 weeks (range: 10–26) respectively. The average functional Knee Society Score was 93.0 (range: 80–95). The average range of motion of the affected knees was 1.5–121.5°. No significant difference was found in knee alignment between immediate and 18-month post-operative measurements. Additionally, no significant difference was found in functional scores and range of motion between one, two and three-column fracture groups. Twelve patients suffered superficial infection, one had limited skin necrosis and two had wound dehiscence, that healed with nonoperative management. Intraoperative vascular injury occurred in two patients. Fixation of failure was not observed in any of the fractures treated.
               
                  Conclusion
                  An updated Three-Column Concept assessing fracture morphology and injury mechanism in tandem can be used to guide surgical treatment of tibial plateau fractures. Limited results demonstrate successful application of biologically friendly fixation constructs while avoiding fixation failure and associated complications of both simple and complex tibial plateau fractures.
               
                  Level of evidence
                  Level II, prospective cohort study.The treatment of complex tibial plateau fractures (TPF), especially those caused by high-energy trauma, remains a challenge in many respects. Historically, the Schatzker and AO/OTA classification systems, both of which are based on radiographic assessment of fracture pattern With advancements in CT imaging and 3-D reconstruction technology, TPF can be better evaluated in a multiplanar fashion It is well known that open reduction and internal fixation (ORIF) is a preferred treatment method for most TPF In this article, we report the results of TPF treatment via an updated Three-Column Concept (uTCC), best thought of as a “3-D morphology injury mechanism based protocol to surgical approach(es) and implant fixation” ( From September 2008 to August 2012, 439 consecutive patients with operatively treated TPF using the “uTCC” were prospectively enrolled at a single Level 1 trauma centre. The approval of institution's ethical review board was obtained prior to initiation of the study. Patients were excluded based on the following criteria: (1) pre-existing deformity; (2) multiple trauma with an injury severity score of >16; (3) open fracture classified as Gustilo Grade IIIc requiring plastic or vascular surgeries Provisional stabilization of injuries with skeletal traction or knee-spanning external fixation was performed in instances of high-energy fractures or compromised soft tissue. Open fractures underwent initial irrigation in the emergency department and subsequent irrigation and debridement in the operating room when deemed necessary. Definitive stabilization of fractures was performed when soft tissues were amenable to surgical intervention. On admission, all patients were evaluated following a standard imaging protocol consisting of radiographic plain films and CT modalities. Injuries were classified into different fracture categories according to the previously described “TCC”. In this classification system the tibial plateau is divided into three parts, individually defined as the lateral, medial and posterior columns as seen on axial plane CT images and 3-D reconstructions The updated Three-Column Concept consisting of the initial fracture classification as noted above in addition to further assessment of injury mechanism was applied to all fractures to formulate the surgical plan. The theory functions on the premise that the residual deformity present on evaluation of TPF is a result of the injury mechanism. Through careful evaluation of specific radiographic parameters, the position of the knee (flexion/extension) at time of injury and the direction of the deforming force (varus/valgus) causing fracture can be identified. This information can be further used to guide preoperative planning and surgical stabilization of the fracture. A tibial plateau column fracture results from an applied axial load with the knee in a specific position in conjunction with a varus or valgus directed deforming force. The flexion/extension position of the knee is determined by the posterior tibial slope angle (pTSA) as measured on either the lateral radiographic plain film image or sagittal CT images. The varus/valgus force is determined by medial tibial plateau angle (mTPA) as measured on either anterior-posterior (AP) radiographic plain film image, or coronal CT images ( Fracture according to compression or tension failure mechanisms is also noted using the above radiographic parameters and fixation applied accordingly. Primary plating with main buttress function is applied to the compression side. If the tension side is comminuted or unstable, application of a secondary supporting plate is recommended ( Lastly, the location of key articular surface damaged is noted on CT imaging and should be considered as an independent factor in determining the overall surgical approach ( Zero column fractures consist of a disrupted articular surface with intact extraarticular cortices One-column fractures can be subdivided into one of three types: medial, lateral and posterior column fractures. These simpler fracture patterns can be treated through application of the traditional three-column classification, however, application of the “uTCC” allows for systematic planning of the final fixation construct ( A split fracture of the lateral column, with or without articular surface depression is relatively common Medial column fractures, with or without articular surface depression are caused by varus and axial forces with the knee in a position of extension. A medially based implant to buttress the medial column while preventing varus deformity should be used. With medial column fractures it is important to note any concomitant posterolateral soft tissue injuries that may need to be addressed at the time of surgery. For the less common isolated posterior column fracture Treatment of two-column fractures, particularly those involving the posterior column remains challenging In addition to a medial column fracture, a posteromedial fragment or posterolateral articular surface depression can be seen. Two distinct injury mechanisms dominate this fracture pattern. Decreased medial pTSA and mTPA indicate an extension-varus mechanism, requiring main buttress the medial via a medial approach. Usually a 4.5 Lateral column fractures extending to the posterior column are the most common fracture type, often associated with significant articular depression Combined medial and lateral column fractures are often caused by an axial force with the knee in extension. Implant placement at both anterolateral and anteromedial sides is necessary to restore the pTSA. The mTPA helps to determine which side failed due to compression and will require more robust fixation. If the mTPA is increased, there is usually associated comminution on the lateral side, and a longer and stronger anterolateral plate works best as the main buttress. A decreased mTPA indicates a stronger varus force causing failure, requiring the primary implant to be placed on the anteromedial side as a buttress. Three-column fractures, which are the most complicated, can have a combination of flexion/extension and varus/valgus forces resulting in injury ( Associated soft tissue injuries were evaluated by preoperative magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) and intraoperative examination. Per protocol, all ruptured menisci were repaired to the best degree possible. Disrupted ligamentous insertions were also repaired. Lateral collateral ligament ruptures were repaired if the knee was found to be unstable to varus load on exam while medial collateral ligament injuries were treated nonoperatively in most cases. Rupture of the body of cruciate ligaments was treated nonsurgically at the time of initial fracture fixation and addressed surgically at a later date if indicated. Postoperatively, early range of motion and non-weight bearing were emphasized. Passive range-of-motion exercises were initiated on the first post-operative day. Toe-touch weight bearing was initiated at 8 weeks. Full weight bearing (FWB) was not permitted until radiographic signs of primary bone healing, usually present at 12 weeks postop. All patients were followed on a monthly basis for the first six months and on the 12th and 18th months postoperatively. Standard AP and lateral radiographs were evaluated. The femorotibial angle (FTA), mTPA, pTSA and articular step-off were measured by two surgeons (YF.X., WJ.Q.) at immediate postoperative and 18-month follow-up. Malreduction was defined as intra-articular step-off >2 Objective knee evaluation and patient reported functional outcomes were assessed at 18-month follow-up according to the Western Ontario and McMaster Universities Osteoarthritis index [WOMAC]) and functional Knee Society Score (KSS) SPSS Statistics 19.0 software (IBM SPSS Inc, Chicago, IL) was used for the statistical analyses. The descriptive statistics were employed to determine ranges, means, and standard deviations. Student paired From September 2008 to August 2012, 355 tibial plateau fractures were assessed and treated using the updated Three-Column Concept. 287 fractures were followed clinically and radiographically for a mean postoperative period of 44.5 months (range, 18–96 months). 68 patients were excluded because they were lost to follow up before the minimum 18-month post-operative period (see From September 2008 to August 2012, 355 tibial plateau fractures were assessed and treated using the updated Three-Column Concept. 287 fractures were followed clinically and radiographically for a mean postoperative period of 44.5 months (range, 18–96 months). 68 patients were excluded because they were lost to follow up before the minimum 18-month post-operative period (see Bone graft was used in 61 of 287 (21.3%) treated fractures. Bone graft choice varied with 22 fractures receiving β-TCP (β-tertiary calcium phosphate), 13 allograft and 16 iliac crest autograft. Bone graft became less frequently used in the later period of this study, with preference shifting towards stabilization of sub-articular defects utilizing a rafting and in situ autograft technique. This involves mobilization of cancellous bone from the inferior/opposite part of the metaphysis using an osteotome and elevation into the proximal part to fill the defect Superficial infections were found in twelve cases. Wound dehiscence occurred in two anterolateral incisions and edge necrosis occurred in one medial skin incision. All wound problems healed with nonoperative management. No implant failure was noted. Eighteen patients complained about hardware irritation. The implants were partially or totally removed in 125 patients after bony union, including the 18 cases mentioned above. There was no iatrogenic nerve damage. In 13 cases (4%) patients experienced temporary peroneal nerve palsy related to the initial injury. Two cases had vascular lesions that were repaired primarily. No malreduction or secondary loss of reduction was found over the time period studied. Complications are listed in detail in In total, the average radiographic bony union time and FWB time were 13.5 weeks (range, 10–28 weeks) and 14.8 weeks (range, 10–26 weeks) respectively. Delayed union (>16 weeks) was seen in 21 patients, but all achieved fracture healing under protected weight bearing. Patient scores for pain, stiffness and function as determined by WOMAC and functional KSS score at 18-months postoperative were 1.3, 0.5, 2.8 and 93.0 (range, 80–95), respectively. The average range of motion of the affected knees was 1.5–121.5°. In One-/Two-/Three- Column fracture groups, no significant difference was found in FTA, mTPA, pTSA or articular step-off on the radiographs between immediate and 18-months postoperative. Statistically significant differences were found in terms of time to bony union and time to FWB among the three groups. There was no difference however, in final clinical scores. The results of measurements and analyses are shown in It has been recognized that successful treatment of high energy TPF is more complicated than previously appreciated, particularly for fractures involving the posterior column Once fracture morphology is accurately identified according to the “TCC” questions may persist as to whether all fracture columns need independent fixation through different surgical approaches, and whether all fracture columns require primary stabilization with stiff and bulky implants. This has led to the development of an updated Three-Column Concept, which can be used to determine the necessary surgical approach(es) and fixation methods indicated by injury mechanism as inferred from 3-D fracture morphology. It has been introduced in the treatment for TPFs in this prospective cohort study. Based on our clinical experience to date and previous biomechanical studies The “uTCC” allows surgeons to apply a systematic approach to pre-operative planning. It allows one to determine the position, and number of the plate(s) to be utilized in the fixation construct as well as the appropriate plate size. Rather than fixing all broken columns with bulky implants equally, a more biomechanically and cost-effective plating construct can be achieved. Positive outcomes in surgical treatment for TPFs rely on achieving and maintaining anatomic alignment and articular reduction throughout the healing process It is important to note that cases of high energy TPF (Two-/Three-Column fractures) achieved satisfactory radiographic outcomes as well as knee function scores postoperatively over the time period assessed. The only discrepancy noted between the groups was found in the time to bony union and full weight bearing, which was within 1 to 2 weeks of the overall average. Despite the nature of this short-term follow-up, we feel it is safe to conclude that successful initial surgical treatment for TPF using the “uTCC” will result in knee stability that can be maintained with associated satisfactory knee function ( The number of postoperative complications encountered in this study was relatively low compared with previous studies Other complications such as fixation failure lead to pain and knee dysfunction, often requiring revision surgery Delayed union was found in 21 patients, 14 of which had fracture extension into the tibial shaft. Since signs of primary healing were observed, protected WB was allowed as the closing fracture gap was protected by implant fixation ( Several factors may have contributed to the successful treatment for TPF in this study: (1) the updated philosophy taking injury mechanism, articular surface involvement and soft tissue injury into consideration allowed for individualized fixation strategies to be well planned for each case; (2) patients were followed routinely on regular basis improving compliance with weight bearing restrictions and rehabilitation protocols; (3) advancements in implant design in conjunction with rafting techniques allowed for maintenance of mechanical stability after fracture reduction; and (4) soft tissue integrity was respected in all surgical decision-making contributing to relatively low overall complication rates. Limitations to this study include that the study remains a single centre's experience, though it carries a large volume of patients with TPF. Despite its prospective nature, this study does not provide a long-term follow-up with randomized controlled groups. Due to the limited focus of the results presented here the detailed techniques for associated ligament and meniscus injuries were not included in this paper. Great care was taken however, to address these associated injuries in the pre-operative planning of all TPF fixation. Related research is under way to further study the influence of these associated problems. Additionally, although bone graft was not controlled for in the statistical analysis, it was not considered to play a significant role in the final results presented. Because the wide use of periarticular locking plates and rafting techniques increase the total mechanical stability, patients with/without bone graft were both allowed to start early rehabilitation in this study. Lastly, the pre-operative comorbidities of each patient were not listed, however the incidences did not reach statistically significant difference, and are unlikely to bias the interpretation of results. In conclusion, the updated Three-Column Concept provides new insight into the treatment for TPF. The satisfactory radiographic and functional outcomes achieved prove its effectiveness. We believe that this new concept, together with newly developed implants, can substantially improve clinical results in complex TPF. The patient sustained a scooter accident with his knee in mid-flexion. The plain film radiograph as well as the CT image taken at the time of injury confirmed a high-energy three-column fracture. The pTSA increased both medially and laterally, indicating a position of knee flexion at injury; the decreased mTPA and the comminuted posteromedial ridge indicated that a varus load was the major deforming force. The lateral column fracture was the result of a tension failure requiring minor support fixation. Ultimately, medial column fixation with a primary robust plate stiff and long enough to support the entire column should be applied in buttress function. Four questions need to be answered next: (1) how to address the articular surface; (2) what is the sequence of implant placement; (3) which approach should be used, and (4) whether to apply buttress fixation to the posterolateral fragment independently. A main buttressing plate is placed first to reconstruct the posteromedial ridge. An anteromedial supporting plate is placed next to prevent over reduction. Next, a supplementary buttress plate is applied for independent fixation of the posterolateral fracture. Reconstruction of medial and posterior columns facilitates the reduction of the lateral column fracture and the lateral supporting plate is placed at last. This not only supports the lateral column but also rafts the articular surface. Since all three columns should be accessed, a combined surgical approach is necessary. The medial and posterior columns are fixed through a single reversed L incision, while lateral column is fixed through a standard lateral approach Four questions need to be answered next: (1) how to address the articular surface; (2) what is the sequence of implant placement; (3) which approach should be used, and (4) whether to apply buttress fixation to the posterolateral fragment independently. A main buttressing plate is placed first to reconstruct the posteromedial ridge. An anteromedial supporting plate is placed next to prevent over reduction. Next, a supplementary buttress plate is applied for independent fixation of the posterolateral fracture. Reconstruction of medial and posterior columns facilitates the reduction of the lateral column fracture and the lateral supporting plate is placed at last. This not only supports the lateral column but also rafts the articular surface. Since all three columns should be accessed, a combined surgical approach is necessary. The medial and posterior columns are fixed through a single reversed L incision, while lateral column is fixed through a standard lateral approach The authors declare no conflict of interest to declare. The authors would like to appreciate Dr. Justin Lucas (Seattle, USA) and Dr. Richard Buckley (Calgary, Canada) for their kindly review of our paper. Research grants were received from Supplementary data associated with this article can be found, in the online version, at The following are the supplementary data to this article: Supplementary Figs. 7–9 were based on the same case for additional illustration of applying updated Three-Column Concept.