The non-aqueous redox flow battery (NARFB) is a promising device for grid-scale energy storage. However, its electrochemical performance and long-term stability still need to be improved. This work shows that the electrochemical performance of NARFB can be remarkably enhanced by optimizing the supporting electrolyte and separator. The battery with 2,1,3-benzothiadiazole (BzNSN) as anolyte, 2,5-di-tert-butyl-1-methoxy-4-[2′-methoxyethoxy]benzene (DBMMB) as catholyte, tetraethylammonium bis(trifluoromethylsulfonyl)imide (TEATFSI) as supporting electrolyte, and porous Daramic 250 separator delivers an average discharge capacity of 1.7 Ah L−1, voltage efficiency of 87.8%, Coulombic efficiency of 89.1%, and energy efficiency of 78.3% over 100 cycles at the current density of 40 mA cm−2 with 0.1 M active materials. The reasons for the capacity decay over cycling in terms of electrolyte leakage, crossover, and chemical decomposition are discussed.Redox flow battery (RFB) is a promising large-scale energy storage device owing to its independent power and energy features, long cycle life, and rapid response. The aqueous RFBs based on all-vanadium and Zn/Br have been commercially demonstrated [ The anode and cathode active materials are the core components, which determine the energy density and cycling life of NARFBs. Many active materials, including organometallic complexes such as ferrocene [ The supporting electrolyte, which serves to enhance the electrical conductivity of the electrolyte, is another important component for NARFBs. The interactions between the active materials, solvent, and supporting electrolyte have significant influences on the electrochemical performance of NARFBs [ The properties of the separator in terms of conductivity and selectivity also affect the performance of NARFBs [ A 0.1% loss in capacity per cycle over 100 cycles was observed for an aqueous system with 2,6-dihydroxyanthraquinone anolyte and ferrocyanide catholyte. Lin et al. [ With the purpose to improve the performance of NARFBs, BzNSN and DBMMB are selected as the anolyte and catholyte active materials in the present work considering their outstanding performance [ MeCN (Sigma-Aldrich, 99.9%) was used as received. TEATFSI ( Cyclic voltammetry (CV) tests were performed on a VersaSTAT 3 potentiostat/galvanostat (Princeton Applied Research, USA) at room temperature in argon with a standard three-electrode system, with glassy carbon, platinum, and Ag/AgNO For electrolytes analysis, the solvents in the electrolytes after cycling were first removed by natural evaporation. To remove the supporting electrolyte, the sample was diluted with n-hexane followed by centrifugation. Finally, the solvent was once again removed by natural evaporation and replaced with CDCl CV of the ROMs was tested to determine the theoretical open circuit voltage (OCV) of the NARFBs. The CV curves of a mixed-reactant electrolyte of 10 mM BzNSN and 10 mM DBMMB in 0.5 M TEATFSI/MeCN are shown in  The electrochemical performance of flow batteries assembled with 0.1 M mixed-reactant electrolyte in 1 M TEATFSI/MeCN and Daramic 250 membrane was examined with a galvanostatic charge/discharge cycling test. The mixed-reactant electrolyte was used to mitigate the crossover effect. The charge/discharge curves ( CE is slightly higher for cycling at 40 mA cm The improved performance of the present NARFB can be attributed to two factors. The first one is the separator. The Daramic 250 porous separator has a larger pore size of 150 nm [ Cycling stability is always a great concern for NARFBs [ To further explore the probable reasons, the cell was tested at The cycled electrolyte (50 mM solutions of both ROMs) was tested with Similar with the aqueous RFBs [ The electrochemical performance of NARFB with BzNSN anolyte and DBMMB catholyte can be improved by employing appropriate supporting electrolyte and separator. The TEATFSI supporting electrolyte and commercial Daramic 250 porous separator show high compatibility with the active materials and low area specific resistance, respectively, which contribute to the enhanced performance of the resultant NARFB, with an average discharge capacity of 1.7 Ah L This work was funded by the The following is the Supplementary data to this article: Supplementary data to this article can be found online at