In recent years, it has been shown that there is a clear link between froth stability and flotation performance. Air recovery is a measure of froth stability, and describes the fraction of air entering a flotation cell that overflows the cell lip as unburst bubbles. Studies have shown that air recovery passes through a peak as flotation cell aeration is increased. Furthermore, when a cell, or bank of cells, is operated at the air rate that yields this Peak Air Recovery (PAR), higher mineral recoveries are obtained, often for a higher concentrate grade. In this paper, the effect of froth depth on air recovery is discussed, particularly with regards to the interaction between air rate and froth depth.
                  Using results obtained from an industrial experimental campaign, it is shown that, at a given air rate, air recovery passes through a peak as froth depth is increased. The froth depth at which PAR is obtained depends on the air rate; for example at lower air rates, the PAR froth depth will be shallower than at higher air rates. In order to operate at the highest air recovery, therefore, froth depth should increase as the air rate increases. Surveys were carried out at a single air rate and three different froth depths, in which air recovery increased with increasing froth depth. These results show that the lowest grades and recoveries were obtained when operating with the shallowest froth, which also yielded the lowest air recoveries, despite giving the highest mass pull. The highest mineral recovery was obtained when operating with the deepest froth. While the relationship between air rate, froth depth and PAR may be complex, the results presented in this paper underline that operating under conditions that yield high air recoveries is the best indicator for obtaining high mineral recoveries.In recent years, the importance of froth stability in determining separation performance in froth flotation systems has become increasingly recognised ( Air recovery is the fraction of air entering a flotation cell that overflows the cell lip as unburst bubbles, and is a parameter that was first introduced by Several other studies have been presented since that demonstrate the performance improvements that can be obtained by operating banks of flotation cells at their PAR air rate ( The concept of PAR and subsequent performance improvement when operating at the PAR air rate was explained by describing the changes that occur in particle loading on bubbles, bubble stability and froth mobility as cell aeration is varied ( While the relationship between air flowrate, air recovery and flotation performance is now well understood, the effect of other operating parameters, namely froth depth, on air recovery has not yet been extensively studied. More recently, Industrial testwork was carried out over the first three rougher cells (forced air) of a South African Platinum concentrator. Two sets of tests were carried out; air recovery tests in each cell individually, followed by surveys across the three cells at selected conditions. For the air recovery tests, the air rate was varied to Cell 1 and the air recovery measured until PAR had been established. The froth depth was then changed, and the methodology was repeated until the new PAR was established. This was carried out at three froth depths in Cell 1. The air rate and froth depth were set to the positions that yielded the highest air recovery, and the same methodology was carried out in Cell 2, and subsequently Cell 3. Following this ‘air recovery characterisation’ stage of testwork, surveys were carried out over the three cells at a single air rate in each but for three different froth depths, in order to study the effect of changing froth depth on flotation bank performance. During the surveys, in addition to air recovery measurements, metallurgical samples were taken to allow grades and recoveries to be determined. Concentrate flowrates were measured in triplicate. For each test, air recovery was determined using the parameters in Eq. For the air recovery characterisation tests, the aim was to find the PAR air rate at three froth depths in each of the first three cells sequentially. The results of these tests are shown in The first point to note in all cells is the high magnitude of the measured air recoveries, particularly in Cell 3 (see It can be seen that in Cell 1, shown in In Cell 2, shown in In Cell 3 ( The air recoveries for Cells 1 and 2 are also shown as a function of froth depth in These findings are summarised in the schematic in Following the air recovery characterisation tests, surveys were carried out at a single air rate and three froth depths in each cell, details of which are given in From the characterisation tests, it was found generally that, at the air rates selected, the middle froth depth (21 In comparison with The effect of froth depth on the flotation performance for the three surveys conditions is shown in Deeper froths are generally associated with higher concentrate grades, since deeper froths allow longer froth residence times, which allows more time for coalescence of bubbles and drainage of unattached material, including entrained gangue. The increase in concentrate grade is, however, generally assumed to come at the cost of mineral recovery. The results shown in Additionally, The relationship between froth depth and mineral recovery can be related directly to the air recoveries shown in In changing air rate to a flotation cell, changes occur both in the pulp conditions, such as pulp bubble size and particle loading, and also in the froth phase, for example in the entrainment of water and unattached particles, and in froth residence time. When changes are made to the operating froth depth at a given air rate, the resulting changes in froth behaviour and consequently flotation performance are caused only by variation in the froth phase, specifically froth residence time. At a constant air rate, shallow froths allow only short froth residence times, therefore less drainage of water and unattached material can occur. While this increases the froth mobility, the low air recoveries measured suggest that the bubbles are less stable, perhaps through lower solids loading, as shown by As froth depth is increased, longer froth residence times allow for more drainage of unattached material, and it would be expected that this would result in lower froth mobility and mineral recovery. The increase in air recovery, however, suggests that the bubbles are more stable, perhaps through reattachment of detached, or unattached, valuable particles. Although lower concentrate flowrates are measured, at higher solids contents, the material that is recovered to the concentrate is of a higher grade, due to the rejection of gangue through drainage and coalescence, and the high air recovery ensures a high flowrate of bubble surface, therefore a high mineral recovery. As froth depth is increased further, the decrease in mobility and increase in bubble loading will eventually result in the bubbles collapsing before overflowing the cell lip, and consequently lead to a reduction in air recovery and mineral recovery, albeit at a higher concentrate grade. Although the PAR froth depth appears to have shifted between the characterisation tests and the survey, the results presented here do, for the first time, demonstrate a clear link between froth depth, air recovery and mineral recovery. It can be seen that by operating at the froth depth that yields the highest air recovery, a higher mineral recovery can be obtained, which may well be for a deeper froth. Furthermore, the results show that operating at froth depths shallower than the PAR froth depth results not only in a lower concentrate grade but also a clear reduction in recovery. These results show that, while the relationship between froth depth, air flowrate and PAR is complex, operating at conditions that yield high air recoveries remains the best indicator for obtaining high mineral recoveries. Air recovery, or the fraction of air entering a flotation cell that overflows the cell lip as unburst bubbles, has previously been shown to be a robust method of quantifying froth stability industrially. While the relationship between air flowrate and air recovery, particularly with regards to the peak in air recovery (PAR), has been much studied, this paper has presented, for the first time, the relationship between froth depth, air recovery and flotation performance. Using data from an industrial campaign carried out at a South African platinum concentrator, it was shown that not only does air recovery pass through a peak with air rate, but it also passes through a peak with froth depth at a constant air rate. The froth depth at which PAR is obtained depends on the air rate; for example at lower air rates, the PAR froth depth tends to be shallower froths, whereas at higher air rates, the PAR froth depth becomes deeper. In other words, the PAR air rate increases as froth depth also increases. The results showed, therefore, that in order to operate at the highest possible air recovery, the froth depth must increase as the air rate increases. Surveys were carried out at a single air rate and three froth depths in each cell. At the time when the surveys were carried out, the air recovery increased as the froth depth increased (rather than passing through a peak), and consequently the results showed that the highest cumulative grade and recovery was obtained when operating with the deepest froth. Operating with a shallow froth at the air rate selected resulted in a low air recovery and the poorest cumulative grade and recovery, but the highest mass pull, confirming that high mass pull is not indicative of a high mineral recovery. While the results presented here show that the relationship between air rate and froth depth is complex, particularly with regards to air recovery and the position of PAR, it has been shown that operating under conditions that yield high air recoveries is the best indicator for obtaining high mineral recoveries. Consequently, the key to improving flotation performance is to operate at combinations of air rate and froth depth that result in high air recoveries.