An experimental study of the influence of external magnetic field on the fluidization behavior of magnetic pearls was carried out. Magnetic pearls are a magnetic form of iron oxide that mainly consists of Fe2O3 which are recovered from a high-volume power plant fly ash from pulverized coal combustion. Due to its abundance, low price and particular physical and chemical properties, magnetic pearls can be used as a heavy medium for minerals or solid waste dry separation based on density difference. This paper introduces the properties of magnetic pearls and compares the performance of magnetic pearls fluidised bed operation with or without an external magnetic field. Experimental results show that an external magnetic field significantly improves the fluidization performance of magnetic pearls such as uniformity and stability.particle size (μm) magnetic field intensity (Oe) pressure drop (Pa) superficial gas velocity (mm/s) minimum fluidization velocity (mm/s) minimum bubbling velocity (mm/s) Fly ash from coal combustion is a fine-grained dusty material that is primarily composed of silica (SiO There is a promising potential for recovering the magnetic pearls from fly ash for use as a heavy-medium material for dry beneficiation of coal, which is less costly and more efficient for reducing SO The particle size distribution, density, particle shape and magnetic characteristics of magnetic pearls were first studied.  Particle density of magnetic pearls varies from 3.5 to 4.0  The mass magnetic susceptibility of the magnetic pearls is more than 6.3  A series of tests were performed on the effects of the external magnetic field on the critical fluidization gas velocities of the magnetic pearls fluidized bed, the density, uniformity and stability of the fluidized magnetic pearls and the transition from ordinary fluidization to magnetically stabilized fluidization.    Therefore, the external magnetic field increases the minimum bubbling gas velocity of the magnetic pearls and results in good fluidization quality with stable bed density and is thus especially suitable for dry gravity separation of coal or mineral on the basis of density difference.  The main conclusions of the present study are: The measured minimum fluidization velocities increased with the particle size of the magnetic pearls. The external magnetic field of less than 30 The authors wish to thank the National Natural Science Foundation of China (No. 90510002 and No. 90210035) for financing the project.