In this work, four different vacuum sintering temperatures (1250 °C, 1300 °C, 1350 °C and 1400 °C) were studied to determine the optimal process parameters of nano WC–15 wt% (Fe–Ni–Co) and WC–15 wt% Co sintered hard metal alloys. Experimental results showed that the optimal sintering temperatures for nano WC–(Fe–Ni–Co) and WC–Co alloys were 1300 °C and 1350 °C for 1 h, respectively. The sintered nano WC–(Fe–Ni–Co) and WC–Co hard metal alloys showed a good contiguity of 0.44 and 0.42; hardness was enhanced to HRA 90.83 and 90.92; the transverse rupture strength (TRS) increased to 2567.97 and 2860.08 MPa; and KIC was 16.23 and 12.33 MPa√m, respectively. Although the nano WC–(Fe–Ni–Co) alloys possessed a slightly lower TRS value, they exhibited superior fracture toughness (KIC) and hardness similar to that of the nano WC–Co material. Significantly, nano WC–(Fe–Ni–Co) alloys could be sintered at a lower temperature and still retained their excellent mechanical properties.WC–Co hard metal alloys are widely used for machining, cutting, drilling, forming tools and wear resistant parts, due to their exceptional high hardness, excellent wear resistance and better toughness than that of other hard materials. The properties of WC hard metal alloys depend primarily on binder content (such as Co, Fe and Ni) and grain sizes of WC. When the grain size is reduced to a range of submicron meter or nanometer, the hardness and the strength of WC–Co hard metal alloys increase remarkably, and the toughness improves greatly as well, thus showing an excellent mechanical property of the hard materials The grain sizes of WC and composition of the binder are the two major factors, which are responsible for the mechanical properties of the composite. Typical of the WC grain sizes ranges from submicron levels to a few microns and the WC–Co alloys contain 3–30 wt% cobalt Powder metallurgy (P/M) is a good method for fabrication of high melting material with better mechanical properties. Sintering is a very important procedure to achieve the dense and ultra-fine grain structure by densifying the powder materials In this study, nano WC–Co and WC–(Fe–Ni–Co) hard metal alloys were prepared in an innovative way by means of the vacuum sintering process. Nanostructured WC–15 wt% (Fe–Ni–Co) and WC–15 wt% Co hard metal alloys were produced In this research, the binder contents of Fe–Ni–Co and Co were 15 wt%, respectively. Various sintering temperatures were examined in order to find the optimal parameters of nanostructured WC–15 wt% (Fe–Ni–Co) and WC–15 wt% Co alloys and to compare the different properties of the two binders (Fe–Ni–Co and Co) in tungsten carbide materials. The binder Fe–Ni–Co contained 11.62 wt% Fe, 3.02 wt% Ni and 0.36 wt% Co, while the binder Co was 15 wt% Co. Meanwhile, the nano-sized WC–15 wt% (Fe–Ni–Co) and WC–15 wt% Co alloys were designated as WC–(Fe–Ni–Co) and WC–Co, hereafter. Both WC–(Fe–Ni–Co) and WC–Co composite powders showed an irregularly shaped surface. The powders also displayed a significant agglomeration phenomenon, as shown in To evaluate the microstructure and mechanical properties of the WC–(Fe–Ni–Co) and WC–Co hard metal alloys The Hung Ta universal material test machine (HT-9501A) with a maximum load of 245 kN was used for the transverse rupture strength (TRS) tests (ASTM B528-05). Meanwhile,      Contiguity is defined as the average fraction of the surface area shared by a carbide particle grain with all neighboring grains of the same phase. Therefore, by definition, the contiguity can vary between 0 and 1. In this study, the contiguity can be calculated by the following equation Since the interface area of WC–WC was relatively weak, when external stress was applied to the specimens, the contact area of the tungsten carbides with each other was easily broken; thus, the contiguity could not be too high. Normally, a high contiguity value is not expected, but neither can it be too low. According to the literature, the contiguity of the carbide phase in WC–Co decreases with an increasing Co content, but it does not depend on the size of the WC grains     The TRS values of the WC–(Fe–Ni–Co) and WC–Co hard metal alloys after the optimal sintering process were compared. The TRS of the WC–(Fe–Ni–Co) specimen was slightly lower than that of the WC–Co alloys, as the cobalt composition possessed good comminution, which led to a good distribution in the WC matrix and the excellent TRS. In addition, the WC–(Fe–Ni–Co) alloys contained 3.02 wt% Ni, which possesses a good plastic property. After a lengthy milling process, WC–(Fe–Ni–Co) powders can not obtain uniformity and refinement, thus coarse pores are easily produced during the sintering process, which is one of main factors affecting the TRS. Also, the higher vapor pressure of nickel (ten times that of cobalt) at sintering temperature also causes considerable loss of the nickel binder and it is, therefore, necessary to control the working pressure. The loss of nickel in practice has been reported to be 10 wt% or more at sintering temperatures The fracture toughness (K  In this study, the main binders of the WC–(Fe–Ni–Co) hard metal alloys were iron and nickel, and with them a lower sintering temperature (1300 °C) was achieved; whereas cobalt, as the chief binding phase of the WC-C hard metal alloys, required a relatively high sintering temperature (1350 °C) to achieve a complete LPS result. The optimally sintered WC–(Fe–Ni–Co) and WC–Co hard metal alloys showed the hardness enhanced to HRA 90.83 and 90.92; the TRS increased to 2567.97 and 2860.08 MPa; and the K Analyzing the contiguity allowed for a better understanding of the bonding phase dispersion. The contiguity of the WC–(Fe–Ni–Co) and WC–Co hard metal alloys tended to decline as the sintering temperature increased. The optimal contiguity of the WC–(Fe–Ni–Co) and the WC–Co hard metal alloys was 0.44 and 0.42, after sintering at 1300 °C and 1350 °C for 1 h, respectively. According to the experimental results, although the TRS value of the WC–(Fe–Ni–Co) hard metal alloys was slightly lower, but they possessed the better hardness and fracture toughness (K This research is supported by the ASSAB STEELS TAIWAN CO., LTD. The authors would like to express their appreciation for Dr. Harvard Chen and Mr. Meng-Yu Liu.