It is known that surface roughness and chemical composition of the titanium surface influence the osseointegration of titanium implants. Most commercial dental implants offer a shot-blasted rough surface. It is also known that apatite layers coating the surface of titanium implants improve bone response, but the adhesion of the layer to the substrate poses some problems.
                  In this study the roughness and adhesion strength to a titanium dental implant surface of an apatite layer deposited via wet chemistry after a thermochemical treatment were compared with those of plasma-sprayed apatite layers and machined titanium surfaces. Different surface conditions have been studied: (a) as-received machined dental implant surface; (b) grit-blasted titanium surface; (c) grit-blasted and thermochemically-treated titanium surface; (d) titanium surfaces coated with plasma-sprayed apatite. The morphology and roughness of the samples were measured and compared. The adhesion of the apatite layers to the titanium was compared by means of a scratch test.
                  Measured roughness showed that the deposition of an apatite layer did not affect roughness but plasma-sprayed apatite produced a decrease on roughness values when compared to control samples. Both roughness and adhesion strength of the deposited apatite layer to the titanium substrate were higher than those of the plasma-sprayed apatite.Commercially pure (c.p.) titanium implants coated with a layer of plasma-sprayed apatite show bioactive surface properties and bone-bonding ability It was demonstrated by Kokubo et al. The modification of the surface roughness of an implant significantly influences the osteoblastic response One of the most frequently used treatments for creating a rougher surface on a titanium dental implant is grit-blasting. This technique consists on bombarding a surface with small hard and biologically-inert ceramic particles, like alumina (Al This study evaluates the possibility of depositing apatite layers on shot-blasted and thermochemically treated titanium surfaces. The effect of grit-blasting with alumina and silicon carbide particles on apatite deposition and the changes of morphology and roughness on the titanium surface are also studied, as well as the adhesion strength of the deposited apatite layers to the grit-blasted titanium. The results are compared to those achieved with a commercial plasma spray apatite coating. Plates of grade 2 c.p. titanium (10 Ti: machined (lathe cut) c.p. titanium surface (control samples). Grit-blasted surfaces: AL6: titanium grit-blasted with Al SI6: titanium grit-blasted with SiC particles with a mean diameter of 425–600 Surfaces Ti-Bio: Ti AL6-Bio: AL6 SI6-Bio: SI6 Surfaces AL6-PS: AL6 SI6-PS: SI6 The thermochemical treatment was done according to Kokubo The sample is introduced in a vial containing 10 The sample is carefully rinsed with distilled water and dried in an oven at 40 A thermal treatment is applied to the sample in a tubular furnace with a 5 The sample is cooled down to room temperature inside the furnace. The plasma spray treatment of the grit-blasted samples was applied by Bioplasma (Netherlands). The sprayed material was hydroxyapatite and the process was carried out at low vacuum with an initial temperature of the plume of approximately 8500 For the samples Ti, AL6, SI6, Ti-Bio, AL6-Bio, SI6-Bio, each sample was introduced in a vial containing 40 Analysis of the evolution of the species that grew on the samples was done in an environmental scanning electron microscope (ESEM) (2020©, Electroscan, USA). The ESEM requires neither vacuum nor electron-conductor surfaces to be operated. These working conditions allow following the evolution of the same sample throughout the immersion in SBF, as demonstrated in a previous work Complementary imaging of the samples was made using a white light interferometer microscopy (Wyko NT1100, Veeco, USA) for a qualitative comparison of roughness between samples. Surface profiles were measured with a contact 2D-profilometer (Surftest SV500©, Mitutoyo, Japan) and roughness profiles were calculated by filtering the surface profiles with a Gaussian filter. A 0.8-mm “cut-off” value was applied for filtering. The chemical species nucleated and grown on the samples tested for bioactivity were analyzed by Grazing-Incidence X-Ray Diffraction (GI-XRD) in an automatic diffractometer (X'Pert MPD©, Philips, the Netherlands) equipped with a thin film attachment, using Cu-K Five scratches were performed with a diamond stylus with a spherical tip of 50 Statistical analysis was performed using the statistical software Minitab™ (Release 13.1, Minitab Inc., USA). Student's All the thermochemically-treated surfaces (Ti-Bio, AL6-Bio, and SI6-Bio) showed an overlying structure onto the previous morphology (grit-blasted or machined), as shown in When immersed in SBF, nucleation was detected with ESEM on AL6-Bio samples after three days of immersion ( Interferometric microscopy imaging of the samples showed that grit-blasted and plasma-sprayed surfaces have higher roughness values when compared to the control titanium samples ( The surface roughness measurements did not show statistically significant differences between the roughness values of the samples before and after the thermochemical treatment. Moreover, there are no statistically significant differences between the mean values of roughness parameters of the different samples before and after 11 Roughness measurements also showed that the grit-blasted samples treated by plasma spray have lower The GI-XRD patterns of the samples analyzed after the thermochemical treatment were very similar, showing peaks corresponding to titanium, rutile and sodium titanates. A GI-XRD pattern of the surface of a Ti-Bio sample after thermochemical treatment ( A GI-XRD pattern of a surface of an AL6-Bio sample after immersion in SBF ( The adhesion strength of the coating layer was determined as the load when adhesion failure begins. The mean adhesion strength values are shown in The samples immersed in SBF after the thermochemical treatment presented different responses depending on the previous treatment. Deposition of an apatite layer after immersion in SBF was observed for Ti-Bio and AL6-Bio samples, but not for the other samples studied (Ti, AL6, SI6, and SI6-Bio). These results were expected for the non-bioactive surfaces (Ti, AL6, SI6) but not for the SI6-Bio samples. The lack of deposition in SI6-Bio samples cannot be explained by differences in the area covered by the particles after shot-blasting and cleaning, as the area covered in alumina-blasted surfaces is higher on AL6-Bio than on the SI6-Bio surfaces (16% and 11%, respectively) The nucleation kinetics of the apatite layers on Ti-Bio and AL6-Bio surfaces were different. The deposition of the apatite on AL6-Bio surfaces was detected after just three days of immersion in SBF, and one day after the surfaces were completely covered by the agglomerates, mostly composed of apatite with a low crystallinity, as suggested by the low signal-to-noise ratio in the GI-XRD pattern ( The faster nucleation of the apatite on the AL6-Bio surfaces may have different reasons: 1) the presence of remnants of the particles used for the grit-blasting, 2) the surface roughness, or 3) both causes. Alumina, unlike titanium oxide, is positively charged when immersed in SBF because its isoelectric point (IEP It is known that nanometer spaces in the organic matrix with distributions of highly negative charges are needed for the The deposition of an apatite layer has not modified significantly the roughness of the Ti-Bio and AL6-Bio samples. Besides, the deposited apatite layer bonds tighter to the titanium substrate than the plasma-sprayed apatite, as the stability of the hydroxyapatite coating produced by plasma spray relies mostly in a mechanical interlocking instead of the covalent/ionic bonding that presents the apatite formed after thermochemical treatment and SBF immersion Apatite layers have been formed on alumina grit-blasted and thermochemically treated titanium surfaces after immersion in SBF, while maintaining surface roughness. The selection of blasting particles is relevant, as surfaces grit-blasted with silicon carbide particles do not grow a deposited layer. The apatite layers formed on grit-blasted surfaces have higher adhesion strength to the titanium substrate than plasma-sprayed apatite coatings. These results open the possibility of clinical applications of this surface treatment in dental implants. The authors would like to acknowledge the Ministry of Science (CICYT) of the Spanish Government and Klockner company for the financial support and the titanium donated for the study, respectively.