Poly(l-lactide) (PLLA), poly(ε-caprolactone) (PCL) and poly(l-lactide/ε-caprolactone) (PLCL) are medical (co)polyesters that are conventionally manufactured by thermoplastic processing techniques, such as injection molding or extrusion. However, the addition of bioglass particles causes a degradation reaction of the matrix at high temperatures and could limit the fabrication of composite systems by the above mentioned processes. In this work, a surface modification of bioactive glass particles by plasma polymerization of acrlylic acid is proposed as a strategy for the improvement of thermal stability of bioglass filled composite systems. The developed poly(acrylic acid) layer on the surface of bioglass particles, hinders the degradation reaction between the Si–O− groups present in the surface of the particles and the CO groups of the polymer's backbone. As an illustration, the onset degradation temperature (T
                     onset) of PLLA, PCL and PLCL increased respectively from 185.0, 240.1 and 192.2 for bioglass (BG) filled composites to 240.4, 299.5 and 245.7 °C for their modified bioglass (mBG) filled counterparts. Finally, neat PLLA and composites having 15 vol.% of BG and mBG were melt-compounded and subsequently hot pressed to obtain tensile test samples. Non-modified bioglass filled PLLA film was too brittle and difficult to handle due to the sharp reduction of molecular weight during thermoplastic processing. On the contrary, modified bioglass filled PLLA presented a slight increase in Young's modulus with respect to unfilled PLLA but a decrease in both tensile strength and elongation at break.The combination of medical biodegradable polymers with inorganic bioactive particles has emerged as a promising strategy to lead materials with applications ranging from structural implants to tissue engineering scaffolds, particularly in the field of bone tissue engineering The above mentioned polymers and copolymers are prone to be conventionally manufactured by thermoplastic processing techniques such as injection molding, blow molding, thermoforming or extrusion Surface modification of bioglass particles could offer a promising solution to the previously discussed problem. The attachment of organic molecules to the surface of bioglass particles has been previously proposed to improve the interphase adhesion between inorganic particles and polymer matrix Plasma polymerization, which refers to the formation of polymeric materials under the influence of a partially ionized gas (plasma) In this study, acrylic acid was plasma polymerized on the surface of bioglass particles and then, the surface of modified bioglass (mBG) particles was characterized by means of thermogravimetric analysis (TGA), X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS) and Fourier transform infrared spectroscopy (FTIR). Composites of PLLA, PCL and PLCL filled with modified (mBG) and non-modified bioglass (BG) particles were prepared by solvent casting/sonication procedure and their thermal degradation behavior was studied using dynamic and isothermal thermogravimetric analysis (TGA) and gas permeation chromatography (GPC) measurements. Finally, in order to investigate the performance of one of these systems in a real thermoplastic processing technique, PLLA/mBG and PLLA/BG composites were melt compounded and subsequently hot pressed. The mechanical properties of the final product were measured by tensile tests. PLLA of a weight-average molecular weight ( The 45S5 Bioglass As mentioned in the introduction, surface modification of bioglass particles was carried out via plasma polymerization, which was performed in a PICO LF (low frequency-40 kHz) Plasma Polymerization System (Diener electronic GmbH + Co. KG, Germany). This system consists of a horizontal chamber of 32 cm length and 15 cm diameter, where the bioglass particles were placed between 20 μm meshes. The plasma treatment started with a cleaning process in which the chamber was evacuated until 0.2 mbar to remove possible humidity and followed by 10 min oxygen supply at a flow rate of 25 sccm and 700 W. Secondly, the monomer inlet was opened and monomer (acrylic acid, anhydrous, 99%, Sigma–Aldrich) vapor was allowed to flow through the reactor for 2 min being the pressure within the chamber ∼0.15 mbar. Then, power was adjusted to 80 W and the particles were exposed to glow discharge for 45 min. Finally, the power generator was turned off and a deactivation step was conducted, where the monomer was allowed to flow inside the chamber for 5 min. The optimization of all these conditions to obtain an appropriate surface modification and to prevent the fragmentation of the monomer structure during the plasma process has been thoroughly adjusted in a previous work of us 10–15 mg of bioglass (BG) and modified bioglass (mBG) particles were placed in platinum pans and heated within a thermogravimetric analyzer (TGA Q50-0545) from room temperature to 600 °C at a heating rate ( The infrared spectra of the BG and mBG particles were recorded on a Nicolet AVATAR 370 Fourier Transform Infrared spectrophotometer (FTIR). The samples were prepared as follows: a small quantity of bioglass particles was mixed with KBr and the mixture was manually milled until a fine powder was obtained. Finally, the resulting powder was pressed into a disc. Spectra of these samples were taken with a resolution of 2 cm X-ray Photoelectron Spectroscopy (XPS) of BG and mBG particles was performed with a SPECS (Germany) instrument equipped with Phoibos 150 1D-DLD analyzer and monochromatized Al Kα (1486.6 eV) radiation source. Wide scans (1100–0 eV Binding energy, BE; step energy 1 eV; dwell time 0.1 s; pass energy 40 eV) and high-resolution spectra (C1s; step energy 0.1 eV; dwell time 0.1 s; pass energy 20 eV) were acquired with an electron take-off angle of 90°. The hydrocarbon peak component in the C1s spectra was set at 285.0 eV to correct sample charging. The spectrometer was previously calibrated with the peak of Ag 3d 5/2 (368.28 eV). Neat polymers (PLLA, PCL and PLCL) and composite films of these polymers filled with 15 vol.% of non-modified (BG) and modified bioglass (mBG), were prepared by solvent casting using chloroform (Panreac, Spain) as solvent. Briefly, a dissolution of polymer was prepared at a polymer weight to solvent volume ratio of 5% (w/v). BG or mBG particles were added to the polymer solution, which was then sonicated for 15 min. This process was employed to obtain a homogeneous distribution of bioglass particles in the solution and to avoid the formation of agglomerates. Finally, the mixtures were transferred to Petri dishes and dried for 24 h at room temperature and another 24 h at vacuum. Thermal degradation behavior of samples was studied by means of TGA. Samples of 10–15 mg were heated from room temperature to 500 °C at a Apart from dynamic experiments, isothermal degradation experiments were also performed within the TGA. Samples (10–15 mg) of neat polymer and composites filled with 15 vol.% of BG and mBG particles were heated at 10 °C min The progress of the molecular weight of the samples was determined by GPC using a Waters 1515 GPC apparatus equipped with two Styragel columns (10 Neat PLLA and composites filled with 15 vol.% of BG and mBG were processed by a conventional thermoplastic processing technique. PLLA pellets and bioglass particles were dry-mixed and subsequently melt compounded in a corotating twin-screw microextruder (15 ml microcompounder, DSM Xplore). The operating conditions of the microextruder were arranged as screw speed of 60 rpm, barrel temperature of 200 °C and a mixing period of 3 min. The obtained melt was cooled at room temperature, treated by hot pressing at 200 °C during 4 min and water quenched in order to obtain 175–225 μm films. The molecular weight of the samples was measured before and after melt compounding and once the films were eventually conformed. Finally tensile tests of these films were performed with an Instron 5565 testing machine at a crosshead displacement rate of 10 mm min After plasma treatment, the surface of the modified bioglass particles was analyzed by means of thermogravimetric analysis, infrared spectroscopy and X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy. In    For isothermal degradation experiments, a temperature of 210 °C was selected because some of the polymers used in this work are usually processed around this temperature in conventional processing techniques like injection molding or extrusion. This same trend was also observed for both PCL and PLCL. However, the improvement in thermal stability caused by the surface modification of bioglass particles was more clearly visible in the case of PLLA with respect to PCL and PLCL. As reported in our previous work The polymers and copolymers presented in this work could fulfill the mechanical requirements for the regeneration of trabecular bone in load bearing applications. Trabecular bone can be found in the interior of long bones, such as femur, surrounded by a dense cortical bone shell. Flat bones, such as calvaria, presents a sandwich structure with dense cortical layers on the outer surface and a thin trabecular structure within After hot pressing, films of PLLA, PLLA + BG and PLLA + mBG were obtained and their mechanical properties are summarized in In this work plasma polymerization was proposed as a method to modify the surface of bioactive glass particles. This surface modification hindered the degradation reaction between the Si–O Plasma polymerization offers a rapid and clean alternative to traditional wet processes for surface modification of particles. However, the homogeneity of this treatment has to be still optimized in order to assure the modification of the whole surface of all particles. Plasma reactors with fluidized beds or circulating streams are being proposed to achieve this objective. The optimization of this process may result in the production of completely surface modified particles and would permit the manufacturing of bioglass particles filled polyester composites by the conventional thermoplastic techniques, avoiding the risk of thermal degradation during processing. The authors are thankful for funds of the