Sandstone “injectite” intrusions are generally developed by the fluidization of weakly cemented sandstones and their subsequent injection into fractured reservoirs. In this work, a continuum coupled hydro-mechanical model TOUGH-FLAC3D is applied to simulate the discrete fracture network in large-scale sand injectite complexes. A sand production constitutive model is incorporated to consider the formation of sand through plastic deformation and its influence on evolution of fracture permeability. Overpressures in the fluidized sand slurry drives the injection with sand dikes intruded upwards, typically into previously low permeability “tight” mudstone formations. The contrast in poroelastic properties of the underlying weak sandstone and overlying injectite receptor directly affects the evolution of fracture aperture both during and after intrusion. Fluid drainage into the unconsolidated matrix may reduce the extent of fracture aperture growth, through the formation of shear bands. The results of this work have broad implications related to the emplacement of sandstone intrusions and subsequent hydrocarbon accumulation, maturation and then production.Sandstone intrusions within sedimentary successions have been systematically investigated for decades, including the sand injection process ( In past characterizations of sand production, two- (2D) and three-dimensional (3D) finite difference models have been used to simulate the production of sand around the wellbore regime, by applying a strain-softening Mohr-Coulomb constitutive model ( What is the influence of sand fluidization in altering the evolution of fracture aperture? How the poroelastic contrast between the consolidated and unconsolidated formations affects the path of fluid flow and the resulting permeability change in the injectite complex? The following investigates the evolution of aperture of dyke due to the transport of fluidized sand by incorporating the deformation of sand followed by fluidization, and accommodating the influence of the poroelasticity in modulating the fracture pressure and aperture growth. In sand injectite complexes, unconsolidated sedimentary formations (sandstones) usually underlie mudrock seals with low permeabilities of the order of ∼10 The overpressurization in the sand body will facilitate failure of the seal, mostly by tensile/shear fracturing, through reducing the effective stress. A typical failure criterion involves the combined Griffith-Coulomb failure envelope, depending on the relationship between the differential principal stresses (    The sand fluidization process is governed by the fluid pressure, stress state, and fluid velocity adjacent to the pore surface in the sand body. Rocks in sandstone layer may disaggregate into sands in a form of shear or tensile failure. In non-cohesive sands at relative shallow depth where the total stresses are low, when the vertical pore pressure gradient within the sand exceeds the lithostatic gradient, the fluid fluidization velocity ( Typical minimum fluidization velocity for fine-grained and well-sorted sand formations in the size ranges (≤0.05 mm) are 0.3–1 cm/s in the water saturated medium ( In this work, a continuum constitutive model is developed to describe sand fluidization, including formation failure and sand erosion process, and solved using the coupled flow-deformation code FLAC3D-Tough ( When the local discharge magnitude normal to the exterior boundary surface exceeds the critical magnitude, sand production initiates. The rate of produced sand has a direct relationship with the evolution of rock porosity. Based on the assumption that the sand begins to be physically removed from the boundary layer as soon as the porosity reaches the critical porosity Once being fluidized, the density of the mixture Based on field observations, dike apertures usually range from a few centimeters up to 7 m. Despite that most dykes are oriented at steep angles, most of the sandstone volume is accommodated in the permeable (thick aperture) low angle intrusions, which represents that most of the sandstone volume is dominated with saucer-shaped intrusions ( Furthermore, the pressure in matrix and fracture will be adjusted due to the deformation/compaction and the change of fluid modulus. The constitutive model for governing poroelasticity response in dual porosity system is relevant to the matrix volume and fluid modulus, defined as ( Sand injectite complexes, including the Panoche Giant Injection Complex (PGIC), have been identified in different stratigraphic formations in the northern San Francisco area, Sacramento Basin, and San Joaquin Basin, USA (  To interpret and quantify the pattern of dykes, such as orientation and spatial variation, an open source tool-box FracPaQ is applied to the 2D digital image (   Based on the prescribed three simulation cases, the analysis primarily focuses on the magnitude of permeability evolution and the mass of the produced sand, to illustrate the influence of sand fluidization. The properties of the dual-medium of the mudstone where the fracture network is embedded exert a key influence on determining the response of the fracture aperture. To highlight the effect of the poroelastic contrast due to lithologic variation, the Case 2 scenario is employed to replace mudstone with the same unconsolidated lithology as the basal sandstone, using an initial porosity of 0.3 and low modulus.    To highlight the influence of sand production and fluidization in modifying matrix porosity, the evolutions of matrix porosity and fracture porosity are listed separately. The sand will be produced and fluidized once the porosity This work explores the mechanisms of sand emplacement by fluidization and injection contributing to the formation of sand injectite complexes. This is accomplished by inserting an appropriate constitutive model into the framework of the coupled flow-deformation continuum model Tough-FLAC3D. This study focuses on the evolution of permeability for intruded dyke networks, particularly accommodating the transport of sand particles. The fluidization process is considered as a subsequent step following the disaggregation of sand after its failure. When the fluid velocity reaches a critical fluidization velocity, the sand will deform uncontrollably as the grains become entrained within the fluid. The magnitude of erosion process actually determines the timing and mass of the fluidized sands. The higher the fluid velocity and the more weakly cemented the matrix, the stronger the fluidization. Reservoir-scale sand injectite simulations reveal that poroelastic effects exert a strong control on the growth of fracture aperture. Higher permeabilities of the matrix tend to dissipate overpressures from the fractures and reduce the propagation of the injectite dykes. The increment of porosity increase is not as significant for a porous matrix as for the tight matrix condition. Moreover, the development of shear bands in the dyke zone also inhibits the growth in fracture permeability. In this work, sand fluidization initiates once the porosity increases to a critical magnitude. Since the erosion coefficient is linearly related to the magnitude of the induced plastic strain, the propensity for sand fluidization is principally within the unconsolidated sandstone formation after pressurization. If the matrix is unconsolidated with low deformation modulus, the potential for fluidization becomes more significant. Moreover, the fluidization and subsequent sand transport process prompt the development of fracture permeability by increasing either fluid density or modulus. A higher fluid modulus tends to build up greater pore pressure, to yield higher growth of aperture. This study provides an understanding of the controls on the evolution of permeability and porosity in sand intrusion reservoirs – contributing to our understanding of permeability structure that may aid in the recovery of hydrocarbons. The authors wish to confirm that there are no known conflicts of interests associated with this publication and there has been no significant financial support for this work that could have influenced its outcome. The authors would like to thank the support in using FracPaQ from Roberto Rizzo in the