Background
                  This study compared clinical and radiographic results of patients who underwent stabilization of syndesmosis with one tricortical syndesmotic screw divided into three different groups: Group A without preoperative fractured ankle computed tomography (CT) scan, Group B with preoperative fractured CT scan, and Group C with preoperative bilateral ankle CT analysis.
               
                  Methods
                  Between June 2016 and May 2017, fifty-one patients with fracture type AO/OTA 44 B and C were analyzed. Of those, 14 (27.45%) were assigned to Group A, 19 (37.25%) to Group B, and 18 (35.30%) to Group C. Clinical outcomes with AOFAS score at 3, 6 and 12 months were recorded. Seven measurements on axial CT scan images were confronted between the injured and uninjured ankle to check the accuracy of reduction.
               
                  Results
                  At three months of follow up the median AOFAS score was 70.86 ± 2.98 with no significative difference between groups (p = 0.105). At 12 months of follow up the median AOFAS score was higher in group C (93.44 ± 3.01) compared to Group B and Group C. The seven variables measured at the CT scan after syndesmotic reduction were statistically different between groups. We found a better restoration of the tibiofibular distances and the correct ankle anatomy in Group C respect to Group A and Group B.
               
                  Conclusions
                  Use of the pre-operative CT scan of the injured and uninjured ankle give to the surgeons the more and accurate information for the reduction and help him intraoperative in the correct maneuvers. The accuracy of the syndesmosis reduction determines better clinical outcomes.Ankle fractures are common, representing the 10.2% of all fractures [ The purpose of this study is to compare clinical and radiographic results after stabilization of malleolar fracture with syndesmotic disruptions treated surgically with one 3.5 mm tricortical SS. The hypothesis was that there would be a difference in the accuracy of the reduction between patients with preoperative bilateral CT scan compared to patients without preoperative CT analysis of the ankles. The study was approved by our regional ethics committee and our institutional board (N°BF23S42ID). Informed consent was obtained from all patients included in the study. Patients between 20 and 75 years of age with ankle fracture OTA/AO 44-B and 44-C [ All surgical procedures were performed by a senior orthopedic surgeon (GV) or by a resident in the final years of training (MC) under the supervision of the same senior orthopedic surgeon (GV). Open reduction and internal fixation of malleolar fractures were performed following the AO principles. The presence of a Wagstaffe [ An ankle mortise and a lateral view of both ankles were obtained at the end of the procedure to judge the quality of the restoration of anatomic landmarks respect to the uninjured side. A fully threaded, self-tapping 3.5 mm tricortical syndesmotic screw (Synthes) was used for the stabilization of the syndesmosis. A hole was drilled proximal to the ankle joint, with the foot in a neutral position and an angle around 20° posterolateral to anterolateral according to the literature [ The screws were removed between 10–12 weeks after surgery [ All groups were allowed to bear partial weight with crutches from 2 to 6 weeks after the surgery. Full weight-bearing as tolerated was allowed at 6 weeks post-op. Patients were followed clinically and radiographically at 6 weeks, 3 and 6 months and 1 year postoperatively. The main outcome measure was the American Orthopedic Foot & Ankle Society (AOFAS) ankle-hindfoot scale [ Mortise and lateral radiographs of the injured ankle were obtained before and after the surgery, at 6 weeks, at 6 months and 1 year. All patients included in the study have standardized CT scans of both ankles. The CT scans were analyzed with Horos 3.1.2 DICOM Medical Image Viewer. To identify the anatomic distal tibiofibular relationship, we evaluate a series of 7 measurements on axial CT scan images according to Nault et al. [ The CT scan slice chosen for evaluation was recorded. The mean, minimum, maximum, and SD were calculated for each parameter. Statistical analysis was performed with SPSS v25.0 (SPSS Inc., Chicago, IL, USA). The Shapiro-Wilk Test was conducted to verify the normal distribution of the data. One-way ANOVA (Analysis of Variance) was used to assess the differences between the three groups. Fisher’s Least Significant Difference (LSD) test was then executed to evaluate the differences between each group. Pearson correlation test was performed, to evaluate the association between clinical outcomes and radiological variables. The tests were two-tailed with a confidence level of 5%. Between January 2016, and May 2017, a total of 72 patients were assessed for eligibility. Among 72 patients assessed, 14 did not meet the inclusion criteria, 5 refused to participate in the study and 2 were lost in the follow-up. A total of 51 patients (70.83%) completed the one-year follow-up and were evaluated. Of those, 14 (27.45%) assigned to Group A, 19 (37.25%) to Group B, and 18 (35.30%) to Group C ( There was no significant difference between the three groups concerning to the average time of fracture union. The accuracy or restoration of the seven parameters analyzed at the CT scan of the injured ankle after syndesmotic reduction was statistically different between groups. ANOVA results are presented in At 3 months of follow up the median AOFAS score was 70.86 ± 2.98 with no significative difference between groups (p = 0.105). At 12 months of follow up the median AOFAS score was numerically higher in Group C (93.44 ± 3.01) with respect to Group B and Group A ( Two patients in Group C had a superficial infection of the wound managed with oral antibiotics. There were no cases of deep vein thrombosis, nonunion, deep infection or postoperative instability of the ankle. We registered 5 cases of broken screws: 2 in Group C, 1 in Group B and 2 in Group A. Ankle fractures with concomitant syndesmotic injury are quite common resulting from the combined action of torsional and compression forces. According to AO principles, open reduction and internal fixation (ORIF) with plate and screw is the most effective treatment for this fracture pattern [ Also, the fixation method of the syndesmosis has been analyzed and studied. Different research and systematic reviews have not shown any significant difference between the use of screws and the use of dynamic suture button. Authors conclude that high-quality randomized controlled trials with more uniformity in outcome reporting are desirable to determine the long-term effects and cost-effectiveness of the suture-button device [ Park et al. [ Our prospective, case-controlled study showed that the use of the pre-operative CT scan of the injured and uninjured ankle seems to give to the surgeon important information to the reduction and help him to choose the correct intraoperative maneuvers. There were differences between groups for all 7 parameters analyzed on the CT scan. We noticed a better restoration of the tibiofibular distances and the correct ankle anatomy in Group C compared to Group A and Group B and that determines better clinical outcomes. As a matter of fact, the median AOFAS score differed significantly between the groups from 6 months onward. At 1 year of follow up, there were 10.14 points of difference between Group A and Group C. We also found a negative correlation between mean AOFAS score at 12 months of follow-up and ΔC (mm) (R=-0.064; p = 0.0037). These findings confirm what has already been described by Ramsey et al. [ One of the limits of this study is that despite the homogeneity of the population analyzed, different variables were not evaluated: the presence of osteoporosis; grade of activity previous to the trauma; presence and type of posterior malleolus fracture and if present type of fixation (lag screws or plate) or conservative treatment of the posterior malleolus fracture. The strength of the study is its prospective, randomized design. All the patients of the 3 different Groups were followed in the same hospital by the same team of doctors. To our knowledge, this study is the first randomized controlled trial that confirms the use of pre-operative bilateral ankle CT scan as a useful protocol for ankle fracture with concomitant syndesmotic injuries. Future trials and cadaveric studies are necessary to identify the “golden rule” for the ideal angle of the syndesmotic screw placement in order to restore the correct anatomy of the joint. All authors declare no support from any organization for the submitted work; no financial relationships with any organizations that might have an interest in the submitted work in the previous three years; and no other relationships or activities that could appear to have influenced the submitted work.