The aim of this study was to develop a laser-sinterable and radiopaque glass powder as a potential sealer in endodontic therapy. The hypothesis was that it is possible to dope a SiO2-Na2O-CaO-P2O5–based glass with barium (Ba) and tantalum (Ta) in such a way that the prepared glass powder can be sintered using a dental Er:YAG laser, with different parameters at different intensities. A reference glass (G1), a barium-doped glass (G2), and a tantalum-doped glass (G3) were investigated. Their chemistry, particle size distribution, structure, radiopacity, and sintering behavior were investigated using X-ray fluorescence (XRF), laser granulometry, X-ray diffractometry (XRD), X-ray imaging, and laser scanning microscopy (LSM). Sintering behavior was statistically analyzed using the Kruskall–Wallis and post-hoc test (α = 0.05). XRF analysis revealed that all of the glasses produced were within the calculated chemistry. The laser granulometry results confirmed that all glass powders had a similar grain size distribution before sintering, and the XRD investigation showed that all glasses had a characteristic amorphous structure without noticeable devitrification. G3 exhibited the best radiopacity result in compliance with ISO 6876, with a mean value of 4.06 ± 0.10 mm aluminum equivalent. G3 also showed the best sintering behavior among all of the laser parameters tested, without any statistical differences from the reference glass G1 (P > 0.05). Particularly in view of its bonding behavior to dental hard tissues, further research on the use of G3 as an endodontic laser-sinterable sealing material can therefore be strongly recommended.Root canal filling materials are intended to provide good obturation of the root canal system without harming the surrounding hard and soft tissues, and they must simultaneously provide adequate sealing against microorganisms In order to reduce the risk of inflammation, the aim of the present study was to develop a novel glass material that can be sintered by laser and can be used as a biologically safe and durable root canal coating and filling material, overcoming the disadvantages of conventional filling materials. Permanent sealing of the inner surface of the root canal during endodontic treatment could possibly reduce inflammatory effects on the surrounding tissue of the tooth and immunological effects on the entire organism resulting from decay products of tissue residues or metabolic products of bacteria. On the basis of the well-known properties of glass materials, it may be expected that this type of compound is capable of meeting all the requirements specified for a laser-sinterable root canal sealer. For such an approach, it is necessary to evaluate not only a range of suitable materials, but also the optimal laser system. Until now, only a few studies have investigated the effects of different lasers on bioglasses and bioglass pastes. Lee et al. (2005) described the sealing of dentin tubuli using a bioglass paste, followed by subsequent laser sintering (with an Nd:YAP laser), resulting in occlusion of the dentin tubuli A specific radiopacity in the root canal filling material is mandatory in order to ensure adequate radiographic discrimination between the filling and the surrounding hard tissues; the radiopacity of a bioglass can be enhanced by using radiopaque additives such as bismuth oxide SiO Three glass mixtures were prepared from amorphous silica, soda, calcium carbonate, hydrogen phosphate, barium oxide, and tantalum pentoxide using a bench scale (GAB 12K0.1 N; Kern, Balingen-Frommern, Germany). These batch reagents were melted in high-temperature–resistant crucibles using an electrically driven high-temperature furnace (elevator furnace, 400 V, 16 A, 5.5 kW, 50/60 Hz; Thermo-Star, Aachen, Germany) set to 1350 °C with a heating rate of 5 K/min. Following isothermal treatment at this temperature for 3 h, the glasses obtained were quenched in water and subsequently dried for 12 h at 110 °C in a universal oven (UM400; Memmert, Schwabach, Germany). The nominal calculated composition and complementary X-ray fluorescence analysis results (Spectrometer PW2404 X-ray; Philips, Almelo, Netherlands) for these glasses are shown in Comparison of the XRF results with the nominal values shows negligible deviation between the calculated and XRF-verified glass composition, well within the standard errors. After production of the different glass samples, it was necessary to convert them into fine powders with a well-defined particle distribution. The glass cullets were pulverized in an agate mill (Analysette 3 Spartan Pulverisette 0; Fritsch, Idar-Oberstein, Germany) with agate balls and fractionated using several sieves sized 125 µm, 63 µm, 45 µm, and 25 μm in an ultrasonic sieve tower (Haver EML 200 Digital Plus Sieve Shaker; Haver & Boecker, Oelde, Germany). The interval setting and amplitude of the sieve tower were set to 10 and 1, respectively. For all further experiments, a special powder fraction was selected from these uniformly sieved glass powders in the tower. For all material investigations and all sample preparations, only sieved glass powders between 25 µm and 45 µm were used. The particle size distribution of all groups was characterized using laser granulometry with the assistance of ultrasound and water as a dispersing fluid (Mastersizer 2000; Malvern Panalytical, Kassel, Germany). Additionally, X-ray diffraction measurements (3rd Generation Empyrean; Malvern Panalytical, Kassel, Germany) were conducted to check for devitrification events. To investigate radiopacity, five samples from each glass powder group were compacted into pellets using a cylindrical steel mold with a diameter of 10 mm. For this purpose, 0.145 g of the glass powders was compacted using a uniaxial hydraulic press (PW, Paul-Otto Weber, Remshalden, Germany) for 15 s with a force of 10 kN to obtain 1-mm thick pellets. Using a dental X-ray device (Heliodent Plus; Dentsply Sirona, Charlotte, North Carolina, USA), three images with five samples per image and group and one image of the aluminum step wedge were taken. The exposure time was 0.12 s, with an acceleration voltage of 70 kV. The distance to the radiographic film was 38.5 mm. Using the radiographs, the gray values of the samples were matched to the corresponding gray value on the step wedge to calculate the aluminum equivalent in compliance with international standard ISO 6876:2012(E) To investigate the sintering behavior of the glasses, 15 more powdered glass samples in total from each group (G1, G2, and G3) were compacted with 0.35 g per sample and the same parameters as described in the previous section. After demolding, the densified samples were irradiated using an Er:YAG laser (LiteTouch; Light Instruments, Yokneam, Israel) with a wavelength of 2.94 µm. The particular laser chosen for this study is widely used in dentistry, and most oral soft and hard tissues (including calcium phosphate–rich materials) have a high absorption coefficient at this wavelength. All samples were positioned plane-parallel on a sample holder, and the laser beam was aligned perpendicularly to the surface of the samples. Each laser parameter was used for five irradiations within one group, so that a total of 45 irradiated areas could be evaluated. For the irradiation experiments, a handpiece with an optical fiber (1 mm in diameter) without water cooling was used. The schematic Three different sets of laser parameters (P1, P2, and P3) were chosen for the irradiation experiments in this study ( In order to investigate the dependence of the different glasses on these parameters, all groups (G1, G2, and G3) were irradiated with each laser parameter (P1, P2, and P3). Each irradiated area was analyzed using a laser-scanning microscope (VK-110; Keyence, Osaka, Japan). Evaluation of the sintered areas and sintered diameters was carried out using an associated software program (VK-Analyse Module; Keyence, Osaka, Japan) and was based on 20 randomly measured diameters of five laser-sintered samples for each group and parameter. Data for the measured diameters of the laser-sintered spots were statistically analyzed using IBM SPSS Statistics, version 24 (IBM Corporation, Armonk, New York, USA). The datasets were analyzed for normal distribution using the Shapiro–Wilk test, and as the sets were not normally distributed, they were also analyzed with the Kruskall–Wallis test and Dunn–Bonferroni test as a post-hoc test. The significance level was set at 0.05. Additional particle size measurements were performed to ensure a homogeneous size distribution among the prepared glass powders. The distributions obtained for the three powders G1, G2, and G3 are shown in Additional XRD measurements were performed in order to rule out possible devitrification of the various glass samples during the production process. An example diffraction pattern for each group is shown in To reliably classify the samples according to their radiopacity, the image taken from the aluminum step wedge was analyzed in relation to the dependence of the beam attenuation (i.e., radiopacity) on the step thickness. The results obtained, together with the derived aluminum equivalent, are shown in From purely visual inspection, it became obvious that all of the sintered spots featured glazed protective layers. In order to investigate the dependence of the sintered diameters on the intensities selected (according to the parameter sets mentioned earlier), all of the irradiated spots were evaluated using a laser-scanning microscope. This analysis revealed that the sintered areas all had a circular appearance and differed mainly in their diameter values. Using the laser-scanning microscope, all irradiated samples ( Three similarly prepared types of glass were produced using the selected chemistry and material settings described. The reference glass (G1) was compared with a barium-doped glass (G2) and a tantalum-doped glass (G3). XRF and XRD analysis showed that the composition of all the glasses produced was in accordance with the previously calculated target compositions and that the barium-doped and tantalum-doped glasses G2 and G3 did not show any signs of devitrification after quenching. Analysis of the particle size distribution after sieving validated that all of the glass powders were similar in their respective particle size distribution, with minimum values of around 0.3 µm and maximum values of approximately 100 µm. The maximum for each narrow distribution was between 20 and 40 µm, so that variance in the sintering effects in the study resulting from dissimilar powders could be excluded. With regard to the radiopacity in compliance with ISO 6876, analysis of the material absorbance showed an increase in radiopacity—or in the mean aluminum-equivalent values—from the reference group G1 (0.87 ± 0.08 mm) to a higher level in the barium-doped glass G2 (2.25 ± 0.19 mm) and with the highest value of 4.06 ± 0.10 mm in the tantalum-doped glass G3. On the basis of the international standard, only G3 showed a radiopacity equivalent greater than 3 mm, so that only the glass composition of G3 fulfilled the standard All of the laser parameters examined (P1, P2, and P3) allowed sintering of the glasses (G1, G2, and G3), and it was possible to convert the compacted powders into protective glass film layers within controllable diameters using a custom-built dental Er:YAG laser. Evaluation of the sinter diameters showed gradually increasing mean values in each group, with increasing intensity from P1 to P3 (92.86 W/cm The correct material composition and the adjustment of the material properties are as important as the right laser configurations. It should be mentioned that parameter P3 most likely produces the highest temperature increase, although temperature measurements were not part of this study. Adequate temperature control is particularly important in further research, as the surrounding tissue (such as bone and periodontal soft tissue) is very sensitive to elevated temperatures A previous study has shown that it is possible to create a chemical bond between glass powders and biological tooth samples using laser sintering Methods for permanent sealing of the inner surface of the root canal during endodontic treatment are intended to counteract inflammatory influences on the tissue surrounding the tooth and immunological effects on the entire organism through decay products of tissue residues or metabolic products of bacteria. A newly developed glass composition for this application was developed and described in the present study. Successful sintering of the radiopaque glass was demonstrated using a custom-built dental Er:YAG laser. With regard to radiopacity, the tantalum-doped glass G3 showed the best results, with a mean value of 4.06 ± 0.10 mm aluminum equivalent, and therefore complies with the ISO 6876 standard for root canal sealing materials in dentistry. With regard to laser sintering behavior, G3 also showed the highest mean values in all of the groups and all of the laser parameters investigated, whereas G2 (the barium-doped glass) showed significant differences and lower sintering diameters in comparison with the other groups. In conclusion, only the radiopaque glass G3 developed in this study showed a strong potential for application as a laser-sinterable, radiopaque root canal sealing material. Development of this material could open up a novel laser-based field in modern endodontology. Further studies are necessary in order to achieve a deeper understanding of the laser–glass interaction and of bonding to root canal dentin. This study was conducted in accordance with ethical standards. The authors declare that they have no competing interests. We are grateful Philipp Jacobs for the XRD measurements and to Jonas Hildebrand for his support in sample preparation. This study was funded with internal resources by the