In the present work, the effects of the pre-firing temperature of andalusite aggregates (5–3 mm) on the conversion of andalusite as well as the volume stability and oxidation resistance of the Al2O3–SiC–C castables were investigated. The phases of the andalusite aggregates were tested via X-ray diffraction, and their microstructures as well as those of the castables were characterized via scanning electron microscopy. The linear expansion of the castables decreased with increase in the pre-firing temperature of andalusite, as less residual andalusite in the pre-fired aggregates lowered its transformation in the castables during firing at high temperatures. Moreover, the higher amounts of SiO2-rich glass produced by andalusite pre-fired at high temperatures and secondary mullite generated between andalusite and the matrixes were both favorable to the production of castables with denser structure. This prevented the diffusion of O2 into the castables and improved their oxidation resistance.The castable linings of blast furnace iron runners are subjected to repeated changes in temperature, which cause the lining materials to shrink, crack, and even spall [ Al We recently found that the incorporation of andalusite aggregates improved the oxidation resistance of Al Furthermore, we discovered that Al The objective of the present work is to demonstrate that the pre-firing of large aggregates improves the volume stability and oxidation resistance of castables. To this end, andalusite aggregates (5–3 mm) were pre-fired for 3 h at 1300, 1400, 1500, and 1600 °C, and castables with andalusite, unfired and pre-fired at different temperatures, were investigated with a focus on their volume stability and oxidation resistance. The raw materials of the experiment were brown corundum aggregates (Al The raw materials were dry-mixed for 1 min and then wet-mixed for 3 min in a laboratory-scale mixer. The mixtures were cast into moulds with dimensions of 40 mm × 40 mm × 160 mm, or φ120 mm × 120 mm with a hole of φ50 mm × φ45 mm × 70 mm (moulds of anti-slag samples) with vibration, and cured for 24 h at 25 °C. The castable samples were then de-moulded, dried for 24 h at 110 °C, and subsequently fired for 3 h at 1450 °C. The linear change, apparent porosity, and cold modulus of rupture (CMOR) of the castables were tested according to the standards GB/T5988-2007, GB/T2997-2000, and GB/T3001-2007, respectively. The fired castables were heated to 950 °C for 30 min and subjected to air cooling for 5 min (air speed: 8870 m The static crucible method was employed in testing the slag chemical attack resistance of the castables. The slag used to prepare the anti-slag castables was supplied by Tangshan Steel Incorporation (from a 1800 m  As shown in   The microstructures of the castable samples A0 and A3, i.e., the sample with unfired andalusite and that with andalusite pre-fired at 1500 °C, respectively, are shown in      The volume stability of Al This manuscript has not been published or presented elsewhere in part or in entirety and is not under consideration by another journal. We have read and understood your journal's policies, and we believe that neither the manuscript nor the study violates any of these. There are no conflicts of interest to declare. The authors acknowledge the financial support from the