A cost-effective design of concrete elements in compliance with sustainability principles requires to accurately predict the behavior of concrete under various loading conditions. Yet to date available approaches for the prediction and evaluation of recycled aggregate concretes (RAC) under triaxial load are very scarce, which may hinder the transition of such an eco-friendly concrete from lab-based technique to widespread applications. As a first attempt to iron out this issue, this study develops some reliable and accurate analytical tools on the basis of an experimental database containing the results of 193 cylindrical peak stress under axisymmetric triaxial load, 55 cubic peak stress under true triaxial load, 76 peak strains and 61 elastic moduli of RAC retrieved from an extensive review of the literature. First, a new empirical design-oriented model is presented refining the generic form of conventional confinement models for natural aggregate concrete while considering the impacts of RCAs. Then Grey Correlation Analysis (GCA) is conducted to look into the sensitivity of the key parameters that affect the triaxial behavior of RAC. The results of the GCA indicate that the triaxial behavior of RAC mainly depends on the effective water-to-cement binder ratio, aggregate-to-cement ratio, lateral stress conditions, exposure temperature, as well as the RCA replacement ratio. Having the input parameters identified by the GCA, three robust data-mining mathematic tools, namely Multiple Nonlinear Regression (MNR), Artificial Neural Network (ANN), and hybrid Genetic Algorithm Artificial Neural Network (GA-ANN) are employed to simulate the mechanical performances of RAC under triaxial load. The results demonstrate that the developed MNR equations and the neural network models satisfactorily predict the behavior of RAC under triaxial load; among those models (including the developed design-oriented one), the ANN optimized with GA performs the best. These arguably point to the possibility of the application of those models in the design and evaluation of structural members manufactured using RAC, especially for them under complex loading scenarios.Recycled concrete aggregates (RCAs) produced by crushing old concrete from construction and demolition (C&D) wastes can be reused to replace natural aggregates (NAs) in new concrete to eliminate the environmental impacts of these C&D wastes The research outcomes from a large volume of studies published in the past three decades have demonstrated the inferior properties of RCA compared to NA, such as high water absorption capacity, brittleness of the adhesive old mortar, weak bonding between old mortar and new mortar, cracks generated during crushing process (e.g., The real mechanical state of concrete complicates the above-mentioned issues, where concrete is often subjected to multi-axial loadings when it has been structurally used. For instance, a spandrel concrete beam is expected to resist flexure and torsion simultaneously; similar examples are numerous. Undoubtedly, the combined action of forces greatly affects the structural behavior of concrete members. Hence, in order to achieve more reliable and cost-effective designs, it requires to accurately predict the mechanical performances of concrete under complex loading conditions. A few studies hitherto Based on the foregoing literature review, there are still no practical prediction methods, either in algebraic form or expressed as numerical procedures, that can be directly used to estimate the behavior of RAC under multi-axial stress states. Nevertheless, some of the existing approaches (e.g., In addition to examining the aforementioned conventional models, introducing Artificial Intelligence (AI) techniques into the problem at hand is also the objective of this study. Those techniques are mostly data-driven approaches which are capable of learning directly from experimental data, thus they have aroused significant interest in the past few years. A broad spectrum of computer-assisted intelligence methods, such as artificial neural networks, fuzzy logic, model tree algorithm, genetic algorithm, and gene expression programming, have been used to evaluate the effects of multi-parametric variables on the uniaxial behavior of RAC due to their accuracy and reliability To predict more rationally the triaxial behavior of RAC with AI techniques, a two-stage combined methodology is proposed in this research. First the grey correlation analysis (GCA) is conducted to determine the sensitivity of parameters that could affect the performances of RAC under multi-axial conditions. Subsequently, a traditional function-mining method—the second-order polynomial based Multivariable Nonlinear Regression (MNR), and two robust Artificial Neural Networks (ANN), i.e., the Back-Propagation (BP) based ANN and the newly-emerged hybrid Genetic Algorithm (GA) optimized ANN are applied to estimate the behavior of RAC under triaxial load. In the latter three models, their input parameters are exactly those identified by the previous GCA, thus avoiding any blind selection of influential factors. It is noteworthy that GCA is an attractive, powerful mathematical tool for evaluating the sensitivity of independent variables to dependent variables in term of their grey correlations; that is, GCA can be used to predict the geometric proximity between different discrete sequences within a system The methods presented in this paper are developed based on a comprehensive experimental database that is carefully assembled using a set of selection criteria. Significantly, this is the first study to propose practical yet accurate models for the evaluation of multi-axial behavior of RAC, also the first study that synthesizes the so-far experimental outcomes to reach a further understanding of RAC under triaxial stress conditions. Ultimately, the models developed in this study would redound to transferring such a green material into reliable and cost-effective applications, thus contributing to the sustainable constructions. An experimental test database was constructed based on an extensive perusal and collection of information in reference documents regarding the experimental tests of RAC under triaxial load Detailed mix proportions of concrete were provided; No pozzolanic or supplementary cementitious materials were incorporated in RAC mixes; No chemical pre-treatments to RCA were used; The compressive strength was experimentally obtained with cube specimens of an aspect ratio of 1.0 or cylindrical specimens of an aspect ratio of 2.0; By subjecting these criteria, the final test database presented in In Note that two geometry types (cylinders and cubes) were used in those tests. The aspect ratio for cubes and cylinders are 1.0 and 2.0, respectively. In addition, two different cross-sectional sizes were adopted for each geometry type: ( It should also be mentioned that, in To scrutinize the beneficial effect of lateral confinement in triaxial tests of RAC specimens, A number of empirical models for predicting the peak stress as well as the strain at the peak stress (called peak strain hereafter) of NAC under axisymmetric triaxial load (or in so-called confined state) have been proposed in the past decades. It should be highlighted that these models are all developed from regression analysis, during which the uniaxial unconfined compressive strength of concrete ( The applicability of those models listed in The limitation of accuracy with regard to those existing empirical models for the case of RAC may be explained by two factors: ( As noted from for the peak stress of RAC: for the peak strain of RAC: As can be seen from In this study, grey correlation theory was used to determine the parametric sensitivity of the behavior of RAC under triaxial load. The peak stress ( In order to reduce the numerical fluctuation, a normalization process can be conducted: The grey correlation coefficient In the GCA, grey correlation factor ( It is worth noting that the value of  Through the GCA, the lateral stress ( It is worth noting that the sensitivity effect of the ratio of smaller lateral-to-axial stress (i.e., From   From the aforementioned parametric sensitivity evaluation with GCA, it can be concluded that the behavior of RAC under triaxial load depend mainly on the exposure temperature, the magnitude of lateral stress, and the mechanical properties of RAC which are strongly correlated with its mixture proportions (i.e., effective water-to-cement binder ratio and aggregate-to-cement ratio). Those factors are then selected as the primary input parameters used for the later MNR and AI modeling. As for the RCA replacement ratio concerned, despite its less notable effect than the above-mentioned parameters, the average grey correlation factor ( Unlike the NA-based concrete, the characteristics of RCA and the critical parameters with a wide varying range in manufacturing RAC lead to a large variation and uncertainty in the prediction of the behavior of RAC under triaxial load when employing the empirical models developed for the behavior of NAC. The modified empirical model presented previously provides a good predictor to improve the accuracy of estimating the behavior of RAC under triaxial load. In order to achieve more favorable results, the Multiple Nonlinear Regression (MNR) method is utilized herein. The principle of MNR is based on the approximation theory using a second-order polynomial initially proposed by Scheffé Inspired by the biological nervous system, Artificial Neural Network (ANN) is one of the information analysis paradigms that can be utilized as powerful computational tools There are generally two phases for the construction and application of an ANN: the training phase and the testing phase. In the training phase, inputs (i.e., the training data) are fed into the network to pass through the neurons multiplied by the connection weights, generating a level of activity for each neuron. This process is advanced following a certain learning rule. After converged, the trained network can then be generalized (applied) to the testing phase. Among the wide variety of ANNs, the Back-Propagation (BP) neural network has been recognized as the commonly-used one which was initially developed in mid-1980s Generally, the BP-ANN used in this study contains five essential components: ( The transfer function As mentioned before, the incorporation of BP algorithm in the ANN modeling aims only to reduce the systematic prediction errors. BP is known as a local search approach making use of gradient descent to update the weights and biases of the ANN. However, due to the random initialization of weights and biases, the BP-ANN could be trapped in local optima and the global optimum may not be found To remedy this, several studies have proposed to combine the BP-ANN approach with the genetic algorithms (GA) to improve the convergence to global optimum Specifically, GA is gradient free global optimization and search technique inspired by the Darwin’s natural selection and evolution theory. It has the capability to find the global optima through stochastic searching in a large solution domain. The general form GA is composed of three major processes: selection, crossover, and mutation. The mathematical background of GA can be easily found from many references (e.g., In this study, GA is applied to optimize the evolution of weights and biases of the BP-ANN. The flowchart is shown in The MNR and the two neural network models (i.e., BP-ANN and GA-ANN) are all implemented on the Matlab platform Before fed into the networks, the raw data in For database partitioning, both the BP-ANN and GA-ANN models are trained using 80% of the total database, which is indiscriminately selected to avoid any bias To measure the prediction accuracy, descriptive statistics including coefficient of determination (R With the above appraisal indices, the performance of the MNR method and the two developed neural networks can be readily assessed. For the convenience of comparison, the performances of the BP-ANN and GA-ANN in terms of those indices and the other often-used statistical indicators (such as SD and COV) are summarized in For the MNR method, the proportion coefficients listed in   To sum up, the applications of the four suggested models (i.e., the empirical design-oriented model, the MNR model, the BP-ANN and GA-ANN models) on predicting the triaxial behavior of RAC should be very useful. In point of view of practitioners, the developed design-oriented models can serve as a reliable and efficient base with acceptable accuracy. The MNR model developed with a satisfactory performance is also easy-to-implement to estimate the performance of RAC under triaxial load with the presence of its mathematic forms. Nevertheless, this surely does not devalue the two neural networks developed, which can be easily realized and provide reliable alternatives that reflect complicated inter-relationships between the triaxial behavior of RAC and the important design factors. In the present investigation, based on the database constructed for the behavior of RAC under triaxial load, the performance of typical existing empirical models collected from the literature is evaluated. The undesirable accuracies of those models motivate to develop four different types of models, including the design-orient model, the MNR, the BP-ANN and the GA-ANN. Before developing new models, a grey correlation analysis is conducted, which is helpful to check the sensitivity of key parameters that affect the triaxial behavior of RAC. Based on the results presented herein, the following conclusions can be drawn: The confinement effect is beneficial to compensating the detrimental effect of incorporating RCA in new concrete. In general, with a sufficiently high lateral confining stress On average sense, the existing empirical models developed for NAC appear not applicable to the prediction of triaxial behavior of RAC, mainly due to the lack of due considerations on the special and unique characteristics of RCA in those models; An empirical design-oriented model for predicting the mechanical properties of RAC under triaxial load is developed based on fitting the test data constructed in this study; statistically, the proposed model outperforms the existing empirical models (i.e., calibrated based on the NAC experimental measurements) in predicting the peak stress and peak strain of RAC under axisymmetric triaxial load; The GCA-based evaluations demonstrate that the overall behavior of RAC under triaxial load depends greatly on the exposure temperature, the lateral stress conditions, and the concrete mixture proportions; meanwhile, the effect of RCA replacement ratio is not so remarkable when compared to the other parameters, but this factor is still suggested to be retained in predictive models for a sound and rational interpretation; Compared to the other models presented herein, the MNR model and the two neural networks (i.e., the BP-ANN and GA-ANN) developed in a cost-effective manner provide decent fitness in predicting the behavior of RAC under triaxial load, particularly on the peak stress—for the three models, the coefficient of determination range from 0.959 to 0.987, while the mean errors are very limited. Overall, the ANN model optimized with the genetic algorithms performs the best. In view of the above, it is believed that the application of the multivariable regression method and the neural networks may provide well-suited approaches in predicting the triaxial behavior of RAC. Despite the powerful prediction performance of those artificial intelligence methods exhibited in this study, those methods are acting essentially as a black box and lack of profound physical meaning while generating good outcomes. In this sense, continued efforts are needed to explain the underlying mechanisms why the uniaxial as well as multiaxial behaviors of RAC differ from those of NAC. None. The research reported in this paper was supported by 