A high yielding anodic electrodeposition of IrOx particles was conducted on Ti substrates as an electrocatalyst in brine electrolysis. The formation of a stable ligand-free IrOx.nH2O was performed by hydrolyzing IrCl3·3H2O in alkaline solution followed by acid condensation process. The conversion of hydrolyzed Ir to the IrOx.nH2O particles at different pH and aging times are evaluated by the UV–visible spectroscopy. Stable IrOx suspension was prepared at pH 11 in 10 h aging time. Potentiostatic and dynamic potential sweep methods were used for the electrodeposition of IrOx. The cyclic voltammetry analysis on the formation of IrOx indicates that an anodic potential of 0.6 V (vs. SCE) is required for IrOx deposition. The results show that the electrodeposition process based on dynamic potential sweeps enhances the yield of IrOx and the electrocatalytic activity toward the oxygen evolution. The presence of both Ir(III) and Ir(IV) which was observed using X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy confirms the reversible transition of Ir(III)/Ir(IV) occurs during the growth of IrOx on the surface.With the rapid growing consumption of the energy generated from fossil fuels, air pollution and CO Noble metal oxides such as IrO In an earlier study, Yamanaka et al. [ The preparation of a stable dispersion of IrO Literature review shows that lots of studies have been conducted on the electrodeposition of IrO In order to synthesize colloidal IrO Zeta potential and particle size distribution of the IrO The titanium substrate was etched in 15 wt% oxalic acid solution at 80 °C for 30 min until a dark brown solution appeared. The electrodeposition of iridium oxide was conducted by methods of consecutive potential cycling (50 mv s The microstructure of the coatings was examined using field emission scanning electron microscope (FESEM) (TeScan Mira III). Additionally, the composition of iridium with various valence states on the coating surface was analyzed by X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS Thermo Scientific K-Alpha x-ray photoelectron spectrometer) using Al Kα (1486.6 eV) radiation. The IrO Solutions with different concentrations of IrCl During the acidic treatment of IrO  The mechanism of IrO Surface charge of synthesized IrO Based on the results from the UV–visible experiments of the hydrolysis of IrCl The electrodeposition process based on dynamic potential sweeps depends mainly on three parameters: the upper and lower potential limits, the sweep rate, and the number of cycles [ The mechanism for electrodeposition of IrO  In Eq.  The microstructure of IrO The electrochemical behavior of the coatings was evaluated by cyclic voltammetry in 1 M H  The Tafel slopes for anodic electrodeposition of IrO Anodic electrodeposition of the IrO The anodic peak at the potential of 0.6 V (vs. SCE) can be related to the peak responsible for the IrO The authors declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this paper.