Objective
                  Long bone fractures are a common injury in the pediatric population. Differentiation between abusive, or non-accidental trauma, and accidental trauma in children remains challenging for forensic practitioners. A recent clinical-based study was able to separate pediatric abusive from accidental trauma based on femoral fracture pattern using the ratio of fracture length over bone diameter (fracture ratio), as determined from radiographic analysis of this fractured bone. The forensic literature indicates more cases of abuse in younger pediatric victims than accidental cases. While this was the case in the clinical study, the effect was not shown to be statistically significant. Furthermore, while speed of trauma was not considered in the clinical study, a laboratory study with an immature bovine model indicates rotational speed influences fracture pattern, but specimen age was not varied in that study. Therefore, the objective of the current study was to use immature porcine femora to investigate the effects of age and rate of twist on a modified version of this fracture ratio parameter.
               
                  Methods
                  Fifteen pairs of porcine femora with various ages were twisted until observable failure using a custom-built torsional fixture. The left femur of each pair was twisted to failure at a rate of 3 deg/s, while the right femur was twisted at a rate of 90 deg/s. The torque and angle of rotation were recorded at a sampling rate of 10,000 Hz. Fracture ratio was defined as total fracture length divided by bone diameter.
               
                  Results
                  Fracture ratio increased with specimen age, with specimens under the low rate of twist yielding a consistently lower fracture ratio than those from specimens under the high rate of twist. The results showed that both specimen age and rate of twist were significant factors influencing fracture ratio.
               
                  Conclusion
                  The determination of abusive from accidental trauma in criminal cases, based on the pattern of long bone fracture alone, may need to include additional data on the specific age of the pediatric victim and the potential speed of the traumatic event.Femoral fractures are the second most common long bone injury in child abuse cases, Forensic anthropologists and biomechanists are often brought into these cases to comment on whether skeletal fractures are due to an abusive act or accidental trauma. This is problematic as both situations can generate spiral fractures of bone. Recently, however, a clinically-based study suggests a method to separate abusive from accidental trauma based on the pattern of long bone fracture. Due to the current lack of infant and child cadavers for controlled biomechanical experiments, investigators have used surrogate animal models in numerous studies. As an example, Pearce et al. Fifteen pairs of porcine femora, from animals aged 1–26 days and died of natural causes, were collected from a local farm and frozen within 12 h of death at −20 °C. An approved exemption was obtained from the Institutional Animal Care and Use Committee (IACUC) for the current study. Prior to testing, the specimens were thawed at ambient temperature for 24 h. The femora were then extracted, cleaned of soft tissue and immediately wrapped in a gauze-soaked phosphate-buffered saline (PBS). Each specimen was inserted into a custom-built, laser alignment fixture ( Each specimen was twisted until observable failure in a servo-controlled hydraulic testing machine (Instron Corporation; Norwood, MA), using a custom-built torsional fixture in which the linear actuator was attached to a rack and pinion assembly to provide controlled twisting of the specimens. In preliminary tests it was decided to maintain an average gauge or test length of three times the smallest mid-shaft bone diameter for each specimen. The test length was selected to provide the maximally exposed cortical bone length, retaining a sufficient length of potting to secure the specimen in the test fixture and consume the growth plates to prevent premature failure, as shown in Pierce et al. In preliminary tests it was discovered that more aged specimens often showed a longitudinal component in the fracture pattern, aside from that shown during complete or final separation of the bone ends during torsional loading, as noted by Porta. From the youngest to oldest specimen the total bone length increased from approximately 20 to 60 mm, and the bone diameter increased from approximately 6 to 9 mm. Spiral fractures were observed in all specimens. Fracture comminution was observed in some of the higher rate of twist experiments. It was noted that the fracture ratio increased with specimen age, in both the AP and ML planes, with specimens under the low rate of twist yielding a consistently lower fracture ratio than those from specimens under the high rate of twist ( Inspection of the fracture segments in AP views of the bone at the low testing rate indicated no observable segment 2 (longitudinal component in A previous study suggested a good correlation in bending rigidity of bone samples between days of porcine age and months of human age. A recent clinical-based study suggested that cases of abusive and accidental trauma involving pediatric femoral bone fractures could be differentiated by the patterns of helical fracture. While the results of the current study confirmed the effects of age and rate of twist on torsional fracture of the femur, the data were difficult to directly compare with those from the studies of Murphy et al. Torsional fracture of the long bones is suggested to be due to a combination of tensile and shear failure. In summary, the current study suggests that the determination of abusive from accidental trauma in criminal cases, based on the pattern of long bone fracture alone, may need to include additional data on the specific age of the pediatric victim and the potential speed of the traumatic event. These parameters, as well as gathering additional testimony concerning potential mechanisms of injury, studying familial history and assessing the time to report the injury, will all play a role in this difficult task facing the forensic anthropologist and biomechanist. The authors thank Mr. Clifford Beckett for technical assistance. The following is the supplementary data to this article: Supplementary data to this article can be found online at