The precise study of adsorption mechanisms at solid–liquid interfaces requires a good analysis of the surface heterogeneity of the studied solids. For that purpose, molecular probe technique is one of the most powerful, especially at solid–gas interfaces. Indeed, low-pressure gas adsorption coupled to modelling of derivative adsorption isotherms as a function of logarithm of pressure allows to study qualitatively and quantitatively the effect of surface heterogeneity on the energy distribution of adsorption centres. The present review points out the interests of that approach to determine the shape of particles, the presence of high-energy adsorption sites and the surface polarity. Results comparing adsorption at solid–gas and solid–liquid interfaces are also mentioned. 
                        To cite this article: F. Villiéras et al., C. R. Geoscience 334 (2002) 597–609.L'analyse précise des mécanismes d'adsorption à l'interface solide–liquide doit nécessairement prendre en compte l'hétérogénéité superficielle des minéraux. Dans le cas de solides divisés, l'approche la plus adaptée consiste à étudier les conditions d'adsorption de molécules sondes dans le domaine énergétique relatif au dépôt de la première couche. Actuellement, les approches basées sur l'adsorption des gaz apparaissent comme étant les plus performantes, car elles peuvent donner accès à des spectres continus des énergies d'adsorption. Pour un gaz donné, ces spectres peuvent être alors considérés comme étant spécifiques aux solides. Ainsi, l'utilisation de molécules sondes présentant des propriétés différentes permet de mettre en évidence des propriétés spécifiques des sites superficiels. Cet article a pour objectif de faire une synthèse des principaux résultats obtenus à partir d'une technique d'adsorption très basse pression, récemment développée au laboratoire « Environnement et minéralurgie ». Une brève description des techniques expérimentales et des méthodes de modélisation associées sera ainsi suivie de l'application à l'étude de la morphologie des solides divisés, l'analyse des sites de forte énergie et des propriétés de mouillabilité. Enfin, l'intérêt de cette approche relativement à l'étude de l'adsorption à l'interface solide–liquide sera illustré par deux exemples. Le développement récent de capteurs de haute précision et de techniques à introduction continue des molécules sondes a permis d'augmenter considérablement la résolution dans le domaine relatif à l'adsorption de la première couche de gaz. Ces techniques peuvent être divisées en deux groupes : les méthodes basées sur la désorption de molécules sondes, telles que la chromatographie gazeuse inverse à dilution finie les méthodes basées sur l'adsorption de molécules sondes par volumétrie basse pression de quasi-équilibre La volumétrie de quasi-équilibre très basse pression permet d'acquérir, par voie informatique, un très grand nombre de points expérimentaux, si bien qu'il est possible de travailler à partir de la dérivée de l'isotherme par rapport au logarithme de la pression relative La détermination de la forme moyenne des solides cristallins est très importante dans de nombreux domaines. En effet, selon la nature des faces exprimées, les mécanismes et les cinétiques de sorption L'utilisation des isothermes d'adsorption d'argon pour déterminer la lamellarité des kaolinites a été largement discutée Les sites de forte énergie présents à la surface des minéraux peuvent avoir une influence non négligeable sur l'adsorption d'éléments en trace, être le siège de réactions catalytiques... Ainsi, leur quantification et leur localisation peuvent s'avérer importantes dans la compréhension des mécanismes correspondants. Dans certains cas, tels que celui du talc ( De plus, d'autres sites de forte énergie sont souvent mis en évidence avec l'azote et résultent d'interactions spécifiques entre l'azote (molécule polarisable) et des sites polaires superficiels. Pour les phyllosilicates chargés, leur distribution est fonction de la nature du cation compensateur Les résultats présentés ci-dessus montrent que la comparaison entre azote et argon donne accès à des informations sur le caractère polaire–non polaire de la surface. Ces informations sont particulièrement importantes lorsqu'il s'agit d'évaluer la balance hydrophile/lipophile des solides, en relation avec leurs propriétés de mouillabilité, de capillarité, d'adhésion et d'agrégation. Ces aspects concernent les sols, la répartition et la rétention des fluides dans les roches réservoir de pétrole, l'altération des roches et des pierres de taille, l'adsorption des tensioactifs et autres molécules organiques Du fait de la spécificité de chaque couple adsorbat–adsorbant, la comparaison entre adsorption aux interfaces solide–gaz et solide–liquide et n'est pas évidente. Des relations directes ont cependant pu être obtenues pour certains cas favorables, tels que ceux de l'adsorption des chlorures d'alkylamine sur les kaolinites L'étude de l'hétérogénéité à l'interface solide–gaz peut aussi s'avérer utile pour suivre les modifications superficielles des solides modifiés à l'interface solide–liquide. Ainsi, la L'acquisition d'isothermes précises depuis les très basses pressions, couplée à la modélisation des isothermes dérivées, donne ainsi accès à de nombreuses informations sur les propriétés énergétiques superficielles. Cette approche est actuellement en cours de développement pour d'autres sondes que l'azote et l'argon, à l'interface solide–gaz comme à l'interface solide–liquide L'approche développée ici trouve ainsi de nombreuses applications lorsqu'il s'agit de comprendre et de modéliser les phénomènes naturels aux interfaces, tels que l'oxydation catalytique des gaz à effets de serre dans la haute atmosphère par les aérosols et les cendres volcaniques, la dissolution/précipitation dans les sols et les sédiments, les échanges aux interfaces solides–liquides, la bioadhésion. L'analyse fine des propriétés superficielles est aussi très importante pour modéliser et prédire le comportement des minéraux et autres solides divisés, poreux ou non, lors d'opérations de broyage et de séparation (minéralurgie, remédiation de sols pollués) ou à fin d'utilisation dans les barrières géochimiques, dans les matériaux composites, en catalyse hétérogène, en traitement des eaux... The fact that the actually existing surfaces are energetically heterogeneous is now generally recognised by the scientists investigating adsorption at the solid–gas and solid–solution interfaces. This surface heterogeneity is a fundamental feature of real solid surfaces. It can be due to different crystal faces, local crystalline disorder, or the presence of impurities. It may also have its source in the presence of pores of various sizes and shapes. A large variety of experimental methods has been developed for studying more or less directly the structure of solid surfaces. In the case of clay minerals, optic and electronic microscopies provide proofs of their macroscopic heterogeneity. However, all these methods yield only auxiliary information. In this respect, essential information about surface heterogeneity can be obtained by applying methods commonly referred to as ‘molecular probe methods’. A molecular probe method is simply a theoretical/numerical analysis of a certain adsorption quantity (characteristic) measured in the course of adsorption of a chosen adsorbate. The surface energetic heterogeneity is usually considered as a dispersion of the number of the local adsorbate–solid potential minima, called ‘adsorption sites’ among the value of the adsorbate–solid potential at these minima, taken with a reverse sign, and called ‘adsorption energy’. The majority of the methods designed to study surface heterogeneity is based on the assumption that the spectrum of adsorption energies in a given probe/solid system is sufficiently dense to be represented by a continuous function One essential question concerns the nature of surface heterogeneity with respect to a given adsorbate molecule. Indeed, surface heterogeneity cannot be considered as an absolute feature as it is related to a given adsorption system, i.e., a given adsorbent–adsorbate system. Therefore, the nature of surface heterogeneity must always be related to the type of adsorbed molecules, i.e., to the subsequent normal adsorbate–adsorbent interactions. Different probes can then advantageously be used to reveal the specific properties of adsorption sites. This review will show the usefulness of surface heterogeneity assessment for the study of adsorption phenomena at the solid–liquid interface. It is mainly based on adsorption data obtained at solid–gas interface by the use a of low-pressure quasi-equilibrium technique coupled to a specifically developed data analysis procedure. Results obtained on the geometrical properties of platy minerals, the determination of high-energy adsorption sites and wetting properties will then be discussed and followed by examples of relationships between solid–gas and solid–liquid adsorption on heterogeneous surfaces. Two main groups of techniques based on solid–gas interactions can be used to obtain precise information on energetic heterogeneity of solid surfaces: methods based on desorption phenomena such as inverse gas chromatography methods based on quasi-equilibrium adsorption technique LTAM has rapidly proven is usefulness for the analysis of textural heterogeneity of clay minerals, to determine basal and lateral surface areas The experimental procedure has been discussed in many papers The surface of minerals can be divided into In the case of the Langmuir–Temkin equation, the three parameters can easily be derived by considering the first and second derivatives A typical example of DIS modelling is given in The concept of derivative of adsorption can then be used to get quick and reliable results on energetic heterogeneity, which can also be used to assess geometric properties of phyllosilicates and other finely divided solids. The mechanisms of sorption, of dissolution/precipitation, of crystal growth The reliability of the quantitative results can be checked against electronic microscopy In conclusion, at the moment, the DIS method seems to yield the most accurate determination of the flakiness ratio of platy materials. Encouraging results have also been obtained for goethite High-energy adsorption sites on mineral surfaces play a very important role as they can share strong interactions at very low gas pressure or chemical concentrations in liquid media. For instance, it is well admitted that, in case of high-energy interactions between solid surfaces and surfactants, the surface properties of the solid phase can be modified far bellow three-dimensional condensation concentration At solid–gas interface, two types of high-energy adsorption sites can be observed: sites evidenced using different probes, such as argon and nitrogen and sites revealed by nitrogen only. The origin of the first ones is mostly structural. They are observed for instance in phyllosilicates and layer silica, such as magadiite and kenyaite. The second ones mainly arise from specific interactions between surface sites and nitrogen. Such sites were evidenced for the first time in the case of talc It can be noticed that, for most of phyllosilicates, these structural adsorption sites are always present and detected by nitrogen Additional high-energy adsorption sites have also been observed for argon when the surface charge of layer silicates is compensated with divalent cations Specific adsorption of nitrogen can be observed for many minerals such as apatite For calcite (see The results presented in the previous section show that comparison between nitrogen and argon adsorption isotherms gives access to information on polar/non-polar properties of solid surfaces. Such information is particularly worthwhile to evaluate hydrophile/lipophile properties of solids as these properties govern wetting, capillary invasion, adhesion, and aggregation phenomena. The hydrophile/lipophile balance of solid surfaces concerns then many fields in earth science: water interactions in soils, oil-brine distribution in porous rocks, surface alteration and protection of historic buildings, surfactant and other organic pollutant adsorption and transport in soils, sediments and rivers In principle, the distributions of adsorption energies allow to calculate the surface free energy of the solid surfaces. In reality, such assignment was not achieved yet, due to difficulty in determining precisely the exact correspondence between adsorption energy and crystallographic faces, and in defining the exact organisation of the adsorbed film. Indeed, this organisation depends on distances between adsorbing centres acting on the density of the adsorbed phase and, as a consequence, on the intensity of lateral interactions. On real surfaces, atomic organisation, and then distances between adsorption centres, can differ considerably from theoretical atomic organisation on cleavage planes. Thus, adsorption energies deduced from molecular dynamic and Monte Carlo simulation are generally far from reality The previous section has shown that very different adsorption energy distributions can be obtained when apolar (argon) and polar (nitrogen) probes are used. Therefore, the comparison between argon and nitrogen adsorption energy distributions should bring valuable information on apolar/polar properties of powders. For this purpose, the adsorption energy distributions of the first monolayer were plotted as a function of ln on apolar surfaces, argon and nitrogen adsorb through low energy interactions with surface adsorption sites, as derived from Lennard–Jones interaction potentials; as these potentials are similar for both probes when polar adsorption sites are present on the surface, argon adsorbs through apolar interactions, as derived from Lennard–Jones interaction potentials, whereas additional and specific interactions exist between polar sites and nitrogen; on a given surface, nitrogen molecules then first adsorb on polar surface sites at higher energy than on apolar ones; these first adsorbed molecules will then participate to the adsorption on apolar sites through cooperative effects generated by attractive nitrogen–nitrogen interactions ( The comparison between argon and nitrogen adsorption energy distributions derived from low-pressure adsorption experiments then appears as a reliable diagnosis to assess the polar–apolar nature of a mineral surface. In addition, the extent of the difference in position between argon and nitrogen adsorption peaks is an indicator of the magnitude of surface polarity. Although adsorption behaviours depend on adsorbate–adsorbent couples, the information derived from low-pressure gas adsorption could be used to predict or to interpret adsorption phenomena at solid–liquid interface. The case of non-polar molecules adsorption in microporous solids has already been extensively discussed In a recent work of Chamerois As a conclusion, the analysis of modified carbonate samples by using low-pressure gas adsorption coupled to DIS modelling appears as a complementary tool to study complex adsorption mechanisms on a heterogeneous surface at solid–liquid interface. This review shows that the precise determination of low-pressure adsorption isotherms at solid–gas interface can be very powerful to analyse surface properties of solid surfaces. By using argon as a probe, such isotherms allow to go deeper in the geometrical description of particles, as the conventional BET specific surface area can be fractionated according to the distribution of crystallographic faces. The same approach can also be used to analyse the pore size distribution and adsorption phenomena for microporous samples This approach can be used in many fields to understand interfacial phenomena on heterogeneous solid surfaces: chemical exchange, dissolution/precipitation, and crystal growth at solid–liquid interfaces in rivers, soils, sedimentary rocks, oil reservoirs; distribution of fluids in porous materials such as reservoir rocks and soils; gas adsorption and catalytic phenomena on atmospheric aerosols and volcanic ashes. Knowledge on surface heterogeneity of minerals is also useful for many applied problems concerning the design of geochemical barriers for organic and radioactive wastes; the optimisation of grinding and flotation in mineral processing; the design of mineral fillers in material science; the design of adsorbents or catalysts for gas and water treatment...