This chapter discusses research that has contributed to improved understanding of pulverised fuel technology. The processes studied are the grinding of pulverised fuel (PF) in power station pulverisers, coal combustion and the deposition of ash in boiler furnaces. All of these issues impact significantly on the utilisation of coal in power plants in terms of operating and maintenance costs, plant down-time and availability. These issues have been researched by ‘The Community of Practice for Coal Utilisation’, led by the authors, and represent a significant contribution to an understanding of these issues.Modern coal-fired central generating plants make use of a Pulverised Fuel (PF) firing system. This technology is by far the most common for burning coal on a large-scale basis and has been around for about 70 years. Boilers up over 1200 MWe have been built, burning something like 400–500 tonne per hour of coal. A PF-fired boiler is simply a big kettle that produces large quantities of superheated steam. Although the technology is very mature, we still have difficulty designing these kettles to operate without any problems. This is generally due to our ignorance of the processes that we are designing to exploit. The pulverising process is carried out on an on-demand basis by devices called pulverisers (or mills), which are the key element of the PF system. The purpose of the pulverisers is the size reduction of incoming coal from a typical top size of between 50 and 75  Coal goes through a number of processes to achieve complete combustion, including: Release and combustion of volatile matter; Combustion of the residual char; Release of mineral matter. These processes are extremely fast and are over in a matter of milliseconds for average-sized particles, although complete combustion may take seconds for particles at the top end of the range of PF (> So why do we worry about combustion efficiency? In many parts of the world, fly ash can be disposed of to the cement industry, provided the carbon-in-ash value is nominally below 3–5%. This sale constitutes a byproduct sale and can be taken into account in the economics of electricity supply. In some countries which have limited facilities for disposal of ash, Japan for example, the price paid by the cement plant for the ash can be very low, while the cost of disposing of the ash by other means can be very high. This means there is a very real cost incentive to ensure that grinding and combustion in the boiler are as efficient as possible that the ash can be disposed of to the cement industry. Modern coal fired generating plants make use of a PF firing system. The pulverising (comminution) process is carried out on an on-demand basis by devices called pulverisers (or mills). The key element of the pulverised fuel system is the coal pulveriser (mill).The purpose of the pulverisers is the comminution (size reduction) of incoming coal from a typical top size of between 50 and 75 Coal is pulverised (milled or ground) in power plants utilising a number of different mill design types. These include: High speed impact and attrition mills such as beater wheel mills; Medium speed vertical spindle mills such as ball and race mills (compression); Low speed ‘tumbling’ mills such as tube and ball mills. The selection of coals mills for power station applications is dependent on a number of process issues such as coal grindability (usually given as Hardgrove Grindability Index (HGI) or Bond Index), coal moisture, feed size, Abrasion Index, coal rank (lignite mills, for example, tend to be of very specific design) as well as some practical considerations such as plant layout, available floor space (mill footprint), duty cycle of the plant, etc. A wide array of individual designs available in the market. Many boiler manufacturers have their own in-house mill designs or mills can be purchased from specialist mill manufacturers. Generally, for power station applications one of three broad types of mill are encountered. These are set out in The least common type is the attrition/impact type mill. These are high speed mills that have low residence time and can respond quickly to changes in boiler load. They have a small footprint; however, they have high power consumption, high wear rates and are intolerant of tramp material. The second group are the ball/tube type mills. These are less popular in new power station designs as they have very high power consumption and have a very large footprint. This type of mill is slow to respond to changes in boiler load. While they are moisture sensitive, they can cope with a wide array of coal properties and are fairly robust in the material that they can handle. A major advantage of these mills is their low maintenance cost. The third major mill type is the group generally known as Vertical Spindle Mills (VSM) or sometimes Vertical Roller Mills. There is a growing array of mills within this type. Generally, they have very good power to output ratios; they have small footprints and can accommodate a wide variety of coals. The inclusion within the mill body of a classification mechanism makes for a compact item of plant. Wear rates with abrasive coals can be an issue but can be alleviated through the selection of appropriate wear materials. The VSM mill type is clearly the largest group of mills found in power stations and mills of this type have come to dominate new power station designs. Most milling operations focus on four mechanisms that occur in a coal mill system: Comminution (size reduction); Drying; Transport of material; Classification. Failure to understand all four and their inter-relationship is most often the source of poor mill performance. In considering the subject of comminution, it can be considered to have two facets:  How the material being reduced in size behaves in terms of breakage characteristics such as strength and resulting broken size and shape. This relates to how the material responds to the application of breakage energy and force in terms of rate and orientation of application. The analysis of individual mill design and operation is complex; so, for simplicity we will consider a typical mill layout for one mill type only. As VSMs have come to represent the bulk of the power station mill fleet, the explanation of mill operations will be based on this mill type. In coal milling for power stations, a ‘closed-loop’ process is used in which the rejects from the classifier are returned to the mill for regrinding. In The raw (coal) feed enters the mill through a central delivery pipe and falls under gravity onto the Grinding Table; The coal is ground between the rotating Grinding Table and the Rollers. (Refer The ground coal is picked up by an air stream entering the mill through a Port Ring on the periphery of the Grinding Table; Air entering through the Port Ring creates a fluidising zone in which ‘heavy material’ (Mill Rejects) such as rock falls through the Port Ring into the Air Plenum below the Grinding Table and is ejected from the Mill through the Mill Reject System; Drying of the coal occurs through contact with the heated air (and surfaces) within the mill; From the fluidising zone the ground coal is lifted up inside the Mill Body. Larger particles of coal reach a terminal velocity at which gravity will pull them back on to the Grinding Table for regrinding (Elutriation);  Within the Classifier, oversized coal particles are separated from the Product (P) coal (PF) ( The PF exits the mill and is transported to the Burners in the Boiler; The Classifier Rejects (R) are returned to the Grinding Table for regrinding. A particle is given structure by attractive forces within the particle. The action of applying force to particles of any material in order to reduce their size is an attempt to overcome those forces. The processes of size reduction (comminution) are complex and usually involve the following factors: The existence of stresses, cracks and other faults within the particles; The strength of the material, its elasticity and its tendency to split or crack; The stress/strain that the particles may have been exposed to over time; The particle size distribution that makes up the feed and the resultant particle size distribution after breakage; The shape of the feed particles and the shape of the product particles; The method and rate with which the breakage energy (force) is applied; The moisture content of the material.  Elastic deformation of particles before actual fracture occurs; Inelastic particle deformation that actually results in breakage; Elastic deformation of the actual mill and its associated equipment; Inter-particle friction; Friction between particles and the mill surfaces; Friction of the moving mill parts; Inertia of particles and the moving machine parts; Noise, heat and vibration; Effort required to actually impart energy. In coal milling, the reality is that this breakage is not a single-stage process (such as crushing) but, rather, a given feed particle may go through a number of stages of size reduction (or breakage). This is further complicated by downstream closed-loop classification and rejects’ re-introduction into the feed stream. However, many issues that arise with milling coals require a deeper level of understanding of the mechanisms of comminution as it relates to coal. Matters such as: What type and size of milling plant is best suited to a particular coal? How much energy will be needed to mill that coal? What quality of mill product can be expected? Solve particular mill performance issues; The effects of variation within a coal on milling. Two of the key foundations needed for developing an understanding of breakage are: What are the products of a breakage event? What energy is required for breakage? An approach to understanding the products of the comminution process is to consider the resultant particle size distribution that results from the breakage of a known feed. This has been typically based upon what might be described as a multi-parameter statistical analysis of what results from a single breakage A specific rate of breakage; A breakage distribution function ( In practice, the feed is of course not a single particle or a collection of like- sized particles. In fact, the feed will typically be a mixture of particle sizes. So, for ‘real feeds’, consideration must be given to what happens to each size grade through the breakage process. However, in order to arrive at a model for the breakage process given a real feed, there are two assumptions that need to be made: The size distribution in the output (product) from the comminution process from a narrow size range of feed is unaffected by the presence of the products from other size ranges of feed provided the total load on the mill remains constant. This means that the selection and breakage functions remain constant; The efficiency of the separating process remains constant for a given size range and is independent of the rate at which material in that size range is fed to the equipment and of the presence of particles in other size ranges.  In considering the breakage of a single homogeneous particle (refer The fracture of a particle is dependent upon the comminution mechanism, the rate of applied force and material properties such as hardness, toughness and stiffness. The pre-existence of cracks, shear planes or faults arising from discontinuities within the material also adds to the ease or difficulty of comminution. The structure of coal is a function of the bonds holding it together. Comminution processes are aimed at breaking the bonds by stretching or shearing caused by applied stress. Comminution mechanisms such as attrition in fact involve shear. The development of applied stress and its associated strain within a particle is through the application of tensile or compressive loading, or by bending, or shear and torsion as shown (refer  In considering effect of cracks on material strength, it has been shown that the increase in stress for a given crack of length L is L/2 when the crack is perpendicular to the direction of load (refer As particle size reduces, it becomes more difficult to break the smaller particles. The effect of higher specific fracture energy required for smaller particles is related, in the main, to the distribution of minute flaws (cracks) within the material. The smaller the particle, the less potential there is for flaws to occur. In addition, the smaller the particle, the more difficult it is to apply the energy for grinding. For example, if the impact comminution mechanism is considered, the smaller particles have less inertia (due to smaller mass) and thus less resistance to change in direction as a result of an impact and lower internal stress is created within the particle ( The particle size at which a material’s rate of breakage declines is referred to as the ‘end point’ or ‘fatal size’ distribution. The amount of energy required While the multi-parameter statistical analysis approach to the results from a single breakage event has been a long accepted means of illustrating the effect of comminution, much work has gone into reducing such complex approaches to one parameter method which results in a series of size distribution curves ( A methodology of relating comminution product size distributions to comminution energy uses size distribution parameters referred to as ‘ The In studying the products that can occur from a breakage event, To illustrate this, consider a breakage event that results in 10% (accumulative) of the product from the event passing 1/10 ( The same analysis can be repeated for a breakage event that results in 20% (accumulative) and 30% (accumulative) of the product from the event passing 1/10 (r The critical step for those using this approach to address milling issues is the relationship of the energy required to achieve the product distribution. Thus, the degree of breakage as represented by An example of the ‘ The figure shows the combined results for both Coal ‘A’ and Coal ‘B’ for three single particle test sizes (− 1. A consistent set of relationships exist with decreasing slopes for each of these lines; At a particular level of input energy, the size distribution resulting from the breakage of a coal particle can be represented by a one parameter family of curves.  In summary, understanding of breakage theory can assist in understanding that: Any particle of feed material will undergo a number of breakage events before reaching the desired size; Each breakage event produces a range of ‘daughter’ products; The energy required to achieve a particular size distribution is specific to a particular coal; The effective removal of difficult-to-break small products from the grinding zone is important. A significant number of low Hardgrove Grindability Index (HGI) coal deposits exist around the world in locations as diverse as Kentucky, USA, Barakar Coal Formation in India, Kharkhiraa Coal Basin in Mongolia ( Coal is far from homogeneous and thus comminution becomes far more complex than the previous discussion might suggest. Coal is a heterogeneous material (an object or system consisting of multiple items having a large number of structural variations) as opposed to a homogeneous material such as quartz. Thus, breakage of coal has a level of complexity beyond many studies of breakage mechanisms based upon materials such as quartz. In attempting to understand the comminution of coal, it is necessary to explore the ‘construction’ of this material in terms of what makes it up and how those constituents behave. The field of Coal Petrology can help to shed light on this phenomenon ( Coal is fundamentally composed of the fossilised remains of plant debris which has undergone progressive physical and chemical alteration through geological time. Mixed with the organic matter are rocks and minerals of various physical properties and chemical compositions. Mineral species can include clays, with carbonates, sulphides, quartz, glauconite. The mineral matter in coal occurs in two basic ways: 1. Intrinsic inorganic matter which comes from the original living plants that make up the bulk of the coal. 2. Extrinsic or introduced mineral matter.  Physical and chemical properties of the constituents of coal combined to contribute to the properties of the coal seams that make up a coal deposit; The original organic constituents that make up the coal play an important role in the behaviour of the coal required to be processed. Most of the important properties of coal can be directly correlated to the microscopic constituents of the coal. At this level, coal is composed of various constituents called Macerals (or Maceral Groups). Macerals are arranged in various ways called Microlithotypes. Mineral matter is also present in coal and this also becomes evident at the microscopic level. The breakage characteristics of Maceral Groups can be summarised as follows:    A summary of the effects of macerals is given in Low Hardgrove Grindability Index (HGI) coals, such as those in the Surat Basin, Queensland, Australia, exhibit difficult grinding characteristics. This is due not only to the rank of the coal but also its type. They contain layers of liptinite, often termed ‘suberinite’, embedded in the vitrinite base. The vitrinite is brittle and the liptinite is tough, strengthening the matrix, similar The photomicrographs in The parent coal (left) consists of an abundance of vitrinite, shown as the light grey areas. This has layers of liptinite woven through it, shown as the darker grey bands. The white parts are the inertinite macerals. Note the large rounded resin body in the lower right of this field of view. The < Many combinations of the various macerals occur to produce a complex range of particles that can be observed in the ground coal, as illustrated in On the left is a particle, mainly of vitrinite with liptinite (cutinite) layered within its structure. The particle on the right is a complex grain of inertinite (fusinite) with some low reflecting vitrinite woven through it.  There is a small enhancement of vitrinite and liptinite in the + Because combustion reactivity is related to maceral composition as well as particle size, coals rich in reactive components – for example, vitrinite or liptinite – may not have to be ground to the same fineness as coals with less reactive inertinite macerals and mineral matter. Abundant mineral matter At a practical ‘field’ level, much work has been undertaken in Australia in exploring how low Hardgrove Grindability Index (HGI) coals may be ground in existing milling plant. By definition lower HGI coals require more ‘effort’ to process through the size reduction process. Experience has shown that with low HGI coals (down to 29 HGI), when the mill approaches approximately 60% throughput capacity (mass), the mill experiences a number of constraints, which are consistent with both the literature and OEM data: The mill vibrates significantly; Mill power consumption approaches maximum; Mill performance (throughput and cut size) is difficult to maintain. These results are consistent with attempting to process a material that is more resistant to grinding. In general, such a material will require more power for a given size reduction and will be resident in the mill for longer, given the need for an increased number of cycles for a given size reduction. This second point will be reflected in longer residence in the grinding bed, along with higher circulating loads returning via both the elutriation process and classification process. Most coal mills are designed around achieving 100% throughput at 50 to 52 HGI and grinding low HGI coals can lead to problems with regard to their capacity to deliver suitable PF to maintain full boiler output.  The OEM data for the ‘E’ mills does not give consideration to HGI values below 45, but estimated output at HGI 45 is 90% of mill rated capacity. This issue can be overcome by either increasing power or reducing particle fineness. Both of these options have ramifications; in the case of increased power the result would be increased capital (and infrastructure) for new motors, which in turn may have issues for plant life in terms of such things as gearbox load. For an increase in fineness, there are combustion and heat transfer issues along with changes in such downstream issues as carbon in ash. For coals below HGI 45, the reference data is also consistent with what has been learnt from test programs. That is, for HGI values in the 30–35 range, mill outputs of 60–70% are theoretically achievable (at what cost to life of the plant is again an issue). Critical factors in achieving the satisfactory milling of low HGI coals, in VSM types in particular, are: Mill speed; Mill power; Transport air efficiency and consistency within the mill; Reduced circulating load through both improved elutriation and classification; Improved grinding bed structure through a reduction of fine particles returning to the bed (improved classification). In Australia, experience has also been gained in milling low HGI coals in other VSM types such as the Foster Wheeler MBF VSM, CE Raymond Shallow Bowl VSM, Babcock MPS VSM, Ball/Tube Mills and in Riley Power Attrita type Impact/Attrition Mills. When considering the utilisation of low Hardgrove Grindability Index (HGI) coals, the Australian experience highlights two factors: The Pulverised Fuel (PF) specification (typically 70% passing 75 ^m) needs to be examined in terms of the satisfactory combustion of the particular coal. That is, a course grind can be tolerated if the coal in question has a higher reactivity and the resulting combustion is satisfactory. Many existing mills operating in power plants have not been optimised in terms of either design or operation. It has been the Australian Coal goes through a number of processes to achieve complete combustion, as illustrated in Release and combustion of volatile matter; Combustion of the residual char; Release of mineral matter. As a coal particle is heated, the volatile matter in the coal is liberated, as the bonds between the coal molecules are broken, and the coal decomposes. The gaseous volatiles contain a variety of gases including CO The rate at which the volatiles are released, and the amount and composition of the volatile matter depends on: The rate at which the coal is heated; The final temperature to which the coal is heated; The nature of the coal (chemical composition, rank, etc.). An indication of the amount of volatile material released can be obtained from the proximate volatile determination. However, this test is carried  The amount of volatile matter released under PF combustion conditions can be significantly higher than the volatile yield as determined by the Proximate Analysis of coal. The composition of the volatiles is affected by the heating conditions, as well as the rank of the coal, as illustrated in At the temperature range up to 1000 Rank also affects the heating value of the volatiles, as illustrated in Following devolatilisation, a solid char particle remains which reacts with the oxygen on its surface. Char combustion is a much slower process than devolatilisation and it determines the time for complete combustion, this being the number of seconds in a PF-fired boiler. The rate at which the char reacts with oxygen is dependent on the following factors:     The process of combustion of the solid char is illustrated in The products of the combustion reaction between the char and oxygen may be either CO or CO There are two competing and limiting processes that determine the rate at which the char burns: The rate at which oxygen can diffuse to the char surface (diffusion control); The rate at which carbon at the char surface can chemically react with oxygen (chemical control);  Combustion takes place in three regimes. In Regime I, at low temperature, the chemical reaction rate is slow compared with the rate of diffusion of oxygen to the particle surface. In this case, the partial pressure of oxygen at the particle surface is very close to that in the free stream ( As the temperature is increased, the chemical reaction becomes sufficiently rapid for the diffusion of oxygen to the particle surface and through the pores to exert a notable rate-limiting effect. Under these conditions, the combined processes of diffusion and chemical reaction are the Further increases in temperature eventually cause the chemical reactions to become so rapid that the oxygen is consumed as it reaches the outer surface of the particle. In Regime III, the reaction is entirely controlled by the diffusion of oxygen from the free stream to the particle, and the partial pressure of oxygen at the particle surface is low compared to that in the free gas stream. Theoretical considerations illustrate some of the gross factors that affect the reaction rates of char particles:     The impact of coal macerals on the combustion characteristics of both Australian and overseas coals have been investigated using laser heating of single PF particles of different macerals ( During devolatilisation, some coal macerals soften and individual particles form different types and shapes of char particles. Based on shape, wall thickness, and porosity, these chars may be classified into three major groups: ‘cenosphere’, ‘network/honeycomb’, and ‘solids’, as illustrated in The cenosphere type chars are associated with vitrinite, while the network/honeycomb and solid chars are derived from medium to high reflectance inertinite. In general, chars which have thin wall thickness (< In terms of reactivity, the formation of different char types can be summarised as follows: Char types produced from devolatilisation can be characterised into three major morphological groups: Group A: Cenospheres (thick wall and thin wall) Group B: Network/honeycomb structures Group C: Solid particles The average values of char reactivity for the main char types were in the following order:  The formation of cenosphere type chars was found to be closely related to the concentration of vitrinite in the parent coal, and their abundance increased with vitrinite content and coal rank (R The type of cenospheres formed after devolatilisation was affected by temperature. More thin-walled cenospheres were produced at lower temperatures (1000 In general, the combustion efficiency of PF increased with increasing coal volatile content, and with decreasing rank. The combustion efficiency In addition to the variation of combustion efficiency, it was noted that the combustion conditions and other physical characteristics, such as char size, shape, porosity, etc. had a significant influence over combustion. Also, the portions of chars left unburnt, after combustion, were derived from both vitrinite and inertinite. Inertinite is not actually inert in the PF combustion process as all carbon will burn; however, some inertinite will burn more readily (reactive inertinite) than other parts. The proportion of reactive inertinite, under PF combustion conditions, and particularly for the Australian coals tested, was higher than that estimated by standard coal petrography. Based on the conclusions arising out of this research work, it was clear that less reactive thick-walled cenospheres were produced from coal vitrinite, and that increasing vitrinite content increased the number of cenospheres produced. But, the overall combustion efficiency of high vitrinite coals was still not fully known, particularly the relationship between temperature and the production of cenospheres from vitrinite. This means that high vitrinite coal, particularly coking coal, The authors have recently carried out some detailed maceral analyses on the residues from HGI testing for a very low HGI coal (HGI ≈ 30). As well as affecting grinding, macerals also affect the combustion characteristics of the coal. In the case of Surat Basin coals, previously discussed, the liptinite/vitrinite matrix means that the high volatile liptinite will rapidly devolatilise during rapid heating and cause the matrix to break down into smaller, more reactive particles. In addition to volatile content, different macerals produce different types of char particles according to the rank of the coal and these chars have varying combustion characteristics. Thin-walled cenospheres, produced mainly from vitrinite in sub-bituminous and high volatile bituminous coals, have the highest combustion rate, while solid particles produced from lower volatile inertinites have the slowest rate. Pilot-scale pulverising and combustion testing of such a coal indicated that the solution to the difficult grinding was to simply grind the PF coarser There are several drivers that encourage ash to stick to boiler tubes in sufficient quantities to cause operational problems but there are two conditions required for significant deposits to build up on boiler tubes: The incoming ash from the gas stream must adhere to the boiler tube. The actual mechanism of adherence is in debate but what is required is a reaction between specific components in the ash stream and the metal of the tube or furnace wall; After adherence the ash particles will accumulate on the initiating layer and build up the deposit. A significant accumulation requires the tube adherence to be sufficiently strong to support the weight of the deposit. Slags are composed of metal alumino-silicate compounds all derived from the mineral matter in coal. The clays provide the alumino-silicates and metals from a wide range of oxide, sulphide, sulphate, and carbonate minerals. The minerals that make up slags are the result of thermal decomposition of the coal minerals that form glasses, and then by mechanisms of diffusion crystallise new minerals stable at the temperatures that exist in the furnace.  The ash from a coal with high iron content can be expected to melt and accumulate in boiler furnaces, but that is not always the case. Whether or not the coal ash will lead to slagging depends on the iron-bearing minerals that are in the coal. The prime requirement is to identify and quantify the iron-bearing minerals that will be delivered into the furnace by the coal. If a coal does slag and iron dominates, then the mineralogy of the slag has to be identified and quantified. The slag will contain the mineral phases that are in the FeO-SiO The generation of a slag depends on whether or not the iron becomes available to be taken into the iron-bearing glass and this is determined by the actual mineral that contains the iron. If the iron is in a thermally unstable mineral, then on heating that mineral will break down releasing what is usually a ferrous oxide. An iron oxide generated in this way is chemically active and will react with other compounds to form a third phase. As an example, iron oxide can react with alumino-silicate to form iron- alumino-silicates, and the type of alumino-silicate formed will depend on the energy considerations derived from the thermodynamics and kinetics of the system. There are a number of iron-bearing minerals in coal, the common include:      The characteristic mineral found in an iron-based slag are iron cordierite and mullite. The mullite is usually iron enriched to the extent of 5% to 8% iron in the mullite structure. This iron content has been determined by the electron microprobe. High iron content, alkalis and alkali earths are the elements that with alumina and silica make basalt. At the other end of the spectrum, should the coal mineral matter be silica and alumino-silicate only, then the rock would be called a rhyolite. There are a multitude of rock names whose definitions depend on their mineral assemblages. All of the slags that the authors have studied are, in the language of petrology, either basalts or andesites. Andesites have less iron enrichment than basalts, and have more sodium- bearing plagioclase feldspars. Note the use of the plural here, because there are internal variations for each group as well. The bottom line is that a much clearer understanding of boiler slagging is realised if we use the principles forged from the many decades it has taken to erect the geological science of petrology – the study of rocks. Coals, with relatively low iron in the ash, that have seemingly benign ash deposition characteristics, can have a high propensity for deposition. These coals have elevated alkali contents, potassium and sodium and it is the presence of these elements as oxides that can be the cause slagging. It has long been accepted that potassium, and more so sodium, are volatilised out of the furnace and are therefore not involved in the slagging processes. Investigations carried out by the authors have demonstrated that this contention is only partly true in that the mineral form of the alkali-bearing Experience with a coal with 2.8–4.5% Fe The mechanism that was causing the slagging was due to a small amount of potassium being present in the ash. The mineral transformations can be explained by reference to the K On the FeO-SiO  For one particular South Australian lignite, an investigation of coal mineral matter in all the seams being mined at the time included both mineralogy and ash chemistry. Also mineralogical examination of slags taken from the power station furnace, was undertaken. Feldspars were found in the slags and significantly albite, the sodium end-member of the plagioclases. The other end member was calcium, an alkali earth element. Also present was sanidine, which is feldspar that contains the three metals: sodium, potassium and calcium. Petrologists have determined that sanidine occurs only in volcanic rocks. It was found that certain seams in the mine contained excess sodium and also high amounts of sulphates. In the furnace, the resultant sodium sulphate formed a liquid that allowed sodium to enter the silicate system. The solution took the form of a simple If the SI value was over about 10–15, then it appeared as if slagging problems would emerge. There was one particular seam that was the main source of sodium and the mine carefully excluded this seam from the power station blends. Other higher sodium-bearing seams had the sodium content diluted to acceptable levels but judicious blending with more benign coals based on the sodium index. This practice met with great success in controlling slagging in the boilers. With regard to the reactions between the molten minerals and the iron in the boiler tubes, it has been observed that, where large deposits are formed, there is typically a strongly bonded initial layer that is very high in iron and well bonded to the tube surface. This layer was very hard and other, softer material was attached to this layer. This suggests that there are numerous particles in the combustion gases of a boiler that are virtually 100% iron and it is these that form this initial layer on which other material can attach and build up to, sometimes, massive proportions. Recently, the authors have carried out detailed evaluations of the processes of slag formation in boiler furnaces. The formation of a slag in a furnace is strongly analogous to the processes that form volcanic rocks in and on the Earth’s crust. Both the rock and the slag form from a hot liquid. If this liquid is cooled quickly (quenched), then both will form glass – glass being a supercooled liquid. In geology, the hot liquid is magma and perhaps we can use the same word for liquid slag in a furnace. With slower cooling, the magma will start to crystallise. The crystals will deplete the magma of the elements that are in the crystals, thus changing the chemistry of the liquid. If the magma flows away from the early formed crystals, or if the crystals fall to the bottom of the liquid (magma) chamber, the remaining liquid will precipitate different crystals if it continues to cool. If we are in the geological world, this results in a thick slab of rock that shows a consistent change in rock composition from bottom to top. The changes in composition include the first crystals being iron rich, the later crystals calcium-magnesium rich and finally silicates that contain the alkalis sodium and potassium. If there is enough silica, then a high silica glass will be the last liquid in the melt, which forms quartz in the rock. The equivalent is cristobalite in boiler slag. 