Mg-RE alloys containing long period stacking ordered (LPSO) phases usually exhibit excellent mechanical properties while the effect of LPSO phases on mechanical properties is still in dispute. To clarify the intrinsic effect of LPSO phases in Mg-RE alloys, we investigated two selected Mg-RE alloys through microstructure manipulation. The experimental results indicate that the LPSO phases can not only inhibit the coarsening of predominant strengthening β′ phase with a c-axis base-centred orthogonal (cbco) structure, but also accommodate basal dislocations during plastic deformation. Therefore, smart alloy design by incorporating the LPSO and β′ phases synergistically has great potential to achieve optimized mechanical properties with high strength, high ductility and high creep resistance in Mg-RE based alloys.The long period stacking ordered (LPSO) phases are frequently observed in ternary Mg-RE-X alloys It is well acknowledged that intragranular precipitates strengthen the matrix through impeding the movement of dislocations and the magnitude of precipitation strengthening effect strongly depends on the morphology and crystallography of precipitates with respect to the matrix. According to Nie et al.’s In our recent work, we found that the lamellar LPSO blocks showed strong pinning effect to impede the grain growth at elevated temperatures Alloys with chemical compositions of as-cast (F) Mg-9.86Y-5.32Gd-1.54Zn-0.36Zr (wt. %, denoted as WGZ1051K hereinafter) and Mg-12.56Y-4.88Gd-1.30Zn-0.33Zr (wt. %, denoted as WGZ1251K hereinafter) were prepared in mild steel crucibles through melting high purity Mg, Zn (≥99.9 wt.%) and Mg–25Y (wt.%), Mg-25Gd (wt.%) and Mg–30Zr (wt.%) master alloys with a protective atmosphere of mixed CO In order to clarify the intrinsic role of LPSO phases on mechanical properties of Mg-RE-X alloys, Mg-9.86Y-5.32Gd-1.54Zn-0.36Zr (WGZ1051K, wt.%) and Mg-12.56Y-4.88Gd-1.30Zn-0.33Zr (WGZ1251K, wt. %) were designed. After T4 treatment, the volume fraction of LPSO phase in the as-cast WGZ1051K alloy was increased (see The ageing curves were studied in order to investigate the effect of microstructure evolution on mechanical properties in these two alloys.  Compressive stress–strain curves of as-cast (F), solution-treated (T4) and peak-aged (T6) conditions of the WGZ1051K and WGZ1251K alloys are shown in Optical micrographs of WGZ1051K-T6 and WGZ1251K-T6 alloys are shown in The β′ phase, which forms on the prismatic On the basis of the above experimental results, it is evident that the LPSO blocks can facilitate the plastic deformation as well as inhibit the growth of predominant strengthening β′ phase during ageing. Accordingly, we can propose a potentially effective approach to develop new Mg-RE based alloys with high strength, high ductility and high creep-resistance. As shown in the schematic diagram in Although the strengthening effect of LPSO phases is not significant, the presence of LPSO phases can retard the coarsening of the β′ phase and thus enhance the mechanical properties of Mg-RE alloys. The LPSO phases can also enhance the ductility of the Mg-RE alloys since the interface between LPSO phases and α-Mg matrix can accommodate dislocation slip during plastic deformation. An ideal microstructure model that combines the benefits of LPSO and β′ phases can be achieved for the design of advanced Mg-RE based alloys with high strength, high ductility and high creep resistance. The authors acknowledge the Frontier Research Center of Materials Structure, School of Materials Science and Engineering, Shanghai Jiao Tong University and the Australian Microscopy & Microanalysis Research Facility at the Centre for Microscopy and Microanalysis, the University of Queensland. The first author also acknowledges the