Previous studies have reported that calreticulin (CRT), a calcium-binding and chaperoning protein, is expressed only in the endoplasmatic reticulum, nucleus and at the cell surface. In this study we clearly show that odontoblasts and predentin matrix contain CRT. To our knowledge, this is the first time CRT has been described in the extracellular matrix. The expression of CRT was studied by immunohistochemistry, ultrastructural immunocytochemistry and in situ hybridization in developing rat teeth. CRT was detected as a 59-kDa protein in rat pulp cell culture medium and dentin extracellular matrix extract by Western blotting. The presence of the protein was shown in rat odontoblasts and predentin with immunohistochemistry. At the ultrastructural level, the labeling was distributed in the rat odontoblasts, ameloblasts and predentin. Northern blotting showed the presence of CRT mRNA in rat molars, which was confirmed by in situ hybridization in odontoblasts and ameloblasts. We now present the first convincing evidence that CRT is found in extracellular matrix where it may play an important role in mineralization.Calreticulin (CRT) is an endoplasmatic reticulum (ER) luminal resident protein, which affects many cellular functions, both inside and outside of the ER lumen. CRT acts as a chaperone and regulates Ca CRT, isolated in 1974 by Ostwald et al., was originally identified as a sarcoplasmic/endoplasmic membrane protein ( The protein structure of CRT suggests the presence of three domains; a N-domain, P-domain and C-domain ( The Ca Results of St-Arnaud et al. also support the proposal that CRT plays an important regulatory role in osteoblast function, differentiation and bone formation. The constitutive expression of CRT in osteoblastic cells inhibited mineralization ( The aim of this study was to investigate whether odontoblasts expressed CRT, using biochemical, molecular and immunohistochemical techniques. Here we describe CRT in rat odontoblasts and predentin, showing that the high expression of the protein might indicate an important role in tooth hard tissue formation, especially with respect to Ca Bovine dentin extracts were screened for novel dentin matrix proteins. Extracts were subjected to DEAE ion-exchange chromatography and fractions of interest were subsequently further separated on a hydroxyapatite column. SDS-PAGE analysis of all the fractions identified a protein band in two fractions with the molecular weight of approximately 59 kDa ( The mineralized phases of rat bone and dentin were first extracted with 4 M guanidine hydrochloride, followed by 0.5 M EDTA in 4 m guaridine hydrochloride. The total extract was analyzed by two SDS-PAGE gels, and one was stained with Coomassie Blue ( Immunohistochemistry with the goat anti-mouse CRT antibody on paraffin sections of 5-day-old rat heads showed a signal in the odontoblast layer ( Ultrastructural immunolabeling was performed using the rabbit anti-mouse CRT antibody in different areas ( Total RNA was isolated from 5-day-old rat femur, calvaria and molars, which was heat denatured and electrophoresed on an agarose/formaldehyde gel. The total RNA was transferred onto a PVDF membrane, which was hybridized overnight with a In situ hybridization was performed on paraffin sections of 5-day-old rat head. The specimens were deparaffinized, rehydrated in ethanol, and rinsed in phosphate-buffered saline (PBS). The sections were treated with HCl and Proteinase K. The sections were post-fixed in paraformaldehyde and exposed to triethanolamine with acetic anhydride. After washing with PBS, the sections were treated with prehybridization mixture. During hybridization, the slides were incubated with hybridization solution containing the In order to analyze the effects of vitamin D on the amount of exported CRT in dental pulp cell cultures, cells were cultured in the presence of vitamin D. The conditioned medium from untreated rat pulp cells, rat pulp cells after 24 h vitamin D treatment and extracted extracellular matrix produced by these cells were analyzed by SDS-PAGE ( Previous studies have reported that CRT, a calcium-binding and chaperoning protein, is expressed in the ER, nucleus, at the cell surface and in the bloodstream. In this study we clearly show that odontoblasts and predentin matrix contain CRT. To our knowledge, this is the first time CRT has been described in the extracellular matrix. CRT extracted from the extracellular matrix of bovine dentin, was partially purified by using two chromatographic steps. Initially, the protein was purified exploiting the acidic character of CRT on an anion-exchange column (DEAE-cellulose), thereby separating the molecule from other dentin matrix proteins. The fraction identified as containing CRT was subsequently purified utilizing the protein's high affinity for hydroxyapatite to separate it from the remaining contaminants ( The C-terminal of CRT contains polyacidic amino acid sequence, composed of glutamic and aspartic acid residues and this may contribute to the high affinity demonstrated for hydroxyapatite. The C-terminal has also been demonstrated to have a high Ca Our Western blot ( During dentinogenesis, Ca There has been discussion about a possible inter- or intracellular route of Ca Numerous Ca Several studies showed that CRT inhibits binding of the vitamin D receptor to the vitamin D responsive element of the parathyroid hormone gene and blocks the action of vitamin D and thus prevents serum Ca Taken together, these observations suggest that CRT, as a major ER protein, which is also found in the predentin area, may participate in an intracellular Ca In conclusion, our results support the hypothesis that Ca The use of research animals in the present study complied with national guidelines in Sweden and permission was given by the regional ethical board in South Stockholm. The extraction was performed as described previously by The dentin extracts dissolved in urea were chromatographed on DEAE-cellulose (DE-52) ion-exchange columns (2.6×20 cm Samples prepared on the hydroxyapatite column and pulp cell culture were precipitated with ethanol ( Peptides were isolated from digests in polyacrylamide gel of purified protein with sequencing grade trypsin (Promega) as originally described by Goat anti-CRT antibody (Santa Cruz, CA) is an affinity-purified goat polyclonal antibody, raised against a peptide mapping at the amino terminus of CRT of mouse origin. Rabbit anti-CRT antibody (Novus Biologicals, Littleton, CO) is raised against a GST fusion protein containing amino acids 154–347 of mouse CRT. The proteins of rat bone, rat dentin as well as the conditioned cultured media from rat pulp cells and the extracellular matrix produced by the cells were transferred to PVDF membranes (Immobilon-P, Millipore Corp.) after electrophoresis, according to Five-day-old rat heads were fixed for 1 day at 4 °C in 4% paraformaldehyde in PBS pH 7.0 and decalcified in 12.5% (w/v) EDTA solution pH 7.0 for 4 days, then washed for 24 h in PBS at 4 °C. The samples were subsequently dehydrated, embedded in paraffin and 7 μm thin sections were cut and mounted on glass slides (Superfrost Plus, Mänzel, Germany). The sections were rinsed with xylene 2×5 min to remove the paraffin, then rehydrated through ethanol and rinsed in Tris-buffered saline (TBS). The specimens were pretreated with 0.2 M HCl for 15 min followed by 3% H An established protocol for ultrastructural immunocytochemistry on resin-embedded tissue was applied ( Total RNA was isolated from 5-day-old rat femur, calvaria and molars using RNAgents The whole heads of 5-day-old rats were fixed overnight at 4 °C with 4% paraformaldehyde, pH 7.0. The tissues were decalcified in 12.5% (w/v) EDTA solution, pH 7.0, for 2–3 days, dehydrated and embedded in paraffin. Seven-micrometer sections were mounted on glass slides coated with aminopropyl triethoxysilane. The sections were deparaffinized in xylene, rehydrated in ethanol, and rinsed in PBS. The sections were treated with 0.2 M HCl for 15 min, 20 μg/ml Proteinase K for 30 min at 37 °C, and rinsed with 0.2% glycine. The sections were post-fixed in paraformaldehyde and exposed to triethanolamine with acetic anhydride for 10 min on a shaking platform. After washing with PBS, the sections were prehybridized with prehybridization mixture (60% formamide, 5× SSC with 10 mM DTT) for 1 h at 42 °C. During hybridization, the slides were incubated with hybridization solution containing the Molars of 5-day-old rats were dissected and transferred to PBS with 2× antibiotic-antimycotic. The pulps were removed with forceps and placed in fresh PBS with 2× antibiotic-antimycotic. Following collection, the pulps were transferred into digestion solution (0.25% trypsin-EDTA, 2 mg/ml collagenase A) and incubated for 45 min at 37 °C. Culture medium (90% L-MEM with RNA and DNA, 10% fetal calf serum with 5000 unit Pest) was added and the cells were centrifuged for 5 min at 800 rpm. Following centrifugation the pellet was resuspended in culture medium. The suspension was transferred to a T-75 bottle and incubated at 37 °C in 5% CO Extracellular matrix was extracted from the pulp cell cultures. The cells were washed twice with PBS without Mg We would like to thank Cecilia Christersson, Ingrid Lindell, Carin Lundmark and Marie-Louise Olsson for excellent technical assistance. The authors also thank Dr Rachael V. Sugars and Dr Mitchell Dushay for their kind help and insightful advice on preparing this manuscript. The study was supported by the Stockholm County Council and the Swedish Research Council.