Experimental results for indium adsorption onto some ion exchange resins of different organic functional groups are presented. The following resins were tested: Ionac® SR-5 and Ionac® SR-12 (Sybron Chemicals), S950 (Purolite Company) and Amberlite® IR-120P (Rohm&Haas, Brazil). The indium concentration in the aqueous solution was based on a typical indium sulfate leach liquor obtained from a zinc hydrometallurgical processing route of a Brazilian plant and treated with solvent extraction for some impurities removal. The performance of the resin was based on the indium adsorption loading capacity and its selectivity concerning iron as a typical impurity present in the solution. Some parameters, such as initial pH and volume of the aqueous feed solution and contact time were studied. Batch tests were carried out. The experimental results allowed to select the chelating resin containing iminodiacetic acid groups with high potential for purification of the indium sulfate solution.Indium is a crystalline, very soft, ductile, and malleable metal that retains its highly plastic properties at cryogenic temperatures. It generally increases the strength, corrosion resistance, and hardness of an alloy system to which it is added. Indium is widely spread in nature, generally in very low concentrations. During smelting processes for the recovery of base metals, mainly zinc, indium is concentrated in by-products such as residues, flue dusts, and slags. The processes for the recovery and production of indium are complex, sophisticated and characterized by a low direct extraction efficiency. Low-melting alloys represent a major use of indium. The second most common use is the indium addition to lead-tin bearings for heavy-duty and high-speed applications providing particularly high resistance to fatigue and seizure. It is also used in electrical contacts, dental alloys, liquid crystal displays, low-pressure sodium lamps, alkaline dry batteries, and semiconductors ( Solvent extraction has been the main process investigated in order to remove indium from aqueous solutions (     This work presents the experimental results for indium adsorption onto some ion exchange resins of different organic functional groups. Ionac Although some authors have been investigating the indium adsorption on ion exchange polymeric resins, this paper emphasizes the indium selectivity with reference to iron. This is a relevant conduct because iron is always present in high concentration in aqueous feed solution of indium recovery and its chemical behavior in adsorption is similar to indium. Stock solutions of In, Fe The ion exchange polymeric resins selected for investigation are commercial products having different organic functional groups. Their characteristics are given in The performance of the resin was based on the indium adsorption loading capacity and its selectivity concerning iron as a typical impurity present in the aqueous solution. Therefore, to achieve this, some parameters, such as initial pH, volume of the aqueous feed solution and contact time were studied. The tests of adsorption were carried out at laboratory bench-scale and at room temperature (25 The resins were conditioned before the adsorption tests. Since there were different resins to be investigated, the conditioning was carried out according to each system. The conditioning characteristics for resins are given in Distilled water was used for the washing stage and conditioning of all resins. Sulfuric acid solutions were used for the H The conditioning used for the cationic resin Amberlite A sample of the aqueous phase after each test was collected for determination of iron and indium concentration in the solution by atomic absorption spectrophotometry method (932AA Computerized Model, GBC Scientific Equipment, Australia). The indium and iron concentrations in the ion exchange polymeric resins were determined by mass balance. In order to evaluate the indium ions adsorption characteristics as well as the main impurity––iron ions––the influence of initial pH of the feed solution was studied.  The use of chelating resin containing aminophosphonic acid groups––SR950 for this system was restricted due to the high iron concentration. The mixed feed solution with In and Fe together became unstable in pH equal or higher than 2. In this case, the tests with S950 were carried out only in pH 2. Despite the restriction of the pH, the In adsorption on S950 was smaller than on the chelating resins SR-5 and SR-12. The Fe adsorption remained at the same levels of the other resins ( It was observed in As regards Fe adsorption in As for chelating resin S950 in In Fe adsorption was about 10% in all pH range when the resin SR-5 was used. However, this adsorption was higher when the solution with Fe The percentage of Fe adsorption from Fe In general, it was noticed that the behavior of both chelating resins with iminodiacetic acid groups and diphosphonic acid groups was similar. But the chelating resin containing iminodiacetic acid groups––SR-5 in spite of not having reached a higher In adsorption in only one bath experiment, it had more selectivity when it was compared with the other two chelating resins containing diphosphonic acid groups––SR-12 and aminophosphonic acid groups––S950. Even if cation exchange polymeric resins were not mentioned in the literature for indium purification, the Amberlite It was observed in In order to correlate the mass of conditioned dry resin with a volume of the aqueous feed solution that achieves an effective In adsorption, the dependence of metals adsorption on feed solution volume for chelating resins SR-5 and SR-12 was studied, as shown in  As shown in The kinetics of In and Fe adsorption were determined as a function of contact time with chelating resins, containing iminodiacetic acid groups––SR-5 and diphosphonic acid groups––SR-12, as shown in Two hours were necessary to reach the equilibrium with chelating resin SR-5, as shown in Concerning the indium adsorption characteristics, as well as the selectivity for iron, it was concluded that the chelating resin containing aminophosphonic acid groups––SR950 and the cation exchange resin Amberlite The indium adsorption rate on chelating resin containing iminodiacetic acid groups––Ionac In only one bench-scale experiment, using 20 ml of feed solution per 1.0 g of conditioned dry resin containing iminodiacetic acid groups––Ionac From the experimental results, it was suggested the selection of chelating resin containing iminodiacetic acid groups––Ionac The authors are thankful for the Center for the Development of Nuclear Technology––CDTN/CNEN and the Brazilian National Science Council-CNPq for the financial support to conduct this work. The authors also thank PRONEX-Mineral Technology Program from the Science and Technology Ministry (MCT-Brazil) and Millennium Institutes Program-MCT/CNPq/Brazil for the financial aid to present this paper at the Minerals Engineering’2002 Conference.