A bulk material that consists of the stable icosahedral phases (I-phases) in the Ti–Zr–Ni system has been fabricated in a hot press using mechanically alloyed (MA) powders. Considerable amounts of amorphous phase and nanocrystals are formed after MA for more than 30 h in the mixture of elemental powders (Ti, Zr, Ni) with the overall composition of Ti41.5Zr41.5Ni17. The amorphous phase transforms into the I-phase in the temperature range of 573–673 K during continuous heating in differential scanning calorimetry (DSC) with the heating rate of 40 K/min. The powders MA for 40 h are hot-pressed for 2 h at 873 K under the applied pressure of 900 MPa to form a bulk I-phase material. The evolution of the Vickers microhardness has been examined in the load range of 0.5–10 N. The indentation size effect is accompanied by a modification of the fracture pattern. At a low value of the load, no crack is observed. As the load increases, the first cracks observed around the indenter are lateral cracks, and then radial cracks are found for load larger than 1 N.Thermodynamically stable icosahedral phases (I-phases) have been reported in several alloy systems MA of the powder mixture of pure Ti (−325 mesh, 99.9%), Zr (−325 mesh, 99.9%) and Ni (−325 mesh, 99.9%) powders was carried out in a high-energy ball mill (spexmill). The powder mixture that has the composition of Ti As milling time increases, the grains of elemental powders are refined and a considerable amount of amorphous phase is formed after milling for more than 30 h as inferred from the XRD patterns shown in To identify the reactions corresponding to the exothermic and endothermic peaks, the powders MA for 40 h are isothermally annealed at a temperature (743 K) between the endothermic and endothermic peak temperatures and at a temperature (883 K) higher than the onset temperature of the endothermic peak, respectively.  Results of load-hardness behavior are presented in The Vickers microhardness is defined as the ratio of the applied load to the pyramidal contact area, with the contact area calculated from the length of the indentation diagonal assuming a perfectly square indentation mark. However, (1) Considerable amounts of amorphous phase and nanocrystals are formed after MA for more than 30 h in the mixture of elemental powders (Ti, Zr, Ni) with the overall composition of Ti (2) A bulk material that consists of the stable I-phase can be fabricated in a hot press using MA powders. The powders MA for 40 h are hot-pressed for 2 h at 873 K under the applied pressure of 900 MPa to form a bulk I-phase material. (3) The indentation size effect is accompanied by a modification of the fracture pattern. At a low value of the load, no crack is observed. As the load increases, the first cracks observed around the indenter are lateral cracks, and then radial cracks are found for load larger than 1 N. This work was supported by the Creative Research Initiatives of the Korean Ministry of Science and Technology.