Magnetic and electrical separators are being considered in the same chapter, as there is often an overlap in the application of the two processes. A classic example of this is the processing of heavy mineral sands in which both magnetic and electrostatic separation are crucial to achieve separation. Magnetic separators exploit the difference in magnetic properties between the minerals in a deposit and are used to concentrate a valuable mineral that is magnetic (e.g., magnetite from quartz), to remove magnetic contaminants, or to separate mixtures of magnetic and nonmagnetic valuable minerals. An example of the latter is the tin-bearing mineral cassiterite, which is often associated with traces of the valuable minerals magnetite or wolframite, which can be removed by magnetic separators. This text will only briefly introduce the concepts associated with magnetism in mineral separation. For those interested in further details there are a number of other sources ( All materials are affected in some way when placed in a magnetic field, although with many substances the effect is too slight to be easily detected. For the purposes of mineral processing, materials may be classified into two broad groups, according to whether they are attracted or repelled by a magnet: Diamagnetic materials are repelled along the lines of magnetic force to a point where the field intensity is smaller. The forces involved here are very small and diamagnetic substances are often referred to as “nonmagnetic”, although this is not strictly correct. Diamagnetic minerals will report to the nonmagnetic product (“non-mags”) of a magnetic separator as they do not experience a magnetic attractive force. Paramagnetic materials are attracted along the lines of magnetic force to points of greater field intensity. Paramagnetic materials report to the “magnetic” product (“mags”) of a magnetic separator due to attractive magnetic forces. Examples of paramagnetic minerals which are separated in commercial magnetic separators are ilmenite (FeTiO Paramagnetism in a material originates due to the presence of unpaired electrons which create magnetic dipoles. When these magnetic dipoles are aligned by an externally applied magnetic field, the resultant magnetic moment causes the material to become magnetized and experience a magnetic force along the lines of the applied magnetic field. Certain elements have electron configurations with many unpaired electrons, but the magnetic response of a given mineral depends on the structure of the mineral as well as its constituent atoms. For example, pyrite (FeS Ferromagnetism can be regarded as a special case of paramagnetism in which the magnetic dipoles of a material undergo exchange coupling so that they can more rapidly align themselves with an applied magnetic field. Examples of diamagnetic, paramagnetic, and ferromagnetic behavior are shown in Compared to paramagnetic materials, which need high-intensity (high magnetic field) magnetic separators to report to the magnetic product, ferromagnetic materials are recovered in low-intensity magnetic separators. The magnetic properties of a material may be measured directly via a vibrating sample magnetometer (used to Vibrating sample magnetometers are expensive instruments and require specialized personnel to operate. As such, they are typically found only in research settings, such as universities. A more practical tool in mineral processing labs for determining magnetic properties is the Frantz Isodynamic Separator, shown diagrammatically in The Franz is also used to characterize materials, separating fractions that can then be identified. These data can form the basis of predicting separation in full size magnetic separators. For ferromagnetic materials, the Davis tube is more suitable and is the common tool for characterizing magnetic iron ores ( The magnetic flux density or magnetic induction is the number of lines of force passing through a unit area of material, The magnetizing force, which induces the lines of force through a material, is called the field intensity, The intensity of magnetization or the magnetization ( Magnetic susceptibility ( Combining If we then define the dimensionless relative permeability, we can combine For paramagnetic materials, The magnetic susceptibility of a ferromagnetic material is dependent on the magnetic field, decreasing with field strength as the material becomes saturated. The magnetic force felt by a mineral particle is dependent not only on the value of the field intensity, but also on the field gradient (the rate at which the field intensity increases across the particle toward the magnet surface). As paramagnetic minerals have higher (relative) magnetic permeabilities than the surrounding media, usually air or water, they concentrate the lines of force of an external magnetic field. The higher the magnetic susceptibility, the higher the induced field density in the particle and the greater is the attraction up the field gradient toward increasing field strength. Diamagnetic minerals have lower magnetic susceptibility than their surrounding medium and hence expel the lines of force of the external field. This causes their expulsion down the gradient of the field in the direction of the decreasing field strength. The equation for the magnetic force on a particle in a magnetic separator depends on the magnetic susceptibility of the particle and fluid medium, the applied magnetic field and the magnetic field gradient. This equation, when considered in only the Production of a high field gradient as well as high intensity is therefore an important aspect of separator design. To generate a given attractive force, there are an infinite number of combinations of field and gradient which will give the same effect. Another important factor is the particle size, as the magnetic force experienced by a particle must compete with various other forces such as hydrodynamic drag (in wet magnetic separations) and the force of gravity. In one example, considering only these two competing forces, Certain elements of design are incorporated in all magnetic separators, whether they are wet or dry separators with low- or high-intensity magnetic fields. The prime requirement is the provision of a high-intensity field in which there is a steep field strength gradient. In a field of uniform magnetic flux, such as in The design of field gradient in magnetic separators may be divided into two types: open-gradient magnetic separators (OGMSs) and high-gradient magnetic separators (HGMSs). In an OGMS design, the magnetic gradient is created by the poles of the magnets themselves, and as a result the gradient is relatively weak ( The introduction of particles with high magnetic susceptibility into a magnetic field will concentrate the lines of force so that they pass through the particles themselves ( Much of the optimization of high-intensity separators is based on providing as many sites of high field gradient as possible to improve the magnetic particle carrying capacity of the separator. Wet high-intensity magnetic A visual comparison of the effects of different matrix materials on magnetic flux may be seen in Provision must be incorporated in the separator for regulating the intensity of the magnetic field in order to deal with various types of material. This is easily achieved in electromagnetic separators by varying the current, while with permanent magnets the interpole distance can be varied. In the case of laboratory separators, this can also be achieved by interchanging the permanent magnets for magnets of higher magnetic field intensity. A special class of magnetic separators, known as superconducting separators, may be used when very high field intensities are required. Additional information on superconducting separators may be found in It is important to note that increasing field intensity does not necessarily lead to an improved separation. Work by As magnetic field strength is increased, the magnetic field gradient in the separator will also change; this is not considered in the calculations in Commercial magnetic separators are continuous-process machines, and separation is carried out on a moving stream of particles passing into and through the magnetic field. Close control of the speed of passage of the particles through the field is essential, which typically rules out free fall as a means of feeding. Belts or drums are very often used to transport the feed through the field. As discussed in Provision for collection of the magnetic and nonmagnetic fractions must be incorporated into the design of the separator. Rather than allow the magnetics to contact the pole-pieces, which then requires their detachment, most separators are designed so that the magnetics are attracted to the pole-pieces, but come into contact with some form of conveying device, which carries them out of the influence of the field, into a bin or a belt. Nonmagnetic disposal presents no problems; free fall from a conveyor into a bin is often used. Middlings are readily produced by using a more intense field after the removal of the highly magnetic fraction. Magnetic separators are generally classified into low- and high-intensity machines, but here we include high-gradient and superconducting devices. Low-intensity separators are used to treat ferromagnetic materials and some highly paramagnetic minerals. As shown in The removal of “tramp“ iron from feed belts can also be regarded as a form of low-intensity magnetic separation. However, tramp iron removal is usually accomplished by means of a magnetic pulley at the end of an ore conveyor ( Dry low-intensity magnetic separation is confined mainly to the concentration of coarse sands which are strongly magnetic, a process known as “cobbing,” and is often carried out using drum separators. For particles below 5 The general design of drum separators is a rotating, hollow, nonmagnetic drum containing multiple stationary magnets of alternating polarity. The medium-intensity Permos separator uses many small magnet blocks, whose direction of magnetization changes in small steps. This is said to generate a very even magnetic field, requiring less magnetic material ( Although drum separators initially employed electromagnets, permanent magnets are used in modern devices, utilizing ceramic or rare earth magnetic alloys, which retain their intensity for an indefinite period ( The drum separators shown in In a counter-current separator, the tailings are forced to travel in the opposite direction to the drum rotation and are discharged into the tailings chute. This type of separator is designed for finishing operations on relatively fine material, of particle size less than about 800 The third possible configuration is the counter-rotation type, where the feed flows in the opposite direction to the rotation. This type is used in roughing operations, where occasional surges in feed must be handled, and where magnetic material losses are to be held to a minimum when high solids loading is encountered, while an extremely clean concentrate is not required. Drum separators are widely used to treat low-grade iron ores, which contain 40–50% Fe, mainly as magnetite, but in some areas with hematite, finely disseminated in bands in hard siliceous rocks. Very fine grinding is necessary to free the iron minerals that produce a concentrate requiring pelletizing before being fed to steelmaking blast furnaces. At the Iron Ore Company of Canada’s Carol Project, low-intensity magnetic separation is used as an initial cobbing step on the cyclone overflow of the ball mill discharge to remove magnetite. This magnetite concentrate is then combined with the tailings of spiral gravity concentrators to be fed to a rougher wet drum low-intensity separator where magnetite is removed and sent directly to the pellet plant, with the tailings from the drum being sent for further gravity processing to concentrate any remaining hematite ( The mechanism by which ferromagnetic particles are captured by low-intensity drum separators has been investigated for both high solids content (10–17% solids by weight) and low solids content (2%) ( At Palabora, the tailings from copper flotation (see Another example of wet low-intensity magnetic separation is the treatment of flotation tailings at the Niobec mine in Quebec, Canada ( The cross-belt separator ( Rare earth roll separators use alternate magnetic and nonmagnetic laminations (like those illustrated in Dry rare earth drum separators provide a “fan” of separated particles, which can often be seen as distinct streams ( Weakly paramagnetic minerals can only be effectively recovered using high-intensity (B-fields of 2 Induced roll magnetic (IRM) separators ( The primary variables affecting separation using an IRM separator are the magnetic susceptibility of the mineral particles, the applied magnetic field intensity, the size of the particles, and the speed of the roll ( In most cases, IRM separators have been replaced by the more recently developed ( Dry high-intensity separation is largely restricted to ores containing little, if any, material finer than about 75 Without doubt, the greatest advance in the field of magnetic separation was the development of continuous WHIMSs ( Perhaps the most well-known WHIMS machine is the Jones separator, the design principle of which is utilized in many other types of wet separators found today. The machine has a strong main frame ( The weakly magnetic particles are held by the plates, whereas the remaining nonmagnetic particle slurry passes through the plate boxes and is collected in a launder. Before leaving the field any entrained nonmagnetics are When the plate boxes reach a point midway between the two magnetic poles, where the magnetic field is essentially zero, the magnetic particles are washed out using high-pressure scour water sprays operating at up to 5 There are currently two types of WHIMS machines, one that uses electromagnetic coils to generate the required field strength, the other that employs rare earth permanent magnets. They are used in different applications; the weaker magnetic field strength produced by rare earth permanent magnets may be insufficient to concentrate some weakly paramagnetic minerals. The variables to consider before installing a traditional horizontal carousel WHIMS include: the feed characteristics (slurry density, feed rate, particle size, magnetic susceptibility of the target magnetic mineral), the product requirements (volume of solids to be removed, required grade of products), and the cost of power ( Wet high-intensity magnetic separation has its greatest use in the concentration of low-grade iron ores containing hematite, where they are an alternative to flotation or gravity methods. The decision to select magnetic separation for the concentration of hematite from iron ore must balance the relative ease with which hematite may be concentrated in such a separator against the high capital cost of such separators. It has been shown by In addition to recovery of hematite (and other iron oxides such as goethite), wet high-intensity separators are now in operation for a wide range of duties, including removal of magnetic impurities from cassiterite concentrates, removal of fine magnetic material from asbestos, removal of iron oxides and ferrosilicate minerals from industrial minerals such as quartz and clay, concentration At the Cliffs–Wabush iron ore mine in Labrador, Canada ( The paramagnetic properties of some sulfide minerals, such as chalcopyrite and marmatite (high Fe form of sphalerite), have been exploited by applying wet high-intensity magnetic separation to augment differential flotation processes ( As noted in Instead of using one large convergent field in the gap of a magnetic circuit, as in the Jones separator, in HGMS a solenoid is used to generate a uniform field with a solenoid core, or working volume, filled with a matrix of secondary ferromagnetic poles, such as ball bearings, or wire wool, the latter filling only about 10% of the working volume. Each secondary pole, due to its high permeability, can produce maximum field strengths of 2 The solenoid can be clad externally with an iron frame to form a continuous return path for the magnetic flux, thus reducing the energy consumption for driving the coil by a factor of about 2. The matrix is held in a canister into which the slurry is fed. Both continuous and batch-type HGMS are available, with batch-type HGMS requiring periodic demagnetization in order to remove accumulated magnetic particles, while the continuous HGMS ( An inherent disadvantage of high-gradient separators is that in producing an increase in field gradient, the working gap between secondary poles is reduced, so that the magnetic force has a short reach of no more than about 1 In order to address some of the deficiencies in the design of HGMS, new horizontally fed vertical carousel separators have been designed that incorporate a pulsating feed system to ensure particle dispersion (i.e., avoid flocculation) and prevent nonmagnetic entrainment. The SLon VPHGMS ( Future developments and applications of magnetic separation in the mineral industry lie in the creation and use of increasingly higher product of field and field gradient, that is, the “force factor.” Matrix separators with very high field gradients and multiple small working gaps can draw little benefit from field strengths above the saturation levels of the secondary poles (~2 Certain alloys have the property of presenting no resistance to electric currents at extremely low temperatures. An example is niobium–titanium at 4.2 The main advantage of superconducting separators is that elevated magnetic field strength increases the maximum feed slurry velocity with a corresponding increase in capacity ( In 1986, a superconducting HGMS was designed and built by Eriez Magnetics to remove magnetic (and colored) contaminants from kaolinite clay for operations in the United States. This machine used only about 0.007 The 5 A picture of a superconducting magnetic separator in a horizontal arrangement installed in a plant is shown in An open-gradient drum magnetic separator with a superconducting magnet system has been operating commercially since the 1980s ( The development of HGMS and superconducting separators capable of concentrating very fine or very weakly magnetic mineral particles has prompted the application of magnetic separation techniques to treat many waste streams from mineral processing operations. Fine (<10 Electrical separation exploits the differences in electrical conductivity between different minerals in a feed. Since almost all minerals show some difference in conductivity, it would appear to represent the universal concentrating method. In practice, however, the method has fairly limited applications due to the required processing conditions (notably a perfectly dry feed), and its greatest use is in separating some of the minerals found in heavy mineral sands from beach or stream placer deposits ( There are two distinct forces which may be considered in the context of electrical separation. The electrophoretic force is the force experienced by a charged particle under the influence of an electric field, and the dielectrophoretic force is the force experienced by a neutral particle in a fluid when subjected to a nonuniform electric field. The dielectrophoretic force is somewhat analogous to magnetic force as it relies on the polarization of a neutral particle into an electric dipole as well as a nonuniform In order to exploit the electrophoretic force for mineral separation, a treatment step prior to separation is required in all electrical separators to selectively charge the mineral particles. This selective development of charges on particles relies on conductivity differences between the minerals. As most electrical conduction occurs in the surface layers of atoms ( There are three main mechanisms by which minerals are charged: ion bombardment (corona charging), conductive induction, and frictional charging (tribocharging or contact electrification). Each of these three mechanisms has a corresponding separator type, the details of which are described in the following sections. To understand electrical separation methods, knowledge of the electrical properties of materials is required. Introduction to the relevant concepts, as they apply to mineral processing, along with detailed descriptions of many industrial separators, may be found in the comprehensive reviews by Charging via ion bombardment occurs as a high voltage is applied between two electrodes so that the gas near the electrodes ionizes and forms a corona discharge, a continuous flow of gaseous ions. Mineral particles passing through this corona are bombarded with the flow of ions and develop a charge. A similar mechanism of charge application is employed in electrostatic precipitators used to remove fine particulate matter from flowing gas streams. In mineral separation applications, different conductivities of the charged mineral particles then result in different rates of charge decay and correspondingly different forces experienced by the particles. The typical separator relying on corona charging is the high-tension roll (HTR) separator ( When ionization occurs, the mineral particles receive a spray discharge of ions which gives all particles in the corona field a surface charge. As the HTR drum rotates and particles are moved outside of the corona field, weakly conductive particles maintain a high surface charge, causing them to be attracted to and pinned to the rotor surface. This is often referred to as pinning by the Particles of relatively high conductivity lose their surface charge as the charge rapidly dissipates to the earthed rotor. The centrifugal force of the rotor, along with The primary industrial use of HTR separators is in the processing of heavy mineral sands ( A combination of pinning and lifting can be created by using a third “static” electrode following the corona discharge electrodes with a diameter large enough to preclude corona discharge. The conducting particles, which are thrown from the rotor, are attracted to this third electrode, and the combined process produces a very wide and distinct separation between conductive particles (lifted from the rotor surface) and nonconductive particles (pinned to the rotor surface). High-tension separators operate on feeds containing particle sizes of 60–500 Some machine factors affecting the operation of an HTR separator include: geometry of the electrode assembly, electrode voltage and polarity, rotor speed, rotor diameter, and splitter position ( While HTR separation primarily exploits the differences in conductivities between minerals, an equally important criteria for successful operation is the presence of at least one strongly conductive (on an absolute basis) mineral species in the separator feed. It has been shown by HTR separators have been one of the mainstays of the mineral sands industry for decades. Very little development of the machines has occurred in that period; their generally poor single pass separation has been tolerated, and overcome by using multiple machines and multiple recycle streams. However, in the last few years innovative new designs have started to appear, from new as well as established manufacturers. Roche Mining (MT) have developed the Carara HTR separator, which incorporates an additional insulated plate static electrode to help deflect the path of conductive particles thrown from the rotor ( OreKinetics has introduced the new CoronaStat machine ( The second charging mechanism used in electrical separators is conductive induction, in which polarization of a mineral particle occurs upon exposure to an electric field. Similar to charge decay in HTR separators, the ability of the mineral particle to respond to this induced polarization is directly related to its conductivity. Polarization results when an uncharged particle develops an opposite charge, relative to the electrode creating the electric field, at the surface closest to the electrode and a corresponding like charge to the electrode on the particle surface furthest from the electrode. Conductive particles are able to redistribute these induced charges across the particle surface, while nonconductive particles are unable to redistribute these charges and will remain polarized. The electric force on a polarized particle is a function of the degree to which it polarizes, which is in turn affected by both the size and shape of the particle ( Separators exploiting this charging mechanism are typically used to separate strongly conductive particles from weakly conductive particles and employ static electrodes to “lift” charged conductive particles from a grounded surface while nonconductive particles remain pinned to that surface. The most common such separator is the electrostatic plate (ESP) separator. In an ESP separator, material is gravity fed through the separator and the force on the charged particles acts to counteract the force of gravity. In contrast to HTR separators, coarse particles will tend to report to the nonconducting fraction, which is why final cleaning of the products of HTR separation is often carried out in purely electrostatic separators. Modern electrostatic separators are of the plate or screen type ( Similar to the CoronaStat for HTR separation, OreKinetics has also developed an improved ESP separator known as the UltraStat separator ( The final charging mechanism used in mineral processing is triboelectrification, or contact electrification, in which two materials of dissimilar electrical properties exchange electrons upon coming into contact with one another. As most minerals are semi-conductors, with volume conductivities between 10 Once the minerals have acquired a charge, they are often separated using a free-fall design consisting of two charged electrodes which deflect mineral particles based on their surface charge with the mineral particles collected in different bins. Such separators have been used on a lab scale to separate quartz from wollastonite and calcite, calcite from insoluble silicates ( In all triboelectric charging devices, mineral particles come into contact with not just one another, but also the material from which the conveying device is constructed. It is therefore important to take this into consideration, as different materials, such as brass and Teflon, have large differences in work function and will therefore produce corresponding differences in the charges produced on a given mineral particle ( Charge acquisition of mineral particles in triboelectric separation may also be controlled through the use of a surface treatment prior to tribocharging such as: surface cleaning, chemical pretreatment, thermal pretreatment, irradiation, changes in the atmospheric humidity, or surface doping ( One of the explanations for continued research interest in triboelectric separation is the minimal effect of gravity Recently a new triboelectric separator, the ST separator, has been developed by Separation Technologies which employs conventional interparticle contact to tribocharge mineral particles and a continuous loop open-mesh belt that travels at high speeds (5–20 Earlier in this chapter the possibility of combined magnetic and electrical separation was noted, particularly in the processing of heavy mineral sand deposits. Mineral sands flowsheets vary according to the properties of the minerals present, wet magnetic separation often preceding high-tension separation where magnetic ilmenite is the dominant mineral, for example.  The heavy mineral concentrate is first divided into conductive and nonconductive streams using HTR separators. The conductors are treated using cross-belt and roll magnetic separators to remove the ilmenite as a magnetic product. The nonmagnetic stream is cleaned with high-intensity roll and rare earth magnets to separate the weakly paramagnetic leucoxene from diamagnetic rutile. The nonconductors undergo another stage of wet gravity separation to remove quartz and other low-specific-gravity contaminants, before sizing and cleaning using HTR, ESP and Ultrastat separators to produce fine and coarse zircon products. Similar flowsheets are used in South-East Asia for the treatment of alluvial cassiterite deposits, which are also sources of minerals such as ilmenite, monazite, and zircon. In the case of the Cliffs–Wabush mine (discussed in