The present study explores the possibility of using metal foams for thermal management of fuel cells so that air-cooled fuel cell stacks can be commercialized as replacements for currently-available water-cooled counterparts. Experimental studies have been conducted to examine the heat transfer enhancement from a thin metal foam layer sandwiched between two bipolar plates of a cell. To do this, effects of the key parameters including the free stream velocity and characteristics of metal foam such as porosity, permeability, and form drag coefficient on temperature distribution, heat and fluid flow are investigated. The improvements as a result of the application of metal foam layers on fuel cell systems efficiency have been analyzed and discussed. Empirical results were in an agreement with previous numerical studies and have shown that to remove the same amount of generated heat, the air-cooled fuel cell systems using aluminum foams require half of the pumping power compared to water-cooled fuel cell systems. The critical coolant temperature difference for Proton Exchange Membrane (PEM) fuel cell systems was considered in which the applied foam layer created a uniform temperature distribution across the graphite plates.Fuel cell systems, converting fuels directly into electrical energy, are promising energy conversion systems for future mobile and stationary applications The goal is to enhance the thermal management in fuel cell systems where three aspects of that should be considered: size/weight, thermal resistance and electrical resistance of the system. Following that, two key design factors of heat exchangers, pressure drop and heat transfer, should be also noticed as they significantly affect the performance of different types of fuel cell stacks, including proton exchange membrane fuel cells (PEMFC) and solid oxide fuel cells (SOFC). Consequently, there are noteworthy parameters depended on other aspects of a fuel cell stack which should be simultaneously considered when we design a heat exchanger. Having a complicated structure of fuel cell systems Fuel cell system can be commercialized when significant technical challenges are addressed; among them, the proper thermal management is the most critical issue which needs to be resolved. As an example, PEM fuel cells work in a temperature range of 60–80 In a PEMFC, the heat generated is generally removed by a cooling system or transferred by conduction–convection across the faces of the stack. Thus, the thermal properties of individual components, i.e. polymer electrolyte, catalyst layer, gas diffusion layer (GDL) and bipolar plate (BPP) dictate the total heat removal rate Water-cooled heat exchangers, requiring an extra cooling loop for water (radiator), use water as the coolant and remove heat from graphite plates ( Air-cooled fuel cell systems, on the other hand, use the ambient air as the coolant. Considering both water and air cooled systems, thicker bipolar plates are needed for water or air channels (either straight or serpentine), formed on the back of the bipolar plates. This dramatically increases the cost as bipolar plates are expensive so is the manufacturing of the cooling channels The novelty of the present design Numerical and experimental studies have been conducted on difference water/air cooled heat exchangers to optimize the heat exchanger designs. The study compares the heat transfer rate and pressure drop of the metal foam heat exchanger with conventional water-cooled heat exchangers designed by Ballard Power Systems Inc. for a PEM fuel cell stack. The main focus of the present work is on an experimental investigation on two typical PEM fuel cells in cross-flow, placed in a high speed wind tunnel. Key parameters, including the free stream velocity ( The test rig, locally designed and manufactured at the University of Queensland, consists of an open air wind tunnel and a heating system as illustrated by From the experimental measurements, it is possible to calculate the thermal resistance According to Moffat There are two type of commercially available metal foams, examined in this report as characterized in    The temperature distribution has also been investigated for metal foam sample 2 in which the range of wall heat flux One of the critical challenges of the fuel cell thermal management is minimizing the required pumping power ( According to the product manual According to the results of FCvelocity-9SSL V4, the required pumping power can be predicted as 72 The present study investigates the performance of metal foams as replacements for water-cooled heat exchangers with application to PEM fuel cell systems. Experimental studies have been conducted to examine the heat transfer enhancement from a metal foam plate sandwiched between two bipolar plates, considering the effects of the hydrodynamic parameters and metal foam characteristics. Proposed metal foam heat exchangers showed that increasing air flow rises pressure drop of the system, coming at a large cost in terms of pumping power requirements while incremental increases in air velocity significantly decreases the thermal resistance through the aluminum and graphite plates. The temperature distribution across the graphite plates, for the range of air flow rates, tends to be relatively low and constant. The results have shown that the air-cooled fuel cell systems, using aluminum foams, require half of the pumping power, compared to water-cooled fuel cell systems, to dump the same amount of generated heat and with identical operating conditions. The authors of this article would like to thank Australian Research Council for financial support for this project.