This research focuses on elucidating the present knowledge gaps in geopolymer concrete's engineering properties, specifically its stress-strain behaviour. Geopolymer concrete (GPC) is an emerging alternative to ordinary Portland cement concrete (OPCC), and is produced via a polycondensation reaction between aluminosilicate source materials and an alkaline solution. As a relatively new material, many engineering properties of geopolymer concrete are still undetermined. In this paper, the compressive strength, modulus of elasticity and stress-strain behaviour of ambient and heat-cured GPC and OPCC have been studied experimentally. A total of 195 geopolymer concrete cylinders and 210 Portland cement concrete cylinders were tested for the above mentioned characteristics. Based on the experimental results, constitutive models describing the complete stress–strain behaviour in uniaxial compression have been developed for the low-calcium fly ash-based geopolymer concrete and the heat-cured Portland cement concrete.concrete compressive strength (mean) concrete stress concrete modulus of elasticity secant modulus of elasticity concrete strain concrete strain at peak stress ultimate concrete strain concrete strain at point of inflection material parameter that depends on the shape of the stress-strain curve modified material parameter for the ascending branch modified material parameter for the descending branch curing parameter A precise evaluation of the mechanical properties of a material is essential in order to use it for structural engineering applications. Broad knowledge of the deformability of concrete is necessary, for instance, to calculate deflections of structures, to compute stresses from observed strains or to establish the constitutive laws for numerical simulations (e.g. input for finite element modelling, FEM, programs). Due to the intrinsic properties and compositions, any material can behave differently under different loading conditions. It is therefore crucial to study the stress-strain behaviour of new emerging materials to fully characterize their performance for the purpose of design and field implementation. Geopolymer concrete (GPC) is a new class of inorganic (polymer) material, first introduced in 1975 by Davidovits The stress-strain behaviour of ordinary Portland cement concrete (OPCC) under uniaxial compression is relatively well understood Thomas and Peethamparan Some researchers were also focused on the stress-strain behaviour of confined geopolymer concretes and pastes. Haider et al. Diaz-Loya et al. The curing methods applied by Diaz-Loya et al. It has been proved in many research works The aim of this paper is to use a comprehensive experimental data set to develop a constitutive model to represent the complete stress-strain curves for ambient and heat-cured low-calcium fly ash-based geopolymer concretes. The study defines a novel constitutive relationship for heat cured geopolymer concrete, which appropriately predicts the complete stress-strain curve of the material. Since the compressive strength and stress-strain relationship of geopolymer concrete appear to be strongly dependent on the curing temperature and heat-curing duration, the effect of these parameters has also been addressed in the proposed stress-strain relationship. Furthermore, a Portland cement concrete mix has been prepared as a reference point for the sake of comparison. The OPCC mix has the same amount of aggregate and binder as the geopolymer concrete. This mix has been cured under standard ambient curing conditions, as well as, heat curing conditions. The mechanical properties and stress-strain behaviour of the OPC concrete is also investigated and a stress-strain model for heat-cured conventional concrete is then proposed. Three different sources of aluminosilicate materials have been used in this study for synthesising the geopolymeric binder. A low-calcium type (ASTM C 618 Class F) fly ash, sourced from Eraring Power Station in New South Wales, Australia has been used. The fineness of FA by 45 μm sieve was determined to be 87% passing (tested in accordance with AS 3583.1 The alkaline solution mixture consisted of 12 M sodium hydroxide (NaOH) solution and sodium silicate (Na A maximum nominal size of 10 mm aggregate was used in this study. Sydney sand with a specific gravity of 2.65 and water absorption of 3.5% was used as fine aggregate and 10 mm crushed basalt gravel with specific gravity of 2.8 and water absorption of 1.6% was used as coarse aggregate. All aggregate was kiln dried at 105 °C for a period of 48 h prior to batching. The drying procedure, which removes all the moisture content of the aggregate as well as the organic particles in the sand, could help to more accurately adjust the mix water. Two concrete mixes are investigated in this study. The first concrete mix is a geopolymer concrete while the second concrete mix is an ordinary Portland cement concrete. The OPC concrete has exactly the same amount of aggregate and binder as the GPC mix. The GPC mix has 388 kg/m For OPCC, mixing was performed in accordance with AS 1012.2 The freshly mixed concrete was then cast in 100 × 200 mm cylinder plastic moulds in two layers and compacted using an external vibrating table to achieve proper consolidation. Three cylinders were prepared for each test variable. Immediately after casting, the samples were covered by lids and sealed in plastic bags to avoid excessive loss of moisture due to evaporation during curing at an elevated temperature. In order to monitor the quality of the sealing system, specimens' mass were measured before and after the heat curing period and the rate of moisture loss was negligible (<0.1%). GPC and OPCC specimens were heat-cured in an oven one hour after completion of the casting. Twelve different heat curing conditions applied to the identical concrete samples consists of three different temperatures of 60, 75 and 90 °C and four curing periods of 8, 12, 18 and 24 h. After finishing of the heat curing period, samples were demoulded and stored in the controlled room at a temperature of 23 ± 2 °C until the testing date. Apart from the heat curing regimes, both GPC and OPCC samples were also cured under sealed ambient condition (SAC) which is storing of the sealed specimens in a controlled room at a temperature of 23 ± 2 °C just after completion of the casting until the day of testing. Furthermore, lime-water curing (LWC) is also applied to the selected OPCC samples as the well-known standard curing condition for the conventional Portland cement concrete. The compressive strength of GPC and OPC concretes was measured at 1, 3, 7 and 28 days of age using a 3000 kN universal testing machine. Specimens were tested under a load rate control condition with a load rate equivalent to 20 ± 2 MPa compressive stress per minute, following the Australian Standard AS 1012.9. All the cylinders were ground flat on both ends before performing the tests. The compressive stress-strain behaviour of the specimens was also studied. Uniaxial compressive load was applied and the axial and circumferential strain was recorded by means of extensometers/strain gauges mounted on the specimen as shown in The static chord modulus of elasticity was calculated based on the data recorded, in accordance with the Australian Standard AS 1012.17. The Young's modulus was determined as the secant modulus, measured at a stress level equal to 40 percent of the compressive strength of concrete. The average compressive strength at 1, 3, 7 and 28 days of age, as well as, 28-day modulus of elasticity (MOE) for each curing regime (3 replicates) are reported in The ambient-cured fly ash based geopolymer concrete investigated in this study, exhibited very low compressive strengths at early ages compared to identical specimens cured at elevated temperatures (60–90 °C). At age 28 days, the ambient-cured GPC reached a strength of around 40 MPa which was 35% less than the highest strength of the heat-cured geopolymer concrete (i.e. 62.3 MPa). The appropriately heat-cured GPC achieved more than 90% of its 28-day compressive strength after just 24 h. For example, the GPC cured at 75 °C for 18 h obtained a strength of 55.9 MPa after 1 day which is 93.2% of its 28-day compressive strength. As discussed elsewhere by the first author As shown in The stress–strain curves of GPC and OPCC specimens for all the curing conditions are shown in Therefore, it can be concluded that, in fly ash based geopolymer concretes, increasing the curing temperature and time results in a more brittle post-peak response although the modulus of elasticity and maximum stress increases at the same time. However, for Portland cement concrete, the reverse is true. Heat-curing causes a less brittle fracture and more ductile post-peak behaviour for OPC concrete. The reason for this observation could be the increased amount of porosity (micro-pores) in the cement paste matrix due to accelerated heat curing. The influence of porosity on stress-strain behaviour of Portland cement concrete has already been mentioned in previous research Appropriate heat curing of GPCs also helps further reaction of the fly ash particles and reduces the amount of unreacted ash grains within the geopolymer matrix. The FA grains are not fully dissolved during the geopolymerisation process, and the reaction takes place mainly in the surface layer of the solid particles to form primary geopolymer gel Modulus of elasticity is an important property of concrete. It is used to determine the deflection of structures for serviceability requirements and in seismic analysis for deformation and drift calculations. Modulus of elasticity is also used in prestressed concrete for calculating the elastic shortening of concrete and creep loss. Current models for conventional Portland cement concrete may not take into consideration the complexity and difference of geopolymer concrete, and thus may predict the modulus of elasticity of GPC inaccurately. Many researchers have recognized aggregate characteristics as an important parameter in predicting modulus of elasticity of concrete. However, curing time, curing temperature, and testing age for GPC and OPCC should also be considered as important parameters in predicting modulus of elasticity, in addition to the aggregate characteristics and compressive strength. In this section, the modulus of elasticity models for geopolymer and conventional concrete are proposed based on regression analyses of the experimental data. The proposed models for modulus of elasticity of GPC and OPCC are presented as Eqs. The proposed models are compared with ACI 363R (1992) and AS3600 (2009) design codes. Several researchers have proposed linear expressions that are a function of concrete compressive strength to predict the strain at peak stress. Popovics Regression analyses have been done on the raw GPC and OPCC strain at peak stress versus compressive strength data. The strain at peak stress model for the GPC and OPCC is developed based on this analysis and is presented in Eqs. The proposed models are compared with Setunge The ultimate concrete strain ( Regression analyses have been undertaken on the raw GPC and OPCC ultimate concrete strain versus compressive strength data. The Attard and Setunge's  The stress-strain relationship of plain, unconfined concrete in compression is necessary for the analysis of structural elements. The stress-strain relationship is in general known to depend on a number of interrelated test parameters such as the water-cement ratio, type of binder(s), aggregate properties, mixture proportions, and rate of loading. The post-peak branch of the stress-strain curve is also affected by testing conditions, including frictional restraint between the platens and the specimen, rotation of the spherically-seated platen, and testing machine stiffness This study aims to develop a stress-strain relationship for low calcium fly ash based GPC and heat-cured OPCC. The essential parameters that determine the slopes of the ascending and descending branches are formulated in the previous sections, including the modulus of elasticity, strain at peak compressive strength, and ultimate concrete strain. Non-linear regression analyses were performed on the results from the GPC and OPCC tests with different curing conditions and the stress-strain relationships presented below also consider the curing conditions. The proposed compressive stress–strain relationship for GPC and OPCC presented in Eqs. Aslani et al. From In order to check the models reliability, the stress strain curves obtained experimentally by Hardjito et al. Twelve different heat curing conditions were applied to geopolymer and Portland cement concrete samples. The compressive strength, modulus of elasticity and stress-strain behaviour were measured. Heat-cured fly ash-based geopolymer concrete samples developed compressive strengths ranging between 27.4 and 62.3 MPa and modulus of elasticity ranging between 13.5 and 25.9 GPa at age 28 days. The Portland cement concretes obtained 28-day compressive strength in the range 42.6–64.5 MPa and modulus of elasticity of 28.7–35 GPa. It was observed that the compressive strength and elastic modulus of fly ash-based GPCs increased with increasing curing temperature up to 75 °C and curing duration up to 24 h. Heat curing decreases the long term compressive strength of OPC concrete by up to 34% and the modulus of elasticity by 18%. Non-linear regression analyses were conducted in order to develop simple and reliable models for the modulus of elasticity, strain at peak compressive strength, and ultimate concrete strain for GPC and OPCC. These proposed models have been shown to provide good agreement with the experimental results. The compressive stress-strain relationship has also been developed using the proposed modulus of elasticity, strain at peak compressive strength, and ultimate concrete strain models for both GPC and OPCC mixtures. The following conclusions can be drawn from the experimental results and the analytical studies conducted in this study; The existing stress-strain models previously developed for Portland cement concrete, such as Collins and Mitchell's Collins and Mitchell's The inclusion of the curing parameter ( This research work is funded by the