The authors present a surgical technique using a collinear reduction clamp through the modified ilioinguinal approach (MIA) for anteromedially displaced acetabular fractures along with the surgical outcomes. Between October 2010 and June 2015, 15 patients underwent surgical treatment for anteromedially displaced acetabular fractures; 10 both-column fractures and 5 anterior column and posterior hemitransverse fractures. Anteriorly displaced anterior column fragment and medially displaced quadrilateral plate fragment were simultaneously reduced using a collinear clamp and fixed with a 3.5mm-reconstruction plate through MIA. Postoperatively, anatomical reduction was achieved in 12 patients, while imperfect reduction was achieved in 3. At a mean follow-up of 49.0 months (range, 24–93 months), the mean Postel Merle d’Aubigné score were 16.3 and the mean VAS score was 0.9. Final radiographic grades according to Matta system were excellent in 13 patients and good in 2. Surgical technique using a collinear reduction clamp through the MIA can provide satisfactory outcomes in anteromedially displaced acetabular fractures.Treatment of anteromedially displaced acetabular fractures can be more challenging because of two-directionally displaced fracture components and their close proximity to neurovascular structures. Although it was not specifically classified as a single type according to the Letournel and Judet classification system, a new effort to classify it as a single type has been tried, recently The modified ilioinguinal approach described by Karunakar et al. A collinear reduction clamp (Synthes This study aimed to report the surgical outcomes of anteromedially displaced acetabular fractures reduced with a collinear reduction clamp through the modified ilioinguinal approach (MIA). The current study hypothesized that modified ilioinguinal approach and the collinear reduction clamp are available to treat this fracture type. Surgery was performed with the patient in the supine position on a radiolucent imaging table (Radiolucent Imaging Top®, Mijuho OSI, CA, USA) with manual traction according to the original descriptions of Karunakar After surgery, non-weight bearing on the operated side was maintained for about 4 weeks; thereafter, tolerable weight bearing with a pair of crutches was allowed. Full weight bearing was permitted about 10 weeks after surgery depending on the degree of radiographic fracture consolidation. Between October 2010 and June 2015, 15 consecutive patients with anteromedially displaced acetabular fractures were operated using a collinear reduction clamp through the MIA. The study group included 13 men and 2 women with a mean age of 47 years (range, 22–65 years). According to Letournel and Judet classification, there were both-column fracture in 10 patients and anterior column and posterior hemitransverse fracture in five patients ( At the final follow-up, the Postel Merle d’Aubigne (PMA) score ( All patients were followed up for a minimum of 2 years with a mean 49.0 months (range, 24–93 months). Anatomical reduction of the acetabular fracture was achieved in 12 patients and imperfect reduction was achieved in 3 patients on plain radiographs. At the final follow-up, radiographic grades were excellent in 13 patients ( Regarding complications, foot drop and weakness of the ipsilateral lower extremity was reported in one patient with a both-column fracture. This was ultimately diagnosed as lumbosacral plexopathy, which probably occurred during the reduction and bleeding control around the sciatic notch. At the final follow-up, he had partially recovered. In addition, one lateral femoral cutaneous nerve lesion was observed that recovered completely at 6 months’ follow-up ( Anteromedially displaced acetabular fractures are generally caused by impaction of the femoral head into the quadrilateral surface and superomedial dome, which displaces the quadrilateral plate medially and the anterior column anteriorly. It may be difficult to obtain anatomical reduction and firm fixation without a sufficient surgical field and appropriate reduction tools in these two-directionally displaced fractures The MIA based on the modified Stoppa approach eliminates the need for dissection around the lymphatics, limits the release of the inguinal ligament, and allows for easier plate passage through a larger medial window, compared with the conventional approach In anteromedially displaced acetabular fractures, a collinear reduction clamp can be a very simple and effective tool for reducing and simultaneously maintaining two-directionally displaced anterior column and quadrilateral plate components based on the current findings. In addition, interfragmentary compression between two-directionally displaced fracture components can be achieved easily and simultaneously by sliding the feed rod of a collinear reduction clamp, thereby reducing the gap in the fracture site and achieving a congruent joint surface. It is also used as a temporary firm fixator so that no additional device or temporary fixation is necessary. We could achieve satisfactory reduction and surgical outcomes in almost all cases by using a collinear reduction clamp in this specific fracture type. Several authors have developed new fixation strategies for medial infrapectineal buttress plates in medially displaced quadrilateral plate fractures This study is limited by its small cohort size and retrospective nature despite the prospectively collected data. Also, there was no comparative group treated with other approaches or reduction instruments. However, to date, no comparative study exists in the published literature and there has been little information about this specific fracture pattern treated with this specific reduction tool and modified ilioinguinal approach. Accordingly, we believe that important information can be gleaned from this small cohort because this study included a uniform cohort of patients who sustained anteromedially displaced acetabular fracture and were treated through the same anterior approach by a single surgeon at a single institution. We are not aware of any clinical series specifically assessing the results of the MIA using a collinear reduction clamp in anteromedially displaced acetabular fractures, although these have been used widely in the treatment of acetabular fractures. The current findings show that anteromedially displaced acetabular fractures can be treated successfully using a collinear reduction clamp through the modified ilioinguinal approach with satisfactory surgical outcomes and fewer complications. In anteromedially displaced acetabular fractures, surgical technique using a collinear reduction clamp through the MIA for two-directionally displaced fracture components is reliable and reproducible. It leads to favorable surgical outcomes after a minimum of two years’ follow-up. However, comparative studies with larger cohort and long-term follow-up, which use different approaches and reduction techniques for this fracture type, are needed to confirm our results. The authors declare that they have no competing interest. There was no financial support for the study. JHY planned and designed this study and wrote this article. DKK gathered data of patients and created figures and tables. CYJ and JHH wrote and reviewed this article.