The objective of this work is to determine the concentration profile of a saturated polydisperse ore tailing sediment without the presence of flocculant and in steady state. To this end, a method to resolve the balance of effective solid stress σ(z) and concentration profile ϕ(z) is developed. This method considers a stress distribution in a saturated and static granular medium in equilibrium with the hydrostatic pressure of the surrounding fluid. To resolve the coupled problem (σ(z),
                     ϕ(z)), a new constitutive equation for the volumetric solids fraction is proposed based on the concept of the compressibility of porous material. As a result, a method to estimate the axial concentration and effective stress distribution profile as a function of quantifiable physical parameters is obtained. The solution is validated using a series of laboratory experiments consisting of batch sedimentation tests of suspensions at different concentrations and carried out in graduated cylinders. In this work, the experimental results and simulations for three different types of material are presented: a) tailings with high coarse particle content, b) typical tailings and c) copper ore concentrate. It is concluded that the developed model allows the determination of concentration profiles, with the obtained results very close to experimental observations. In addition, the model can characterize a specific tailing type through physical parameter k
                     
                        c
                     . Finally, it is concluded that the effective stress profile obtained by the model is of a non-linear nature, which explains the conventional use of potential or exponential correlations for effective solid stress. In the area of mineral processing, concentration processes such as flotation of copper sulfides generate tailings, which are suspensions of gangue containing types of iron oxides, sulfides and clays. These tailings must be processed using thickeners to recover water and subsequently deposited in tailings dams. In these solid-liquid separation operations such as thickening and tailings deposition, it is essential to know the volumetric solids concentration profiles of the resulting particle beds. The understanding of these profiles allows the quantification of the inventories of the solids of the beds as well as the design of thickeners and operational control In the analysis of stress in granular materials, it is known that frictional forces condition the distribution of stress between the particles and the wall the vessel To respond to the objectives laid out in this study, a coupled model whose numerical solution consists of solid stress and concentration profiles has been developed. In order to illustrate the development of the model, in Part 3, Theory and Calculation, we begin by establishing the differential equation for the distribution of effective stress in saturated sediment. Then a new constitutive equation for sediment is developed. Next, a methodology to obtain numerical solutions of the profiles is proposed. In addition, a case study of a conventional thickener typically used in solid-liquid separation operations in Chile is presented. Finally, the experimental validation of the coupled model in this study is shown. To carry out the experimental tests, various types of particulate matter from tailings and copper concentrates were used. In particular, this work presents the results for 3 materials: a) coarse tailings, b) fine tailings, and c) copper ore concentrate. The physical properties and parameters of these particulate materials are detailed in For the suspensions, distilled water without flocculant at a temperature of 20 As shown in To carry out the tests, suspensions for each type of material were prepared at different initial concentrations As a result of the experimental tests and sampling, a collection of The phenomenon of non-flocculated polydisperse solid particle sedimentation in a viscous fluid for the generation of a water-saturated sediment was studied in order to model the axial solids concentration profile. The experimental tests were carried out in graduated cylinders of internal dimensions As shown in Pressure can be measured directly using a manometer because it corresponds to the pore pressure. In this case, the particles are in contact with each other, establishing a transmission network of forces that generate effective solid stress To develop the sediment stress model, we considered a control volume (CV) in static equilibrium, such as that shown in The term The area of the transverse section Eq.  Formation of non-flocculated sediment Initially, there is a suspension with a concentration Variation of solids concentration with effective stress The physicochemical mechanisms of aggregation of particles that operate within the range of colloidal size, that is, under ~ The following boundary conditions are considered. The case of interest in this work corresponds to the expression Calculation of the maximum stress Effective stress is manifested on boundary Thus, a first approximation for It can be observed from results (7) and (8) that the model allows the boundary condition In this work a methodology to calculate the concentration and stress profiles in a water-saturated sediment in static equilibrium is proposed. To this end, Eqs. To initiate the iterations, values must be assumed for Two iteration levels are considered. An internal iteration cycle is used to determine the constant A second iteration cycle is used to determine the value of In From these solutions ( The obtained stress profiles are shown in In The curves presented in  In Considering the correlations of The main conclusions can be summarized as follows. The granular nature of sediment implies that the effective stress profiles are not linear, as shown in The concentration on the surface of sediment The numerical solutions presented in d) Parameter Parameter  We are grateful for the support of CRHIAM Conicyt/Fondap Project-15130015. Diana Celi would like to acknowledge the support of a scholarship from the Ministry of Education Science and Technology (SENESCYT), Open Call 2012-Phase II, as well as the support of the Conicyt Scholarship for Doctoral Studies in Chile 2016 (application N° 21160718).  Solids inventory using the proposed methodology Consider a thickener with an inside diameter of 30.48 [m] and a total height of 6.23 [m], as shown in The mineral used was the same one used in this work in laboratory experiments and characterized in the experimental procedure. Parameter From the numerical solution shown in By performing numerical calculations Solids inventory using the phenomenological theory From the phenomenological theory of sedimentation and consolidation To find a profile of concentrations If Eq. 