Enhanced desulfurizing flotation of different size fractions of high sulfur coal was investigated using the sonoelectrochemical method. The supporting electrolyte used in this process was calcium hydroxide and the additive was anhydrous ethanol. The effects of treatment conditions on desulfurization were studied by a single-factor method. The conditions include anhydrous ethanol concentration, sonoelectrolytic time, current density, and ultrasound intensity. For the coal samples with different size fractions, the optimal experimental conditions for anhydrous ethanol concentration, sonoelectrolytic time, current density, and ultrasound intensity, respectively, are achieved. Under optimal conditions, the raw and treated coals were analyzed by infrared spectroscopy and a chemical method. Pyritic sulfur, organic sulfur, and ash are partially removed. Compared with different size fractions coal, desulfurizing flotation of high sulfur coal by sonoelectrochemistry is an effective technology.The increasing demand for coal has led to more extensive mining of coal seams, so that the mined coal has high sulfur content. Reducing sulfur content in coal prior to its use in many applications is essential. To this end, researchers have focused on searching for simple, economic, and efficient desulfurization methods as this has become an issue of worldwide concern. The process of enhanced desulfurizing flotation of coal using electrochemistry involves simple technology; this process has been reported in several published articles In recent years, the integration of electrochemistry and sonochemistry has given rise to an interdisciplinary method called sonoelectrochemistry. Research in this area has attracted considerable attention, and some of the advantages reported in literature include the improvement of electrochemical progress while obtaining results superior to those obtained by electrochemistry alone High sulfur coal from the Tunlan coal plant in Shanxi, China was used for the experiment. By screening, the coal was separated into samples of different size fractions. The date at which proximate analysis was conducted and the sulfur content of the different size fractions of coal are listed in Electrolytic power was provided by a DH1722 DC-regulated power supply. Graphite (97.4 Other equipment used in the study are an SK250HP ultrasonic cleaner (59 Specific amounts of supporting electrolyte, additive, and coal sample were placed in the electrolytic trough, to which distilled water was added to obtain a volume of 250 The calculations of sulfur and ash reduction are expressed as is the weight of the original dried sample, is the weight of the original dried sample after leaching, denotes the sulfur percentage in the original sample, represents the sulfur percentage in the coal obtained from leaching, is the ash percentage in the original sample, and denotes the ash percentage in the coal obtained from leaching. The effects of sulfur reduction, clean coal yield and sulfur content plotted against ethanol concentration are presented in  The effect of pH plotted against sonoelectrolytic time under the same experimental conditions is presented in In alkaline system, the OH   The sulfur content, yield and sulfur reduction for different size fractions coal when subjected to enhanced flotation using sonoelectrochemical methods, under optimal conditions, are listed in With difference size fractions, the infrared spectra of raw and treated clean coal generated by sonoelectrochemistry-enhanced flotation are shown in Under their optimal conditions, the sulfur content analysis of different size fractions of clean coal by sonoelectrochemistry-enhanced flotation is shown in The study aimed to evaluate the feasibility of enhanced desulfurizing flotation of different size fractions of high-sulfur coal using the sonoelectrochemical method. For the different size fractions coal, the optimal experimental conditions for anhydrous ethanol, sonoelectrolytic time, current density, and ultrasound intensity, respectively, are achieved. Under their optimal conditions, the optimal ultrasonic intensity are 1.2 This project was supported by the