Again the improvements in this volume owe a lot to the collective use of the second edition by many classes of students, from their comments relating to content, to the reworking of  Students using the first edition are thanked for providing useful feedback to improve the presentation in a general way and for testing the concepts of most of the problems. My former and present students in polymer chemistry have I am grateful to numerous contacts in industry and environmental laboratories who contributed technical information included in this book. I would particularly like to thank the following: B.R. Buchanan, Dow Chemical Inc.; W. Cary, Suncor; R.G.M. Cosgrove, Imperial Oil Enterprises Ltd.; F.G. Colladay, Morton Salt Co.; J.F.C. Dixon, Canadian Industries Ltd.; R.W. Ford, Dow Chemical Inc.; T. Gibson, B.C. Cement Co.; G.J. Gurnon, Alcan Smelters and Chemicals Ltd.; D. Hill, B.C. Forest Products; J.A. McCoubrey, Lambton Industrial Society; R.D. McInerney, Canadian Industries Ltd.; R.C. Merrett, Canoxy, Canadian Occidental Petroleum; S.E. Moschopedis, Alberta Research Council; J.C. Mueller, B.C. Research; J.A. Paquette, Kalium Chemicals; J.N. Pitts, Jr., Air Pollution Research Centre, University of California; J.R. Prough, Kamyr Inc.; J.G. Sanderson, MacMillan-Bloedel Ltd.; A.D. Shendrikar, The Oil Shale Corp.; J.G. Speight, Exxon; A. Stelzig, Environmental Protection Service; H.E. Worster, MacMillan-Bloedel Ltd. They have been credited wherever possible through references to their own recent publications. I also thank all of the following individuals, each of whom read sections of the text in manuscript form, and C.G. Carlson who read all of it, for their valuable comments and suggestions: R.D. Barer, Metallurgy Division, Defence Research Establishment Pacific G. Bonser, Husky Oil Limited R.A. Brown, formerly of Shell Canada M.J.R. Clark, Environmental Chemistry, Waste Management Branch, B.C. Government H. Dotti, Mission Hill Vineyards M. Kotthuri, Meteorology Section, Waste Management Branch, B.C. Government J. Leja, Department of Mining and Mineral Process Engineering, University of British Columbia L.J. Macaulay, Labatt Breweries of B.C., Ltd. D.J. MacLaurin, formerly of MacMillan-Bloedel Ltd. R.N. O’Brien, Department of Chemistry, University of Victoria M.E.D. Raymont, Sulphur Development Institute of Canada W.G. Wallace, Alcan Smelters and Chemicals, Ltd. R.F. Wilson, Dow Chemical Canada Inc. M.D. Winning, Shell Canada Resources Ltd.  Some of the line drawings and one photograph are borrowed courtesy of other publishers and authors, as acknowledged with each of these illustrations. To all of these I extend my thanks. It would be tempting to blame any final errors on computer programming glitches which may, occasionally, have been the case. It would be appreciated if errors from any source were brought to my attention.