Combined leaching of solid wastes to electrodeposition can be an attractive technique for their optimal beneficiation. In most investigations in the area, results are given in terms of energy consumption and selectivity, without thorough analysis of the rates of the various processes involved. The present investigation deals with the significance of transport and transfer phenomena involved in relation to reaction processes, in a cell combining electroassisted leaching to electrodeposition in view to designing treatment processes of manufactured wares after their end of life. The case of the so-called black mass of used Ni–Cd batteries has been considered here, for the separate productions of nickel salts and metal cadmium. First, leaching of the various hydroxides contained in the black mass has been studied either upon addition of acid or by electrochemical generation of H+ at the anode. Moreover, transport of the metal cations produced from the anode compartment to the cathode through the cloth acting as the separator has been investigated through a simple description of transport phenomena. Comparison and discussion of the various transport or reaction rates could show that ion transport through the porous separator could represent the rate-determining step.Concentration of protons (mol Concentration of metal ions in the solution (mol Particle diameter (m) Damköhler number Faraday constant (96487 A.s eq Cell current (A) Mass transfer coefficient at suspended particles (m Rate constant of surface chemical reaction (m Overall transport coefficient (m Molar mass (kg Mass amount of solid particles (kg) Number of particles Transport rate of species Mole amount of species Mole amount of suspended hydroxide (mol) Mole amount of species Mole amount of species External area of the cloth (porous barrier) (m External area of suspended particles (m Volume of liquid (m Volume of suspended particles (m Dimensionless ratio Leaching degree Mass fraction of species Faradaic yield Density (kg Initial Anode Cathode Cadmium Cobalt Hydrogen evolution Species i Nickel Surface The domain of combined metal recovery and treatment of solid waste has been the topic of a number of fundamental and applied works for two decades because of its significance in both environmental and economic aspects: toxic species have to be separated then rendered inert while valuable compounds have to be converted to their best forms for further use or trade. Among the electrochemical techniques offered As a matter of fact, dissolution of the solid phase relies upon complex combination of mass transfer of the reactive species – here H The present investigation deals with the significance of the various transport and transfer phenomena in relation to reaction processes, for the case of the electroassisted leaching of the black mass recovered from used Ni–Cd batteries. In particular, leaching of the various hydroxides contained in the black mass has been studied and a model has been developed for interpretation of the experimental observations. Besides, transport of metal cations from the anode compartment to the cathode chamber through the polymeric cloth employed has been investigated. Comparison of the various transport rates could evidence the rate-controlling process. The black mass considered here was obtained by dismantling spent Ni–Cd batteries (Sanyo Cadnica KR 7000 F). Packaging matter i.e. metal and plastic envelopes together with paper wrapping, was first separated, so that only the content of the electrode materials – metal, metal hydroxides and carbon – was considered here. Several batteries have been dismantled and the solid matter of the electrodes was collected into one large fraction. Physical and chemical features of the dark solid collected were evaluated. As expected, Co is a minor component in the solid to be treated at approx. 2.5 The size distribution of the solid waste collected directly from the batteries could be grossly determined by mechanical sieving. Because the solid particles to be leached in the electrochemical cell have to be separated from the other compartment by a cloth, it was preferred for these tests not to grind any further the solid mixtures. As shown in The morphology of the particles is far from uniform, with the presence of small grains evoking broken needles a few micrometers long together with larger entities with apparently similar crystal orientations ( Tests of electroassisted leaching coupled to electrodeposition were carried out in a cell, whose design derives from that of previous investigations The two chambers were separated by a polypropylene (PP) cloth (Mortelecque) between two 3 Leaching tests of the solids for estimation of the overall kinetics have been achieved in a 200 In electroassisted leaching tests, 165 Preliminary experiments conducted in the laboratory showed that compact and adhering Cd deposits could be produced at 350 In a first attempt, the model was developed for single metal hydroxide particles, subject to the following assumptions: Leaching consists of mass transfer of protons to the solid surface and subsequent surface reaction. The overall leaching rate is controlled by both mass transfer and surface reaction with respective rate coefficients The solid consists of single metal hydroxide particles, with initial mass amount Particles are considered monodisperse spheres, with initial diameter The initial concentration of H Along the run, the proton concentration in the bulk, The surface concentration of protons at the particle surface The model equations consist of two mass balances, one on the metal species in solid form, the other on H Leaching of multicomponent solids has been investigated, however, neglecting any possible hindrance by the dissolution of less reactive phases on the dissolution of more reactive solid phases. Besides, the solid has been assumed to consist in the mixture of various single hydroxide particles—e.g. formed by mixing pure Cd hydroxide particles to pure Co(OH) The solid is a blend of various species i, with initial weight fraction Metal nickel cannot be leached in sulphuric solutions at concentrations below 2 For application of the model, it has been first assumed that leaching of Cd hydroxide was controlled by mass transfer, with a very high surface reaction rate. Because of the particular flow conditions in the anode chamber of the cell, mass transfer coefficient at the suspended solid could not be estimated with accuracy and this assumption had to be made; the validity of the assumption is discussed later. Defining subscript i equal to 1 for Cd, Simulations have been carried out considering various The agreement between theory and practice is shown in Although leaching of multicomponent particles likely differs from that of a blend of single-metal particles, the model proposed here allows interpretation of black mass leaching: Cadmium hydroxide can be rapidly leached, under significant mass transfer control of protons to the solid surface; Nickel and cobalt hydroxides are leached more slowly due moderate reactivity of the solid surface, as expressed by finite chemical rate constants. The surface reaction step involved in the dissolution process appears to have comparable meaning and significance for the two hydroxides. The finite value of the rate constant, which may express possible inhibition of the surface by a species contained in the black mass is of a moderate interest, since it is to depend on the morphology of the two hydroxides. It has to be expressed that the physicochemical nature of the “surface chemical process” is very little known, at least from this macroscopic investigation. What has only been demonstrated here is that for the two metals, phenomena differing from the external mass transfer to the particle surface have a strong controlling effect on the overall leaching rate. Whatever the nature of this rate-controlling process, the overall first-order process with rate constants For closer understanding on this evidenced phenomenon, further work would be required, in particular through examination of the surface morphology of the various hydroxides forming the solid particles. Numerous discontinuous runs have been carried out to determine the best operating conditions Because the paper is mainly devoted to analysis of the various transport and reaction rates in the overall process, we limited the presentation and the discussion of the experimental data in terms of time variations of concentrations in the various species and estimation of transport coefficients. The aspects more related with applied electrochemistry will presented in another paper. In a first attempt, electroassisted leaching of black mass could be investigated independent of metal deposition by inserting the anionic membrane between the two compartments: therefore no transport of protons and metal cations occurred in the cell, and the protons generated at the anode were consumed by leaching of the black mass introduced in the chamber. For this purpose, as explained above, the run was conducted at 350 In the anodic chamber, 20 The cathodic chamber was filled with 165 The experimental variations of cation concentrations in the anode chamber are shown in The model developed for chemical leaching can be extended to the present case upon addition of a source term corresponding to water oxidation (proton generation). Eq. At the cathode, the amount of Cd The run had to be stopped after 4 The two compartments were separated by one of the polymeric clothes described in Section Three dedicated tests have been run with the two clothes, in all cases with dissolution of 20 For Run 1, the current density was fixed at 350 Run 2 was designed for closer investigation of transport phenomena. The current density was fixed at 350 Run 3 was performed with the looser cloth PP-289 with continuous electrolysis at 350 Separators, namely clothes or porous non-reactive barriers prevent from the transport of non-soluble species, while allowing transport of dissolved compounds. As a matter of fact, in addition to diffusion and migration phenomena, convection through the porous medium can also occur. The intensity of the three transport processes depends on pressure, concentration and potential fields, the porosity of the medium and its pore size distribution, as well as the solution conductivity. Various laws can be applied in view to modelling the complex system. In the present case, because of the multicomponent nature of the system investigated and the poorly defined flow conditions, it was preferred to use the preliminary simple approach described below. Convection flux is proportional to the product of local concentration and fluid velocity—resulting from stirring or pumping. Assuming equivalent flow conditions in the two compartments, the convection flux of species i is proportional to Diffusion flux is usually ruled by concentration gradients: the corresponding rate is to be little significant in the bulk of the two chambers, but more significant in the vicinity of the cloth: in this area it can be considered proportional to concentration difference ( Migration flux, although proportional to the local concentration, depends also on the potential gradient, but in any case, the migration flux of a given species has the same direction in the two compartments, e.g. from the anode to the cathode side for cations. In the above approach, the overall transport flux has been assumed as being proportional to the concentration difference between the two chambers: The data for Runs 1 and 2 have been summarised in Interpretation of Run 3 was conducted by using Eq. Analysis of the various steps involved in the overall process carried out under the above operating conditions can be achieved in terms of characteristic times. The worked example was 20 Leaching of the millimetre-sized hydroxide particles in a stirred vessel in an acidic solution can be carried out within time lapses varying from a few minutes to one hour, depending on whether the operation is mainly limited by mass transfer of protons to the solid, or by other (slower) phenomena. Grinding the black mass more finely would largely accelerate the leaching rate of Cd hydroxide but the partial control by surface chemical reaction in the dissolution of the two other hydroxides would not be modified. Electroassisted leaching occurs upon H Considering that 0.056 Two main cation species are generated by leaching: Cd The present work was aimed at highlighting transport phenomena in a process with electroassisted leaching coupled to electrodeposition for separation and beneficiation of valuable matters in used Ni–Cd batteries. The technique has been shown to allow high selectivity in Cd separation from Ni and Co salts by efficient electrodeposition after the electroassisted leaching of the mixed hydroxide solid. The energy consumption although of an acceptable level, is larger than those offered by electrowinning or electrodeposition processes, mainly because of the cell voltage—in the range 6–10 Considering the lab cell used here, the rate of the overall process is controlled to some extent by the electrogeneration of protons to be consumed in hydroxide leaching, by the electrochemical deposition of one of the metals contained in the used batteries, and more strongly by the transport rate of cations to the cathode compartment through the porous barrier. Presumably, ion exchange membranes exhibiting mass transfer coefficients one order larger than the clothes used, could allow shorter operation times. However membrane surfaces can be damaged by the presence of suspended solids in the stirred compartment, or be fouled with deposit of inert matter produced by the dissolution of the black mass as observed in preliminary tests The initial number of moles of solid metal hydroxide, Dimensionless diameter