The present study investigates different strategies for the treatment of a mixture of digestate from an anaerobic digester diluted and secondary effluent from a high rate algal pond. To this aim, the performance of two photo-sequencing batch reactors (PSBRs) operated at high nutrients loading rates and different solids retention times (SRTs) were compared with a semi-continuous photobioreactor (SC). Performances were evaluated in terms of wastewater treatment, biomass composition and biopolymers accumulation during 30 days of operation. PSBRs were operated at a hydraulic retention time (HRT) of 2 days and SRTs of 10 and 5 days (PSBR2-10 and PSBR2-5, respectively), whereas the semi-continuous reactor was operated at a coupled HRT/SRT of 10 days (SC10-10). Results showed that PSBR2-5 achieved the highest removal rates in terms of TN (6.7 mg L−1 d−1), TP (0.31 mg L−1 d−1), TOC (29.32 mg L−1 d−1) and TIC (3.91 mg L−1 d−1). These results were in general 3–6 times higher than the removal rates obtained in the SC10-10 (TN 29.74 mg L−1 d−1, TP 0.96 mg L−1 d−1, TOC 29.32 mg L−1 d−1 and TIC 3.91 mg L−1 d−1). Furthermore, both PSBRs were able to produce biomass up to 0.09 g L−1 d−1, more than twofold the biomass produced by the semi-continuous reactor (0.04 g L−1 d−1), and achieved a biomass settleability of 86–92%. This study also demonstrated that the microbial composition could be controlled by the nutrients loads, since the three reactors were dominated by different species depending on the nutritional conditions. Concerning biopolymers accumulation, carbohydrates concentration achieved similar values in the three reactors (11%), whereas < 0.5% of polyhydrohybutyrates (PHB) was produced. These low values in biopolymers production could be related to the lack of microorganisms as cyanobacteria that are able to accumulate carbohydrates/PHB.Wastewater treatment with microalgae is regarded as an economical and environmentally friendly process with the additional advantage that the biomass produced can be reused, allowing an efficient nutrient recycling ( In spite of the benefits, microalgae-based wastewater treatment technologies face operational limitations and challenges, such as the high costs derived from biomass separation from the treated wastewater ( In a previous work by A mixed culture composed by green algae, cyanobacteria, bacteria, protozoa and small metazoa was used as inoculum. It was collected as thickened biomass (100 mL) from a harvesting tank connected to a pilot closed-photobioreactor (30 L) already used as tertiary wastewater treatment ( Experiments were performed at lab-scale in three photobioreactors consisting of a closed polymethacrylate cylinder with an inner diameter of 11 cm, a total volume of 3 L and a working volume of 2.5 L each. Experiments were carried out during 30 days, and all of them were submitted to light/dark cycles of 12 h each. Illumination during the light phase was supplied by two external halogen lamp (60 W) placed at opposite sides of each reactor and providing 220 μmol m Two of the reactors were operated in a sequencing batch operation mode at a HRT of 2 days. One of these photo-sequencing batch reactors (PSBR), named PSBR The influent treated in the reactors consisted on uncentrifuged digestate diluted in secondary effluent in a ratio of 1:50 (characteristics are shown in Nutrients monitoring was carried out by analyzing samples taken from the reactors at the end of the dark phase, after settling. All parameters were determined in triplicate and analyzed from the influent (mixed digestate and secondary effluent) and the supernatant of each reactor. Note that in the case of the reactor SC Nitrogen was measured as total ammoniacal nitrogen (TAN), nitrite (N-NO Phosphorus compounds analyzed were inorganic phosphorus (IP) measured as orthophosphate (dissolved reactive phosphorus) (P-PO Total organic carbon (TOC), Total inorganic carbon (TIC), soluble organic carbon (OC) and soluble inorganic carbon (IC) were measured from raw and filtered samples using a C/N analyzer (21005, Analytikjena, Germany). The volumetric load (Lv-X) of each nutrient (TOC, TIC, TAN, NO Total suspended solids (TSS) and volatile suspended solids (VSS) were measured in the mixed liquor at the end of the dark phase three days per week. In PSBR Biomass production of each reactor in [g VSS L Settleability [%] was determinate according to the following formula: Microalgae composition was qualitatively evaluated by means of microscope observations twice per week using an optic microscope (Motic, China) equipped with a camera (Fi2, Nikon, Japan) connected to a computer (software NIS-Element viewer®). Cyanobacteria and microalgae species were identified Carbohydrates and polyhydroxybutyrates (PHB) content were measured twice per week in the biomass sampled from each reactor at the end the dark phase and before the settling period. Then, 50 mL of mixed liquor were collected and centrifuged (4200 rpm,10 min), frozen at −80 °C overnight in an ultra-freezer (Arctiko, Denmark) and finally freeze-dried for 24 h in a lyophilizer (−110 °C, 0.049 hPa) (Scanvac, Denmark). PHB and carbohydrates extraction and quantification was performing the methodology described in Due to the different HRT, nutrients volumetric load applied to PSBR As it can be observed in Within the wastewater treatment context, due to the similar TN concentrations in the three reactors ( On the other hand, TP in the effluent showed different patterns than those observed for TN. In general, the best performance was obtained in the semi-continuous reactor (SC These patterns in the three reactors depended on the mineralization of TOP in all the reactors ( Regarding wastewater treatment, the best TP removal efficiencies were achieved in SC Regarding the uptake of the different carbon species, although the effluent in three reactors averaged similar concentrations along the experimental time ( Given the results obtained, it is clear that the treatment efficiency of both PSBR Regarding the concentration of biomass, all the reactors showed an exponential increase during the first two weeks of operation. In the SC In spite of the clear increase patterns registered in the biomass concentration, the highest biomass production was achieved in PSBR According to the microscopic monitoring, the microbial composition in SC In PSBR On the other hand, PSBR In addition to the lack of dispersed cells observed by microscopy in PSBR Considering these systems for biomass production, this study demonstrated that microbial composition could be controlled by nutrients loads and, at the same time, influenced by the SRT. For instance, it was shown that protozoa and diatoms can survive in a wide range of nutrients loads since their presence was observed in either low loads (SC Another important result to consider is that bacterial presence increased more in PSBR It is important to highlight that although microalgae based wastewater treatments similar to the ones described in this study, have been successfully used for the treatment of digestate from different sources, the majority of the studies until now have employed batch or semi-continuous operation ( As mentioned in Section In this study, nutrients removal and biomass growth were analyzed in photosynthetic sequencing batch reactors (PSBR) treating digestate diluted with secondary effluent. Two PSBRs were operated at hydraulic retention time (HRT) of 2 days and solids retention time (SRT) of 10 and 5 days, comparing the results obtained with those of a semi-continuous (SC) reactor operating at HRT and SRT of 10 days. PSBR showed removals rates of 30 mg L The authors would like to thank the European Commission [INCOVER, GA 689242] and the Spanish Ministry of Science and Innovation [project FOTOBIOGAS CTQ2014-57293-C3-3-R] for their financial support. Dulce Arias kindly acknowledge her PhD scholarship funded by the National Council for Science and Technology (