Ground ultrafine and nano- materials are mainly produced by wet stirred media milling. The product related stress model can be used for the optimization of such grinding processes; the operational parameters can be related to the particle size or specific surface of the product. At the same time, for many materials dry grinding is required. During dry stirred media milling different problems arise, such as aggregation, agglomeration and particles sticking on the mill liners and on the grinding media. Consequently, the processes taking place in the mill and the effects of the operational parameters on the product properties are not as thoroughly known as in the case of wet stirred milling. In the present paper the application of the product related stress model for product dispersity control in dry batch stirred media milling is presented. Modifications of the models' main parameters such as stress intensity and stress number are introduced. The applications of the modified main parameters are presented for the optimization of the material and grinding media filling ratio, as well as functions for the characterization of the effect of the stress number and stress intensity on the product. With the introduced modifications, the product related stress model proved to be suitable for the characterization of dry batch stirred media milling.In the last decade demand has increased for fine (< The properties of a bulk material can be divided into two main groups from the grinding point of view: (1) dispersity, characterized by the particle size distribution, particle shape, surface morphology and by the interfacial properties, and (2) structural properties, such as crystal structure, amorphous, microstructure, and impurities in the particle. The common purpose of grinding is to decrease the particle size or to increase the specific surface area; however, during grinding not only these properties can be changed, but other dispersity properties may be modified, including particle shape and the structural properties of the material. The above-described properties are collectively called “property function” ( The control of the product properties made from dispersed materials can be done by the process function. A processing technology can be described by the process function ( The grinding kinetics based on the experience of dry batch ball milling ( The demand for ever-decreasing grinding fineness has resulted in the replacement of traditional ball mills with stirred media mills, which make possible the needed drastic increase in energy-transfer intensity along with the required decrease in the grinding media size. A stirred media mill is a high energy density mill which is used for industrial nano-size particle production, mainly in wet mode. The effectiveness of the mill has been established; however, its application in dry grinding is still limited today. The stirred media mill is an important milestone in the mill development, because while previously the movement of the grinding media was carried out by rotation (ball mill) or vibration (vibration mill) of the milling chamber, in this case the rotation of the concentrically or eccentrically placed rotor makes the grinding media move. As a result, the grinding media collide with each other; are pressed to the mill liners; and collide with the rotor. The particles of the feed material are fractured by the impact, pressure, collision and friction stresses. Changing the rotor velocity over a wide range – compared to the ball mill, where the stress intensity can be changed only in a limited range – allows the stress intensity to be changed over a wide range, which opens new horizons in the field of comminution. German researchers ( Based on findings from wet stirred media milling ( In another set of studies, a series of dry grinding tests were performed in a prototype continuous horizontal stirred mill to investigate the effect of operating parameters such as stirrer speed, feed rate, media filling and ball size, considering the degree of size reduction and the energy consumption. The test results showed that the stirrer speed, the media size and the media filling are directly proportional and the feed rate is inversely proportional with the specific energy consumption ( In another study ( The mechanical activation of cement in a batch stirred media mill was investigated by Particle size or specific surface of the product can be related to the operational parameters by the product related stress model, thus creating a basis for control of the stirred media milling in wet mode. Dry stirred media milling based on such an approach was investigated by Based on the literature study it can be concluded that only a few papers deal with dry grinding in stirred media mills and in these papers different types of stirred media mills were used, mainly in continuous mode. Moreover, no overall model exists, so the effect of operational parameters was investigated separately, despite the numerous parameters and the experience gaining in wet stirred milling. This paper presents a modification of the product related stress model for the characterization of dry batch stirred media milling, the method used for the study and the experimental results obtained. Furthermore, the functions suitable for the characterization of the effect of the stress number and stress intensity on product dispersity are presented. Three grinding experiment series in a dry batch horizontal stirred media mill were carried out with different material and at various values of grinding media filling ratio, rotor circumferential velocity, grinding media diameter, grinding media density and grinding time. The laboratory-scale stirred media mill was designed and built by the Institute of Raw Material Preparation and Environmental Processing, University of Miskolc. The stirred media mill is equipped with a high-wear-resistance (Al During the experiments 45–106 and 106–160 The milling was performed by loading the feed material and the grinding balls into the grinding chamber and starting the mill. After a certain time the grinding media and the free-moving mass fraction were taken out and separated from the grinding beads by sieve. The weight of the grinding media and the free-moving mass fraction was measured. A small sample (< The particle size distribution of the ground material was determined by a Horiba LA-950 V2 type laser diffraction particle size analyser in distilled water. During the measurement process 1 Grinding experiments were carried out to investigate the effect of the grinding media φ The effect of the stress intensity and stress number was investigated in more detail in a separate experimental series. During these experiments the grinding media diameter and density and the rotor circumferential speed were changed. The material filling ratio was 50%; the grinding media filling ratio was 60% during the measurements. The rotor circumferential velocity v The main parameters of the product related stress model are the stress number SN and stress intensity SI based on the experience of wet grinding. In order to use the model for the optimization of dry batch grinding the application should be investigated and some theoretical modifications should be made. The following equation was presented for the determination of the stress number in wet grinding ( In the case of dry grinding, instead of the suspension concentration Based on this, the stress number of dry batch grinding SN The material filling ratio φ The following equation was presented for the determination of the stress intensity in wet grinding ( This equation is only valid if: only single particles are stressed intensively between the grinding media and, therefore, the stressed particle volume does not depend on the grinding media size, the tangential velocity of the grinding media is proportional to the circumferential speed of the discs, the diameter of the discs is kept constant, and the elasticity of the feed material is much smaller than that of the grinding media ( In the case of dry batch grinding single particle stressing can be done only when the fine particles do not stick on the grinding media surface, so the grinding is adhesion free. However, this criterion is not feasible, because during ultrafine and nano-grinding the drastically increasing specific surface is accompanied by very high free surface energy, which leads to the agglomeration phenomenon. During the calculation of the stress intensity acting on the particle during a stress event, the effect of the adhered particles on the grinding media should be taken into account: The following sections present the application of these modifications for the optimization of the material and grinding media filling ratio and for the characterization of the effect of the stress number and stress intensity on the products dispersity. The effect of the material filling ratio (pore filling between the grinding media) on product fineness can be seen in The change of the specific surface as a function of the stress number is shown in   The increase of the material filling ratio The reason for the decrease in energy utilization as a function of the stress number in the measured SN range (see During the calculation of the stress intensity acting on the particles during dry grinding, it should be taken into account that a particle layer sticks to the grinding media surface and the stress intensity is decreased by this effect. As the particle layer on the grinding media surface is thicker, the stress intensity is even lower. Taking this into account, the following formulations are suggested: When estimating the number of the free-moving particles involved in grinding, it is necessary to introduce the change in the number of particles (N The effect of the grinding media filling ratio can be seen in  The increase of the grinding media filling ratio φ The change of the specific surface area as a function of the stress number at different stress intensities can be seen in With the change in the stress intensity SI, different specific surface area–stress number S  The summarizing evaluation of the grinding experiments carried out by different grinding media diameter, density and rotor circumferential speed can be seen in A theoretical figure ( Particle shaping: the stress intensity is lower than the value necessary for the breakage of the feed particles; the particle size does not decrease. However, in this section the abrasion of the particle surface is carried out, resulting in the rounding and surface roughness reduction of the particles. The different particle shaping tasks have different optimal operational parameters which can be determined based on the work of Grinding: as the stress intensity increases the median particle size decreases until a minimum point. In this section the main change is particle size reduction, so classical grinding can be carried out effectively in this section. The grinding in a dry batch stirred media mill has an optimal SI value as well at a constant specific grinding work. Grinding efficiency decrease: further increase of the stress intensity does not result in further particle size decrease, which can be explained by two different effects: (1) based on the experience of wet grinding, a drastic decrease in the stress number and (2) aggregation, agglomeration and sticking phenomena during dry stirred media milling. Stirred media mills can be used for different purposes in dry batch mode, such as particle shaping, grinding or mechanical activation. However, ground material with desired properties can be produced only when the operational parameters are set properly and the effect of the stress number and stress intensity on the product dispersity is known. Measurement results demonstrate that the product related stress model is suitable for the characterization of dry stirred media milling, with the following adjustments: the stress number can be calculated by the following equation the stress intensity can be calculated by the well-known Eq. The measurement results proved that in the dry batch grinding of brittle materials in a stirred media mill based on the product related stress model the curves of the S stress intensity [Nm] stress number (wet grinding) [−] stress energy [Nm] energy utilization [cm stress number (dry grinding) [−] grinding media filling ratio [%] material filling ratio [%] rotor circumferential velocity [m/s] grinding media diameter [mm] grinding media density [kg/dm grinding media porosity [%] material porosity [%] rotor revolution [1/min] volume of the grinding chamber [dm suspension concentration [%] volume of the pores between the grinding media [dm volume of the feed material [dm thickness of the adhered particle layer on the grinding media surface [μm] number of the free moving particles inside the grinding chamber number of the particles inside the grinding chamber number of the adhered particles inside the grinding chamber the work necessary for the compression of the particle bed [J] thickness of the particle layer before the stress [μm] thickness of the particle layer after the stress [μm] force necessary for the particle layers' compression [N] This research was supported by the