This paper investigates the performance of a beta-type Stirling refrigerator. The proposed refrigerator has twin tubular evaporator and condenser. The tubes of both evaporator and condenser have insertions of multiple twisted metallic tapes inside them. In the proposed refrigerator, a wire net regenerator is suggested. The working fluid is selected to be Helium. Rhombic drive mechanism controls the synchronization of the reciprocation of both the displacer and the piston. A computer program in the form of a spreadsheet is prepared to solve the refrigerator cycle numerically. The results get the more suitable dimensions of the evaporator, the condenser, the regenerator, and the more suitable stroke to bore ratio of both piston and displacer. The refrigerator develops 0.000283 TR/cc, COP = 0.5297 at 800 rpm. The comparison among the present work and previous ones shows that; the present refrigerator explores an enhancement in COP up to 100%, especially at low-speed levels.Surface area, m2 Cylinder bore, m Tube diameter Gear radius Friction coefficient Heat transfer coefﬁcient, wm-2K-1 Wire mesh number, pores/inch Minor losses coefficient Thermal conductivity, wm-1k-1 Length, m Mass, kg Mass ﬂow rate, kg/s Speed, rpm Number of twisted tapes Number of transfer of units Power, w Pressure, pa Heat transfer rate, w Speciﬁc gas constant, Jkg-1 K-1 Crank radius, m Length of the drive mechanism links, m Reynolds number Stroke, m Stanton number Temperature, K Time, s Overall heat transfer coefficient, Wm-2K-1 Volume, m3 Velocity, ms-1 Tape width, m Coordinates, m Pitch length of twisted tape (180° rotation), m Phase angle, Regenerator effectiveness Crank angle, Connecting rod angle, Viscosity, Density, Porosity Compression space Charging Clearance Condenser Cooling water Displacer Expansion space Evaporator Hydraulic Maximum Minimum Inner conditions Outer conditions Piston Positive overlap Regenerator Schmidt Swept Tube Total Thermal Transport Port Twisted-tape The wire of the regenerator Recently, Stirling refrigerators systemized as low power consumption, tiny sizes, light weights, long lifetime, easy to manufacture, high performance, rapid cool-down, low starting power, and low pollution levels. The refrigerators used as coolers for high-temperature superconducting devices, infrared sensors, and home appliance due to their environmental friends as they have no side effects on Ozone layer deterioration, [ The aim of the present work goes towards using the tubular heat exchanger with the insertion of twisted metallic tapes as an evaporator and a condenser in the proposed beta type Stirling refrigerator. Choice of this type of heat exchangers is due to it has a cooling load considerably higher than that of a plain tube with no insertion. This is attributed to the stronger swirl which enhances the turbulence intensity, and so, higher convective heat transfers than the axial-flow through the plain tube. Also, the existence of such tapes reduces the dead volume which reduces the power required to drive the refrigerator. The paper is sequenced as the following manner; description and analysis of the proposed refrigerator in the vision of Schmidt theory, section The proposed beta-refrigerator shown in Referring to  Referring to According to Schmidt assumptions [ The total charged mass of the working fluid is: Thus, Schmidt Referring to The heat absorbed and rejected rates are as follows [ The frictional pressure drop due to the fluctuating flow through the evaporator and the condenser can be determined as follows [ A cylindrical regenerator which forms of successive homogeneous layers of stainless steel wire net suggested. The pressure drops through the regenerator due to fluctuating flow was determined as follows [ The regenerator effectiveness is: The elliptic A computer program in the form of a spreadsheet was prepared to solve the previous equations numerically; all parameters calculated instantaneously at the crank angle. The temperature of the refrigerated space kept constant at −10 C also the cooling water temperature kept constant at 20 °C. The crank angle changed at 1.0 - degree step. The crank angle changed at 1.0 - degree step. The regenerator effectiveness kept more than or equal 97%. The bore set at 0.1 m. The outer diameter of the casing shell fixed equal the bore for the evaporator and a condenser. The dimensions of the heat exchangers, number of twisted tapes, stroke, phase angle, charging pressure, and speed was varied to get the more suitable values that result in higher cooling load and The more suitable data of the beta type Stirling refrigerator are as following, Referring to Referring to Referring to Referring to Referring to In From A microcomputer simulation of Stirling cryocoolers using Helium as a working fluid done by Ref. [ The proposed refrigerator can be derived by a solar powered Stirling engine as shown in The Analysis and design consideration of mean temperature differential Stirling engine for solar application was done by Ref. [ Referring to the data of the solar powered Stirling engine of [ The Modelling of a Stirling engine with parabolic dish for thermal to electric conversion of solar energy was done by Ref. [ Referring to the data of the solar powered Stirling engine of [ The present work deals with the performance of beta type Stirling refrigerator using shell and tube heat exchanger with multiple twisted tapes inserts inside the tubes of the evaporator and the condenser. The principal dimensions of the refrigerator that result in higher cooling load and better The more acceptable dimensions of the refrigerator to develop higher heat removal rate with a considerable The existence of the insertion of twisted tapes inside the tubes of both evaporator and condenser enhances the performance of Stirling refrigerators by about 32%. The enhancement ratio corresponding to the number of twisted tapes is as follows; 8.5% for single tape, 16% for double tapes, 23% for triple tapes and 32% for fourth tapes respectively. The refrigerator can be manufactured using the calculated dimensions to validate its performance experimentally. A case study for the possibility of the proposed refrigerator to use a solar powered Stirling engine as a prime mover was provided. The comparison among present results and previous one shows a so-well-suited and so-acceptable trending and shows that the present refrigerator explores an enhancement in  The tubular heat exchangers with the insertion of multiple twisted metallic tapes inside the tubes suggested for alpha and gamma types of Stirling refrigerators. The tubular heat exchangers with the insertion of multiple twisted metallic tapes inside the tubes suggested for Stirling engines and heat pump using solar energy.