In this study, an alternative method for processing mixed nickel‑cobalt hydroxide precipitate to separate the nickel from cobalt and manganese is proposed and evaluated. The proposed method comprises a leaching step using sulfuric acid to dissolve the nickel and cobalt from mixed hydroxide precipitates, and subsequently, an oxidative precipitation step to separate the dissolved nickel from cobalt and manganese using ozone as the oxidant. The results of the leaching experiments showed that 97% and 96% of the nickel and cobalt can be dissolved in the leaching step while leaving 92% of the manganese in the residue using 1.0 mol/L sulfuric acid solution at 25 °C, a slurry density of 100 g/L and leaching duration of 2.5 h. The results of the oxidative precipitation experiments showed that complete precipitation of the dissolved cobalt and manganese can be achieved using ozone as oxidant with nickel co-precipitation of about 8.8% at 25 °C, equilibrium pH of 5.0, oxidant gas flow rate of 1 L/min and precipitation duration of 2 h. The ability of ozone to affect cobalt and manganese oxidation into their higher valence enables their precipitation as cobalt oxyhydroxide and manganese dioxide, respectively, and their separation from nickel was demonstrated in this study.Most of the existing hydrometallurgical processing plants for nickel laterite ores use intermediate precipitation processes to recover the nickel and cobalt from the leach solution. The precipitation process produces an intermediate product of nickel and cobalt either as mixed sulfide precipitate (MSP) or mixed hydroxide precipitate (MHP) while largely separating these two metals from major impurities such as manganese, calcium and magnesium. Mixed sulfide precipitation processes have a higher selectivity for nickel and cobalt over manganese and magnesium resulting in a lower level of impurities compared to mixed hydroxide precipitation. The operation of a sulfide precipitation process, however, is relatively expensive and complex because this process requires the use of hazardous hydrogen sulfide gas at elevated temperatures and pressures. An additional complication is that MSP is not readily leachable under atmospheric pressure conditions and thus, an autoclave is required to redissolve the nickel and cobalt for subsequent separation and product recovery. The hydroxide precipitation route is, therefore, more favourable over sulfide precipitation particularly for simpler processing plants as it avoids the technical complexity and intensive capital required to recover the nickel and cobalt. Since mixed hydroxide precipitation processes are not highly selective against manganese, the refining process of the produced MHP must incorporate a measure to separate manganese from the nickel and cobalt before their recovery. One industrial approach to achieve this separation is via ammonia-ammonium carbonate leaching which is able to selectively dissolve nickel and cobalt over manganese as nickel and cobalt form stable amine complexes while manganese is thermodynamically stable in its hydroxide or carbonate forms ( An alternative industrial approach is to leach MHP in sulfuric acid and subsequently separate cobalt and other elements from the nickel sulfate solution using organophosphinic extractants such as Cyanex 272 ( Recently, Byrne, Hawker and Vaughan ( In this study, a similar processing method that exploits the difference in the oxidasability of nickel, cobalt and manganese is proposed but using ozone as oxidant. The proposed approach is to firstly leach the MHP with sulfuric acid solution to achieve complete dissolution of the nickel and cobalt prior to oxidant addition and pH adjustment to separate the nickel from cobalt and manganese. Ozone is proposed as an alternative oxidant to persulfate because (1) it has higher reduction potential, which is 2.08 V compared to 2.01 V of a persulfate relative to the standard hydrogen electrode ( Previous investigators have demonstrated that ozone can oxidise and precipitate manganese ( The reports on the oxidative precipitation of nickel with ozone in the presence of cobalt were, however, inconsistent. The main focus of this study is to determine the separation performance of the proposed processing method to treat mixed nickel‑cobalt hydroxide precipitates at a laboratory scale under industrially relevant operating conditions. The effect of time, acid concentration and slurry density on the metal dissolution and subsequently, the effect of time, temperature and oxidant gas flow rate on the separation of manganese and cobalt from nickel are discussed. An industrial MHP sample was used which is originally from a nickel laterite processing plant in Western Australia, similar to the sample described in The chemical composition of the MHP sample is shown in The reagents used in the present experiments were sulfuric acid (98% purity), anhydrous sodium hydroxide (99% purity), nitric acid (65% purity) and hydrochloric acid (37% purity). These reagents were of analytical grade and distilled water was used to dilute or dissolve the reagent if needed. Leaching of the MHP sample was carried out in a 1 L glass reactor with hotplate heating and agitation provided by a magnetic stirrer. A reflux condenser was attached on the reactor to minimise evaporative losses. A thermometer was also attached and partially immersed in the slurry to monitor the temperature of the system during mixing. Control of the temperature was carried out manually by adjusting the heating level as needed. The volume of the lixiviant and stirring speed were kept constant at 300 mL and 300 rpm, respectively, in all leaching experiments. About 2 mL of solution sample was collected using a sampler equipped with a filter at its tip at a pre-determined time interval after the leaching experiment was started. To maintain a constant solid-to-liquid ratio in the system, 2 mL of the lixiviant was added after each sampling. At the end of each leaching experiment, the slurry was filtered through Whatman qualitative filter paper No. 1. The filtrates were later used in the precipitation experiment. The leaching (dissolution) extent of each metal as a function of time was calculated based on the weight of the metal in the solution and the initial weight of the metal in the MHP sample as follow: The experimental setup for the oxidative precipitation experiment is shown schematically in Before the precipitation experiment was started, the solution was first exposed to ozone for 2 h in a pre-oxidation step to raise the oxidation-reduction potential (ORP). The time for the precipitation experiment was then started when sodium hydroxide solution, which was used as the neutralisation agent, was added into the reactor to adjust the pH while the solution was being contacted with the ozone. The pH measurement was performed by using HANNA HI8424 pH-meter equipped with HI1230B pH probe. The precipitation extent of each metal as a function of time was calculated based on the difference of the weight of the metal in solution after and before the experiment relative to its weight in the feed solution as expressed in the following equation: The dissolution of a divalent metal, Me, from its hydroxide form, Me(OH) The results of the leaching experiment at various sulfuric acid concentrations ranging from 0.7 to 1.5 mol/L shown in The results clearly show that nickel and cobalt were more readily leached than manganese since only 8% of the manganese was dissolved at the third hour of leaching with the 1.0 mol/L sulfuric acid solution. The results also show that manganese co-dissolution in the leaching step is relatively insensitive to the increase in acid concentration as it was only slightly enhanced despite the considerable increases in the amount of hydrogen ion at higher acid concentrations. The results, therefore, indicate that most of the manganese was present in its oxidised forms and can be easily separated from the nickel and cobalt in the leaching step. The effect of slurry density on the nickel, cobalt and manganese dissolutions at a slurry density ranging from 50 to 200 g/L was carried out using 1.0 mol/L sulfuric acid solution at 25 °C. The results, as shown in Therefore, the dissolution with 1 mol/L acid and slurry density of 100 g/L is more desirable than that with 50 g/L because the lower slurry density provides only slight increase in the nickel and cobalt dissolutions but nearly doubles the volumetric requirement of the lixiviant to produce identical throughput of the two metals and halves their concentrations in the pregnant leach solution. The latter is particularly undesirable for the subsequent recovery step of the nickel such as by electrowinning which needs a sufficient level of concentration of the metal cation. In addition, the use of the lower slurry density increases the co-dissolution of manganese more significantly. Hence, it was determined that leaching with 1.0 mol/L sulfuric acid at a slurry density of 100 g/L and temperature of 25 °C for 180 min was an optimum condition. The oxidative precipitation experiment was carried out at pH 5.0 using the obtained filtrate from the previous leaching experiment under the optimum condition as the feed solution, which contained 48.1, 1.8 and 0.3 g/L of dissolved nickel, cobalt and manganese, respectively. The effect of precipitation duration, oxidant gas flow rates and temperature were investigated. Profiles of cobalt, manganese and nickel precipitation percentage as a function of precipitation time at 25 °C, oxidant gas flow rate of 1 L/min and pH of 5.0 is shown in Due to the precipitation induction period, it is suggested that cobalt oxidation according to The formation of cobalt oxyhydroxide (CoOOH) rather than cobaltic hydroxide (Co(OH) While both manganese and cobalt are stabilised in the solid phase by preferential oxidation, the results of the present experiment show that oxidative precipitation of manganese proceeds much easier than cobalt. This is consistent with the thermodynamic predictions for oxidative precipitation of divalent aqueous iron, manganese, cobalt and nickel shown in The occurrence of water oxidation, which is thermodynamically favoured, during the oxidative precipitation experiment was not visually observed given the nature of the experiment which involved introducing gas into the reactor. The effect of temperature on the cobalt, manganese and nickel precipitation at a pH of 5.0, oxidant gas flow rate of 1 L/min and precipitation duration of 2 h is shown in The fact that nickel precipitation was decreased following the decrease in the concentration of dissolved ozone in the solution indicates that the co-precipitated nickel was that of the oxidised nickel species. This is apparent from the results of Profiles of cobalt, manganese and nickel precipitation as a function of oxidant gas flow rate at the rate range of 1 to 3 L/min, temperature of 25 °C, pH of 5.0 and precipitation duration of 2 h, are presented in The proposed MHP leaching using a sulfuric acid solution that would provide about the same stoichiometric amounts of hydrogen ion to dissolve the nickel and cobalt from the MHP was found to be capable of dissolving almost all of these two metals while leaving the majority of manganese in the solid phase. Such high dissolution of the nickel and cobalt suggests that these two metals were not passivated in this leaching process, which is often observed with ammonia-ammonium carbonate leaching ( The results of the oxidative precipitation process showed that a nickel-rich solution containing 43.8 g/L of nickel with only 0.001 and less than 0.0001 g/L of dissolved cobalt and manganese, respectively, can be produced from a feed solution that contains 48.1, 1.8 and 0.3 g/L of nickel, cobalt and manganese, respectively. The ratio of nickel to cobalt concentration in the produced solution was about 42,000 which is significantly higher than those reported from the nickel-rich solutions produced by solvent extraction in Queensland Nickel using LIX® 84 and Bulong Nickel Operation using Cyanex® 272 (an organophosphinic acid extractant), which were about 4000 ( It is helpful to make a note on the energy requirement to produce ozone for the proposed technique. Based on the rate of nickel, cobalt and manganese oxidation at the most optimised condition found in this study, about 27 g of ozone was consumed per kg MHP sample assuming that each mole of cobalt and nickel consumed half a mole of ozone and each mole of manganese consumed one mole of ozone. The manufacturer of the ozone generator used in the present study claimed that the energy efficiency of the ozone generation was about 22 kWh per kg ozone. Depending on the efficiency of ozone utilisation, therefore, the energy requirement for ozone generation can be as low as 0.6 kWh per kg MHP sample using the present experimental setup. Notably, the power consumption for generating ozone is continuously decreasing following the advancement of the technology ( The experimental results obtained in this study showed that the proposed method is able to dissolve most of the nickel and cobalt from the mixed nickel‑cobalt hydroxide precipitate and separate the dissolved nickel from the cobalt and manganese. The leaching step was able to dissolve 97% and 96% of the nickel and cobalt, respectively, from the precipitate while leaving 92% of the manganese in the residue using 1.0 mol/L sulfuric acid solution at 25 °C and a slurry density of 100 g/L. The dissolved cobalt and manganese were then able to be separated from most of the dissolved nickel via oxidative precipitation using ozone as oxidant at a gas flow rate of 1 L/min, equilibrium pH of 5.0, temperature of 25 °C and precipitation duration of 2 h. Under these conditions, a nickel-rich solution containing 43.8 g/L of nickel with only 0.001 and less than 0.0001 g/L of dissolved cobalt and manganese, respectively, can be produced from a feed solution that contains 48.1, 1.8 and 0.3 g/L of nickel, cobalt and manganese, respectively. Hence, the results suggest that the proposed processing method can circumvent the need for a solvent extraction step to produce a high purity nickel product from mixed nickel‑cobalt hydroxide precipitates.