Based on the requirements and available sample amounts in geometallurgical studies of ore variability, a small scale batch grindability test has been developed, the Geometallurgical Comminution Test (GCT). The test requires 220g of sample material and can be conducted within 2.5–3h. Test results are evaluated using a modified Bond equation together with a linear correlation factor. The test and evaluation method have been validated against several ore types.Time and accuracy of measurements of ore comminution behavior are most relevant when setting up an appropriate geometallurgical programme, e.g. for predicting the throughput of a mineral beneficiation plant for varying ore properties. Established comminution test methods require comparatively large amounts of sample material and are time demanding and therefore costly ( Test methods used for characterizing ore comminution behavior range from rock mechanical tests over various particle breakage tests to bench-scale grindability tests. The latter group of tests includes the well-known Bond test method ( The Bond test applies a standardized ball mill of 305      Besides its long processing time and the significant sample mass requirement, it has also to be considered that the Bond test is subject to some uncertainty related to the variable number of grinding cycles for reaching steady-state, the circumstance that energy is not really measured, and its susceptibility to procedural error due to the human factor in testing. Several suggestions have been made over years to modify the Bond test in order to minimize the timely effort and sample amount needed while keeping the required level of reliability. More particularly, this involved (i) the development of single-pass or batch comminution tests instead of simulating a locked-cycle grinding process, (ii) the utilization of smaller grinding mills together with the original Bond test procedure, (iii) or the reduction of the number of test cycles based on certain assumptions and/or complemented by simulations for determining an estimate of the Bond ball mill grindability. Further, it can be mentioned that also tests for wet grinding were developed to overcome the problems related to very fine dry grinding (  Smith and Lee used an earlier version of Bond’s empirical formula (Eq. A simple batch test for wet and dry grinding was developed by Outokumpu (   Also for the SGS Modbond grindability test an open circuit dry batch test was used for estimating the Bond work index after calibration against the standard Bond ball mill test (  A shortened procedure for the Bond grindability test was also suggested by As an alternative to testing, correlations of the Bond index with sample properties have been investigated. From the analysis of the different test modifications and their performance parameters it can be concluded that an efficient and at the same time small-scale comminution test is still missing for geometallurgical testing with very small samples. Therefore, a novel batch grindability test, the Geometallurgical Comminution Test (GCT), is suggested here, which is characterized by the following requirements: Minimize the necessary sample amount to what is available in geometallurgical testing, Significantly reduce the processing time and related costs, Exclude or minimize process related errors during test conduct, Use a small and inexpensive standard laboratory mill. In order to provide a comminution test method suitable to analyzing even small drill core samples the GCT – Geometallurgical Comminution Test programme has been developed at Luleå University of Technology. The entire test programme involves crushability and grindability test work as well as mineralogical analyses for both entire, samples as well as selected sieve fractions ( As part of the test procedure a small scale batch grindability test has been defined as a shortcut test method for estimating the Bond ball mill work index. For this test a small laboratory ball mill is used that has a volume of ca. 1.4 The suggested batch grindability test involves the following steps: Sample preparation: Preparation of 220 Test execution: Dry batch grinding test of the sample is done using cumulatively 2, 5, 10, 17 and 25 Particle size: The particle size distributions are numerically evaluated for the 80% passing size. Additionally the sample amount below the target product size is determined corresponding to the grindability analysis within the Bond procedure. Energy for grinding: Recording of the gross electrical power draw during the grinding test is done using a conventional energy meter. To overcome the limited precision of the meter an energy-time relation has been established for the experimental setup. The mechanical power provided to the mill is back-calculated using efficiency data for both electrical engine and mechanical drive ( Evaluation: Experimental data evaluation and GCT work index calculation as described in the following paragraphs using spreadsheet calculation. The evaluation of the grinding test results is then based on the Bond formula for calculating the specific energy for grinding W:     Potential differences in the shape of the product particle size distribution compared to a locked-cycle test with screen are neglected in the calculation of the   The proportionality constant k divided by 10 is denoted as the GCT work index and can be determined using the several data pairs of W and The suggested approach to data evaluation takes up the earlier formulation of the Bond equation, where energy is expressed by gram per number of mill revolutions passing the target particle size:  The derived GCT work indices are higher than the Bond work index from the standard test. This might be explained by the different evaluation methods but also by the lower energy intensity in the small ball mill. By introducing appropriate correction factors, the GCT work index can then be correlated to the original Bond work index based on common target product particle size of 106 For validation of the small scale grindability test procedure and the development of a correlation between the GCT work index and the standard Bond work index, grinding tests were carried out with fifteen samples from different types of deposits in the Nordic countries having wide mineralogical variations. For each sample the full Bond grindability test was conducted following the Bond standard test procedure and results from that were compared with the GCT grindability test. The target product size in all the tests was kept constant at 106 The small scale grindability test was performed by using a Capco jar mill, type 337SS, with a steel ball charge of 1.3 Full Bond grindability tests were done in a standard ball mill with an internal diameter of 305 Different mineral samples were collected from mines in Sweden, Norway and Finland that can be categorized into three major groups: The first category was a group of oxide ores including magnetite and hematite from iron ore deposits in Northern Sweden. Originally, these ore samples were the starting point for developing the GCT and main focus when analyzing ore comminution behavior in the geometallurgical context, i.e. magnetite dominated ore (FAR) and hematite dominated ore (HAR) were collected after pre-concentration in the cobbing plant in Malmberget and used as reference samples during the entire investigation. Composite magnetite (MGT) and hematite (HMT) ore samples were received via belt cut from the processing plant in Malmberget and introduced to the investigation plan to study the effect of sample variations in geometallurgical comminution testing. The samples from the Kiruna iron field ore deposit is known as magnetite-apatite deposit having fine grained magnetite. The mineral include besides _Fe oxides actinolite, K-feldspar, albite, phlogopite, chlorite, titanite, quartz, and talc ( The second category were sulphide ore samples which comprise gold deposits, porphyry copper and massive sulphide deposits from Boliden mine sites (KSM and RSM). Other samples falling into this category were dominated massive zinc (RS1) and massive chalcopyrite-pyrite (RS2) from another ore deposit in the Skellefteå area. The occurrences of the massive sulphide are associated with felsic pyroclastic rocks, quartz porphyries and minor mafic volcanites ( The third category was a group of non-metallic minerals that included pure quartz, calcite and olivine. The quartz and calcite sample were received from two different mines in Norway. The quartz was received from Elkem quartz deposit having a simple mineralogy. The calcite sample from Brønnøysund in Northern Norway contained coarse grained calcite marble ( A brief summary of the sample description is given in In In a first step, the grinding tests were analyzed with respect to the grinding progress and in order to exclude possible anomalies. It can be seen that all the grinding curves were monotonously decreasing with increasing within the grinding time, i.e. none of the mineral samples showed indications for overgrinding or agglomeration and coating effects during the test. Comparing with the original Bond tests, the GCT grinding curves were running below the curves obtained with the large mill, thus indicating lower energy intensity. Further, the linear relation between energy for grinding and the 80% passing product particle size was examined.  Comparing the results from the two grindability tests revealed that there is a linear relationship between the work indices. When taking into account the geometric scaling factor between small mill and Bond mill and a correction of the GCT work indices for mill drive and engine efficiency, a remaining linear correlation factor of 4.0 can be derived from the experimental data. The model for estimating the Bond work index from GCT test data is then given by:  η Mill drive and engine efficiency, η λ Geometric scaling factor, λ  The three samples of industrial minerals, however, showed larger deviations. Complementing the tests with these samples with smaller sample mass to compensate for the lower density did not show significant differences. Also, some of the metal ore samples had densities in the same range. From that it has to be concluded that a more complex dependency on texture and mineralogy is controlling the comminution behavior. The estimation of the Bond index could be improved by adjusting the linear correlation factor or by introducing another model parameter in Eq. The results received from the tests were also compared with the mineral composition and related properties of the samples as described in The test can be further optimized with respect to timely effort by reducing the number of time steps. As discussed above, this is much depending on the individual sample. This can involve shorter tests as in the case of FAR (see In order to assess the repeatability of the measurement by GCT, at least three experiments for each sample were performed. Based on the measured particle size distributions and the interpolation for determining the 80% passing particle size, the relative error was approximately 1.4%. Otherwise, the GCT testing procedure involves errors from sample preparations, i.e. splitting and weighing, and from measuring specific grinding energy. All in all, the experimental results could be reproduced within good precision. However, looking at the entire chain from sampling over testing to geometallurgical modeling it must be concluded that the whole procedure is very much determined by the quality of the sample selection. I.e., errors within sampling affecting representativeness cannot be compensated by higher accuracy of the test and model. A single pass grindability test for geometallurgical testing has been developed and validated against full Bond grindability tests for fifteen different ore samples. The test results from the GCT reveal that the method itself is precise and capable of reproducing a work index. The suggested evaluation method for estimating the Bond work index from the GCT work index is possible with a relative error of on average 5.1%. Compared to the full Bond grindability test the following advantages can be highlighted: The test uses a very small roller-driven laboratory ball mill in conjunction with an ordinary energy meter. The test involves a sequence of up 5 grinding tests with in total 25 The required sample size is only 220 The authors want to point out that the suggested test method is not meant to replace the standard Bond test. It is intended as a complementary approach when working with small scale samples as in the geometallurgical context. The financial support of the