Accurate prediction of phase equilibria in the presence of electrolytes is important for many applications. For hydrate phase equilibria in the presence of salts, the fluid phase equation of state needs to be coupled with a reliable electrolyte model. In this work, various electrolyte models: Debye-Hückel, truncated Debye-Hückel, Pitzer theory and Bromley activity models have been critically evaluated for predicting the mean activity coefficient for various aqueous salt solutions. The Debye-Hückel and truncated Debye-Hückel models give accurate predictions at lower salt concentrations, but a large deviation was observed at molal concentrations higher than about 1 mol/kg. The Bromley activity model and Pitzer theory were found to be good alternatives to the Debye-Hückel models and its modifications. For 1:1 electrolytes, the Pitzer theory and Bromley activity models give accurate predictions up to the saturation limit of salt solutions. Conversely, mean activity coefficient calculations for 1:2 electrolytes (CaCl2, MgCl2 and BaCl2) using the Pitzer theory, Bromley activity model, or Debye-Hückel model and its modification were not able to capture the electrolyte contribution of these salts.Accurate prediction of phase equilibria in the presence of electrolytes is important for many applications such as hydrometallurgy ( The focus of this work was to critically evaluate various electrolyte models used in conjunction with a fluid phase equation of state for ultimately predicting hydrate phase equilibria. Thus, mean activity coefficients and osmotic coefficient data from the literature ( In this section, the electrolyte models are briefly reviewed to illustrate the differences between them. Debye and Hückel ( Complete dissociation of electrolytes. Each ion is surrounded by ions of the opposite charge. Ions are treated as point charges. Electrolyte concentrations are very low (less than about 0.01 M). The Helmholtz free energy ( Here κ is the inverse Debye length and is given as: From Eqs. Eq. Instead of the complete Debye-Hückel model as given by Eqs. A and B in Eq. Further simplification of the Debye-Hückel derivation leads to a more simplistic form of the Debye-Hückel equation. Here, instead of calculating values of A and B from Eqs. Bromley ( It should be noted that Eq. Pitzer extended the Debye-Hückel theory by considering salt as hard spheres, and the radial distribution function is given by (Eq. The activity coefficient of the electrolyte is derived as follows, and has two extra terms in addition to Debye-Hückel term (Eq. Mean activity coefficient calculations were carried out for various salts, up to the saturated solution limit, by implementing the various physical models discussed above in MATLAB. The following sections present the evaluation of those models for 1:1 and 1:2 electrolytes, as well as the effect of temperature on electrolyte activity.   Mean activity coefficient calculations were also performed for other electrolytes, and the average absolute deviations from the experimental data are reported in  Similar analysis was also performed for other 1:2 electrolytes including CaBr The overall average absolute deviations in predicting activity coefficients for 1:2 electrolytes are presented in Salt activity models were also tested for mean activity coefficient calculations from a low to medium temperature range. Pérez-Villaseñor et al ( The modified second ( The temperature dependence of Coefficients for temperature dependency are given in  Model predictions of the mean activity coefficient for potassium chloride are shown in Mean activity coefficient calculations were carried out using various activity models for calcium chloride over a temperature range of 0–40 °C up to the saturation limit ( Mean activity coefficient data for a number of salts have been compiled and used to evaluate various physical models: Debye-Hückel, truncated Debye-Hückel, Pitzer theory and Bromley activity models. All models performed well at low electrolyte concentrations. Expectedly, for Debye-Hückel and truncated Debye-Hückel models, a large deviation was observed at concentrations greater than about 1 mol/kg. For 1:1 electrolytes, the Pitzer theory and Bromley activity models give accurate predictions up to the saturation limit of salt solutions. Conversely, mean activity coefficient calculations for 1:2 electrolytes using the Pitzer theory, Bromley activity model, or Debye-Hückel model and its modification were not able to capture well the electrolyte contribution of these salts. We thank the