C mineralization and aggregate stability directly depend upon organic matter and clay content, and both processes are influenced by the activity of microorganisms and soil fauna. However, quantitative data are scarce. To achieve a gradient in C and clay content, a topsoil was mixed with a subsoil. Single soils and the soil mixture were amended with 1.0mg maize litter C g soil−1 with and without endogeic earthworms (Aporrectodea caliginosa). The differently treated soils were incubated for 49 days at 15°C and 40% water holding capacity. Cumulative C mineralization, microbial biomass, ergosterol content and aggregate fractions were investigated and litter derived C in bulk soil and aggregates were determined using isotope analyses. Results from the soil mixture were compared with the calculated mean values of the two single soils. Mixing of soil horizons differing in carbon and clay content stimulated C mineralization of added maize residues as well as of soil organic matter. Mixing also increased contents of macro-aggregate C and decreased contents of micro-aggregate C. Although A. caliginosa had a stimulating effect on C mineralization in all soils, decomposition of added litter by A. caliginosa was higher in the subsoil, whereas A. caliginosa decreased litter decomposition in the soil mixture and the topsoil. Litter derived C in macro-aggregates was higher with A. caliginosa than with litter only. In the C poor subsoil amended with litter, A. caliginosa stimulated the microbial community as indicated by the increase in microbial biomass. Furthermore, the decrease of ergosterol in the earthworm treated soils showed the influence of A. caliginosa on the microbial community, by reducing saprotrophic fungi. Overall, our data suggest both a decrease of saprotrophic fungi by selective grazing, burrowing and casting activity as well as a stimulation of the microbial community by A. caliginosa.Decomposition of soil organic carbon (SOC) as well as soil aggregation are important processes that regulate soil functions. These processes are influenced by the quality and quantity of SOC and clay ( Generally, one may expect decreased C mineralization in subsoils compared with topsoils, since subsoils are often characterized by a low content of organic matter and reduced microbial activity, resulting in a higher mean C residence time than for topsoils ( Mixing of different soil horizons is a naturally occurring process and is accomplished in temperate ecosystems predominantly by anecic earthworms ( In addition to a stimulating effect on C mineralization, the activity of earthworms may also stabilize C, as has been observed in earthworm casts ( The effect of earthworms on C mineralization and sequestration processes may be mediated by their influence on the microbial biomass. However, studies on effects of earthworms on microbial biomass have yielded contrasting results. In one study, gut passage did not change the microbial biomass ( In general, the processes that govern C mineralization and aggregation in topsoils and subsoils are not completely understood. This is especially true for the effects of earthworm activity on these processes. To elucidate the interaction of aggregation and C mineralization in the presence of earthworms, incubation experiments were conducted with a topsoil, a subsoil and a mixture of the two. Treatments included the addition of maize litter and An incubation experiment was conducted with three different soil materials. Topsoil A was obtained from the upper soil layer (0–10 Soils were sieved (2 Aggregate fractionation was conducted by sieving in distilled water using the method described by Total C and total N, as well as the Microbial biomass C were determined by fumigation extraction ( For the mixed soil AB, we compared all measured data with the mean values of topsoil A and subsoil B. The effects of treatment and soil were tested by analysis of covariance performed with the GLM procedure of the Statistical Analysis System ( Cumulative C mineralization was significantly higher in the mixed soil AB than in subsoil B and topsoil A ( Soil microbial biomass linearly decreased from topsoil A to mixed soil AB and finally to subsoil B ( Ergosterol content was 38% lower in soil mixture AB than topsoil A and there was a significant soil treatment interaction ( Remaining litter C in bulk soil decreased significantly from topsoil A to subsoil B and then to mixed soil AB, suggesting that the mixing of soil stimulated litter decomposition ( Macro-aggregate C was highest in mixed soil AB and lowest in subsoil B ( Higher C mineralization in mixed soil AB than in topsoil A and subsoil B showed a stimulating effect on CO Microbial biomass C was not increased by soil mixing, indicating that priming was due to an accelerated microbial SOC turnover. Overall, priming was most likely due to subsoil OC brought in contact with the higher amount of microbial biomass C of the topsoil. Litter decomposition differed significantly between the soils: overall C mineralization was lower in litter amended topsoil A than in subsoil B and mixed soil AB. This indicates that the use of added C resources by microorganisms in the upper soil layer was more efficient, as microbial biomass was much higher in the topsoil than in the subsoil. This dependency of resource use efficiency on the ratio of substrate to microbial biomass C has been repeatedly observed in incubation ( Litter amendments stimulated C mineralization in the mixed soil more markedly than in the other two soils. The isotopic analyses indicate that litter C remaining in soil after incubation was lowest in the mixed soil AB, indicating that the surplus in SOC mineralization due to soil mixing was accompanied by a stimulation of litter decomposition. The increased C mineralization in the treatments with In contrast to total C mineralization, litter decomposition was increased by Microbial biomass C increased linearly with SOC and clay content of the soils. The microbial biomass C in topsoil A was somewhat higher (30 In addition to observations of selective feeding of earthworms on litter and on litter-colonizing organisms, several experiments have demonstrated that earthworm species selectively feed on fungi ( In our study, the distinct increase of ergosterol in subsoil B with litter addition indicates the importance of plant residues in low SOC soils for saprotrophic fungi. Nevertheless, the ergosterol to microbial biomass C ratio was very high in subsoil B for both the control and litter treatment, suggesting that subsoils are characterized by a high percentage of saprotrophic fungi in the absence of a grazing soil fauna. A similar elevated ergosterol to microbial biomass C ratio was observed by After 49 days of incubation, aggregation patterns and litter-derived C in aggregates in the mixed soil AB were more similar to topsoil A than to subsoil B, indicating that SOC and clay did not linearly affect aggregate formation and incorporation of added plant residues. Incubation of soils with litter and litter High absolute and relative mineralization rates in subsoil B were associated with a low macro-aggregation. Nevertheless, subsoil B showed the highest content of C as well as litter derived C in micro-aggregates, which was also shown for another silt soil ( Mineralization of litter by endogeic earthworms depends upon SOC and clay content, as more litter is mineralized if other C sources are scarce and clay content is low. The high litter decomposition in subsoil B with added Mixing of two soil layers, differing in SOC and clay content, increased C mineralization in the control as well as in the litter amended treatments, demonstrating that SOC and litter priming effects can be observed by mixing SOC from different soil horizons. High mineralization rates in subsoil B per unit SOC occurred together with low macro-aggregation of this soil, whereas in micro-aggregates the content of C as well as litter derived C increased. After mixing subsoil B with topsoil A, the relationship between aggregation and C mineralization was reversed. Further investigations with soils differing in soil texture and content of SOM should be conducted to unravel the processes of aggregate turnover and the formation as well as the effects of C mineralization. In this investigation the opposing effects of The technical assistance of Gabriele Dormann, Karoline Czynski and Claudia Menz is highly appreciated.