The process of melting and recycling magnesium alloys using fluxes produces a residue termed black dross. The black dross investigated contained metal and non-metallic phases with a considerable content of rare earth metals (REEs). The black dross was separated by crushing and screening into metal and non-metallic fractions. The non-metallic fraction was further processed by water and acid leaching. In the water leach, NaCl, KCl and CaCl2 were separated for crystallisation. In the acid leach the residue was treated with hydrochloric acid in order to dissolve the rare earth elements Ce, La, Nd and Pr. Selective precipitation by oxalic acid and solvent extraction using D2EHPA or PC88A enables a recovery of up to 92.6% of the REEs from the oxide-salt-fraction. The equilibrium isotherms of the solvent extraction operation indicate the potential for further separating the rare earth elements. A flow sheet of the whole processes was developed in order to guide industrial application.Black dross is the residue from the recycling and melting of aluminium and magnesium alloys when using fluxes based on mixtures of alkali halide salts. It is usually produced by companies involved in magnesium recycling. It consists of approximately 50–60% salt (mainly chlorides with some fluorides), 25–30% oxides and nitrides, 5–20% suspended or dissolved metal and up to 2% intermetallic compounds ( The non-metallic fraction contains 6.7% metal. The metal fraction consists of about 74% metal and 26% non-metallic components. Chloride and fluoride were not analysed in the present investigations. Typical contents in the oxide-salt-fractions of black dross are 25–30% Cl and 1–5% F ( The processing of black dross arising from the recycling of aluminium is well-established ( As is clear from Besides the elemental composition of the black dross, the mineral phases in the materials are also relevant. Information related to the phases in aluminium and magnesium drosses can be found in the literature: in A process for the treatment of slags and dross from the magnesium melting is described by In the case of melting rare earth containing magnesium alloys such as AE42 (4% Al, 2% RE), AE44 (4% Al, 4% RE), WE43 (4% Y, 3% RE) and WE54 (5% Y, 4% RE) the black dross in addition contains considerable amounts of rare earth. Instead of a single rare earth often mischmetall, for example 50% Ce, 25% La, 15% Nd, 5% Pr and other REEs, are used. For such a material the leaching conditions have to be adapted in order to enable the transfer of REEs into solution. The REEs can be separated by solvent extraction ( In the following section, the recovery process is divided into individual modules. Pieces of about 40 The solution from the acid leach step contains REEs but also a significant amount of Mg and minor contents of Na, K, Ca, Mn, Al, Fe and Be. To recover the REEs, solvent extraction experiments have been carried out using extractants containing 20 For the extraction experiments, two different solutions were used. Both of them were typical REE containing solutions from the acid leach. The one solution was treated directly, whereas for the other the dissolved REEs were precipitated from the acid leach solution by the addition of oxalic acid at pH The composition of the solutions and residues after digestion were analysed by ICP–OES. The arising hydrogen gas from the leaching experiments using water was collected in a burette for determination of its volume as described in The oxide-salt fraction with the identical composition of that of The developing gas during the reaction in the water leach was collected in a burette and its volume was then recalculated to standard conditions taking pressure and temperature into account. The investigations of 5 samples of the oxide-salt fraction resulted on average in a gas volume of 57 The repeated leach operation results in an enrichment of Na According to The mean values of the other elements in solution were 13.2 The composition of the leach residue after filtration, washed with water and dried at 110 It can be observed that the concentrations of the elements of the residue are slightly increasing with the exception of the dissolved Na, K and Ca. Some slight decrease of Fe and Mn can also be noted. At this pH the water soluble Mg- and REE-chlorides are precipitated as hydroxides. Mg, Al, Be, Fe, Mn and REEs as oxides are also hydrolysed to form hydroxides. Fluoride was not analysed. However, it can be assumed that some fluoride is likely to be present because the CaF In this series of experiments the amount of initially used materials was of 100 The Ca and Mg contents of the residues are different in comparison to the residue of the experiments with pH control, The calcium values of the residue are lower. Only two cycles were performed, therefore no significant calcium precipitation effect at this pH by CO The residues from the leaching operations at pH From the figures, it can be observed that the recovery of Nd and Pr is practically 100% whereas for Ce and La it is below 100% even at pH  An experiment using the residue of the water leach without pH-control as feed was also performed. The solid mass feed for the acid leach was 259.4 It appears that the material contains insoluble components other than the readily soluble chlorides and oxides. This assumption can be verified by evaluating the appearance of the residue. Two types of particles are found: a coarse fraction with a metallic appearance and a fine non-metallic fraction. The dried residues were sieved with a 90 At low pH-values, high concentrations of Al and Mn are present in the coarse fraction. There is evidence suggesting that this insoluble Al–Mn-phase corresponds to the well-known intermetallic compound Al While the hydrometallurgical process steps so far are relevant for the processing of dross from magnesium melting operations, the next step is the treatment of the solution with regards to rare earth metals metallurgy. There are different processes to separate the REEs from the other constituents of the solution ( Using the data of Because of the co-extraction of Al, Be and Fe even at a low pH-value of 0.5 and the well-known difficulties of stripping 3-valent iron from D2EHPA with acids ( Subsequently the oxalates were calcined at 800 For comparison purposes, PC88A was used in a number of experiments as an extractant. The initial solution contained 7.8 From the figures, the separation potential can be seen. At pH Using the results from the above described testing of the different process steps, a flow sheet for the processing of REE-containing magnesium black dross is suggested, The residue from the melting process with addition of flux of the REE-containing magnesium alloy AE44 was separated by crushing and screening into a metal and oxide-salt-fraction. Wet sieving is very effective in separating the oxide-salt fraction from the metal. Simultaneously, a water leach step is included. However, extra magnesium metal is dissolved, which is not desirable. Through multiple contacting of the solution high concentrations of NaCl and KCl are achieved for the subsequent crystallisation. The pulp density has to be rather low because of the foaming caused by the evolution of gas. In this process step a considerable volume of gas of 57 Presently such a process is not in use, because of the lower landfill costs. However, with increasing demand for the valuable REEs, processing of REE containing black dross will be soon asked for. As the black dross product is usually produced in small or medium sized enterprises, implementation of the proposed flowsheet in individual operations is less feasible. Potentially, however, companies engaged in the processing of black dross from aluminium recycling with the know-how of the leaching and crystallisation operations can be considered as alternative locations for the treatment of the magnesium material. Another conceivable alternative is that of industrial plants which produce MgCl The experiments for the present investigation have been carried out by the authors during their employment in the Institute of Metallurgy at the Clausthal University of Technology whose contribution is herewith acknowledged.