The fragments from crushed rock are initially very angular. The erosion process causes the fragment shape to evolve from angular to well rounded and affects the mechanical behaviour of granular materials. This report explores the effect of particle shape caused by erosion (E
                     r) on macroscopic and microscopic behaviour under triaxial compression tests of granular materials via the discrete element method. A convex rigid block was employed to model particles with different erosion degrees. After being prepared in the densest condition, all particle assemblies were subjected to axial compression until a critical state was reached. The macroscopic characteristics, including the shear strength and dilatancy response, were investigated. As E
                     r increased, the shear strength generally decreased, and the volumetric strain monotonically decreased. Then, the microscopic characteristics, including the coordination number, particle rotation, percentage of sliding contacts and contact force, were examined. Finally, analysis-related anisotropy coefficients of the entire contact network were evaluated to probe the microscopic origins of the peak and residual shear strength related to E
                     r.Rocks are affected by various natural factors, such as diurnal and seasonal variations in temperature ( The research objects of previous laboratory experiments and numerical simulations have systematically investigated the effects of particle shape on the mechanical behaviour of granular materials, e.g., aspect ratio ( To date, many methods have been used to investigate the effect of particle shape on mechanical behaviour, such as laboratory experiments and field tests. Although these experimental tests have acquired ample macroscopic data and provide insights into aspects of particle morphology, there are still many deficiencies of these methods, e.g., large discreteness of results, poor repeatability of processes and insufficient micro-interpretation ( In this context, we use a 3D DEM particle system to explore the effect of particle shape caused by particle erosion on the mechanical behaviour of granular materials. This work is organized as follows. First, the definition of particle erosion degree and the process of assembly formation are briefly introduced. Then, the macroscopic responses, including the shear strength and dilatancy, are presented. Subsequently, microscopic responses, such as the coordination number, particulate rotation, sliding contact and contact force, are investigated. In addition, the fabric anisotropy of the entire contact network is analysed. Finally, the main conclusions of the work are provided. It is well known that the rounded shapes of pebbles arise because of faster erosion of parts furthest from the centre, which neatly explains why sharp corners are worn away. By laboratory tests, Numerical simulations were carried out using the DEM program PFC Note that the contact type is simplified in PFC6.0 and there is only one contact point for two particles in contact. Namely, different contact types consisting of vertex, edge and face could not be recognized in this study. The simple linear displacement-force contact law ( Particles with random orientations were initially generated within a cube without contact. The cube was modelled using six rigid walls. Taking into account the computational cost, each assembly was limited to 2000 particles. This number is consistent with the similar numbers (1170–3000) used in previous studies ( To eliminate the effect of assembly size and minimize stress non-uniformities, After isotropic compression, conventional drained triaxial compression tests were simulated in this study. The isotropic assemblies were subjected to vertical compression by a downward displacement at a constant velocity of the top wall, while the confining pressure The macroscale stress tensor for microscale quantities of the contact forces and contact vectors is as follows: The purpose of this study is to quantify the effect of particle shape caused by erosion on the mechanical behaviour of granular materials. All assemblies were sheared to an axial strain of The particle size was slightly decrease with increasing    To explore the microscale behaviour at the particle scale, various particle-scale characteristics were investigated, including the coordination number (CN), particle rotation, sliding contact and contact force. The traditional definition of CN is the average number of particles contacting a particle. Numerically, CN can be calculated as 2 Rolling and sliding are two important relative movement parameters for each particle in contact. The mean particle rotation within particle system can be obtained as follows: Sliding contact is governed by Coulomb's friction law. The sliding ratio The force transmitted during shearing for granular materials is through coexisting strong and weak contacts, which divides the entire contact network into strong and weak subnetworks. To quantitatively investigate the mechanical roles of the two subnetworks, the External loads of a particle system transmit through the contacts between particles, which form the contact force networks that have been regarded as an important factor affecting the mechanical behaviour of granular systems (  The macroscopic and microscopic characteristics described above indicate the effects of The relationship between the stress-force-fabric relationship (SFF for short) and the stress ratio were derived by In 2D domains, the relationship in Eq. The variations in these anisotropic coefficients at both peak and critical states with respect to As reported by several previous researchers ( In this paper, the effect of particle shape caused by erosion on macroscopic and microscopic mechanical behaviour under quasi-static shearing is quantitatively analysed using rigid blocks via the 3D DEM. The degree of particle erosion was defined using the index Referring to the macroscopic behaviours, the shear strength at the peak and critical states decreases with increasing The authors declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this paper. The authors appreciate the constructive comments and suggestions offered by the two anonymous reviewers, Prof Xiaoqiang Gu of TJU, Dr Ning Guo of ZJU and Dr Shiwei Zhao of HKUST on the manuscript. This research was financially supported by Supplementary data to this article can be found online at The following are the Supplementary data to this article: