Over the last decade, nanocrystalline and ultra-fine grained (UFG) materials with grain size less than 1μm have aroused considerable interest due to their superior mechanical properties compared to conventionally grained materials. In this work Ti–Nb microalloy steel was processed by the severe plastic deformation (SPD) technique called Accumulative Roll Bonding (ARB) in order to produce an ultra-fine grained microstructure and improve the mechanical properties. After initial preparation to achieve good sheet bonding, 8 cycles of ARB at 550°C were successfully performed. Observation of optical microstructure, scanning electron microscopy (SEM) micrographs, and X-Ray Diffraction (XRD) peak broadening analysis were used for the characterization of grain structure of the ARB processed sample. The mechanical attributes after rolling and cooling were examined. It was calculated that metal's yield and tensile strength increased by 334% and 215% respectively, while the ductility dropped from as-received value of 34% to 2.9%. Microhardness of the material was studied at room temperature. There was a continuous enhancement of hardness by increasing the pass number of the ARB process. At the 8th pass, the hardness values increased by 230%. The rolling process was stopped at 8th cycle when cracking of the edge became pronounced.The main objective of the transportation and especially automotive industry is aimed at weight and fuel reduction, and hence energy saving. The aim is therefore to reduce overall vehicle body weight by using lighter materials or thinner metal sheets and exploiting the material diversity in order to compensate for the extra weight, while at the same time not compromising on the strength. Over the last decade nanocrystalline or ultra-fine grained (UFG) materials with an average grain size below 1 So the advantage of this process over other processes is concerned with overcoming the difficulties connected with residual porosity in the compacted sample, impurity from ball milling, processing of large scale billets, and the practical application of the resulting material. Ti–Nb microalloy steel was used in the tests. The chemical composition of this material is given in After 8 cycles of the ARB process, the number of bonded layers was 256. The microstructure was examined in the RD–TD plane (RD and TD are the rolling and transverse directions, respectively) by optical microscopy (OM), scanning electron microscopy (SEM) and X-ray diffraction (XRD) peak broadening analysis. Ti–Nb microalloy steel samples were etched by Nital solution after polishing. Tensile direction was parallel to the rolling direction. Tensile tests were carried out at ambient temperature using an Instron 8502 testing machine (capacity: 30 In order to investigate the bond quality of the ARB processed Ti–Nb microalloy steel strips, optical examination of the 1, 3, 5 and 8 cycles ARB processed samples was conducted. All optical micrographs were observed along the transverse direction of the rolling sample. As shown in  A typical XRD pattern of Ti–Nb microalloy steel is shown in The development of hardness with the number of ARB cycles is shown in  The yield strength, the tensile strength and the elongation have been determined in the tensile tests. The results are shown in There are two major sources of limited ductility in nanocrystalline or UFG materials processed by ARB, namely low interlamellar bond strength of the last bonded layer and low work hardening. The absence of work hardening causes localized deformation and leads to early tensile instability and thus low ductility The active strengthening mechanisms in Ti–-Nb microalloy steel include solid solution strengthening, precipitation strengthening, grain boundary strengthening and work hardening. In the first few cycles, the dominating strengthening mechanism in ARB processed Ti–Nb microalloy steel sample may be attributed to strain hardening or dislocation strengthening The difference between yield and tensile strength values is only pronounced in the as received state, but diminishes upon further ARB rolling. This clearly indicates that the strain hardening potential of Ti–Nb microalloy steel decreases with increasing number of ARB cycles. In this material, limited strain hardening can be attributed to a small grain size. By switching to the nanoscale, the classical deformation behavior of crystalline materials may be changed as other deformation processes, like grain boundary sliding, dislocation annihilation or twinning, become dominating. The ARB structure has a high dislocation density which affects the deformation behavior as moving dislocations are normally not stored in the grain interior, but rather at the grain boundaries. Consequently dynamic recovery takes place mainly along the grain boundaries. Hence the strain hardening capability is reduced as dislocation annihilation and recovery can easily take place at the grain boundaries Ti–Nb microalloy steel with an ultra-fine structure was obtained by accumulative roll bonding. The UFG material shows higher hardness, yield and tensile strength compared to its conventionally grained counterpart, but unfortunately shows only limited ductility. Hardness and yield strength of UFG material are typically 2.35 and 3.34 (respectively) times higher than that of the conventionally grained counterpart. The elongation to failure decreases after the first few ARB cycles and is significantly lower in comparison to the as-received materials. In the UFG Ti–Nb microalloy steel the maximum elongation to failure in the rolling direction reaches up to 2.9%.