The article provides information about the results of test work dealing with the assembly of magnetic circuits from NdFeB material designated for magnetic filters. It describes the way in which a further increase in the value of magnetic induction was reached in the middle of the air gap in the case of a circuit assembled from two opposing magnetic blocks. It also informs about the assemblage of magnetic circuits with a considerably higher volume of the separation zone suitable for industrial purposes. In all the tested cases, the dependence of the magnetic induction in the middle of the air gap on the width is shown, including a corresponding graphic representation and a comparison with the results obtained in the previous testing period. With a new magnetic filter the cleaning of ceramic suspension was carried out. The results of an industrial scale test are presented.For further development of magnetic circuits with permanent NdFeB magnets, it was possible to build directly on the results obtained from previous work in this area ( Based on our previous knowledge, two main directions of further work were set out. In the case of the original type of a magnetic circuit, with one large magnetic block made from NdFeB magnets in each pole, the aim was to reach a further increase in the values of magnetic induction in the air gap. The aim of the second direction of the work was, again using NdFeB magnets, to create a new magnetic circuit making it possible to reach high values of magnetic induction in a larger volume of an air gap; thereafter to further equip this magnetic circuit with a tank and a canister/cassette with a matrix, and thus to create an industrial discontinuous magnetic filter which would enable the processing of higher-volume flows of ceramic casting slips and glazes. In both of the cases of the aforementioned magnetic circuits, the procedure used for their assemblage was similar to the one used previously ( The closed ferrous circuit was again in both cases designed as consisting of two parts, enabling a fluent change of the air gap between the casings of magnetic blocks by means of forcing-off screws. The individual parts were coated with zinc, to provide anti-corrosive protection. In connection with the term “ferrous circuit”, used in this publication, it is necessary to specify that the material of both types of closed circuits is an ordinary rolled unalloyed construction steel of standard quality with a guaranteed weldability, chiefly for its availability and price. Concerning the magnetic properties, however, a more suitable material would undoubtedly be magnetically soft iron with a low content of carbon or suitable cast steel, for example. The first tests with magnetic filter with this type of magnetic circuit were carried out using the methodology according to The matrix used in the cassette during these tests was created from expanded-metal sheets of stainless steel, oriented parallel to the flow direction of the suspension and perpendicular to the direction of the magnetic field between the magnetic blocks. The distance between the expanded-metal sheets was set at 1 mm by using stainless-steel spacer wires. This type of matrix (with various diameters of spacers) has already been used long-term in magnetic filters with ferrite magnets in a number of industrial works in the Czech Republic and therefore has also been used, for the possibility of comparison, in a filter with NdFeB magnets. A cassette with the outer dimensions of the cross-section 100 On this basis, advanced magnetic circuit with one magnetic block in each pole was constructed. Compact plates were assembled from small magnetic blocks from the NdFeB material with the value of the maximum energy product 377 kJ/m The magnetic induction The described magnetic circuit is shown in The design for the air-gap dimensions (length Two NdFeB magnets of different qualities have gradually been used so far to realize the magnetic circuits of this type. The first model of the circuit was equipped with magnets with a lower maximum energy product (BH) In both these models, all magnetic blocks were, in contrast to the previous case of the small magnetic circuit, assembled from only three pieces of compact magnetized plates, thus the height of each large magnetic block was 90 mm. The other two dimensions of all the placed magnetic blocks were the same as the dimensions of the magnetic blocks used in the aforementioned case of the small magnetic circuit, namely that the dimensions of the actual magnets were 150 All five magnetic blocks in each pole are arranged in a line. Owing to the usage of an external steel frame on each compact plate and stainless-steel casing on each block, the dimensions of the whole pole after the assembling are 550 The closed ferrous circuit was assembled again from two mutually movable parts. Each of these parts was welded from pieces of steel plate with the thickness of 20 mm and the rolled profile U 160, strengthening the longer side of the circuit (under the magnetic blocks) and thus increasing the rigidity of its construction. In connection with dimensions it is necessary to mention that the design of this ferrous circuit was subordinated to the condition of a substantial limitation on the weight of the whole magnetic filter, which has to be periodically manipulated within the specific case of usage under industrial conditions. For this reason, the profile of the actually used ferrous circuit is smaller than what would be in accordance with the corresponding calculation ( The total dimensions of the actual circuit are 800 As in the previous case, the magnetic induction The magnetic filter with the described magnetic circuit (with an inserted tank and a removable cassette with a separation matrix) is shown in The above-mentioned prototype of the circuit (equipped with magnets with a lower maximum energy product (BH) It is obvious from the results obtained up to now from the industrial tests of both types of magnetic filters described that during the tests of the filter with one block in each pole ( The values of magnetic induction measured in the air gap of the magnetic circuits described above are listed in From The increase in the values of magnetic induction in the middle of the air gap in a magnetic circuit with one magnetic block in each pole as compared with previous results was successfully achieved mainly through the use of NdFeB magnets with higher (BH) The knowledge from the developments up to now was applied when assembling a larger magnetic circuit, suitable for application in industry. The assembly of this circuit with more than fivefold length in comparison with the previous model was successfully realized, and the first magnetic filters with this kind of a circuit have already been put to use directly in the technological lines of ceramic and porcelain works for the magnetic filtration of glazes. The achieved results of the first technological tests appear very favorable. The obtained, positive values of magnetic induction even with the larger widths of the air gap, however, cannot in any case be considered to be final. It is obvious that during further development it is feasible to further increase the values of magnetic induction in the whole range of the measurement—be it by the aforementioned usage of a more suitable material and dimensioning of the ferrous magnetic circuit, by using magnets with higher (BH) The Academy of the Science of the Czech Republic supported this work as grant project No. S3046004 and Institute Research Plan, Identification Code AVOZ30460519.