Three different potassium compounds, namely K2SO4, KOH, and K2SO4 + KOH, were used as additives to extract lithium from lepidolite by roasting and water leaching. The effect of the additive/ore mass ratio on the extraction of Li, K, Si, and Al was compared among the different additives. Efficient extraction of Li and K was obtained by roasting lepidolite with the K2SO4 and K2SO4 + KOH additives. The Li extraction and K recovery were 92.78% and 81.72% respectively under the optimum conditions: K2SO4/KOH/ore mass ratio of 1:0.5:1, roasting at 900 °C for 2 h, and water leaching at 90 °C for 3 h with a liquid to solid (L/S) ratio of 5:1. The decomposition process of lepidolite with different additives was explored. The results indicate that lepidolite is decomposed into kalsilite when roasted with KOH and mixed phases of kalsilite, leucite, K2SO4, and LiKSO4 when roasted with K2SO4 and K2SO4 + KOH additives. Li in the lepidolite is converted into soluble LiKSO4, facilitating its extraction. The addition of KOH contributes to the formation of kalsilite, which makes K recovery easier.Lithium is widely used in rechargeable batteries owing to its low density of 0.534 g/cm Lepidolite is one potential resource that can be exploited for lithium production, with large reserves and a relatively high lithium grade of about 3.0–7.7 wt% Li High lithium extraction from lepidolite has been obtained by roasting it with various compounds prior to leaching. As KOH has strong alkalinity and a low melting point, it could be used as a roasting additive to decompose silica-based minerals while reducing the roasting temperature and improving the reaction of mineral digestions ( Lepidolite concentrate (4.59 wt% Li A certain amount of lepidolite concentrate was mixed with a roasting additive (K The metal concentration in the solution was determined by inductively coupled plasma-optical emission (ICP-OES, Optima 5300 V, Pekin-Elmer, USA) after being diluted to a suitable concentration range. The mineral composition in the lepidolite concentrates and leaching residues was characterized by XRD. The morphological transformation of solid samples was analyzed by SEM (JSM-7001F, Oxford, Japan). The spot and micro-domain elemental composition of the solid samples were determined by EDS (GENESIS XM 2i, EDAX, US). The elemental composition in the solid samples (lepidolite concentrates and leaching resides) was accurately determined after the following treatment: 0.2000 g of solid sample was placed in a platinum crucible, 1 mL of H The extraction of Li, Si, and Al, and the recovery of K (considering the amount of K introduced as roasting additive) were calculated based on Eq. Lepidolite samples were roasted with various amounts of each roasting additive (KOH, K High Li extraction was also obtained when roasted with the mixed K The total K before roasting was come from two parts, one from the roasting additive and another from the composition of the ore. Based on the total K, its recovery from the leach solution with various additive/ore ratios is shown in Based on the amount of K added as the roasting additive, its recovery (R  The effect of different types of additives/ore mass ratios on Si and Al extraction is listed in From the above results, the optimal additive/ore ratios of the different K compounds for high Li extraction and K recovery are considered to be K To study the decomposition of lepidolite, it was roasted with the different potassium compounds at the optimal mass ratios of K The composition of lepidolite is K(Li, Al) When roasted with additives of K The mechanism of Li extraction with K According to The mass ratio of K The recovery of K decreases slowly as the temperature changes from 600 to 900 °C, and then increases at 1000 °C. At 800 °C, diffraction peaks of kalsilite and leucite appeared. Combined with the results in The extraction of Si is about 30% when the temperature raised to 900 °C. The trend of Si extraction is the same as that of Li, which proved that the transition from high-silicon lepidolite to low-silicon kalsilite and leucite underwent a de-Si process. Moreover, Si and Li were likely to exist in the same phase, most possibly in LiAlSiO The effect of roasting time was investigated in a range of 0.5–4 h. The leaching conditions were as follows: leaching temperature 90 °C, time 3 h, and L/S of 5. The effect of roasting time on elemental extraction is shown in The recovery of K changed slightly with time, and its trend was still opposite to that of Li just as temperature effect discussed before. It was also found that the recovery trend of Si was again the same as that of Li. From the results, Li was almost completely dissolved and reached the maximum extraction at 2 h. Therefore, the roasting time of 2 h was chosen as the optimum for further investigations. The ore samples used in the leaching experiment were obtained by mixing lepidolite with K  Although higher extraction of Li and K was obtained by acid leaching, the content of impurities, such as Si and Al was also found very high, resulting in difficulty for subsequent Li purification. As leaching with water (leaching solution at pH = 14) could yield a very high extraction of Li and K, and additionally, could effectively restrain the leaching of Al and Si to some extent, hence water is considered as the preferred leaching reagent. The effect of leaching temperature on the extraction of elements concerned was investigated between 20 and 100 °C for 3 h at a L/S ratio of 5:1 as shown in The effect of L/S ratio on elemental extraction was investigated from 1:1 to 9:1 at 900 °C for 3 h with results shown in The effect of leaching time on elemental extraction was investigated from 0.5 to 5 h at 900 °C and a L/S ratio of 5. The results are shown in A mixture of lepidolite with K The image of mounted samples shown in As discussed above, high recovery of valuables of Li, K, Rb and Cs can be obtained from lepidolite by roasting with some additives of K The decomposition process of lepidolite was investigated by using K The authors declared that there is no conflict of interest. This work was supported by the National Key R&D Program of China (2018YFC1900500), the Key Research Program of Frontier Sciences of