Objective
                  To investigate effect of double button plate fixation in the treatment of inferior patella fracture
               
                  Methods
                  Patients with inferior pole of patella fracture were treated with double button plate fixation. The perioperative and postoperative outcomes of MPIF with those of KWIF patients with metacarpal and phalangeal fractures were included.
               
                  Results
                  The average operation and hospital stay time was 55 min and 8 days respectively. Range of motion (ROM) and knee society scores(KSS) was related to a greater increase. No patients have nonunion, infection and revision.
               
                  Conclusion
                  In this study, double button plate fixation technology for the treatment of comminuted fracture of the inferior patellar pole has the advantages of simple operation, rapid recovery, early full weight bearing, better ROM and KSS, without incidence of nonunion, infection and revisions or reoperation.Patella fractures are common, accounting for 1% of skeletal injuries At present, there is still much controversy in the clinical treatment of comminuted fracture of inferior pole of patella fracture Some reports suggest that circular ligation and suture can be used, but wire banding cannot effectively close the proximal articular surface of patella, and debris can easily enter the articular cavity Patella inferior fracture managed by fixation with K-wires or metal implants often cause local soft tissue irritation and necessitate implant removal. An alternative is to utilize double button plate fixation methods. We have adopted double button plate fixation in the management of patella inferior fracture. Here, we report the results of the fixation techniques. We identified a total of 3 cases of lower patella fractures operated on at our department for the 1-year period spanning from January 2018 to December 2018. Of the 3 patient, there were 2 females and 1male with an average age of 62 years. A total of 3 patients received fixation by means of double button plate. Traffic accident and fall injury on level ground was the most common mechanism of injury, traffic accident accounting for 2 (67%) of 3, fall injury accounting for 1(33%) of 3. Average operation time was approximately 55 min. A follow-up period of 12 months was attained in 3 patients ( Decision in regard to fixation method of the inferior fractured patella was determined intraoperatively by the surgeon based on its configuration. Distal pole fractures were managed with double button plate, and those considered to be stability to prevent anterior displacement of fracture fragments in addition to transosseous sutures. Transverse and comminuted intraarticular fractures were treated by double button plate fixation. For the former, we utilized the AO-technique of axial K-wires in combination with anterior tension banding and implant configuration in the latter often necessitated additional augmentation to achieve stability as described below. After satisfactory anesthesia, the patient took supine position, used tourniquet and anterior median incision, exposed the broken end of the fracture, then punctured into a diameter of 3.0 mm drill hole and inserted two wire button plates along the distal fracture fragments from the upper pole to the lower pole, proximal fracture fragments from the lower pole to the upper pole ( Postoperative radiographs were taken the day after surgery. Patients were given a plaster as protection postoperatively. In general, 0 to 90° of flexion in-brace was allowed for the first 2 weeks postoperatively and allowed to weight bear. Patients were given their first follow-up appointment at 2 weeks postoperatively for wound inspection, then they were followed up every 4 to 6 weeks to monitor for functional return and clinical/radiological fracture union ( The primary outcomes of this study were the reoperation rates for the fixation methods and the prevalence of symptomatic hardware causing soft tissue irritation. Secondary outcomes included surgical complications (fixation failure/displacement, implant breakage/dislodgement, nonunion, infection), radiological parameters, and knee function. Overall, no patients received reoperations after initial fracture fixation ( The 3 cases of incision healed well and the patella returned to normal by X-Ray after operation. During the follow-up period, there was no bone displacement, double button plate loosening and ligament rupture. At 2 weeks after operation, plaster were removed, all patients had normal flexion and extension of the knee joint at 6–8 weeks, and 3 months after operation, the fracture had reached the healing standard. A total of 3 patients receiving metal fixation, demonstrated no exist patella baja. During the follow-up period, all radiological analysis showed no reduction in patella height. Functional outcome was assessed by means of walking status and knee range of motion upon final follow-up ( Fractures of the inferior pole of patella are mostly caused by indirect violence, or are more common in patients with osteoporosis Partial resection of comminuted fracture of the lower pole seems to be more indicative than patellectomy Recognizing the shortcomings of inferior patellar pole resection, more clinicians are willing to retain the inferior patellar pole and try to restore the local anatomical structure Fractures of the inferior patellar pole cause a continuous interruption of the knee extension device, which makes the patient unable to extend the knee. The principle of treatment of patellar inferior pole fracture is mainly to restore the continuity of knee extensor, rather than anatomical reduction of joints Compared with Kirschner wire tension band, the use of double button plate fixation technology has the following advantages: (1) less trauma, shorter operation time, convenient use of instruments and fixtures; (2)Double button plate fixation have good biocompatibility, which has little impact on the anatomical structure of the knee joint; (3) It is conducive to the early recovery of the function of the patients after operation. No second operation is needed to remove the implant. The small scar of the incision can meet the needs of the patients for the cosmetology of the incision. In this study, double button plate fixation technology for the treatment of comminuted fracture of the inferior patellar pole has the advantages of simple operation, reliable fixation, restoring patellar anatomical shape, early functional exercise to achieve rapid recovery, good healing effect, reliable internal fixation and fewer complications. At present, the treatment of patellar inferior pole fracture with double button plate has been carried out for a relatively short time, and the number of cases is relatively small. There are also shortcomings in this study, such as small sample size and insufficient follow-up time, which may lead to deviations in the evaluation of curative effect. Further expansion of sample size and long-term follow-up are needed to confirm this. The author(s) received no financial support for the research, authorship, and/or publication of this article.  The authors declare that they have no competing interests. The authors would like to thank Tianjin First Center Hospital for providing the database.