In this letter, we present a facile approach to fabricate hydrophobic surfaces based on electrostatic field assisted self-assembly of fibers onto conductive micropillars. Hydrophobic patterns fabricated in this work are inspired by an underwater fern Salvinia molesta. Hydrophilic cellulose acetate nanofibers were electrospun on a conducting micro-patterned surface to create a hierarchical structure. The water contact angle increased from just below 70° (hydrophilic) on the micro-patterned structures to ∼140° (hydrophobic) for the hierarchical structures. Introduced hydrophobicity is due to the pinning of the water droplet to suspended hydrophilic nanofibers and a reduced solid-water interface.Nature has inspired the engineering of materials to provide a number of functionalities like superhydrophobicity, adhesiveness, antireflectivity, low drag and self-healing among others The most common approaches to the biomimicry of hierarchical structures have been to deposit platelets and tubules, plasma etching on micro-patterned structures and the deposition of electrospun nanofibers on micron scale structures or directly by micropatterning of electrospun nanofiber mats   Furthermore, to investigate the effect of the distance between pillars on the deposition of nanofibers, three different samples with varying pillar distances (50, 100 and 150 Contact angle experiments were performed to investigate the effect of a reduced solid-liquid interface and the pinning behavior due to suspended nanofibers over the three-dimensional micro-patterned surfaces. These suspended nanofibers on the micro-patterned pillars prevent the Wenzel transition of water droplets by pinning them due to their hydrophilic nature. For patterned and hierarchical structures, in addition to surface roughness, capillary pressure also affects the wetting behavior. Capillary pressure is a non-wetting pressure which prevents the transition of a water droplet from a Wenzel to Cassie state. Capillary pressure increases with the reduced feature size and spacing between the features For hierarchical structures, the contact angle decreased from ∼139° to ∼98° with an increasing pillar spacing from 50 to 150 We have successfully fabricated bio-inspired air retaining hydrophobic surfaces by aligning electrospun nanofibers over an array of micro-patterned surfaces. The morphology of the micro-textured pattern not only affects the fiber alignment process but also its wetting behavior. These aligned suspended nanofibers help to pin water droplets and stabilize the air-water interface. This approach may find applications in fabricating hydrophobic surfaces in underwater conditions. Further, the possibility to electrospin a large number of polymers makes this simple technique to fabricate complex hierarchical structures potentially generic and therefore opens up a wide variety of applications in fluid transport, ship coatings and other submersible conditions. This work is supported by DST-UKIERI (IND/CONT/E/14-15/370 & DST/INT/UK/P-92/14) project. MK acknowledges assistance with the use of FESEM facility at the University of Exeter. Authors acknowledge IIT Hyderabad for providing research facilities required for carrying out experiments. Supplementary data associated with this article can be found, in the online version, at 