Bioremediation of chromium (Cr(Ⅵ)) contaminations has been widely reported, but the research on its removal mechanism is still scarce. Studies on Cr(Ⅵ) removal by strains affiliated to genus Pseudochobactrum revealed the Cr(Ⅵ) efficiency removal through the reduction of Cr(Ⅵ) to Cr(Ⅲ). However, the location of Cr(Ⅵ) reduction reaction and exact mechanism are still unspecified. In this work, a Gram-positive bacterial strain, Pseudochrobactrum saccharolyticum W1 (P. saccharolyticum W1) was isolated and tested to remove approximately 53.7% of Cr(Ⅵ) (initial concentration was 200 mg L−1) from the MSM medium. Analysis of SEM-EDS and TEM-EDS indicated that chromium-containing particles precipitated both on the cell surface and in the cytoplasm. Batch experiments indicated that the heat-treated bacterial cells almost had no ability to remove Cr(Ⅵ) from solution, while the resting cells could remove 62.0% of Cr(Ⅵ) at the initial concentration of 10 mg L−1. Additionally, at this concentration, 64.8% and 70.8% of Cr(Ⅵ) was reduced by cell envelope components and intracellular soluble substances after 6 h, respectively. These results suggested that the removal of Cr(Ⅵ) by P. saccharolyticum W1 was through direct reduction, which occurred on both cell envelop and cytoplasm. The results also showed that cytoplasm was the main site for Cr(Ⅵ) reduction compared to the cell envelop. Further analysis of FTIR and XPS verified that C–H, C–C, CO, C–OH and C–O–C groups of cells involved in correlation with chromium during Cr(Ⅵ) reduction. The study offered an insight into the Cr(VI) reduction mechanism of P. saccharolyticum W1.Chromium, as a common industrial raw material, is widely used in electroplating, leather tanning, wood preservation, material dying and other industries ( Currently, some Cr(Ⅵ)-reducing bacterial strains have been isolated and identified, such as Since existing research work on the Cr(Ⅵ) removal by strains affiliated in genus  The conical flasks containing 200 mg L Cells of Cells in later log-phase grown at 30 °C were harvested by centrifugation at 10,000 rpm for 20 min at 4 °C, and the pellets were washed three times with 25 mM Tris-HCl buffer (pH 9.0). Then the cells were resuspended with buffer to prepare cell suspension and sub-packed into an erlenmeyer flask. NADH, citrate, acetate, formate, lactose, glucose, lactate, or glycerin was added into the cell suspension as supplied electron donor at the end concentration of 1 mM, respectively ( Cells at later logarithm growth phase grown at 30 °C in the culture medium and harvested by centrifugation at 10,000 rpm for 20 min at 4 °C, and cells then washed three times with 25 mM Tris-HCl buffer (pH 9.0) ( The cells cultured at 48 h were collected by centrifugation (10,000 rpm, 20 min) and then washed three times with phosphate buffer. The morphologies of bacterial cells were observed by XL 30 ESEM scanning electron microscopy (SEM) (Hitachi S4800) ( In order to verify that As shown in It has been previously reported that chromate-reducing microbes had the abilities to utilize a variety of organic compounds as electron donors (EEDs) in Cr(Ⅵ) reduction process ( In order to locate the Cr(Ⅵ) reduction site of  It is well known that the structure and composition of cell wall is the main difference between Gram-positive bacteria and Gram-negative bacteria. The cell wall of Gram-positive bacteria consist of only a thick and dense layer of peptidoglycan and phosphoteichoic acid. While the cell wall of Gram-negative bacteria is multi-layered structure, which include peptidoglycan layer, lipoprotein layer, lipocortex layer, phospholipid layer and lipopolysaccharide layer in the order from inside to outside. Thus, we speculated that the differences in structure might affect the exact patters in Cr(Ⅵ) transportation and enzyme reduction. It was reported that Cr(Ⅵ) reductase activity was associated with both cell inner portion and cell surface for The analyses of SEM-EDS were adopted to investigate the cell morphological changes of As seen from The FTIR spectra of XPS is a rapid analytical method to study the functional groups in cells of So, the precipitation of Cr(III) compounds in cells of The present study demonstrated that the removal capability of Cr(VI) by This work was financially supported by