The Gol-e-Gohar iron deposit (1.2 Gt @ 57.2% Fe, 1.85% S, 0.16% P) occurs in Ediacaran banded magnetite-hematite-schist. Mirzaei et al. (2018) hypothesized that post-metamorphic Fe-rich fluids linked to large unknown magmatic bodies were the main source of magmatic-hydrothermal and skarn magnetite mineralization during Middle Mesozoic. However, the absence of granodiorite-related magnesian skarn halo and hydrothermal feeder zone on the geological map-cross section is inconsistent with their hypothesis. New evidence, including U-Pb zircon age dating (605–544 Ma), geological map (Fig. 1) and sulfur isotopic signatures of pyrite show that the synchronous submarine ultramafic-mafic volcanism, sedimentation and iron oxide mineralization were formed during Ediacaran time. In this regard, the presence of metajaspilites, exoclastic dropstones in ore-host rocks and the magnetite position on discrimination diagrams display an Ediacaran type of metamorphosed banded iron formations (BIFs). Heavy mineral sampling in drainage patterns crosscutting the metamorphosed Gol-e-Gohar complex may indicate further concealed BIFs in the Sanandaj-Sirjan Zone.BIFs of Algoma (Archean), Superior (Paleoproterozoic) and Neoproterozoic types are chemical exhalative hydrothermal sediments, typically composed of iron oxides, chert, Mg-Fe silicates, sulfides and carbonates and contain more than 15 wt% Fe ( Over the past 50 years, the genesis of Gol-e-Gohar iron deposit (1.2 Gt @ 57.2% Fe, 1.85% S, 0.16% P) has been the subject of debate and yet much discussion is needed for a refined model of iron mineralization. The recent paper by A refined model of magnetite mineralization for either BIFs or magnesian skarns at least requires a correct geological map supported by U-Pb zircon age data and sulfur isotopic signatures of sulfide minerals. These important frameworks have not been explored by Stratigraphically, deformed brachiopods in the marbles overlying the ultramafic-mafic lavas at Gol-e-Gohar complex belong to Early Cambrian ( The most challenging point of the paper published by  The ore at Gol-e-Gohar mine displays massive magnetite macrobandings with more than 10 m thickness interbedded with different schists and metacarbonates (Authors, page 641, It is well known that banding in the least metamorphosed BIFs is between Fe-oxyhydroxide layers and silicate mineral layers, but not necessarily with chert ( The Authors (Fig. 8) do not define each stage of paragenetic sequences of either magmatic-hydrothermal or skarn iron mineralization, but claim that the iron ores were mainly linked to magnesian marbles, though the magnesian marbles could also form by regional metamorphism of dolomitic carbonates. This is against Fig. 8, where most of dolomite forms in stage one, but magnetite occurs in stage three. To clear this confusion, a possible paragenetic sequence is shown in During the first stage, riftogenic synchronous submarine ultramafic-mafic volcanism occurred with clastic and chemical sedimentation. These changed to metaultramafic-mafic lavas interlayered with schists during regional metamporphism. The second stage was followed by diagenetic sequences of chert, sandstone, shale and carbonate rocks interlayered with banded iron hydroxides- hydromagnetite-magnetite, amorphous silica-quartz, serpentine, talc, actinolite, tourmaline, chlorite, albite and syndepositional dropstones. The pre-metamorphic bandings are still preserved in the weakly metamorphosed banded magnetite-hematite-quartzite-schist in southeastern part of the area. In the third stage, the banded magnetite-hematite and their enclosing rocks were subjected to prograde regional metamorphism of greenschist facies during Cimmerian orogeny. This produced elongation and recrystallization of coarse-grained (0.3–0.5 mm) magnetite and pyrite parallel to the foliation of biotite, sericite, chlorite and actinolite ( In the fourth stage, retrograde metamorphism led to infiltration and reaction of H The total content of oxides in some minerals as described by The biplot diagrams of V/Ti-Fe, Ti-Ni/Cr, and V-Cr) ( The new U-Pb zircon age data (605–544 Ma) show an Ediacaran time for synchronous submarine volcanism, chemical-terrigenous sediments, BIFs and glaciomarine dropstones similar to other Neoproterozoic ores worldwide (  The dual model of the Authors fails to show any outcrop of granodiorite-related magnesian skarn or magmatic-hydrothermal feeder zone of magnetite mineralization. Based on the U-Pb age dating, ore structures, discrimination diagrams and experimental thermodynamics ( In the first stage, synchronous submarine ultramafic-mafic volcanism and terrigenous-chemical sediments deposited within shallow riftogenic basins ( New U-Pb zircon age data (605–544 Ma) and average sulfur isotopic signatures of pyrite (+24 per mil) correlate to the Ediacaran time of iron mineralization at Gol-e-Gohar complex. This study does not support the presence of granodiorite-related skarn and magmatic-hydrothermal model of iron mineralization. The banded structure of ores is better matched with BIFs rather than unseen magmatic bodies or skarn ore zone at depth, and geophysical data do not support the presence of magmatic bodies at depth. The discrimination diagrams support an Ediacaran-type of BIFs rather than skarn, IOCG or magmatic Kiruna ores. Heavy minerals sampling in drainages crosscutting the bandings in the metamorphosed Sanandaj-Sirjan zone may guide to further iron mineralization. We highly appreciate the cooperation of the Gol-e-Gohar mine geologists, in particular Dr. M. Mohammadi for field assistance and drill core sampling at anomaly#3 of the Gol-e-Gohar mine