This paper introduces a resin-in-pulp (RIP) hydrometallurgical process, which is widely used in gold leaching and recovery industry, to recover rhenium effectively and economically from molybdenite calcine by leaching, absorbing and eluting operations. With fresh water leaching and strong basic anion resin absorbing simultaneously, followed by NH4OH and HNO3 eluting Mo and Re respectively, more than 90% of rhenium was recovered. Factors influence leaching such as leaching time, ratio (wt/wt) of solid to liquid in the pulp, ratio (v/v) of resin to the pulp as well as parameters affecting the absorbing and eluting processes are discussed. The new RIP rhenium recovery process obtained is of the advantages of higher selectivity, short process, less costs and environmental compact, which is beneficial to the molybdenum and rhenium industries to comprehensive utilize their less common metals resource.The recovery of rhenium from molybdenite calcine has both important environmental and economic values. Rhenium is a less common metal with special properties and is widely used in the petrochemical industry, aviation, electron, medicine and metallurgy etc. It occurs mainly accompanying molybdenite and usually concentrated into the fumes during calcination. Because of the higher value of rhenium than that of molybdenum, the recovery of rhenium from the fumes has both economic and environmental benefits and received much attention in our literature ( The current industrial practice of recovery rhenium from rhenium bearing materials can be described as leaching–extraction and leaching–ion exchanging resin absorbing–eluting processes ( The resin-in-leaching solution (RIL) followed by selective elution processes is an effective process for rhenium recovery. However, the long leaching and absorbing operations, less selectivity of ion exchanging resin and lower capacity of absorption makes the process cost higher. Resin-in-pulp (RIP) is a good process for recovery of gold from gold bearing materials. The process is characterized by fast kinetics, without filtration and almost free of organic contamination. The gold can be simply separated and recovered by elution with special reagents at room temperature ( The sample of the fume came from the JinDui Cheng Mine, which is the biggest molybdenum mine and located in east of Shaanxi Province, China. The chemical composition of the fume is shown in The resins examined in these experiments were resin D216 and gel type resin 201X7. The resin was treated with NaOH, ion free water, washed with HCl and finally with ion free water step by step until the eluate was at pH After the RIP, the pregnant resins were separated from the pulp, washed with ion free water, then eluted firstly with NH All chemicals used in the experiments were of chemical grade purity. The leaching and absorbing operations were carried out in an one litre reactor mounted with pH and temperature detectors, 200 g of the fume was used each time, the solid to liquid ratio during leaching was 1:4, moderate stirring and room temperature (from 288 to 303 K) was adopted, the amount of the resin used in the RIP was about 8 mL, the pulp was stirred whilst monitoring the change of Re and Mo concentration. The concentrations of rhenium and molybdenum were determined by colorimetry using butyl rhodamine B and thiocyanate respectively. To compare with the selectivity and absorbing capability of the two resins, a series leaching tests were carried out under conditions of fume sample 200 g, 303 K, L From  According to liquid membrane diffusion theory (  The rapid leaching of the calcine suggested that adding the resin earlier would be appropriate and the rhenium concentration for a run where the resin was added after 0.5 h is shown in By comparing the final Re concentrations of The residue solution contained about 25–30 mg/L Re and this was removed during a second RIP step lasting 2 h. After this the rhenium in the solid residue was analysed and showed that more than 95% of rhenium was leached, a little higher than that mentioned in the literature ( The pregnant resin has both Re and Mo on the resin, so a two-step elution was investigated. The saturated resin bed was washed with distilled water until neutral, then eluted with 1 mol/L HNO The solution chemistry of molybdenum and rhenium are complex with different species present according to both pH and concentration. So further study needs to be carried out to investigate the influence of speciation on the adsorption and elution characteristics. Studies have shown that at pH  Strong basic anion exchange resin (201 RIP is an effective process for recovering and separating Re from molybdenite calcine. With the RIP, the leaching efficiencies of Re can reach 95%, and the selectivity of Mo is acceptable. Ammonium chloride/ammonium hydroxide are good washing solutions for selectively eluting molybdenum, while dilute nitric acid is good for rhenium.