This paper presents the results of an experimental research on the mechanical performance and failure pattern of stratified cemented tailings backfill (CTB). Different stratified CTB samples with various cement/tailings ratios (1/4, 1/8,1/10), solid concentrations (72 wt%, 75%, 78%) are prepared and cured in a well controlled chamber with temperature at 20 °C and 90% ± 5% relative humidity. Mechanical tests are conducted on the samples, in which the scanning electrical microscopic (SEM) and thermal gravity (TG) analysis of stratified CTB specimens are performed. The results show that the binder content, solid content and curing age enhance the uniaxial compressive strength (UCS) of stratified CTB. The stratified structure can have an effect on the compressive strength of CTB, depending on the backfilling ratio at a time (each filling height at a time to the total filling height is defined as the backfilling ratio), i.e., a comparatively large backfill ratio at a time has a negative effect on the strength of stratified CTB. However, a small backfilling ratio lead to strength increase at all ages and magnitude of the positive effect is increased with the decreases in the backfilling ratio at a time. The UCS development of stratified CTB with backfilling ratio follows a similar trend that first reduces to a lowest value, and then gradually increases regardless of binder content and solid concentration. When the binder content and curing age are constant, there is a good polynomial relationship between the stratified coefficient of CTB specimen and backfilling ratio. The failure patterns of stratified CTB samples contain tensile, shear and hybrid failure pattern. The stratified CTB specimen with 50% and 25% backfilling ratio are characterized by conjugate tensile failure and shear failure pattern, and the stratified CTB specimens with backfilling ratio of 12.5 and 10% are mainly shear failure pattern. The results also show that a good understanding of the effect of stratified structure on the compressive strength of CTB is crucial for designing reasonable CTB structure with high mechanical property, reducing the backfilling operations cost.Cemented tailings backfill commonly consists of 70–85% (by solid weight) tailings, and 3–7 wt% binder, with a relatively proportion of water to produce a slump of 18 to 25 cm, and it is increasingly implemented in underground mines around the world At present, several studies have been conducted to investigate different internal and external factors about CTB. Consolidation, stope depth and specimen size effects play a great role on strength performance of CTB However, all of aforementioned researches mainly performed on the performance properties of integral CTBs and ignored the effect of artificial stratified structure on CTB properties. Error will be brought out without considering the stratified structure when the CTB is used in large scale stope and composed of stratified structural planes. Additionally, most of the available results from studies on the effect of stratified structure on the mechanical parameters of jointed rock mass or rock-like material were implemented for stratified rocks Tailings used in the tests were collected from Lilou iron mine in Hefei City, Anhui Province, China. The tailings slurry from tailings discharge outlet was filled into the plastic buckets for sedimentation. After 30 days, the upper-layer leaching water was removed and the left dewatered tailings were dried and mixed uniformly for CTB preparation. Based on China's Common Portland Cement Standard (No. GB1752007), No.42.5 Portland cement was used as the binder agent. And distilled water was used to prepare the designed CTB samples. The chemical compositions of used tailings are listed in The cement dosage ranges from 10% to 25% by mass of total dry tailings and different mass concentrations to support the safety requirement of secondary stope, which depend on strength of surrounding rock and geological structure of different zones in Li-Lou mine. The details of the binder recipe are provided in In this study, a total of 135 CTB samples are prepared with cement-to-tailings ratio (c/t ratio) of 1/4, 1/8, 1/10, mass concentrations of 72%, 75% and 78 wt%, and cured at 3, 7 and 28 days. The tailings, binder and water with different proportions were prepared by electronic scale with an accuracy of 0.01 g and thoroughly homogenized about 12 min to produce the desired CTB mixtures. All fresh CTB mixtures have slump values between 220 and 250 mm, which are above the threshold of transportation standard To obtain the uniaxial compressive strength (UCS) and microstructure development of the CTB specimens, the mechanical tests, microstructural tests included scanning electrical microscopic (SEM), thermal gravity (TG) analysis were executed as follows. In view of inexpensive and easy operation, a key parameter used to evaluate the quality of the CTB is uniaxial compressive strength (UCS). The UCS of the hardened backfill is often used to judge its structural integrity or durability since the test can be taken into routine quality control programs at the mine. The test machine is a concrete uniaxial compressive strength tester (YAW-60). The uniaxial compressive strength tests in this study were conducted by the apparatus with a maximum capacity of 60 kN in accordance with ASTMC 39 SEM analysis was resorted to investigate the influence of binder and solid content, curing age on microstructrual change in the CTB specimens. SEM allowed direct observation of hydration products morphology and pore structure between the products and tailings in the CTB matrix. The SEM analysis was performed using a Carl Zeiss EV018 microscope with an oven-dried chamber in which the specimens were carbon-coated and examined. TG analysis was also used to quantify the influence of binder and solid content, curing age on hydration products change in the CTB specimens. All the TG tests were carried out by a STA449F3 Thermal Analyzer produced by NETZSCH company at a linear heating rate of 10 °C min The uniaxial compressive strength of stratified CTB specimens prepared with different backfilling ratios, binder contents and solid concentrations are presented in From The The backfilling ratio has significant influence on the mechanical behavior of stratified CTB. When compared to the C472-100% sample (control sample), the C472-10% sample showed considerably higher 28-day compressive strength. The difference becomes more obvious as binder content, solid concentration increases and curing age processes. This behavior is clearly illustrated in The strength behavior of stratified CTB is different from that integral CTB when the binder content, curing age and solid concentration are same To establish the quantitative relationship between the stratified coefficient of CTB specimen and backfilling ratio, the results are fitted by non-liner fitting equation, the relationship equations and correlation coefficientR The stress-strain curves of different stratified CTB specimens are obtained by the loading tests, parts of the results are shown in To investigate the failure patterns of stratified CTB specimens with different binder content and curing age, the failure pattern images are shown in The results on the failure pattern of the stratified CTBs with different backfilling ratios presented and discussed above provide useful support for the UCS improvement by backfilling ratio, and have practical implications as well. The backfilling ratio between 12.5% and 10% at a time is found to have a positive influence on the 7 and 28 days strength of stratified CTBs. High strength are beneficial to the reduce of backfilling cost and improvement of stope stability in mine site. In this paper, the experimental results of research work that investigate the effects of binder content, curing age, and backfilling ratio at one time on the mechanical performance of stratified CTB cured at 3, 7 and 28 days. The SEM and TG analysis provide the effects of curing age and binder content on the microstructure evolution and quantity of hydration products in the CTB matrix. The UCS development of stratified CTB specimens with different binder contents and solid concentrations is illustrated. The relationships between backfilling ratio and UCS of stratified CTB are fitted. The failure pattern and mechanism of stratified CTB are obtained and explained, the results are summarized as follows. The obtained results revel that the curing age, binder content and solid concentration have a positive effect on the compressive strength of stratified CTB. With the increasing of curing age and binder content, larger amount of hydration products are produced and the increase in the UCS development of stratified CTB are significantly observed. The backfilling ratio is a determinant of whether stratified structure has a positive or negative effect on the strength of stratified CTB. A comparatively large backfill ratio at a time has a negative effect on the strength of stratified CTB. However, low backfilling ratio lead to strength increase at all ages and magnitude of the positive effect is increased with the decreases in the backfilling ratio at a time. The UCS development of stratified CTB shows a V-type distribution that first decreases to a lowest value and then increases with the decrease in the backfilling ratio. There is a good polynomial relationship between the stratified coefficient of CTB specimen and backfilling ratio. The stratified CTB specimens show significant brittle characteristic. The tensile, shear and hybrid failure patterns are predominant way during loading tests. The failure pattern of stratified CTB specimen with 50% and 25% backfilling ratio are characterized by conjugate tensile failure at the top loading end and shear failure, and the stratified CTB specimens with backfilling ratio of 12.5 and 10% are mainly shear failure pattern. The results in this paper can provide a better understanding the mechanical performance of stratified CTB. Utilization of the results is helpful for mine engineers to design a better backfill structure and contributes to reduce the backfilling operations costs. This work was financed by the The authors declare to no conflicts of interest.