The 2004–2008 eruption of Mt. St. Helens (MSH) produced a series of lava domes and spines distinguished by the occurrence of an enveloping carapace of finely comminuted, weakly indurated fault gouge. The fault gouge results from fracture and shear strain, causing comminution of dacite along the conduit walls during ascent. The faulting associated with the formation of gouge is assumed to be the origin of a repetitive microseismicity (i.e., “drumbeat” seismicity) sourced at ∼0.5–1km depth. The early phases of dome extrusion were attended by several small explosive events producing plumes of volcanic ash derived largely from the fault gouge.
                  Here we present experimental results that establish the requisite conditions for this cataclastic production of volcanic ash at MSH. The experiments are low temperature rock deformation experiments performed on MSH dacite under confining pressures consistent with conduit pressures (0.1, 25, 50, 75MPa). The first set of experiments ended once a through-going shear fracture was formed; these produced a highly localized fault surface and associated fault gouge. A second set of experiments allowed frictional sliding along the fault surface after failure thereby exploring the role of shear strain on grain size reduction of the gouge.
                  Rock strength increases with confining pressure (from 139 to 722MPa at 0.1 to 75MPa). Unconfined loading of the MSH dacite produced several longitudinal fractures with little gouge and a small stress drop (∼120MPa), whereas 75MPa experiments produced a near-linear shear fracture, with a stress drop of ∼300MPa. The amount of gouge and the grain size distribution of the gouge are only weakly affected by the confining pressure. Continued sliding (i.e., shear strain) causes a substantial increase in the amount of gouge but does not increase the number abundance of the finest (<10μm) particles. Thus, the finest particles are an expression only of the magnitude of the stress drop event (fracture) and not the shear strain during frictional sliding. The frictional sliding experiments elucidate the coefficient of friction – all confined experiments show stable slip and strain hardening with a slight increase in coefficient of friction from 0.48 to 0.55, with increased confining pressure. The unconfined sample shows a very low apparent coefficient of friction of ∼0.17.
                  These results allow us to postulate the following ideas concerning the production of volcanic ash by syn-eruptive cataclasis. The significant stress drop, that produces abundant fine ash-sized particles, demands a material that can store substantial elastic energy prior to failure. Highly crystallized, low porosity magma, such as that found at MSH, and favoured by lower ascent rates, is ideal. More rapid ascent and extrusion of lava domes will result in less crystallized and more porous lava; such materials are much less likely to support the cataclastic production of ash sized gouge.Volcanic ash includes all particles <2 The eruption of Mount Saint Helens (MSH) from 2004 to 2008 suggests an alternative means of producing volcanic ash. These eruptions generated a series of dacite lava domes each characterized by a ∼1–3 Here we present results from a suite of experimental studies on the protolith dacite sampled from the MSH lava domes. These results are used to: (1) evaluate the physical conditions and rock properties that are required to generate fine grained gouge within volcanic conduits, (2) quantify the differences in grain size distributions of gouge formed during a stress drop versus frictional sliding and compare these distributions to the natural gouge, and to (3) provide insights on the intrinsic and extrinsic conditions necessary to generate ash by brittle cataclasis and comminution of solid dacite versus magmatic fragmentation processes. The 2004–2008 eruption of Mount Saint Helens (MSH) generated seven ‘whaleback-shaped’ dacite lava domes; each dome was enveloped by a thick carapace of fault rocks enriched in fines (i.e., <2 Accompanying the extrusion of the domes was a repetitive seismicity, referred to as ‘drumbeat seismicity’ and having magnitudes less than 2, focal depths less than 1 The samples of MSH dacite used as experimental starting materials were collected during the 2004 sampling expedition to Mt. St. Helens ( The Large Sample Rig (LSR) triaxial rock press used for this research is fully described by The samples used in the deformation experiments were ∼25 A suite of eight experiments was performed on cores of MSH dacites at room temperature and under confining pressures of 0.1, 25, 50, and 75 The fault gouge on the MSH’s lava domes formed by brittle deformation of a hot, near-fully crystallized solid ( We have also measured grain size distributions in samples of gouge collected from the experimental run products and samples of natural fault gouge collected from the MSH lava domes. Our grain size distribution (GSD) analysis is restricted to the <250 The peak and yield stresses for all experiments are presented in All experiments on MSH dacite show brittle behaviour, with only a small portion of the pre-failure curve being non-linear. A rapid stress drop, accompanied by a loud ‘bang’, characterized failure for all experiments. Reproducibility of experiments is better than ∼5%, as illustrated by the coincidence in mechanical strength between fracture and sliding experiments ( The peak differential stresses attained for the sliding friction experiments are nearly identical to that for the fracture experiments. Maximum sliding for the experiments is ∼6 The strength of the shear zones increases with increasing confining pressure ( MSH dacite run products contain macroscopic fractures; the fracture angles, taken with respect to the core axis ( For the sliding experiments, the sample deformed under atmospheric conditions has multiple longitudinal sliding surfaces, all of which are lined with gouge. The 25 Deformation is localized around the macroscopic shear fractures ( There is a link between fault rock microstructure and grain size distributions (GSD) of fault rocks and the mechanical properties and behaviour of faults ( Particle size distributions for gouge material are plotted for experiments and for MSH natural gouge. The GSD are plotted as cumulative number % ( These same grain size ( Fracture and frictional sliding experiments were performed at similar conditions ( Sample-sized shear fractures are formed by the coalescence of Mode I tensile cracks. During the stress drop and associated displacement, grain size is reduced by wear and cataclasis leading to production of gouge. Many studies have measured the (GSD) of the fine size fractions of natural fault rocks (e.g., The We have used the same methodology to compare the best-fit model parameters for the natural gouge material to the experimentally produced gouge ( The generation of the fine grain size fractions (i.e., <2 We did not perform experiments under saturated conditions. The presence of a fluid phase may reduce the coefficient of friction and the peak stress of rocks, which will affect the magnitude of the stress drop ( What is the mechanism that gives rise to the drumbeat, microseismicity? In continental fault zones, slip is typically aseismic – i.e., stable, at shallow depths (i.e., <2 Our frictional sliding experiments did not generate stick slip behaviour over a range of We propose that the overpressure exerted from the underlying rising magma, results in a build up of shear stresses at the margin of the dome that locally exceed the fracture strength of the dacite. The dacite fails causing a stress drop and the formation of a new fracture surface whilst generating fine ‘ash’ by cataclasis. The average extrusion rate of the domes is ∼7 The continual supply of new, unfractured dacite to a depth of 1 The restriction of microseismicity to ∼0.5–1 Numerous volcanic domes are similar to MSH, in that they form by the transport of solid magma to the surface along shear zones ( Each of these volcanoes has the potential to generate fine fault gouge that can subsequently be entrained and “blown out” by gas and fluids associated with phreatic or phreatomagmatic explosions. These events would be expressed by explosive venting of plumes of ash (lacking vitric shards) or the formation of tuffisite veins in the subsurface. An implication of this dispersal process is the potential for the coarser gouge material being left behind as lag within subsurface fault zones. Immediately after these explosive events, the fault zone will be depleted in fines and, thus, would be expected to have increased permeability. The increased permeability within the fault zones would facilitate degassing of the underlying magma, reducing explosivity, and resulting in a low porosity, highly crystalline dacite – such as that seen at MSH. The cataclastic production of volcanic ash also has import for mitigation strategies for volcano sourced aircraft safety hazards. The dispersal of fine ash into the stratosphere is hazardous to aviation, as was well displayed by the April 2010 eruption of the volcano at Eyjafjallajokull, Iceland. The main hazards are the melting of ash onto turbine engines and the abrasion of jet component parts ( In conclusion, our results show that: (1) fracture experiments, even at room temperature, generate gouge with similar characteristics to those observed in MSH natural gouge, and (2) the finest grains are formed at the stress drop and are not significantly altered by shear strain. We propose that the fine-grained ash (<2 Funding for this research was from NSERC Discovery Grants to JKR and LAK. MSH dacite and gouge material was kindly provided by Carl Thornber of the USGS Cascade Volcano Observatory. We thank Edward Nelles for performing some of the experiments. We thank Stephan Kolzenberg and Edward Nelles for performing the grain size analyses. The manuscript was significantly improved by thoughtful and thorough reviews by Brittany Brand and Mike Heap and by a final review of the revised manuscript by Yan Lavallee.