This chapter introduces the principle of how low-grade iron ores are upgraded to high-quality iron ore concentrates by magnetic separation. Magnetite is the most magnetic of all the naturally occurring minerals on earth, so low-intensity magnetic separators are used to upgrade magnetite ores. On the other hand, because oxidized iron ores like martite, hematite, specularite, limonite, and siderite are weakly magnetic, high-intensity magnetic separators and high-gradient magnetic separators are required to upgrade oxidized iron ores. Therefore, it is important to develop and optimize processing flow sheets according to the nature of iron ore to achieve both high recovery and high grade at a low cost. Three flow sheets for magnetite ores and seven flow sheets for oxidized iron ores separation are discussed.In the past 30 years, the world iron and steel industry has experienced significant development. This has resulted in a rapid increase in iron ore demand. The current supply of high-grade iron ores can no longer meet market needs. Low-grade deposits are therefore being developed and mined. However, these low-grade iron ores must be upgraded to a suitable Fe grade and impurity level before being charged to metallurgical furnaces. Magnetic separation technology plays an important role in upgrading such low-grade iron ores, because magnetic separators possess the combined advantages of large capacity and low operating cost and being environmentally friendly. This chapter first introduces the principles and recent advances in magnetic separation technology in processing iron ore, followed by examples of flow sheets for magnetite and oxidized ores. Different materials possess different magnetic properties by which they may be separated. Most mineral separating processes are carried out in water or a slurry, so fluid drag forces and surface interfacial tension are also competing forces. Only if the magnetic force acting on a particle is stronger than the sum of all the competing forces will the particle move toward the magnet. The magnetic field can be provided by a permanent magnet or by energizing a coil. The magnetic force acting on a particle can be calculated using the following equation: From Equation In magnetic separation, as the mass and the magnetic susceptibility of the particle are fixed, only the magnetic field intensity or gradient can be varied to change the magnetic force. This is why it is extremely important to create a magnetic field of high intensity and gradient for oxidized iron ores in order to achieve higher iron recovery. Different minerals existing on earth possess different magnetic properties, ranging from strongly magnetic, weakly magnetic, zero magnetic, to antimagnetic. This can be represented by magnetic susceptibilities. The magnetic susceptibility of a mineral can be measured by comparing the weight gain in a magnetic field with a standard mineral, the magnetic susceptibility of which is known. Based on the magnetic susceptibility values in Of the oxidized iron ores, specularite is most susceptible to magnetic fields, as it is better crystallized, followed by martite and hematite. It is therefore easier to upgrade specularite using magnetic separation, compared with martite and hematite. In contrast, limonite is less susceptible to magnetic fields and more difficult to recover using magnetic separation. Siderite contains only 48.2% Fe, and hence, it is impossible to achieve a high Fe grade for siderite concentrates. Therefore, it is very rare to mine and concentrate siderite in industry. In iron ore, white gangue minerals include quartz, feldspar, and calcite. The magnetic susceptibilities of white gangue minerals are close to zero. It is therefore relatively easy to separate them from iron ores by magnetic separation. However, the magnetic susceptibilities of dark gangue minerals, such as spodumene, chlorite, garnet, biotite, and olivine, are very close to the magnetic susceptibilities of oxidized iron ores. It is therefore more difficult to separate them from oxidized iron ores by magnetic separation. Typical harmful minerals in iron ore include pyrite and apatite, which contain the harmful elements S and P. They are also weakly magnetic. But if their magnetic susceptibilities are smaller than for oxidized iron ores, it is still possible to partially remove them from oxidized iron ores by magnetic separation. Low-grade iron ore mined from the earth is usually composed of several minerals, desirable and undesirable. Magnetic separation means applying magnetic separators with the appropriate magnetic field intensity, magnetic field gradient, and other conditions to separate different minerals according to their differences in magnetic susceptibility. Low-intensity magnetic separators (LIMS) are widely applied to separate magnetite. Some of the typical LIMS are compared below.  As shown in There are several types of permanent magnetic drum separators used for roughing and cleaning and for fine and coarse particles. They may look different, but they all work on the same principle. The magnetic column separator consists of an electrically energized system, a feed box, a nonmagnetic chute, a separating column, water supply pipes, and a magnetic outlet controller ( The electrically energized magnetic column creates a low-intensity magnetic pulse (0.01–0.02 Magnetic column separators are only used for magnetite cleaning to improve the iron grade of concentrates, but magnetic column separators consume more water than drum LIMS separators. The magnetic thickener consists of an awl chute, a feed tank, an overflow chute, a low-intensity permanent magnetic system located in the lower center, a water supply pipe, a magnetic outlet pipe, and an adjusting valve ( When the iron ore slurry is fed to the feed tank, magnetite particles are dragged down under the action of the magnetic force, gravity, and water, and some of the fine light gangue minerals such as quartz float up to the overflow chute. The magnetic thickener is often used for magnetite slurry dewatering after the separation procedure. It can also reject some of the light and fine nonmagnetic minerals. The disk magnetic scavenger consists of several disks made of permanent magnets and a device collecting the magnetic components ( When the iron ore slurry flows through the lower part of the disks, the magnetite particles are attracted to the surface of the disks by magnetic forces. These particles are then brought up to a higher position on the disks and finally scraped off by the magnetic collection device. The disk magnetic scavenger is used for magnetite scavenging and is usually installed on the combined tailings stream of the magnetite separation plant. It can lower the iron grade of the final tails and thus help to achieve a higher iron recovery. Oxidized iron ores are much more difficult to upgrade by magnetic separators, because their magnetic susceptibilities are only about 1% or less of that of magnetite. In oxidized iron ore separation, it is therefore important to create magnetic fields with high intensities and high gradients to achieve higher iron recoveries. The Jones wet high-intensity magnetic separator (WHIMS) was developed in 1956. The structure of the Jones separator is shown in When a direct electric current passes through the energizing coils, a high magnetic field with a high gradient is established in the separating zone located in the electromagnetic system, with the focused magnetic field at the teeth top of the grooved plates reaching 0.8–2 The SLon vertical ring and pulsating high-gradient magnetic separator (SLon magnetic separator or SLon) was developed in 1981 ( The SLon magnetic separator utilizes the combined forces of magnetic fields, pulsating fluids, and gravity to beneficiate weakly magnetic minerals. It consists of 10 main parts, including an energizing coil, a magnetic yoke, and a separating ring, as shown in When a direct electric current passes through the energizing coils, a high-intensity magnetic field of high gradient is established in the separating zone in the lower portion of the separating ring located in the electromagnet system, where the background field intensity is 0–1.3 Since the ring rotates in the vertical plane, the flushing direction of the magnetic particles is opposite to the direction of the slurry feed relative to each matrix pile, so coarse particles can be washed out without having to pass through the entire depth of the matrix pile. The pulsating mechanism drives the slurry up and down and keeps the particles in a loose state in the separating zone all the time. Thus, magnetic particles can be more easily recovered by the matrix, and the nonmagnetic particles can be more easily dragged out through the matrix. The opposing flushing and pulsation help to prevent matrix clogging, and the pulsation helps to purify the magnetic product. These measures guarantee that SLon magnetic separators offer the advantages of higher grade and higher recovery of the magnetic product and more flexibility. For low-grade iron ore separation, it is very important to develop an optimized flow sheet to achieve the best iron concentrate grade and iron recovery while keeping the cost as low as possible. The major principles are as follows: Before separation, the run-of-mine ore needs to be crushed and ground down to a specific particle size to liberate the minerals as much as possible. But crushing and grinding consumes a lot of energy. As the particle size becomes finer and finer, the grinding energy consumption increases exponentially. Therefore, it is likely that the gangue minerals will need to be discharged in several steps, that is, staged grinding and separation to reject the gangue minerals as early as possible and keep the mineral mass for final grinding as low as possible. There are several methods that are often used in combination with concentrate iron ores, that is, magnetic separation, flotation, and gravity separation (such as jigs, spiral separators, shaking tables, and centrifugal separators). Detailed information on gravity separation and flotation technologies will be covered in In summary, magnetic separation should always be given priority when designing iron ore beneficiation flow sheets. For some oxidized iron ores, the selectivity of high-intensity and high-gradient magnetic separators may not be as good as other methods. Nevertheless, they can reject most of the gangue minerals if they are used at the roughing stage. This will significantly reduce the amount of ore required to be “cleaned” by flotation or gravity separation. Magnetite is strongly magnetic, so low-intensity magnetic drum separators (drum LIMS) are widely used in processing magnetite ores. But in the final stage of separation, because the selectivity of magnetic columns or reverse flotation is better than that of drum LIMS separators, these separation technologies may be used to obtain a better concentrate iron grade. In many magnetite iron ores, the major gangue mineral is quartz, which is harder and more difficult to grind than magnetite. In the ground product, the average size of unliberated quartz particles is usually larger than that of magnetite. Therefore, vibrating screens are usually used to screen out unliberated coarse quartz particles, which can be returned to the ball mills for regrinding.  The annualized plant results demonstrated that a concentrate containing 67.3% Fe can be produced from a run-of-mine ore containing 30.4% Fe using this flow sheet at a mass yield to the iron concentrate of 37.1%, an iron recovery of 81.9% (Fe in the concentrate), and a tailings grade of 8.7% Fe.  The annualized plant results demonstrated that an iron ore concentrate containing 68.4% Fe could be produced using the flow sheet from run-of-mine ore containing 29.1% Fe, at a mass yield to the iron concentrate of 34.8%, an iron recovery of 81.7%, and a tailings grade of 8.2% Fe.  The annualized plant results showed that a concentrate containing 69.1% Fe could be produced using this flow sheet from a run-of-mine ore containing 30.9% Fe at a mass yield to the iron ore concentrate 35.7%, an iron recovery of 79.9%, and a tailings grade of 9.6% Fe. Oxidized iron ores are much more difficult to process using magnetic separators due to their extremely low magnetic susceptibilities. However, high-intensity and high-gradient magnetic separators have been successfully developed and used to separate oxidized iron ores. As some oxidized iron ores contain some magnetite, drum LIMS, or other separators may also be required in the processing flow sheets.  An iron ore concentrate containing 64.6% Fe can be produced using this flow sheet from a run-of-mine ore containing 51.1% Fe at a mass yield to the iron concentrate 69.6%, an iron recovery of 88.0%, and a tailings grade of 20.2% Fe. In oxidized iron ores, it is usually easier to obtain a higher-Fe grade concentrate from specularite using magnetic separation, because its grains are better crystallized. In Plant results have demonstrated that an iron ore concentrate containing 67.1% Fe can be produced from run-of-mine ore containing 34.9% Fe, at a mass yield to the iron concentrate of 38.9%, an iron recovery of 74.7%, and a tailings grade of 14.4% Fe. If the gangue mineral in an iron ore is predominantly quartz, reverse flotation is usually used in the cleaning stage to improve the concentrate grade. From the plant operating results for this flow sheet, an iron ore concentrate containing 67.5% Fe was produced from a run-of-mine ore containing 30.5% Fe, at a mass yield to the iron ore concentrate of 35.7%, an iron recovery of 78.9%, and a tailings grade of 10.0% Fe. The iron oxide crystal grains in most iron ores are not evenly distributed in size. Spiral separators can therefore be used to take out the coarser iron oxide grains in the primary grinding circuit to save grinding energy and help achieve a higher iron recovery. In the primary grinding stage of the flow sheet in The fine size fraction is about 90% -75 The key advantage of this flow sheet lies in the fact that the spirals and SLon magnetic separators take out about 20% of the mass of the final iron concentrate and about 20% of the mass of the final tailings, respectively, from the coarse size fraction. This greatly reduces the masses being fed to the secondary ball mill and reverse flotation, thereby greatly reducing the total processing cost. From the plant results for this flow sheet, an iron concentrate containing 67.5% Fe could be produced from a run-of-mine ore containing 30.1% Fe, at a mass yield to the iron concentrate of 34.9%, an iron recovery of 78.0%, and a tailings grade of 10.2% Fe. If an oxidized iron ore contains a certain proportion of magnetite, which is associated with gangue minerals, high-intensity or high-gradient magnetic separators may not be suitable in the cleaning stage. For example, if a particle contains 1% magnetite and 99% quartz, its magnetic susceptibility can be as high as 6.25 Centrifugal separators can separate fine mineral particles according to their specific gravity, which for quartz and magnetite/hematite are 2.6 and 5.0 An example where SLon magnetic separators and centrifugal separators are used in combination in a flow sheet is shown in The iron ore is first ground to about 90% -75 It was found from plant operating results using this flow sheet that an iron ore concentrate containing 63.5% Fe could be produced from a run-of-mine ore containing 39.4% Fe at a mass yield to the iron concentrate of 38.2%, an iron recovery of 61.6%, and a tailings grade of 24.5% Fe. The higher than usual Fe grade of the tailings is due to the presence of unrecoverable Fe in the gangue minerals. Compared with the SLon magnetic separator, the operating cost of reverse flotation is much higher. The flow sheet in The ore is first ground to about 50% -75 The magnetic susceptibilities of limonitic iron ores are the smallest of the oxidized iron ores, so they are more difficult to recover with high-intensity or high-gradient magnetic separators. Because the crystal water in limonitic ores will report to the iron ore concentrate in magnetic separation, the iron ore concentrate grade is limited to about 52% Fe.  As high-grade iron ore resources become less and less due to the rapid increase in steel production, iron ore beneficiation is becoming more and more important. The complexity of new ores also makes the task more and more difficult. Recent advances in magnetic separation are summarized below. Development of large magnetic separator models can increase the ore treating capacity, reduce energy consumption, and save space. The largest permanent magnetic drum separator is 1800 The largest SLon vertical ring and pulsating high-gradient magnetic separator is the SLon-4000. The diameter of its separating ring is 4000 As magnetic separators progress toward larger capacity, higher efficiency, and lower operating costs, some subeconomic iron ores have been utilized in recent years. For example, magnetite iron ore containing only about 4% Fe (beach sands or ancient beach sands) to 15% Fe (iron ore formations) and oxidized iron ore of only about 10% Fe (previously mine waste) to 20% Fe (oxidized iron ore formations) are reported to be utilized. They are first crushed and the coarse particles pretreated using roll magnetic separators. The magnetic product of roll magnetic separators may reach 25–40% Fe and then is fed to mineral processing plants. Most iron ore processing in the fine particle ranges is carried out on a wet basis. The alternative is dry magnetic separation, but many laboratory tests have shown that it is not as efficient as wet magnetic separation in the fine particle ranges. However, some iron ore resources are located in dry areas where adequate water supply is very difficult to obtain and hence dry processing is the only option. Dry permanent magnetic drum separators have been developed to separate magnetite and have been used in industry. And a SLon-1000 vertical ring and vibrating high-gradient magnetic separator has been developed for dry magnetic separation. It can treat weakly magnetic minerals in the size range 0–2.0 The majority of iron ores occurring naturally on earth are low-grade and need to be upgraded prior to use in metallurgical processes. Magnetic separation is the most important method for upgrading low-grade iron ores to high-quality iron ore concentrates because of its high capacity and low operating cost. Iron ores are divided into two different groups according to their magnetic susceptibility, that is, strongly magnetic iron ore such as magnetite and weakly magnetic iron ores (oxidized iron ores) including martite, hematite, specularite, limonite, and siderite. In iron ore beneficiation, LIMS are used to treat magnetite ore, while high-intensity and high-gradient magnetic separators are used to treat oxidized iron ores. Because different iron ores possess different magnetic characteristics, it is very important to develop an optimized flow sheet to maximize the Fe grade of the concentrate with high Fe recovery while at the same time minimizing operating costs. Through discussion of industrial flow sheets for iron ore beneficiation, including three flow sheets for magnetite separation and seven flow sheets for oxidized iron ore beneficiation, this chapter has demonstrated the ways that various magnetic separation technologies can be used for upgrading complex low-grade iron ores.