Replacement arthroplasty of the elbow is in constant evolution. Although it was initially used mainly in patients with inflammatory arthritis, its indications were expanded to other conditions that place higher demands on the implants. Elbow arthroplasty presents some unique peculiarities. Compared with the hip and knee joints, the elbow is relatively small and its stability depends greatly on ligamentous integrity. Linked semi-constrained elbow arthroplasties became popular in the United States and central Europe; these inherently stable implants raise the concern of increased contact pressures on the already thin polyethylene. Unlinked arthroplasties, popular in the United Kingdom and Asia, might have better tribological properties but are at risk for instability and decreased elbow extension. Elbow arthroplasty is further complicated by the need to violate the extensor mechanism for exposure, the increased risk of infection, the role of the radial head, and potential clinical problems related to the ulnar nerve. Present and future innovations might include the use of linkable implants, alternative bearing surfaces, uncemented fixation, distal humerus hemi-arthroplasties, unicompartmental arthroplasties and improved revision systems.Ensure joint stability May be used in the presence of ligamentous insufficiency May be used in the presence of severe bone loss Better range of motion (soft-tissue release and non-anatomic implantation) Less constrained implants may be associated with a lower risk of wear, loosening and osteolysis Less bony-invasive, which may be beneficial if revision or resection are required Some anatomic humeral components may be used as hemiarthroplasty Increased constraint may result in increased tension to the interface and higher risk of mechanical failure secondary to wear and/or loosening More extensive canal invasion, potentially complicating revision surgery Cannot be used as hemi-arthroplasty Component linking may make implantation more difficult Possible failure of the linking mechanism Most require more accurate component positioning in order to ensure proper articular tracking It is possible to subluxate or dislocate the joint Difficult to use when there is the need to compensate for bone loss or ligamentous insufficiency Limited ability for soft-tissue release or non-anatomic implant positioning in patients with stiffness Replacement arthroplasty of the elbow is in constant evolution. Although it was initially used mainly in patients with inflammatory arthritis, its indications were expanded to other conditions which place higher demands on the implants. Elbow arthroplasty presents some unique peculiarities. Compared with the hip and knee joints, the elbow is relatively small and its stability depends greatly on ligamentous integrity. Linked semi-constrained elbow arthroplasties became popular in the United States and central Europe; these inherently stable implants raise the concern of increased contact pressures on the already thin polyethylene. Unlinked arthroplasties, popular in the United Kingdom and Asia, may have better tribological properties but are at risk for instability and decreased elbow extension. Elbow arthroplasty is further complicated by the need to violate the extensor mechanism for exposure, the increased risk of infection, the role of the radial head, and potential clinical problems related to the ulnar nerve. Present and future innovations may include the use of linkable implants, alternative bearing surfaces, uncemented fixation, distal humerus hemi-arthroplasties, unicompartmental arthroplasties, and improved revision systems. There is some confusion regarding the terminology used for implants available to replace the elbow joint. In general, there are two broad categories of implants which differ in the presence or absence of a mechanism linking the humeral and ulnar components ( The distinguishing feature of this category of implant is the physical linking of the humeral and ulnar components at the time of surgery in order to avoid The linked semi-constrained implant most commonly used currently is the Coonrad-Morrey prosthesis ( In this kind of arthroplasty the components are not mechanically linked. Maintenance of prosthesis articulation depends on the adequate position of each component as well as ligamentous integrity and the dynamic stabilizing effect of the musculature. Most of these implants provide a more or less anatomic resurfacing of the distal humerus and proximal ulna and some incorporate a radial head component. The most popular unlinked implants are the Souter-Strathclyde and the Kudo prosthesis ( The clinical outcome and long-term survivorship differs from implant to implant, and the results obtained with a given linked or unlinked implant cannot be extrapolated to other members of the same implant family. However, there are a few advantages and disadvantages of each of these two design philosophies ( Linked implants ensure joint stability, even in the presence of severe bone loss or ligamentous insufficiency. These implants not only eliminate one of the main complications of unlinked implants, namely dislocation, but also allow a more aggressive soft-tissue release in patients with preoperative stiffness and deformity, which allows more reliable restoration of elbow motion. On the other hand, the increased constraint associated with implant linking results in increased tension on both the joint surface and the interfaces, which may facilitate polyethylene wear and component loosening. Semi-constrained implants did represent an improvement, but well-fixed semi-constrained implants are at risk for accelerated wear in the presence of ligamentous imbalance.  However, linked implants do have substantial disadvantages, especially when they are constrained. In those situations where the remaining bone stock and ligamentous structures are adequate, unlinked implants are at least theoretically at less risk of mechanical failure secondary to wear, osteolysis, and loosening. As a general rule, the stems of unlinked implants are shorter; this is especially beneficial when revision or resection is required. Some anatomic unlinked humeral components may also be used as hemi-arthroplasties. The need for a radial head implant is controversial. On one side, patients with an arthritic radial head or a previous radial head resection may benefit from the use of a radial implant, which may increase stability and result in a greater improvement on the lateral side of the joint. However, from a technical point of view it is difficult to achieve proper alignment and tracking of the radial head Currently published data seem to favour the use of linked semi-constrained implants. Little Recently designed implants have maintained some of the classic features recognized to improve the outcome of elbow arthroplasty (such as the use of a flange), but provide three potential advantages: The bearing surface design allows the use of thicker polyethylene subjected to less contact pressure. The instrumentation and design allow a more anatomic reconstruction with more attention being paid to reproduction of the anatomic center of rotation. The components may be linked after being completely seated. The Latitude system probably is the best example of this new generation of elbow arthroplasty. This modular system is linkable, meaning that the surgeon may choose at the end of the case to leave the implant linked or unlinked depending on his or her intra-operative assessment of stability. In addition, to my knowledge, this is the only system that allows conversion of a distal humerus hemi-arthroplasty to a total elbow arthroplasty without revising the humeral stem. Inflammatory arthropathies such as rheumatoid arthritis represent the classic indication of elbow arthroplasty. Those patients with more severe involvement (Mayo Clinic stages III to V) experience great improvements in pain and function. In addition, the polyarticular nature of these conditions may limit the overall activity level of these patients, with a low rate of wear and loosening. In the earlier stages of rheumatoid arthritis, there is usually enough bone stock and ligamentous integrity to allow the use of unlinked implants. The successful outcome of elbow arthroplasty in inflammatory conditions prompted its use for the treatment of other conditions (  Other indications for elbow arthroplasty include the salvage of distal humerus non-union in elderly patients, large post-traumatic defects, as well as elbow reconstruction after tumor resection. Primary osteoarthritis of the elbow usually affects younger patients and is treated successfully in many patients with joint debridement procedures such as osteocapsular arthroplasty. Most of the surgical approaches used for implantation of an elbow arthroplasty require mobilization of the elbow extensor mechanism. Subcutaneous ulnar nerve transposition is routinely performed by most surgeons. The author's preferred exposure is the triceps-reflecting Bryan-Morrey approach; The approach described by Bryan and Morrey ( Splitting the triceps in the midline with detachment of its medial and lateral halves from the olecranon also provides a good exposure. The main advantage of this approach is maintenance of the extensor mechanism centralized over the olecranon, but transmuscular approaches are in general less appealing and the repair of the medial half is sometimes unsatisfactory.  The bony preparation is different for each particular system. Most components are stemmed and require preparation of the humeral and ulnar canals with rasps and broaches. The author uses the Coonrad-Morrey system. With this system, the humeral side is prepared first after exposing the joint and releasing the lateral and medial collateral ligaments. The humeral canal is identified and used as a reference to cut a yoke-shaped segment of the distal humerus to accommodate the distal part of the humeral component. Next, the canal is prepared to accept the stem and the anterior cortex of the distal humerus is exposed for future contact with a bone graft placed behind the anterior flange of the humeral component. The ulnar canal is opened at the midportion of the trochlear notch and the canal prepared with right or left broaches. The components are then cemented in place with antibiotic-loaded polymethylmethacrylate, placing a bone graft between the anterior humeral cortex and the humeral flange. The components are then linked together. The ulnar canal is usually relatively narrow, which requires the use of a small flexible cannula to introduce the cement, which should be applied very early. Preoperative stiffness or deformity usually requires extensive soft-tissue balancing and releases. Limited extension may be corrected by anterior capsular release and proximal placement of the humeral component with elevation of the joint line. Limited flexion is corrected by posterior capsular release and occasionally resection of the anterior aspect of the coronoid. The goal of the early phase of postoperative treatment consists of limited postoperative edema. The elbow is immobilized in extension with an anterior plaster splint and a bulky dressing and the upper extremity is kept elevated. When a linked arthroplasty is used, elbow motion without protection may be initiated in the first few days after surgery depending on the aspect of the wound. Most surgeons keep the elbow immobilized for approximately two weeks after using an unlinked elbow arthroplasty to protect the ligamentous structures and decrease the risk of instability. A nocturnal extension splint is useful for the first few weeks after surgery when there is a marked preoperative flexion Polyethylene wear is the main limiting factor for the survivorship of current elbow designs. Prior to surgery patients should understand the need to protect their upper extremity. Empirically, patients are recommended to avoid lifting with the involved upper extremity more than 1 kg (2 lb) on a repetitive basis or more than 5 kg (10 lb) on a single event. Several studies have documented the outcome of elbow arthroplasty in rheumatoid arthritis using both linked and unlinked implants. Gill and Morrey Van der Lugt In general, most patients with rheumatoid arthritis experience satisfactory pain relief and functional improvement with both linked and unlinked implants. Most patients maintain a good arc of motion and the rate of mechanical failure is small. Some authors believe that the outcome of elbow arthroplasty is similar to the outcome of hip and knee arthroplasty in rheumatoid patients. This is one of the most common conditions affecting the elbow joint. Postoperative pain and stiffness are common sequels of elbow trauma. The first step in the evaluation of these patients is to determine how much the articular surface contributes to the patient's symptoms. Patients with a symptomatic articular surface experience pain with resisted flexion and extension in the mid-arc of motion. The status of the articular surface may be evaluated with radiographs and computer tomography (CT) scan. When the articular surface is responsible for most symptoms, the alternative surgical options are somewhat limited and not totally satisfactory. Arthroscopic debridement is more reliable for impingement pain. Interposition arthroplasty includes placement of a layer of cutis, fascia lata, or Achilles tendon allograft interposed between the humerus and ulna and temporary distraction of the joint with an articulated external fixator for approximately six weeks. This procedure is more reliable for restoration of motion than pain relief. Schneeberger The relatively high mechanical failure rate of elbow arthroplasty in patients with post-traumatic osteoarthritis has been the main driving force for the development of newer implants with supposedly better wear patterns ( Open reduction and internal fixation is the treatment of choice for most distal humerus fractures. However, the outcome of internal fixation may be compromised in a selective group of patients with extensive comminution, osteopenia or previous articular pathology. For elderly patients in this situation, elbow arthroplasty probably represents a better alternative. There are different philosophies for the use of elbow arthroplasty in distal humerus fractures. The author's preferred strategy is to work through a The outcome of total elbow arthroplasty in selected patients with complex distal humerus fractures is quite satisfactory. Kamineni and Morrey recently reviewed the results obtained in a consecutive series of 43 patients followed for a mean of seven years. The salvage of distal humerus non-union in selected patients represents a good indication for elbow arthroplasty. Most distal humerus non-unions are treated with internal fixation and bone grafting. However, elderly patients with osteopenia and very limited bone stock may benefit more from elbow arthroplasty. Morrey and Adams published the results obtained in 36 patients with a mean age of 68 years followed for an average time of four years after elbow arthroplasty for distal humerus non-union. Total elbow arthroplasty has also been successfully used in patients with severe stiffness or ankylosis, Deep periprosthetic infection affects the elbow more commonly than other joints. This is attributed to the thin soft-tissue envelope of the elbow as well as the higher risk of infection in patients with relative immune suppression secondary to inflammatory conditions or failed previous surgical procedures for trauma. Currently, the incidence of infection after elbow arthroplasty is estimated to be between 2% and 4%. The overall rate of ulnar neuropathy is difficult to estimate as patients with sensory symptoms are not reported accurately on most published studies about elbow arthroplasty. The incidence of severe ulnar neuropathy probably is around 5%. The rate of extensor mechanism dysfunction is also difficult to analyze in the published literature and is probably underestimated. In Little Unlinked elbow arthroplasty may be complicated by subluxation or dislocation ( The overall rate of aseptic loosening after elbow arthroplasty probably ranges between 5% and 10%, and it is different for different implant designs. According to Little Elbow periprosthetic fractures are classified based on the location of the fracture, the fixation of the components and the need to use special reconstructive The increasing use of elbow arthroplasty, especially in younger patients with increased functional demands, has resulted in a substantial increase in the prevalence of revision surgery. Most revision surgeries require the use of a A careful preoperative evaluation of the patient prior to revision surgery is critical for success. The physical examination should consider the condition of the skin, location of previous incisions, range of motion, joint stability, muscle function and strength, as well as the location and function of the ulnar nerve. The possibility of infection should always be considered and investigated with baseline laboratory studies including white cell count, sedimentation rate, and C reactive protein. Joint aspiration for cell count and cultures should probably be considered in every patient and is mandatory if there is a high suspicion of infection or the parameters mentioned above are elevated. Preoperative radiographs should also be analyzed carefully to evaluate the fixation of the components and the severity of bone loss. A few basic principles apply to all revision cases. The skin overlying the elbow joint is very fragile; the previous skin incision should be used whenever possible and the soft tissues should be handled with extreme care. The ulnar nerve should be identified and protected in all cases; complex humeral reconstructions also require identification and protection of the radial nerve. In many instances, component revision may be performed working on both sides of the triceps, especially in the presence of severe bone loss. Component and cement removal should be done with extreme care, as intra-operative perforations and fractures can occur easily; the use of high-speed burs and flexible cannulated canal reamers is recommended, and sometimes it is necessary to King The field of elbow arthroplasty continues to experience substantial improvements. Currently, elbow replacement represents a successful treatment alternative for patients with inflammatory conditions as well as selected patients with post-traumatic osteoarthritis, elderly patients with low, comminuted distal humerus fractures, the salvage of distal humerus non-union, ankylosis, haemophilic arthropathy, and elbow reconstruction after tumor resection. Some linked arthroplasty designs seem to be associated with a better outcome and allow the management of a wider range of pathology. There is interest in the development of improved designs which will decrease the rate of polyethylene wear and mechanical failure in higher-demand patients and provide increased flexibility in the primary and revision setting. The role of distal humerus hemi-arthroplasty, linkable implants, and components for the radial head need further investigation. The success of elbow arthroplasty depends greatly on the surgeon's familiarity with the anatomy and surgical approaches to the elbow joint, the proper selection and implantation of prosthetic components, and compliance with postoperative recommendations. Although elbow arthroplasty is sometimes the only option to improve pain and function in a wide range of patients, this procedure may be associated with complications which may be difficult to solve, including infection, extensor mechanism dysfunction, periprosthetic fractures, wear, loosening, and osteolysis. Fortunately, revision techniques developed over the last few years allow successful treatment of some of these complications.