A central composite rotatable design and response surface methodology were used to optimize the experimental variables of the electro-Fenton (EF) and solar photoelectro-Fenton (SPEF) degradations of 2.5L of sulfanilic acid solutions in 0.05M Na2SO4. Electrolyses were performed with a pre-pilot flow plant containing a Pt/air diffusion reactor generating H2O2. In SPEF, it was coupled with a solar photoreactor under an UV irradiation intensity of ca. 31Wm−2. Optimum variables of 100mAcm−2, 0.5mM Fe2+ and pH 4.0 were determined after 240min of EF and 120min of SPEF. Under these conditions, EF gave 47% of mineralization, whereas SPEF was much more powerful yielding 76% mineralization with 275kWhkg−1 total organic carbon (TOC) energy consumption and 52% current efficiency. Sulfanilic acid decayed at similar rate in both treatments following a pseudo-first-order kinetics. The final solution treated by EF contained a stable mixture of tartaric, acetic, oxalic and oxamic acids, which form Fe(III) complexes that are not attacked by hydroxyl radicals formed from H2O2 and added Fe2+. The quick photolysis of these complexes by UV light of sunlight explains the higher oxidation power of SPEF. NH4
                     + was the main inorganic nitrogen ion released in both processes.Recently, electrochemical advanced oxidation processes (EAOPs) such as electro-Fenton (EF) and photoelectro-Fenton (PEF) have received great attention for water remediation because they can generate large amounts of oxidant hydroxyl radical ( Reaction In these systems, the BDD anode is preferred since it generates BDD( While the EF process destroys the organics with hydroxyl radicals mainly generated from reaction Recently, our laboratory is developing the solar photoelectro-Fenton (SPEF) process that uses sunlight ( This paper reports the SPEF degradation of 240 Sulfanilic acid (>99% purity) supplied by Sigma–Aldrich was used without further purification. Maleic, tartaric, acetic, oxamic and oxalic acids were of reagent grade from Panreac and Avocado. Heptahydrated ferrous sulfate used as catalyst and anhydrous sodium sulfate used as background electrolyte were analytical grade from Fluka. Sulfanilic acid solutions were prepared with deionised water and their pH was adjusted with analytical grade sulfuric acid supplied by Merck. Organic solvents and other chemicals employed were either HPLC or analytical grade from Merck, Fluka, Sigma–Aldrich and Avocado. The solution pH was measured with a Crison GLP 22 pH-meter. Aliquots of 5 The energy consumption per unit TOC mass (EC) was then calculated from Eq. The mineralization current efficiency (MCE) for each trial was estimated from Eq. The decay kinetics for sulfanilic acid and the evolution of generated carboxylic acids were followed by ion-exclusion HPLC using a Waters 600 LC fitted with a Bio-Rad Aminex HPX 87H, 300 A sketch of the pre-pilot flow plant designed for the EF and SPEF processes is shown in CCRD and RSM were applied to find the optimum conditions for the EF and SPEF degradations of sulfanilic acid. The responses analyzed were the variations of TOC, EC and MCE at 240 Three replicates in the central point were made to estimate the pure error (runs 15–17 for EF and 32-34 for SPEF in Sulfanilic acid solutions were comparatively degraded by EF and SPEF in the pre-pilot flow plant. The initial colorless solutions acquired rapidly a dark brown color, which further changed to orange and yellow, becoming colorless again in 60–80 The analysis of the observed responses (TOC, MCE and EC) given in The high negative contribution of Eqs.  The Fisher distribution ( The optimum conditions for the EF and SPEF degradations of 240  The kinetics of the reaction between sulfanilic acid and generated  Ion-exclusion HPLC of the electrolyzed solutions exhibited peaks related to maleic, tartaric, acetic, oxalic and oxamic acids. The three former acids can be formed from the cleavage of the benzenic ring of aromatic intermediates, then being oxidized to oxalic acid  TN analysis of electrolyzed solutions revealed that the 19.4 The application of a central composite rotatable design coupled with response surface methodology gave the same optimized variables for the EF and SPEF degradations of 240 The authors thank the financial support from