Industrial screens are used in the minerals processing industry to separate solids from liquids and to separate particulate materials into different size ranges. The Sweco separator is a screening device that vibrates about its centre of mass. Sweco claim greater capacity and screening efficiency with less blinding than other types of screening devices. However, technology invented and developed by Vibtec Engineering in Israel has demonstrated that the throughputs of Sweco screens can be increased by at least an order of magnitude (at mesh sizes less than 100 μm) for dry material, without sacrificing efficiency, by retrofitting a device called a Kroosher. The Kroosher is a mechanical converter, converting monoharmonic oscillations to amplified polyharmonic oscillations. Dry screening test work was conducted in order to identify and quantify changes in efficiency for the screening process. It was found that for the same screening efficiency, the throughput may be increased by more than 810% by fitting the Kroosher to a standard Sweco.Screening has been extensively used since the Greeks used horse hair-and-reed sieves to effect particle size separation. The first woven wire screens dates back to the 15th century Germany and remain largely unchanged today ( Four types of screening devices are used in industry today: grizzlies, revolving screens, vibrating screens and sifters ( Vibratory screens, favoured in industry for the separation of coarse particles, consists of one or more screen deck, mounted on top of each other, with each deck having a smaller screen aperture than the preceding screen ( Vibratory screens similar to Sweco screens, a widely used industrial screen type, vibrates about its centre of mass due to eccentric weights on the motion generator shaft. Rotation of the top weight, causes the material to move in a horizontal fashion to the periphery. The lower weight acts to tilt the device, inducing vibration on the vertical and tangential planes. The lead angle, the relationship between the lower and upper weights, controls the spiralling movement of material on the screen surface ( Thus far, single frequency, monoharmonic vibratory technology is still used today as it was in the first vibratory screens in 1910 ( Kroosh technologies developed a system, whereby a mass is activated (by the vibratory action of the screen) on an elastic structure. The elastic structure deforms and random amplitude oscillations appear ( The main focus of the test work was the screening of Different flow rates were fed onto the screen and the separation efficiency (i.e., the amount of short circuiting occurring) determined for each process (with and without the Kroosher). According to information supplied by Lockers Engineering, for using a Sweco vibrating screen to separate at 106 μm, the maximum dry feed throughput will be Test work started at The Kroosher unit was fitted to the Sweco, the lead angle changed and the tests repeated at the same flow rates. The ratio of undersize to total flow was determined for trials with and without the Kroosher and is shown in Screening efficiency may be calculated in different ways. In this case, the screening efficiency was determined by calculating the ratio of the percentage split to the oversize and the percentage of the feed passing the screening size, which was 106 μm in all cases. The efficiency curves obtained were then adjusted such that at zero flow rate, the efficiency of the Kroosher would be 100%. The adjusted efficiency curves are shown in  From  Work is currently underway to investigate the application of the Kroosher to a wet screening situation as well as investigating a new devise, the Ultimate Screener, for screening applications.