Unlike the classic separation technologies, an extraction-precipitation strategy has been developed for the recovery of rare earth (RE) and from industrial wastewater using a novel phenoxycarboxylic acid of 2-(4-butoxyphenoxy) acetic acid (BPAA). Compared with 4-(4-butoxyphenoxy) butanoic acid (BPBA) and 2-(4-(benzyloxy) phenoxy) acetic acid (BZAA), BPAA enabled minimal reagent/equipment/energy uses in each step of the sustainable process. It was successfully used to enrich REEs with the concentration of 159 mg/L, and the enrichment factor of 189 times was reached. The formed precipitate sizes were bigger than the REEs precipitates from industrial precipitants, i.e., oxalic acid, ammonium hydrogencarbonate, CaO and MgO, which could be settled quickly within 1 min. Compared with COD value of 432 mg/L and 725 mg/L in traditional liquid-liquid extraction using P507 and NA, the COD value of 45 mg/L from BPAA using extraction-precipitation strategy were much lower. It is worthwhile mentioning that BPAA has revealed some advantages in the extraction-precipitation process, i.e., higher efficiency, larger processing capacity, lower energy consumption and simple process. The extraction-precipitation strategy may be suitable for large-scale applications.Because of the excellent optical, electric and magnetic properties, rare earth elements (REEs) consisting of 15 lanthanide elements as well as yttrium and scandium were critical for many advanced materials such as permanent magnet materials, optic data transmission, nanotechnology and so on ( In order to effectively recover and enrich lower concentrations of REEs, some classic methods such as solvent extraction and chemical precipitation were widely used for the leaching solution and wastewater produced from ion-adsorbed RE minerals ( Some novel separation processes have been developed for REEs, e.g., adsorption and liquid membrane extraction ( Although the extraction-precipitation strategy revealed higher extraction efficiency and enrichment factor, precipitants such as p- All the reagents were used without further purification. 4-Butoxyphenol, 4-benzyloxyphenol and 4-(1,1,3,3-tetramethylbutyl) phenol were obtained from Xiya Reagent Company, Limited (China). SmCl The pH was measured by a pHS-3C digital pH meter made in Shanghai Rex Instruments Factory. REEs concentrations in aqueous were determined by Thermo scientific iCAP 6500 series inductively coupled plasma-atomic emission spectroscopy (ICP-OES) instrument. FT-IR spectra in the range of 3500–500 cm All the precipitants were synthesized using the Williamson reaction and the detailed synthetic routes of extraction-precipitants have been listed in the All the extraction-precipitation processes were carried out at room temperature. The saponification of extraction-precipitant was achieved by acid-base neutralization reaction. The saponification degree reveals the reaction between extraction-precipitant and NaOH solution at a different molar ratio. Unless otherwise noted, the extraction-precipitation process was carried out by reacting a saponified phenoxycarboxylic acid with a rare earth solution in a centrifuge tube to achieve equilibrium using an air bath oscillator at 300 rpm. The resulting precipitate was separated from the aqueous solution by filtration. ICP-OES was used to determine the concentration of REEs in aqueous solution, and REEs content in the precipitate was calculated by mass balance. The precipitation efficiency (P%), distribution ratio (D) and stripping efficiency (S%) were defined as follows. C The effect of equilibrium time on extraction-precipitation process at an initial pH of 3.58 was measured. The results in It is known that acidic organophosphorus extractants and carboxylic acid extractants have been widely used as extractants in industrial solvent extraction processes, such as P507, P204, naphthenic acid (NA), secoctylphenoxy acetic acid (CA12) and During the extraction-precipitation process, the precipitant was in multiple contacts with the aqueous phase, which required the solubility of precipitant in the aqueous phase was as low as enough to avoid the possible loss. As shown in Taking Sm Loading capacity revealed the ability of a unit mass of precipitant to support metal ions. The larger loading capacity meant that less precipitant could be used to process the same volume of feed, which was important for the miniaturization of extraction equipment, reducing power consumption and waste discharge of separation process ( FT-IR spectra was conducted to analyze the precipitates of BPAA, BPBA and BZAA before and after the extraction-precipitation process. As can be seen in Taking BPAA based extraction-precipitation process as an example, the relationship between REEs and extraction-precipitant was calculated. As shown in SEM images for the precipitates of BPAA-REEs, BPBA-REEs, BZAA-REEs are given in Considering the extraction performance and minimizing reagent/equipment/energy use in each step of the developed process, the higher loading capacity of BPAA was selected as the precipitant of the pilot test and the whole process was carried out at room temperature. The pilot test was carried out under the conditions as follow: Firstly, the saponified BPAA using dilute sodium hydroxide solution (1 mol/L) was slowly added to the rare earth wastewater, and reacted for 5 min to achieve the equilibrium. Then, the precipitate was allowed to stand natural sedimentation. The supernatant was directly discharged and further filtered to dewater the precipitate. Finally, the precipitate was subjected to stripping at room temperature by using 6 mol/L hydrochloric acid to obtain a high concentration REEs enrichment. The results of the pilot test are shown in As can be seen This article developed an extraction-precipitation strategy for the efficient enrichment and recovery of REEs with lower concentrations from wastewater by using phenoxycarboxylic acid precipitants. For this purpose, some novel alkyl phenoxy carboxylic acid derivatives including BPBA, BZAA and POAA have been synthesized. The loading capacity of BPAA at equilibrium was markedly stronger than those of BPBA, BZAA and POAA and higher than the most of the reported solvent extraction and adsorption techniques. Compared with traditional precipitants such as oxalic acid, NH Shuainan Ni and Xiaoqi Sun designed the research, analyzed the data, and wrote the paper; Shuainan Ni performed the research; Qianwen Chen, Yun Gao, Xiangguang Guo, Xiaoqi Sun participated in data collection and discussion. The authors declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this paper. This work was supported by Supplementary data to this article can be found online at The following are the Supplementary data to this article: