Supercritical carbon dioxide extraction was used to extract oil from Echium vulgare seeds. Response surface methodology was applied to analyze the effect of temperature (30, 50 and 70 °C) and pressure (200, 300 and 400 bar) on the oil extraction yield. All extractions were performed at a constant CO2 flow rate of 3 kg/h and at a constant time of 120 min. The analysis of variance indicated that linear coefficients of temperature and pressure, the quadratic term coefficients of temperature and the interactions between pressure and temperature had significant effects on the oil yield under tested conditions. The optimal conditions were found to be 62 °C and 400 bar. Under these conditions, echium oil yield was predicted to be 14.4%. Composition analysis revealed that echium oil contains approximately 16.2% oleic acid and 72.3% polyunsaturated fatty acids. Furthermore, the physicochemical properties of the oil were determined in this study.The Boraginaceae is a large plant group comprised of about 100 genera and 2000 species in the tropical and temperate regions of the world. Supercritical carbon dioxide (SC Response surface methodology (RSM), which combines mathematics with statistics, is often used to design experiments, build models, and evaluate the effects of factors [ In this study, we set out to investigate the effect of extraction temperature and pressure on the yield of echium oil obtained by SC−CO  As recommended in Current Protocols in Food Analytical Chemistry, seed DMCs were measured gravimetrically by drying in the oven at 103 ± 2 °C for 3 h [ The SC−CO Response surface methodology was applied to investigate the effects of “temperature” and “pressure” on SC−CO Preparation of free fatty acid methyl esters from echium oil was performed according to [ Fatty acids were identified by retention times of standards of fatty acid methyl ester mix (Supelco, Germany) and expressed as a percentage of total peak area of all fatty acids in oil sample The refractive index of the oil was detected using a refractometer at 20 °C. Saponification value [ Regression analysis and statistical significance and response surface applications were performed by using Modde 5.0 (Umetrics, Sweden) program. Compliance of the model was evaluated by results of variance analysis (ANOVA). A second-order polynomial model was used to fit the data for the response by the generated model. The moisture content of seeds was 7.5 ± 0.5% as is basis. The influence of moisture on oil mass transfer in the seeds is regarded as insignificant within 3–12 wt% moisture [ The fatty acid composition of the oil extracted under optimum conditions is listed in As can be seen from The graphic plot of predicted values by the model vs. observed experimental values showed a linear distribution In addition, The ANOVA analysis presented in Overall, Contour plot was established to investigate the relationship between the response and the parameters. As seen in Ghoreishi and Bataghva [ The conditions for the maximum echium oil yield was generated by the optimizer function of the Modde 5.0 (Umetrics, Sweden) software. The lowest temperature was selected among the optimum conditions that were generated by the optimizer function. Therefore, optimum conditions were selected as 62 °C and 400 bar for temperature and pressure, respectively. The model was verified using optimum conditions (62 °C - 400 bar). Echium oil yield was obtained as 14% which was satisfactorily close to the predicted value (14.4%) at this point. The iodine value, saponification value, unsaponifiable matter, acid value and refractive index for echium oil were found as 105 g/100 g, 191 mg KOH/g, 3.15%, 0.5 mg KOH/g and 1.468, respectively. The physicochemical properties of echium oil were in accordance with the previous study [  This research was partially supported by