The Fe2O3–SeO2–H2O system was investigated by allowing amorphous ferric selenite (Fe2(SeO3)3·4H2O) precipitate to react with a solution of selenious acid (H2SeO3) at 25 °C for periods up to 3 months. The graphical method based on the chemical analysis of the final wet residue and the associated solution in each experiment for Fe and Se indicated the existence of Fe2(SeO3)3·5H2O (Se(IV) <8.0 mol/L, hereafter “mol/L” is expressed by “M”) and Fe(HSeO3)3 (Se(IV) >8.0 M). The powder X-ray diffraction (XRD) and scanning electron microscopy (SEM) analyses showed a high degree of crystallinity of both compounds.
                  The precipitates in equilibrium with Se(IV) solutions having different Se(IV) concentration at different temperatures up to 170 °C were investigated by differential thermal analysis (DTA) and thermogravimetric (TG) analysis as well as XRD and chemical analyses, for a better understanding of the solid phases involved in the Fe2O3–SeO2–H2O system in a wide temperature range. Fe2(SeO3)3·5H2O, Fe2(SeO3)3·3H2O and Fe2Se2O7 were detected depending upon the reaction conditions, Se(IV) concentration of the solution phase, and temperature.Selenium is one of the significant components of sulfide ores such as chalcopyrite, galena and pyrite. In the smelting of copper and lead, the majority of Se associated with these concentrates is collected in the anode slimes formed during the electrorefining of the metals. However, significant quantities of Se are also distributed in the sludge generated from the sulfuric acid plants and in the electrostatic precipitator dusts captured from the off-gases of the smelting furnaces. These three intermediate products have been treated for the recovery of some valuable metals and Se by pyrometallurgical and/or hydrometallugical processes. The Fe However, there has been no systematic study of the Fe The five ferric selenites listed in the index of the Joint Committee on Powder Diffraction Standards (JCPDS) Index are as follows: FeH(SeO In the treatment of Se-bearing wastewater, Se(IV) is often precipitated with Fe(III) to form Fe In this study, equilibrium experiments for the Fe All the chemicals used were of analytical reagent grade. The selenious acid solution was prepared by dissolving a precisely weighed amount of H The starting material was placed in 100 ml bottles, each containing 25 ml of the selenious acid solutions of varying concentrations. The bottles were capped gas-tightly and then shaken in an air bath at 25 °C for periods of 1–3 months, in order to attain equilibrium between the solid and liquid phases. Previously, it was considered that a longer shaking period was required to attain an equilibrium state in the low acid concentration range. After equilibration, the solutions with a suspension of the precipitate were subjected to filtration through a membrane filter (pore size: 0.65 μm) and the filtrates were subjected to pH and density measurements, as well as to a chemical analysis. The precipitates formed in the lower acid concentration range were rapidly washed several times with distilled water, dried in a vacuum, and subjected to chemical and XRD analyses. The precipitates formed in the higher acid concentration range were also filtered and the wet precipitates thus obtained were directly subjected to chemical and XRD analyses. The morphology of some of the selected solid samples was determined through the scanning electron microscopy (SEM). The starting material was immersed in the Se(IV) solutions of the desired concentrations in an autoclave, and the air in the dead space of the autoclave was flushed and replaced with nitrogen gas. The autoclave was then heated up to the experimental temperatures, where the suspension was held for the desired time, i.e. for 1–3 months, in order to attain equilibrium. The resultant solid phase, after washing and drying, was subjected to thermal analysis, DTA and TG at a heating rate of 10 °C/min, as well as XRD and chemical analyses. The density of the solutions was measured using a specific-gravity bottle of Wadon-type at 25 °C. The Fe and Se concentrations of the filtrates were determined by inductively coupled plasma atomic emission spectroscopy (ICP-AES). The high levels of Se concentration of the filtrates (above 0.5 g/L) were determined by a back titration method using a standard solution of iodine, titrating the thiosulfate remaining after the reduction of Se(IV) to Se(III) with an excess amount of sodium thiosulfate. For the analysis of Se and Fe in the precipitates, both the dried and the wet precipitates were dissolved in a 4 M hydrochloric acid solution. The concentration of Se was determined by weighing the elemental Se quantitatively precipitated by the reduction of Se(IV) in the concentrated HCl solution, with sodium sulfite. After decomposing the remaining sodium sulfite in the now Se-free solution with nitric acid, the concentration of Fe was then determined by titration using a standard solution of potassium dichromate. Since the hydrolysis of the solution attached to the precipitate is unavoidable in any attempt to wash and dry the precipitates, particularly in the high selenious acid concentration range, the graphical procedure known as the “wet residue method” used in the previous works ( The selenious acid solutions containing a suspension of the starting material, i.e., amorphous ferric selenite, were held under mild shaking for 3 months at 25 °C in order to attain equilibrium. The results from the analysis of the solutions, wet residue and precipitates for 30 different runs are listed in The selected wet residue samples, which are marked with an asterisk in The morphology of some solid samples was examined using a SEM. The SEM images for typical specimens of the two compounds identified in this study are shown in For a further investigation of the mineralogical features of the solid phase involved in the Fe–Se(IV)–H    For the pentahydrate ferric selenite, the possible reactions occurring in the course of heating are presumed as follows:  Summarizing the results of chemical and thermal analyses, it is concluded that the stable solid phase changes from Fe In The SEM images of the representative precipitates with different hydration numbers are presented in  Summarizing all the data of the chemical analyses, XRD, DTA, and TG for the solid phases and the Se(IV) concentration of the solution in contact with the individual solid phase, a diagram showing the types of the solid phases of ferric selenite, produced under different conditions, i.e., the Se(IV) concentration of the solutions and their temperatures has been constructed and illustrated in At elevated temperatures higher than approximately 110 °C and in higher Se(IV) concentration range, ferric selenite trihydrate, represented by the formula Fe The Fe Three stable solid phases, ferric selenites, were determined at different Se(IV) concentrations of up to 12 M and at temperatures up to 170 °C, by XRD and SEM observations as well as DTA and TG analyses of the solid phases. The three stable solid phases are ferric selenite pentahydrate, Fe This research was financially supported in part by the Grants-in-Aid for Fundamental Scientific Research from the Ministry of Education, Culture, Sports, Science and Technology, Japan.