The sequences of development of the contemporary mineral liberation technique are reviewed, and the emergence and development of contemporary mills as a main mineral liberation tool, is discussed. The origin of development of the technique and the working hypothesis of the mechanism of high voltage electrical pulse liberation of minerals are described, and the state of the contemporary design and construction of pulse generators are discussed. The types of pulse generators and working chambers, used in the reported liberation tests, are presented. The technological results of tests on the liberation of diamonds, emeralds, minerals, containing metals of platinum group, refractory gold and silver, iron, copper, magnesium ilmenite, and of metals of smelter slags, are reported. The account of the application of pulse liberation technique for the recovery of gold from old tailings by application of high frequency and low energy pulses, is given. The prospects and ways of introduction of the technology of mineral liberation by pulses into industry are discussed.At a certain point in time in the Bronze Age, when demands of metal could no longer be satisfied by the supply from the exhausted deposits of native copper, the smelting of the halcofile minerals became the source of production of this essential material for civilization. At the beginning the processing of metalliferous ores consisted of their size reduction by manual crushing. As technology progressed the manual (and later mechanised) selection of valuable minerals for obtaining from them concentrates, suitable for the following pyro (and later hydro) metallurgy, was introduced. The emergence of mineral processing, as an unavoidable technological stage of the production of metals, turned metallurgical procedure into a multifaceted, technically and economically viable industrial complex and a major human manufacture. Finely crushed ore concentrate, mixed with charcoal, was placed on a clay lined hearth and smelted at temperature > With the advancement of metallurgy the main functions of mineral processing became the liberation and the recovery of valuable constituents from the mined ores for their economical smelting. In order to set free the naturally fine mineral aggregates with dimensions, measured in hundreds μm, out of the matrices of the mined lumps of ores, measured in tens of cm, several techniques of rock disintegration were devised. All of them were derived from the adaptation of the two ancient tools: universally used hammers and pestles and mortars, used for grinding wheat to produce bread. According to archaeometallurgy, the development of mineral processing technique started at the end of the Neolith in the 7th millennia BC, and took place in several independent centres on different continents. During long and slow development of technology some types of ore crushers, based on compressive breakage were developed. At the beginning they were operated manually, later by use of horsepower and eventually activated by steam and electrical power. Jaw Crushers, Double Rolls, Gyratory and Cone Crushers, constructed at the end of 19th century and improved today, are based on compressing lumps of ore beyond their mechanical strength. They are capable of reducing the size of mined ore lumps from several hundreds of mm to fragments of several mm. At the same time the development of machinery for the fine milling went in direction of elaboration of the pestle and mortar concept. In the 19th century in the United States and Australia it took place in the construction of the stamp mills, directly imitating the pestle and mortar model. These apparatuses were introduced for releasing out of the ore matrices the particles of minerals with sizes, close to their natural dimensions in the ore aggregates. These apparatuses combined several (up to 20) mechanised and simultaneously operating pestles and mortars. Stamp mills were usually used for the treatment of golden ores ( However the most significant advancement in mineral liberation technique, lasting till now, took place by adopting the grinding technique, used in the technology of producing cement. In Dessau (Germany) in 1859 Andreas Polysius in his mechanical shop fundamentally reconstructed the conventional tumbling mill, making it possible to grind efficiently the hard clinker for Portland cement ( The concept of the ball mill reflected the process of mineral liberation, happening in nature. The mechanical action of liberating valuable minerals by crushing and attrition of ore aggregates in tumbling ball mills, in many respects resembles the occurrence of placers of perfectly liberated monomineral particles produced by natural forces. Deposits of about 40 important industrial minerals sometimes exist in the form of placers. The state of completely liberated mineral particles in placers is due to the difference in the mechanical strength, and the chemical stability of the heavy metalliferous and lighter rock forming minerals of the ore matrices, subjected to the process of formation of placers. The liberation process in placers occurs during the prolonged period of crushing and attrition of the fragments of ores, migrating from the point of the breakdown of their parent (usually igneous) rocks, their redeposition, scattering and concentration by water and wind before the final settling in local sedimentation traps. But together with the similarity of mechanical actions, performing liberation of minerals in placers and in the industrial, especially autogeneous, mills, there is a fundamental difference between them. The process of liberation of minerals in mills lasts for a short residence time, measured in minutes, while the formation of placers stretches over hundreds millennia. The unavoidable imperfection of the liberation in mills leads to the loss of valuable minerals with their overgrinding, and with poorly liberated fragments of ores at the mineral separation stage of the process. Obviously the progress in the industrial technique of mineral liberation has to be based on finding a more efficient way of fission of ore aggregates, than the conventional multi-step compressive crushing and milling. Although ball mills still remain the main industrial tool for mineral liberation, in the 1980–1990s the other size reduction machines, developed also in the cement industry, were adopted by mineral processing. The use of high pressure (80–300 According to the supposition, that the greater the reduction of the size of the ore fragments, the more liberated minerals become, at the beginning of 21st century horizontal and vertical versions of the ultrafine Isa mills were developed. These machines were developed by Mount Isa Mines Ltd. in Australia and manufactured by the Swiss company Xstrata. Isa mills use the attritional/abrasive mode of breakage. Inside the mill's drum are installed several rotating grinding discs, agitating the fine milling media (ceramic and other fragmented materials of size < The novel method of the disintegration of rock by the application of electrical pulses to ore aggregates, leading to the development of an efficient mineral liberation technique, was not found on the traditional way of steady introduction of the improvements into this process. It was found by accident. In the course of researching the means of decomposing water into oxygen and hydrogen by subjecting it to the breakdown by high voltage electrical pulses, the crushing capability of water shock waves was noticed. Experiments with electrical breakdown of water by pulses with voltage from 10 In the 1960s and 1970s the novel technique of crushing rock by electrical pulses attracted the attention of several research centres in different parts of the world. Research in this field was concentrated in laboratories of the applied physicists and of the specialists in electrical engineering, who were well trained and equipped for managing high voltage and pulsed power, but poorly understood the specifics of the rock mechanics, mining and mineral technologies. In Russia, England, India and USA the physicists embarked on a research attempting to use the water shock waves for developing an alternative way of rock crushing and drilling. A comprehensive drilling project was undertaken in the Sandia National Laboratories (Albuquerqe, USA) in connection with underground nuclear tests. This project was eventually abandoned. The works on the application of high voltage electrical pulses for the liberation of minerals was started in 1970 by rejecting the reliance on the water shock waves, the liberating effect of which did not much differ from that of the mechanical compression in crushers, and the impact of balls in tumbling mills. Nevertheless the experiments showed that disintegration by the shock waves was less affected by attrition, so prominent in mechanical comminution, and generated less of untreatable fine particles. The liberation effect of the direct electrical penetration of ore aggregates by electrical discharge was established in the tests with the rearrangement of the delivery of pulses, ensuring the electrical breakdown of the ore aggregates and not of water. The first systematic comparative liberation tests( The pulse generator, used for the tests, had voltage of 120 The 20 The heavy fractions of all the disintegrated portions were submitted to quantitative mineralogical microscopic analysis. In the analysis were distinguished monomineral particles and mineral intergrowths, consisting of two, three and four different minerals. The mechanically disintegrated material contained 8.77% of material in the form of intergrowths of apatite and of nepheline with all other heavy minerals. The material, disintegrated electrically in the oil medium, had 3.5%, and disintegrated in the water medium only 2.48% of not fully liberated intergrowths of apatite and nepheline fragments. The mechanically disintegrated material held 3.6 times more intergrowths with four minerals than the material disintegrated electrically in water. These tests proved that water is the best possible medium for mineral liberation by electrical pulses. The results of these tests generated the incentive to investigate the mechanism of electrical breakdown of composite solids and especially mineral aggregates with the view to optimize the parameters of pulses for mineral liberation. It was noticed in the series of liberation tests that if the rise time of the voltage of pulses is < The attempt to understand the mechanism of liberation of mineral aggregates, affected by high voltage pulses, on the basis of the existing knowledge of electrical breakdown of solids, did not bring results. Up to now the necessary physical research, providing information on the electrical breakdown of composite solids and minerals in particular has not been carried out. The limited information, available in literature concerning the electrical breakdown of solid matter, contained data of breakdown of the homogeneous plastic insulation by slowly accumulated damage, caused by electrical discharges, has little similarity with breakage of composite solids by a single high voltage pulse. The effect of liberation of minerals by high voltage electrical pulses is the result of localisation of the multiple electrical breakdowns, causing the split of the ore aggregates along the interfaces of the bound mineral constituents. Practically this type of mineral liberation is the only known way to generate intergranular split of ore aggregates over the interface between different minerals. The electrical breakdown of solids takes place when the voltage of the applied electrical pulse exceeds the electrical strength of the ore fragment. Analysis of the relevant publications showed that the commonly accepted understanding of electrical breakdown of solid dielectrics still does not exist ( The general outline of our views of the process of intergranular split in the ore aggregates, affected by pulses, in the form of the working hypothesis can be summarised as follows. It was established by our experiments and supported by calculations that the electrical breakdown of the ore aggregates, affected by high voltage pulses, causes splitting the mineral constituents with different permittivity and/or electrical conductivity along the interface of mineral substances. Prior to the event of breakdown of the composite solids, the material was affected by polarisation, caused by the charge, accumulated on the high voltage electrode of pulse generators. The polarisation causes orientational rearrangement of charges in the affected ore fragments. Such rearrangement occurs in the polarised aggregates of ores and of smelters slags, containing constituents of different permittivity and conductivity. The electrical imbalance at the interfaces between metalliferous minerals (and the metallic inclusions in the smelter slags) and minerals of matrices forms substantial local charges. The breakdown of solids by the high voltage pulses takes place at the interface due to the electrostatic attraction of plasma streamers by the local electrical field at the boundaries of the polarised minerals. Electrical breakdown of solid matter is accompanied by the direct transfer of it into gas and the generation of high temperature (10 A bunch of fine streamlets (the “brunches of the tree”) with submicron diameters develop towards the local interfacial charges of the ore aggregates. As microscopy of disintegrated fragments has shown that the streamlets are extinguished inside the solids or in the water medium. The plasma in streamers and streamlets expands thermally in the radial direction and linearly propagates solids with acceleration at averaged velocity in the order of 5–10 Depending on the polarity of the charge on the high voltage electrode, the growth of plasma channels in the solids due to electrostatic attractions, are directed from the local polarisation charges of solids towards the electrode, or from the electrode towards the local charges of solid fragments. The passage of streamers preferentially occurs in the interfacial areas of mineral aggregates or of metallic joints with matrices in smelter slags. The thermal expansion of plasma produces fractures, cracks and fissures at the boundaries of the metalliferous minerals and metallic inclusions of slags, weakening the cohesion between different constituents inside the aggregates of ores and in the smelters slags. Microscopic observations of the liberation products showed the systems of fissures in the area of joints of different materials with different electrical parameters. The small diameter of the streamers of the expanding plasma is sufficient for the generation of liberating discontinuities between the ingredients inside of aggregates. At the excessive energy of pulses the thermal expansion of plasma leads to the disintegration of solid fragments. In such cases the consumption of electrical energy exceeds the energy, necessary for the mechanical grinding of the fragments. The most revealing pictures of interfacial discontinuities, generated by pulses, can be seen at microscopy of the products of liberation of fine (< In the cases of pulses, well adjusted to the treated ore, the mineral aggregates acquire internal fractures without the disintegration of the fragments or with their partial crushing, while an excessive energy of pulses leads to technologically and economically unnecessary disintegration of the ore fragments. In the special technological cases of necessity of the partial or complete disintegration by pulses, the reduction ratio in one operation can be as high as > Not all of the technologically significant effects established experimentally and used for liberation of minerals, have found a physically viable explanation. Thus the effect of the prevalence of the electrical strength of water over that of the solids, taking place with the decrease of the rise time of the voltage wave of the pulse below the microsecond range, could not be satisfactorily explained solely on the basis of the difference in the ionic and electronic types of conductivity of those matters. The effect of extinguishing the plasma streamlets in the bulk of solids without the connection with earth is not yet not fully understood. And the most significant fact, found in the course of experimentation and still did not received a satisfactory physical explanation, is the growth of efficiency of liberating split of ore aggregates by the shortening of the rise time of the voltage wave of pulses. The controlling of the voltage rise time became an important tool of enhancement of the liberation performance It was found that the mineral liberation process only partly, or not at all coincides with the disintegration of ore fragments. The liberation by pulses and the disintegration by crushing and comminution are two separate techniques for producing monomineral or sufficiently liberated particles for the following process of separation. The technological function of the pulse liberation step is to diminish the cohesion between mineral constituents and ore matrices (and metallic fragments and smelter slags matrices). The final mixtures, consisting of monomineral and sufficiently liberated mineral particles (or metallic fragments of smelter slags) and particles of matrices of the rock forming materials (or slags matrices), are ready for the concluding step of the mineral processing, the efficient selective separation. The producing of the particulate mixtures takes place at the conventional crushing and milling of the pulsed material, but already with broken intergranular boundaries ( Today the compressive (and impactive) breakage is the most energy saving technique of disintegrating mineral aggregates. The partial disintegration by pulses takes place when the parameters of pulses are not sufficiently optimised. An example of partial liberation by pulses is our test on the treatment of the fragments of ore of refractory gold. The fragments of 120 In principle, with optimised parameters of pulses, the liberation treatment can be applied to the primary pieces of the run of mine ore with dimensions of several hundreds mm. Otherwise it could be applied to material of < Even ores of the same set of minerals, but mined from different deposits, possess different structure of matrices, distinct textures, dissimilar degrees of metamorphism, unique mechanical and electrical parameters. All these characteristics can be exploited for their liberation by choosing the suitable regime of pulsation. In order to establish the technologically efficient and economically viable liberation procedure at the current stage of development of this novel technique, the best way is to undertake a short standard test program with the ore in question. For that a pulse generator with flexible parameters of pulses has to be used. Considering the raw materials, which would mostly benefit from their pulse liberation, it is possible to state, that numerous tests on ores of base metals, precious metals, refractory gold and silver, diamond, emeralds and smelters slags invariably showed improvement in their recovery/grade performance in comparison with conventional treatment. For example, even the magnetite and hematite ores of Kiruna deposit (Malmberget, Sweden) possessing one of the highest known head grades of natural iron oxides (> The other range of materials, which would gain from pulse liberation, are the smelter slags, containing fragments of a large variety of valuable ingredients from the base to the rare metals and the old tailings, containing valuable minerals, unrecovered by present day obsolete technologies. However the most technologically and economically substantial results of the pulse liberation can be expected from the treatment of ores of noble and of high value metals and precious stones, refractory gold and silver with low (< The pulse liberation can be beneficial for the treatment of tailings from old dumps, often existing in mineral processing plants, and containing valuable minerals. After the pulse liberation and application of advanced processing techniques they can be recovered cost efficiently. The well known 240 dumps of tailings of the processed golden ore, some of them exceeding 100 The technique of disintegration of solids by the impact of the shock waves of water, generated by electrical breakdown, and following liberation of minerals by the fracturing solid matter, could never have been discovered without the appearance of pulse generators in the high voltage instrumentation, and by their use in the tests on the breakdown of water for its decomposition into oxygen and hydrogen by The pulse generator as a standard electrical device, capable of generating high voltage pulses, comparable with that of natural lightnings, came into existence at the end of 19th century with the experiments of Nicolas Tesla, using a coils resonant transformer circuit for the wireless transfer of electrical energy and the creation of the electrical “super weapon.” His coils circuit included a transformer, several high voltage capacitors, and a spark gap for generating high voltage pulses. Nevertheless the contemporary pulse generators were developed in 1927 by Edwin Marx in the Braunschweig University (Germany) in the form of a network of high voltage capacitors, connected in parallel and interspersed with resistors, producing an additive capacitance of this network. The input of one capacitor was connected with the output of the other and so on, but a gap was left in this circuitry. The capacitors were charged in parallel through the resistors. In the network between the connections of the capacitors, the spark gap with pressurised air or nitrogen was left open. When capacitors are charged to sufficient voltage in the spark gap an ark was initiated, leaving a conductive ionized trail in the gap through which flow the charges, stored in capacitors. All the capacitors suddenly become connected in series, so the voltage of the pulse becomes additive. Contemporary analogue and digital pulse generators operate in the single and repetitive modes at frequencies from one pulse per 30 At the moment there is not a pulse generator, specially designed for use in the liberation of minerals. The liberation tests, performed with industrially mined ores, were done with pulse generators, available in industry and custom built working chambers, where ores were submitted to electrical pulses. In order to keep the rise time of the voltage wave of pulses as short as possible, the working chambers were mounted next to the spark gap or connected with pulse generators by a coaxial cable. During the development of this technique several types of continuously operating working chambers were tested. Among them were chambers with electrodes, made of parallel flat plates, wedge shape vertically located flat plates, spaced at different angles. The majority of tests were done with chambers, equipped with the electrodes configured as a point-flat system. A vertically installed rod was used for the high voltage electrode, while the ground electrode was made as a perforated metallic concave, usually circular, surface. The majority of tests were made in chambers with several synchronically pulsing high voltage electrodes. The tested working chambers were based on different types of the point — plain electrode configurations, and on the wedge type plate electrodes with adjustable inclination between 30 and 90°. The comprehensive tests, which could provide answers to the vital technological questions of efficiency and of the cost of the novel technology, have to be performed on a large spectrum of the industrial ores, including specimens containing fragments of different sizes. The liberation tests should be done with the use of the pulse generator with adjustable voltage, capacitance, voltage's rise time and the repetition rate of pulses. The tests have always to be conducted on equal portions of samples, treated conventionally and with the application of pulses. The grade/recovery of concentrates and the extraction of metals, achieved by both types of treatment, and the energy consumption of both techniques, have to be compared. The novelty of this technology and its unusual features, often prevented the bodies distributing the research funds, to finance the program of the comprehensive tests in one uninterrupted research and development project, outlined above. And it still has not been achieved. Substantial difficulties were faced in obtaining the essential samples of ores from mines around the world. So, the putting together of the multiple testing programs was only partially possible. The tests were performed at different times with long intervals, determined by the success in obtaining the grants, and by the amount of available finances. This excluded the possibility of subsidising the development work of the manufacturers of pulse generators, in order to collaborate with them in making a specific model for mineral liberation work. In practice the available pulse generators, used in liberation tests, were chosen from the standard units of Marx type voltage multiplicators. These units were produced for simulating the effect of nuclear explosions on electronic equipment, for checking the ability of insulation of industrial electrical equipment, and the large transmission lines to withstand the hit of lightnings, and for generating x-rays and some other purposes, unconnected with the treatment of minerals. The liberation tests were done with the use of the slightly reconstructed single shot pulse generator, manufactured by the Swiss company Haefely for testing the insulation of electrical equipment. After the reconstruction it was capable of generating pulses with adjustable voltage between 50 and 600 The other series of tests were done with a repetitive pulse generator, producing pulses with fixed voltage of 100 Several series of tests were performed with the repetitive, three channels, custom built pulse generator, constructed on our request by the High Voltage Institute in Tomsk (Russia), and as much as possible adjusted to our specification. The variable voltage of pulses was set at 200 Several series of liberation tests were performed with the pulse generator, constructed by the American company Maxwell Physics International with partial implementation of our requests. Some parameters of pulses were adjustable according to our specification. Unfortunately the generator proved to be difficult for technological experimentation. The pulse generator had 3 stages with capacitance 25, 50 and 75 Today, after almost nine decades of development of the high voltage pulse generators, and the appearance of several specialised companies in this field, there is a good prospect of designing the model with flexible parameters of pulses, specifically suitable for the optimization of mineral liberation. With the accumulation of experience in liberation of a large variety of minerals (and smelter slags), it became clear that the efficiency of liberation to a very large degree depends on the correspondence between the parameters of pulses and the texture and mechanical and electrical properties of ores. At the beginning of the testing program on the liberation effect of pulses on industrially mined ores, the choice of possibilities for the adjustment of the parameters of pulses was very limited. So, in spite of almost constant positive influence of pulses on liberation performance, even without their optimisation, the full technological and economical potential of the novel technology could not yet be revealed. The first series of tests on liberation of precious stones was undertaken with diamond. The comparative tests were performed on 500 kimberlitic fragments of sizes of 70–120 Among the stones, liberated by the roll crusher, 42 diamond were affected by fractures, 19 lost several splinters, 8 stones were crushed into several pieces, and 11 fragments were not fully liberated ( De Beers decided to construct the production pulse liberation unit, and started negotiation with the Swiss manufacturer of pulse generators. But this project coincided in time with a substantial drop in the demands of diamond and the surplus accumulation of unsold stones in the mid 1980s. The company budget for innovation was substantially reduced, preventing the work on the introduction of this new device. At that time a large manufacturer of equipment started to negotiate with De Beers, offering them the new pressurised roll crushers. Concerning the damage of the precious stones the manufacturer promised the complete preservation of integrity of diamond using pressurised roll. This promise was given without the necessary testing, and negating common sense and further industrial experience. In spite of the damage of stones by crushing in the pressurised rolls units, this type of machine was adopted. The mining company naturally found it easier and more convenient to deal with a big manufacturer with established maintenance service and the availability of spare parts, than undertaking a development project with a small team from a university. So the chance, of substantial advance in the commercialisation of pulse liberation technology together with De Beers, was missed. However the tests on the liberation of precious stones were continued. The efficiency of liberation was tested on silicate ores from the Zeus mine (Sandawana Belingwe, Zimbabwe) containing emeralds of high quality. The mine is located in the south of Zimbabwe in the savannah area, 65 The production unit for the liberation of emeralds was requested and installed in the mine. This unit successfully operated for 8 With continuous deepening of mining operations, taking place in many ore deposits over the world, the head grade of ores have often decreased. This process affected the ores of the platinum group of metals (PGM) and gold at Bushweld Complex (South Africa), leading to the noticeable reduction in the recovery of those metals by mineral processing. The necessity to improve the recovery of PGM instigated a series of liberation tests on samples of sulphide ores from Merensky Reef, and from UG2 chromium reef. The complex flotation of concentrate, containing the precious metals and the sulphides of copper, nickel and cobalt, holds > The energy consumption for smelting a ton of concentrate exceeds of 1 Comparative liberation tests were done on two samples of platinum ore: one from the Merensky Reef and the other from the UG2. Each sample by 20 The results of the analysis of the flotation of concentrates showed, that the conventional treatment of the samples from Merensky Reef generated the recovery of 59.0% PGM with grade of 86.9 At the time of the above testing (2003), the price of Pt became unusually high and the incentive of the mining company to be involved in this complicated and unusual for a mining house endeavour was low. The ability of high voltage electrical pulses to generate in composite solids the micro-discontinuities between constituents with different electrical properties, leading to their liberation, was tested on ores of refractory gold and silver, containing the fine (fractions of μm) fragments of noble metals. The streamlets of plasma with diameters of their cross-sections, measured in μm, penetrate boundaries of fine metallic inclusions, and weaken their cohesion with matrices and open access to leaching agents. The concentrates of ores of refractory gold and silver often resist cyanidation and extraction by carbon adsorption, because sulphide minerals, associated with gold and silver, occlude fine particles of noble metals, while the presence of organic carbon in ores absorb and retain the dissolved gold. With the world wide increase in the mining of ores of refractory gold and silver, finding ways to avoid the environmentally harmful roasting, the slow bio oxidation, and the ultrafine grinding, or to reduce the use of high pressure and high temperature autoclave treatment, is an important technological problem. The sample of ore of refractory gold from an unknown American deposit, containing both: the sulphides (pyrite and arsenopyrate) and carbon, was obtained from one of the leading mineral processing laboratories, which agreed to participate in the comparative testing. The sample was divided into two portions, one of which was crushed to < The laboratory conducted a substantial number of tests on this ore from a new American deposit, and concluded that because of insufficient extraction of gold (in the range of 30%), exploitation of this deposit was not feasible. The sole test on this material with the pulse treatment showed a possibility to increase extraction of gold beyond 59%, which is almost twice more than conventional treatment. Unfortunately, an opportunity for organising a more systematic testing of this ore, leading to establishing parameters of pulses, corresponding to the material and allowing justifiable economical mining of this deposit, did not arise. In the The testing of the liberation efficiency of the pulse treatment of the ore of refractory gold from the Brazilian mine Cuiba (Nova Lima, Minas Gerias) showed how sensitive is the liberation performance to the parameters of pulses. The set of arbitrary parameters for the liberation of the American ore ( The introduction of partial pulse disintegration of ore fragments of < The owners of this mine started to negotiate the construction of the industrial unit, but considering that they deal only with a small research team of university scientists, decided not to proceed. They realised that such a development needs a greater industrial involvement of companies, experienced in the construction of specialised equipment. The work on ores of refractory metals was continued on the refractory silver from the Endeavour Mine (Mexico). The problem with this ore was, that from some areas of deposit, containing material with manganese sulphides, the recovery of silver was low. The results of comparative liberation tests with application of pulses are shown in The successful liberation tests on minerals and smelter slags of the base metals were performed on ores of copper sulphides, ilmenite ore, chromate ore, the slags of iron, copper and aluminium. It was established, that metallic fragments of slags, were liberated by pulses with higher recovery and grade, and in larger fragments than by mechanical crushing. The first liberation results on the base metals, showing an increase of efficiency of leaching from the pulsed minerals, were obtained in comparative tests on the extraction of Mg from the S. African willimite ore. The ore concentrates, liberated mechanically and by pulses, were dissolved in a lixivant with 190.5 Several successful tests were performed on the liberation of ilmenite from an igneous ore from the Titania deposit in Norway. In order to determine the effect of the application of high voltage pulses on the efficiency of leaching Cu from the low grade sulphide ore from the Phalaborwa deposit (S. Africa), the comparative test was undertaken on samples of flotation concentrates of this ore containing chalcopyrite, cubanite and bornite. These tests were performed on one sample of 50 The sample was ‘rate floated’ for 1 In the mid 80s a first attempt at liberation by pulses of the valuable inclusions from the finely comminuted material was made on the sample of sulphide concentrates of refractory gold, containing ~ At the concentration in order of 10 In the 1990s in the Institute of Electro-physics (Yekaterinburg, Russia) a high frequency pulse generator was developed with semiconductor's diodes and a solid state system of communication. Such a pulse generator was applied for the liberation tests of treating tailings, containing gold ( The first tests were undertaken with old tailings of gold ore from Uchalinskaya Mine (Russia), using the working chamber of the original channel design with dimensions 30 The parameters of pulses, chosen for the liberation of gold for its following extraction from the concentrate by cyanidation, were: voltage 200 By such treatment 87% of gold was released at the energy consumption in the order of 0.3–3.0 At the average head grade of the old tailings of < Although the application of the pulse liberation seems to be in the majority of cases more advisable at the beginning of the processing of ores on the run of mine material, or after the first crushing, it is clear, that for the cases of pulse liberation of minerals out of the finely comminuted ore (would it be the old tailings or the concentrates of the refractory noble metals) the pulse generators with high frequency and low energy of pulses, will be the suitable tools. It is known, that the liberation of minerals by crushing and milling is the main consumer of energy in the course of mechanical processing of ores. Correspondingly it often takes more than 70% of the overall cost of treatment. The diversity in energy consumption for the size reduction is directly determined by the mechanical strength of the treated ore, and by the ratio of the initial and final size of the crushed and ground fragments. The crushing part consumes a relatively small fraction of the size reduction energy. The average energy consumption for the liberation by milling in ball mills, rode mills, semi autogeneous (SAG) mills for the majority of industrial ores, is in the range of 10–20 Today the disintegration of solids by compression and impact is the most energy effective method of size reduction, because the dissipation of energy in heat in this method of breaking solids, is minimal. In the development of the technology of liberation of minerals by high voltage electrical pulses, the establishing of optimised energy consumption ( It was found that because of the breakage of solids as a result of the expansion of the high temperature plasma, the dissipation of energy of pulses in heat is higher than in compressive crushing. Correspondingly the consumption of energy for the size reduction by high voltage electrical pulses is 25–40% higher than by mechanical compression and impact. In some cases the excess of energy consumption is much greater. As it was stated earlier the liberation by electrical pulses generates a split between different minerals without the disintegration of ore fragments, or with its partial reduction in sizes. By this approach the expected energy consumption of pulse liberation of minerals will be in the range of several kWh/t. The producing of the particulate mixture of minerals for the separation of concentrates of valuable minerals and the extraction of metals from them, is left to the conventional crushing and grinding, taking place on materials, mechanically weakened by pulses. So, the economic expediency of applying the pulse liberation technology is determined mainly by the cost of additionally recovered value versus the cost of consumed energy. Nowadays the progress in the design and construction of pulse generators is sufficient for creating special equipment for the pulse liberation of minerals, employed at any stage of ore treatment from the run of mine fragments, to the finely comminuted concentrates, or for retreatment of the fine ground tailings. The contemporary units generate pulses of high voltage, high energy and high repetition rate, with capacitive and inductive storage of energy, allowing to create equipment for producing pulses, suitable for liberating a wide spectre of ores and smelter slags. The way of establishing the point of application of pulse liberation in the chain of mineral processing operations, is to determine where the optimal technological performance coincides with minimal energy consumption. One of the possible points for the pulse liberation is at the head of the chain of operation of the mineral processing plants, by the application of high voltage and high energy pulses at a relatively low frequency. The liberation of minerals in the primary ore fragments with dimensions of ~ As it was mentioned above, the problem of commercialisation of the pulse liberation technology faced difficulties which have not yet been overcome. Although the mining companies, involved in this development, appreciated the advantages of the novel technology, and made attempts to be engaged in the construction of the production units for pulse liberation, it never succeeded because of the lack of experience of mining houses in the development of equipment and of funds, available for such an endeavour. The extraordinariness of this technique against the background of millennia old practice of mineral processing by compressive disintegration, and its foundation on high voltage techniques, is the most important problem concerning its commercialisation. The necessity of the developers to go outside the circle of habitual elements of equipment, and to creatively collaborate with experts in pulsed power, is another difficulty. In the contemporary structure of world industry, two or three big multinational companies, generated by the merging of several long established manufacturers of mineral processing equipment, specialize in the development of mineral technology, and have funds for the implementation of inventions in this field. They are involved in work on a large number of different projects, and are not structured for the concentration on a single technology, demanding substantial attention of the staff. Development of technology of the pulse liberation has to be undertaken by a specialised company, fully devoted to a single objective. There is another small, but noticeable complication hindering the endeavour of commercialisation. After the publications of papers, quoted here, there appeared several articles in the mineral processing periodicals, describing experiments with pulse liberation. Usually it is repeating (always without references to the source) the already published concepts and similar experiments. These secondary publications do not consider the industrial application of this technology, and only generate the impression of academic and futurological aspect of this invention. By this, the advantage of novelty of this technique is lost for those people, who could otherwise be engaged in the commercial development. Obviously the most suitable people ready to take the risk of engagement in the commercialisation are specialists, who during the experimentation with pulse liberation, developed ways of solving the specific problems and became convinced in its industrial applicability. The example of successful commercial application of an important novel technical development where the expertise of the inventors was combined with the availability of necessary funds, is the introduction of electrical illumination. For its implementation Thomas Edison established in 1880 his own company The Edison Illuminating Corporation and involved capital of the banks of the Morgans and of the Vanderbilts. In 1882 he switched on his installation for the distribution of current for the illumination of 59 customers in Pearl Street, Lower Manhattan.