Effect of fast neutron irradiation at low fluence level of ∼1018
                     ncm−2, on tensile properties of AISI 304 stainless steel and titanium alloy Ti–6Al–4V, was studied at ambient temperature. Flat tensile specimens, subjected to fast neutron irradiation to three different fluences of 0.6×1018, 1.2×1018 and 4.8×1018
                     ncm−2, in a reactor, were tested at ambient temperature. It was observed that yield strength and tensile strength of the AISI 304 stainless steel increased marginally, upto the fluence level of 1.2×1018
                     ncm−2, but significantly at the highest fluence of 4.8×1018
                     ncm−2. However there was only nominal decrease in ductility due to neutron irradiation. On the other hand, in the alloy Ti–6Al–4V there was fall both in strength as well as ductility with increase in neutron fluence. Ductility was found to decrease upto the fluence of 1.2×1018
                     ncm−2 and remained constant at higher fluences. Phase instability was revealed by X-ray diffraction in both the neutron irradiated materials.Austenitic stainless steels have been chosen as major structural material for nuclear reactors because of their adequate mechanical properties at elevated temperature, compatibility with liquid sodium coolant, weldability, availability of design data and good resistance against irradiation. The effect of neutron irradiation on tensile properties of AISI types 304, 316, 347 stainless steels, at room temperature, has been reviewed Earlier work related to effect of fast neutron irradiation on tensile properties of ferritic low alloy steel has been carried out at higher fluences of 10 Alloy Ti–6Al–4V is an α+β type titanium alloy and is widely used in space technology. Also it is considered a candidate material for flexible attachment of shield blanket modules in the ITER reactor owing to its advantageous combination of properties like high specific strength, excellent resistance against environmental degradation, low modulus of elasticity, high resistance to impact loading and low coefficient of thermal expansion. Recently, effect of neutron irradiation has been studied on tensile properties, fracture toughness, low cycle fatigue, phase stability, plasticity and microstructure of the alloys Ti–6Al–4V, Ti–5Al–2.5Sn, intermetallic compound Ti–35Al–10V and alloys of Ti–Al Therefore, the present investigation was undertaken to examine the influence of fast neutron irradiation at low fluence level, from 0.6 The experimental materials AISI 304 stainless steel and titanium alloy Ti–6Al–4V were obtained in the form of sheet of 2.6 The variation of strength and ductility parameters with neutron fluence is shown in The fractographs in The unirradiated and irradiated samples were characterized by X-ray diffraction ( The variation of different strength and ductility parameters with fluence of neutron is shown in The fractographs in Thus it is obvious that the unusual behavior of softening coupled with reduction in ductility of the alloy Ti–6Al–4V, resulting from irradiation by fast neutron scan not be understood in terms of the usual irradiation hardening. It is pertinent to consider here modification in distribution and segregation of both the alloying elements, Al and V, the α and β stabilizers, respectively. It has been established through systematic Auger depth profiling technique that radiation induced segregation of both Al as well as V occurs in the alloy Ti–6Al–4V, though the degree of segregation was relatively less for Al than V Thus, the present study clearly shows that above a critical fluence level of fast neutron, properties of both the alloys are affected even at low fluence level of neutron irradiation. Both the alloys show phase transformation even at low fluence studied which otherwise is normally at high influences. It may be thus be inferred that such changes initiate even at low doses and continue to high fluences as reported in the literature The following conclusions are drawn from the present investigation:  Fast neutron ( Ductility of the AISI 304 stainless steel is reduced only marginally from fast neutron irradiation, even up to the highest fluence of 4.8 Marked decrease in yield strength and relatively less decrease in the tensile strength occur in the alloy Ti–6Al–4V from fast neutron irradiation. Ductility of the alloy Ti–6Al–4V is reduced due to neutron irradiation upto the fluence of 1.2 Both the materials exhibit phase instability following fast neutron irradiation. The authors are thankful to Dr. M. Sundararaman, Head Mechanical Metallurgy Division, Bhabha Atomic Research Centre, for his valuable suggestions for overall improvement in quality of the manuscript.