In 2008 the authors developed a methodology for assessing underground coal mines for high risk for major-hazard events. It focused on major hazard-related violations of safety standards associated with high-risk conditions. Later using the same stratified pilot sample of 31 mines, injury measures and MSHA citation data were combined into a Safe Performance Index (SPI). Using 2009 data, the database was expanded to 107 mines, which is a 30% sampling of all underground coal mines. The SPI was used to assess the relative safety-related risk of mines, including by mine-size category. The methodology can be used to assist companies, the Mine Safety and Health Administration, or state agencies in targeting mines with high risk for serious injuries and elevated citations for remediation of their violation and/or injury experience.Following the underground coal mine disasters of Post-MINER Act, the Mine Safety and Health Administration (MSHA) increased enforcement of mines in all sectors, and the level of fines was about 3.5 times higher than pre-2006. The provisions of the MINER Act were largely implemented by 2009, with few exceptions, thereby increasing the protection of miners during emergencies and better preparing mines for effective emergency response. Mine safety professionals hoped that major hazard-related disasters would be avoided in the future. However, in spite of many efforts by the Federal government and a number of state governments, the worst underground coal mine disaster in 40 Following publication of the Mine Safety Technology and Training Commission (MSTTC) report, the National Institute for Occupational Safety and Health (NIOSH) followed up on the MSTTC recommendation that NIOSH “develop a series of case studies that mines could use as templates (for risk assessment), and that it conduct workshops and seminars to diffuse this approach to safety throughout the industry.” NIOSH completed its study, but there was little response by industry to attend workshops to diffuse the major-hazard risk assessment methodology. Thus, a key component of the MSTTC report remained largely unaddressed, and it was critical for establishing a safety culture of prevention founded on systematic risk assessment and follow-up remediation of identified major hazard-related risks. Beyond ventilation and roof control plans, MSHA has pursued risk management over the years. Stop Look Analyze and Manage (SLAM), the Pattern of Violations (POV) provision, and Rules to Live By are the most recent examples. The two-step POV process was initiated in earnest in June 2007. Today problems persist with the POV process, which depends on final citations, including elevated ones. The process is also not transparent to the mine safety community, is complex with 10 components comprising the calculation, and is cumbersome to enforce, particularly because a significant percentage of significant and substantial (S&S) citations and orders are challenged through the due process that operators exercise via the Mine Safety and Health Review Commission. In the summer of 2007, the authors initiated a pilot study of 31 underground coal mines, stratified by mine size and state, to analyze the comparative risk among them. One of the tools developed was the Safe Performance Index (SPI), which combines statistics on a mine’s injury experience with its citation experience in determining its relative level of safety, or risk ( The 31 pilot-sample mines shown in Risk assessment for major-hazard conditions using major hazard-related citation data – the calculation made for each mine was the product of the frequency of occurrence of citations and the penalties (in dollars) assessed on them ( The reliability of not getting an MSHA citation on an inspector visit ( The Safe Performance Index. The remainder of this paper focuses on the details of the development of the Safe Performance Index and the results from using it. MSHA data for 2006 on the 31 mines in the stratified, random sample was used in this pilot study. When the project was begun, 2007 data was not yet available. The basic safety data on the sample mines is given in The measures used in calculating the Performance Index (PI), and later the SPI, for 2006 data included standard injury measures, i.e. the No Days Lost Incidence Rate (NDL IR), the Non-Fatal Days Lost Incidence Rate (NFDL IR), and the Severity Measure (SM), and citation-related measures, i.e. Citations per 100 Inspector Hours (C/100 IH), Significant and Substantial Citations per 100 Inspector Hours (SS/100 IH), and withdrawal Orders and unwarrantable failures per 100 Inspector Hours (O/100 IH). They are shown in As the first step in calculating the SPI, the PI is calculated as the summation of the safety measures. The PI thus gives a combined measure where the highest value is the ‘worst’ performer in the group of mines and the lowest value gives the ‘best’ performer. Since the PI had a wide range of values, it was considered useful to index the PI to give a range of values from 0 (best-performing mine) to 1 (the worst-performing mine). Thus the normalized PI was calculated as a mine’s PI divided by the highest PI among all mines. The SPI was then calculated as the normalized PI times 100, with the result subtracted from 100. This gives the best-performing mine with zero injuries and zero citations, theoretically, having a value of 100, with the worst-performing mine having a value of zero. The results of the calculations are presented in Following completion of the pilot study, MSHA 2009 data was captured to examine primarily the fluctuations in the SPI for the 31 mines. As this process unfolded in early 2010, the Upper Big Branch-South Mine disaster occurred and issues related to the ineffectiveness of the Pattern of Violations process were emphasized in the mainstream press and media, and to the U.S. Congress ( For this more recent database, responsive to the need to better reflect the impact of fatalities and full and partial disabilities, the Severity Measure was modified to include statutorily charged days for these more serious injuries. Scrutiny of the previous model for calculating the SPI showed, for the larger sample, that the modified Severity Measure and to a lesser extent a couple of other measures would heavily influence the combination of the component measures. In order to address this situation, first each component measure was scaled to have the same mean (5.00); essentially the data dispersion remained the same. Once equality of means was achieved, then weighting factors were used to place proper weight on the most serious safety-compromising components, e.g., Severity Measure/100 and Orders/100 IH. Following are the criteria used for assigning proper weights on safety measures. Every underground coal mine in the U.S. is inspected by an MSHA inspector on a quarterly basis to check whether a mine is complying with the mandatory health and safety standards. During an inspection, the MSHA inspector(s) issue citation(s) for mandatory health and safety standards that are violated and determine the degree of seriousness based on tabled criteria and their judgment. According to case law ( The underlying violation of a mandatory standard. The existence of a discrete safety hazard contributed to by the violation. A reasonable likelihood that the hazard contributed to will result in an injury. A reasonable likelihood that the injury in question will be of a reasonably serious nature.” If a violation is caused by an unwarrantable failure, where MSHA has determined that the ‘‘mine operator has engaged in aggravated conduct constituting more than ordinary negligence”, then a withdrawal order is generally issued, and ‘‘a reasonable amount of punitive charges” are assessed ( In examining the calculations of the SPI using the original approach, it was found that dividing each mine’s PI by an extremely high PI for the worst-performing mine would excessively inflate SPI values. Because of this inflation, very few mines would have an SPI that fell below 50, even though some of the mines had one or more relatively poor safety measures. Thus to achieve a reasonable SPI that would be practically applicable in targeting poor-performing mines, a value of 15 was selected to normalize the PI for all mines. In the SPI calculation, poor-performing mines with PI values greater than 15 would then get negative SPI values; these would be assigned the lowest SPI value of zero. Using fixed values of 5 for the scaled means of the safety measures and 15 for normalizing the PI, a straight-forward and transparent methodology was thus developed for the screening of poor-performing mines. In this way, each stakeholder group would use the same methodology when making SPI calculations. The results of the SPI calculations are given in In analyzing the SPI results for the 107-mine sample, comparisons of various metrics were made among the top 10% (best-performing), middle 10% (average-performing), and bottom 10% (worst-performing) mines. The best-forming 10% SPI mines, shown in All of them had an NFDL IR and SM/100 much less than the averages for all mines. Ten of 11 of them had a SS/100 IH and all of them had an O/100 IH much less than the averages for all mines. Ten of the 11 mines had no withdrawal orders or unwarrantable failure citations. Five pilot mines and six longwall mines were in the list. Significantly, only one mine on the MSHA list of targeted mines for special inspection made the list. The average-performing 10% SPI mines, shown in Three mines (LW-7, MB-25, and MB-28) had a single measure that was more than two times the scaled mean of a metric, but in each case two or more metrics were significantly lower than the other metrics, including some with higher weighting factors. In one case (MB-1), the mine had four metrics that were 15–36% higher than their means, but one metric with the highest weighting factor was very low, thereby keeping the mine near average. Three mines (LW-6, LW-9, and ML-22) had four or five metrics below their respective means, including one in a highly weighted metric that offset another highly weighted metric that was significantly above its respective mean. In one case (ML-8), the mine’s injury metrics were all excellent, and offset the citation metrics that were somewhat higher than their respective means. In the final three mines (LW-11, MB-13, and ML-15), somewhat elevated but lower-weighted metrics were offset by the highest-weighted metrics that were significantly lower than their respective means. Intuitively, these are the types of performances expected in the middle 10% group. Trade-offs among metrics occurs, but there are no highly weighted metrics that have values much higher than their means. The worst-performing 10% SPI mines, shown in For six of the mines (LW-22, LW-31, MB-2, MB-14, and MB-20), a very high rate for SS/100 IH and/or O/100 IH got them on the list. For five of the mines, a very high rate for SM/100 got them on the list. Four mines had five elevated metrics versus the means for the metrics, while three mines had four elevated metrics versus their means. Thus, poor performances on either the injury experience or the citation experience can lead to targeting for interventions, or several worse-than-average performances can earn greater scrutiny. Following discussions with representatives from Congressman Miller’s office and jointly with several vice presidents in charge of underground coal mine safety, the findings of the application of the Safe Performance Index and its ability to target poor-performing mines were given in testimony before the US House Education and Labor Committee on July 13. A new screening method, designed to replace the existing POV process was included in the Robert C. Byrd Miner Safety and Health Act of 2010, which uses similar metrics, with weighting factors to be determined through interim rulemaking whenever the bill passes through the Congressional processes. At present, the bill has not been passed by the US House of Representatives, and in early 2011 it was introduced in the US Senate. The methodology to target truly poor-performing mines for heightened enforcement action would then be implemented and its effectiveness as a screening tool could be determined. During 2007–2009, the authors used a random, stratified pilot sample of 31 underground coal mines to develop the Safe Performance Index, which uses Mine Safety and Health Administration injury data and citation data to assess the relative safety-related risk of mines. Using 2009 data, the database was expanded to 107 mines, which is a 30% sampling of all underground coal mines producing 10,000 tons or more. Analyses demonstrated that the methodology can be used to assist companies, MSHA, or state agencies in targeting mines with high risk for serious injuries and elevated citations for remediation of their violation and/or injury experience. The results of analyses were presented at a hearing conducted by the US. House Education and Labor Committee, and a similar methodology is now planned to be used for targeting poor-performing mines for elevated enforcement action. Implementation will not occur until the Robert C. Byrd Miner Safety and Health Act of 2010 is enacted.