Bacterial infection of the implanting materials is one of the greatest challenges in bone tissue engineering. In this study, porous forsterite scaffolds with antibacterial activity have been fabricated by combining 3D printing and polymer-derived ceramics (PDCs) strategy, which effectively avoided the generation of MgSiO3 and MgO impurities. Forsterite scaffolds sintered in an argon atmosphere can generate free carbon in the scaffolds, which exhibited excellent photothermal effect and could inhibit the growth of Staphylococcus aureus (S. aureus) and Escherichia coli (E. coli) in vitro. In addition, forsterite scaffolds have uniform macroporous structure, high compressive strength (>30 MPa) and low degradation rate. Hence, forsterite scaffolds fabricated by combining 3D printing and PDCs strategy would be a promising candidate for bone tissue engineering.During the past decade, silicate-based bioceramics, such as calcium silicate, bredigite, bioglass, akermanite, larnite, etc. [ To date, a variety of synthesis routes to produce forsterite powers have been developed, such as the sol-gel method [ Nowadays, three dimensional (3D) printing technology has been applied to fabricate bioceramic scaffolds with a help of computer-aided software, which can precisely control the size and shape of the scaffolds, and the size, shape and connectivity of the pores [ Polymer-derived ceramics (PDCs) strategy demonstrated that organic-inorganic polymeric resin can transform to ceramics by thermal treatment. Also, PDCs strategy is compatible with a variety of shaping process due to the flexibility of polymeric precursors [ More recently, it is interesting that porous ceramic scaffolds have also been reported by combining 3D printing with PDCs strategy [ In this study, we proposed to fabricate forsterite scaffolds with photothermal-induced antibacterial activity by combining 3D printing with PDCs strategy. Here, raw materials composed of silicone resin and magnesium oxide (MgO) fillers were 3D printed to form green scaffolds, and then sintered in an argon atmosphere. Through this strategy, free carbon can be formed in forsterite scaffolds due to the pyrolysis of silicone resin, so that forsterite scaffolds have excellent photothermal performance, and thereby endow with photothermal-induced antibacterial activity for preventing from bacterial infection at bone defects. A commercial silicone resin (polysilsesquioxane, Silres®MK) was purchased from WackerChemie (Munich, Germany). Magnesium oxide powders (MgO, ≥99.5%) and isopropyl alcohol were purchased from Sinopharm Chemical Reagent Co. Ltd (Shanghai, China). All chemicals were used without further purification. Forsterite scaffolds were fabricated by 3D printing of the silicone resin/MgO precursors and sintering in an inert atmosphere. Firstly, silicone resin was completely dissolved in isopropanol and then mixed with MgO powders with a molar ratio of Mg to Si at 1.5, 1.75 and 2.0. The mixture was stirred at room temperature to form an injectable slurry. Subsequently, the injectable slurry was moved into a plastic injection tube that was fixed onto the 4th 3D Bioplotter Wide-angle X-ray diffraction (XRD) patterns were measured with a Bruker D8 ADVANCE X-ray powder diffractometer (Bruker Corp, Billerica, MA, USA). Scanning electron microscopy (SEM) was performed with a FEI Quanta 450 field emission scanning electron microscope. The compressive strength of the scaffolds was tested using a static materials testing machine (2.5 KN) (Zwick Roell, Ulm, Germany) at a crosshead speed of 0.5 mm/min. Raman spectra were recorded on Raman spectroscopy (Raman StationTM 400/400F, PE, USA) with a semiconductor laser (532 nm). FTIR spectra were obtained on a PerkinElmer SPECTRUM 100 spectrometer. The porosities of the scaffolds were measured using Archimedes’ principle and water was used as liquid medium. The porosity (P) was calculated according to the following formulation: P=(W The photothermal performances of each type of forsterite scaffolds were tested under the near-infrared (NIR) light irradiation, which is produced by an 808 nm high-power multimode pump laser (Shanghai Lian Fiber Co., Ltd.). Firstly, the scaffolds were placed in a 24-well culture plate in dry (in air) or wet (in PBS) conditions. Subsequently, the 808 nm laser beam (D = 14 mm) focused on forsterite scaffolds (Φ8 mm × 1 mm) for 5 min. The temperature increases caused by the laser irradiation on forsterite scaffolds at different power densities (0.5 W/cm  For fluorescent-based adherent bacteria live/dead observation, bacteria on different scaffolds were stained with mixed SYT09 and PI dyes for 20 min. Live and dead bacteria will be stained to green and red, respectively. After the scaffolds were rinsed with PBS for three times, inverted fluorescence microscope was employed to observe the survival of bacterial on the surface of scaffolds. To investigate the effect of the molar ratio of Mg to Si from MgO and silicone resin on the phase of scaffolds, the molar ratios of Mg to Si at 2.0, 1.75 and 1.5 were applied for 3D printing of green scaffolds, and green scaffolds were sintered at 1400 On the other hand, the sintering temperature can also influence the phases of scaffolds.    According to the XRD results, slight diffraction peaks of forsterite can be observed after sintering at 1000  To verify the photothermal-induced antibacterial ability of forsterite scaffolds, the photothermal effect and photothermal stability in dry (in air) and wet (in PBS) conditions by an 808 nm laser irradiation for forsterite scaffolds were investigated. As show in The antibacterial activity of forsterite scaffolds with and without NIR radiation was evaluated by a spreading plate method. Specifically, Furthermore, live/dead staining assay was performed to evaluate the M Bacterial infection has become one of the greatest challenges in bone repair [ In summary, forsterite scaffolds with photothermal–induced antibacterial activity have been successfully fabricated by combining 3D printing with PDCs strategy. When the molar ratio of Mg to Si was 1.5 and sintered in an argon atmosphere at 1300 The authors declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this paper. This study was supported by the