Metal pH50 and ΔpH50 values were determined and compared for a number of organic systems to select a synergistic system for the separation of Cd from Zn. The largest ΔpH50(Zn–Cd) value was obtained with HRJ-4277 (nonylsalicylic acid)/Cyanex 471X (triisobutyl phosphine sulphide or TIBPS) system and reached 1.53 pH units, indicating excellent separation of Cd from Zn with this system. Shellsol 2046 was chosen as the diluent of the system due to its larger ΔpH50(Zn–Cd) and excellent phase separation compared with other diluents.
                  Distribution isotherms and subsequent McCabe–Thiele diagrams indicate that 99% Cd could be extracted in two stages at pH 3.80 and A/O ratio of 1.5:1. The extraction kinetics and stripping kinetics of Cd and Zn were very fast with >97% metal transferred within 30 s.
                  In a three-stage batch continuous extraction test, >99% Cd and 0.4% Zn were extracted. The loaded organic solution contained 3.87 g/L Cd and only 12 ppm Zn. In a two-stage batch continuous scrubbing test, all the co-extracted Zn was removed with the scrubbed organic containing <1 ppm Zn. Nearly 99% of cadmium was stripped in two batch contacts with 20 g/L sulphuric acid. Excellent separation of Cd and Zn can be achieved in three stages of extraction, two stages of scrubbing and two stage of stripping with this synergistic SX system.In zinc hydrometallurgy, cadmium is often present as an impurity. The removal of cadmium from zinc sulphate solution in zinc refining can be carried out by cementation with zinc powder. An alternative process to cementation is solvent extraction (SX). The removal of cadmium by solvent extraction has several advantages over zinc powder cementation, which include potential lower capital and operating costs and less environmental pollution. However, to this point, no reagents have been used to selectively remove cadmium from zinc in industrial scale. The development and commercialisation of new, highly selective reagents is very expensive. In addition, demand for the new reagents would be small. As a result, the new reagents would be too expensive to be attractive. Therefore, the use of synergists, preferably commercial reagents, to improve the selectivity of existing reagents is an attractive alternative to the development of new reagents.   The addition of TBPS to alkylsalicylic acids caused substantial shifts for Cd ( A batch counter-current test using a synthetic solution containing 5.5 g/L Cd and 6.9 g/L Zn and an organic solution containing 0.5 M DIPSA plus 0.5 M tri-isobutylphosphine sulphide (TIPBS) in xylene was conducted by The reports by The aqueous solutions were prepared by dissolving the required amount of analytical grade Fe Industrial grade Versatic 10, Shellsol 2046, Shellsol D70 and Shellsol A200 were supplied by Shell Australia, Cyanex 471X (tri-isobutylphosphine sulphide, TIBPS) by Cytec and HRJ-4277 (nonylsalicylic acid) by Schenectady International. Analytical grade t-nonanethiol and n-dodecanethiol were purchased from Sigma Aldrich. All organic reagents were used without further purification. For the tests to select a synergistic system, the concentrations of Versatic 10, Cyanex 471X, HRJ-4277, t-nonanethiol and n-dodecanethiol were all 0.5 M and for the other tests, the organic solution contained 0.2 M nonylsalicylic acid and 0.2 M TIBPS. All batch tests were carried out in stainless steel rectangular boxes in a water bath at 40 Extraction pH isotherms were determined by mixing the organic and aqueous solutions for 5–10 min at the target pH at an A Extraction distribution isotherms and McCabe–Thiele diagrams were determined using A For the determination of extraction kinetics, the aqueous and pre-equilibrated organic solutions were mixed at an A All batch continuous extraction tests were conducted at an A The organic samples were stripped using 100 g/L sulphuric acid solution at an A/O ratio of 5 The pH The pH Three diluents, Shellsol D70 (0.3% aromatic), Shellsol 2046 (19% aromatic) and Shellsol A200 (100% aromatic) were tested. Similar ΔpH The pH Although the separation factor was maximised (410) at an A Within 30 s of mixing, more than 72.0% Cd and 0.9% Zn were extracted at pH 3.80, indicating fast extraction kinetics ( More than 97% Cd and Zn were stripped within 30 s of mixing with a strip solution containing 25 g/L sulphuric acid, indicating very fast stripping kinetics ( The results of the batch continuous extraction test indicate that after three stages of extraction, the concentration of Cd in the aqueous solution reduced from 2.45 g/L in the feed to 16 ppm in the raffinate ( In two stages of scrubbing, 100% Zn and only 2.7% Cd was scrubbed ( With a loaded organic solution containing 4.14 g/L Cd, the total stripping efficiency of Cd after two contacts reached 99.4%, indicating the ease of stripping Cd from the synergistic organic solution.  Metal pH Distribution isotherms and subsequent McCabe–Thiele diagrams indicate that 99% Cd could be extracted in two stages at pH 3.80 and A In a three-stage batch continuous extraction test, over 99% Cd and only 0.4% Zn were extracted. The loaded organic solution contained 3.87 g/L Cd and only 12 ppm Zn. In a two-stage batch continuous scrubbing test, all the co-extracted Zn was scrubbed. The scrubbed organic solution contained < Although the process has been successfully demonstrated in a batch continuous mode, semi continuous tests and fully continuous piloting is recommended to generate data for further process development and plant design. A chemical stability study is recommended for the nonylsalicylic acid/TIBPS system. The authors would like to thank Dr. Keith Barnard and Mr. Peter Miovski for assistance in the test work. Dr. Helen Watling is thanked for reviewing this manuscript and providing valuable comments. One of the authors (Davood Moradkhani) is grateful for the support by the management and staff of the Parker Centre and CSIRO Minerals of Australia. The support of the Australian Government through the Cooperative Research Centre Scheme is acknowledged.