The present work reports the comparison of the effectiveness of ultrasonic bath and horn for intensifying the cooling crystallization of oxalic acid for the first time. The effect of various parameters such as temperature, crystallization time, irradiation time, ultrasonic frequency and ultrasonic power on the crystal characteristics has been investigated. The average particle size of oxalic acid crystals reduced with an increase in irradiation time and ultrasonic power dissipation. Comparison of crystal characteristics obtained in ultrasonic bath with that obtained in the ultrasonic horn under optimized parameters revealed that the average size in the case of ultrasonic horn and bath were only marginally different. The studies related to the effect of different cooling modes using ultrasonic horn revealed that a narrow size distribution and lower average size of 357.2µm was obtained for the cooling using ice cold water as compared to air cooling where observed mean size was 439.7µm. A narrow particle size distribution was also obtained in the scale-up studies using ultrasound horn with mean size of 96.70µm, which was significantly lower than 161.1µm obtained under conventional approach. Overall significant process intensification benefits have been established for the ultrasound assisted approach for cooling crystallization of oxalic acid.Crystallization is an important process affecting the final product characteristics and required in almost all the chemical processing industries especially in the case of fine chemicals and pharmaceutical industries. Continuous crystallization is generally used for large-scale production of crystalline materials Strassburger and Torgesen Oxalic acid was obtained from S.D fine chemicals Ltd. Mumbai. Distilled water prepared in the laboratory was used as a solvent. Solubility data of oxalic acid in water was determined experimentally at different temperatures. Magnetic stirrer was used to completely dissolve the solute in the solvent at desired temperature. Constant temperature water bath was used to increase the temperature subsequently and definite amount of solute was added, till it dissolved completely. The obtained solubility graph has been depicted in  In the case of experiments using the ultrasonic horn, a similar arrangement as used for conventional approach for crystallization was used except that ultrasonic horn was used instead of the stirrer ( The solution of oxalic acid in water was prepared by simultaneous stirring and heating. Based on the solubility data, corresponding to temperature of 65 In the case of crystallization assisted by ultrasound, under supersaturation condition i.e. 44 Studies have been also performed to understand the scale-up aspects under the influence of ultrasonic horn operating at 22 During each experiment, metastable zone width (MSZW) was measured using a glass thermometer. MSZW is based on the measurement of the temperature (T Mean crystal size was determined by separating the mixed particles using a sieve shaker. The weight of particles obtained in each sieve was noted and also the numbers of particles were calculated based on the image analysis approach where a microscope is used to capture the image followed use of image processing software to analyze the data  Ni  where, N m mp Experiments were conducted using the ultrasonic bath to study the effect of sonication parameters on the growth and nucleation. Subsequently, studies have been also performed using ultrasonic horn and agitation to compare with the results obtained in the ultrasonic bath with an objective of establishing best process intensification approach. Experiments were performed to study the effect of total crystallization time described as the time for which the solution is kept for crystal growth. Effect of standing time was investigated by allowing the solution to stand for different time intervals such as 1, 2, and 3 Solubility of oxalic acid (g of oxalic acid/ml of water) in water was established at different temperatures. For the obtained solubility data, a polynomial equation was also fitted as a function of temperature. It was observed that a 4th order polynomial equation was the best fit with the regression value of 0.9924 as represented in The effect of initial temperature on the average particle size was investigated at two different temperatures as 60 and 65 The obtained results of ultrasound assisted approach have been compared with those obtained with the conventional approach performed at the same temperature of 60 The obtained reduction in the time required for onset of crystallization using the ultrasound can be attributed to the higher nucleation rates induced by the ultrasonic irradiations. Passage of ultrasound creates cavitation bubbles in the liquid which can induce nucleation based on the surface energy effects as well as the local hot spots generated by ultrasound leading to instantaneous evaporation of the solvent giving the nuclei formation. It is expected that the cavitational effect is higher at lower initial temperature due to higher energy dissipation and hence higher intensification benefits in terms of lower mean size are obtained due to the use of ultrasound at temperature of 60 Similar results for the effect of initial temperature or the comparison of the ultrasound assisted approach and conventional approach can be observed in literature. Lindenberg et al. Ultrasound is known to induce acoustic streaming at micro-scale and the conditions of localized intense temperature and pressure in the fluid. The observed cavitational effects are dependent on the irradiation time. Passage of ultrasound can provide advantages such as ease of inducing primary nucleation, reduction in the crystal size and better control over the crystal size distribution The obtained particle size distribution at varying irradiation time is depicted in Influence of frequency of ultrasound on the crystal size, induction time and metastable zone width was also investigated using two different frequencies as 22 Study of exact power dissipation into the solution was also performed using the calorimetric studies and it was established that the actual power dissipation into the solution was 53 and 47.6 Li et al. A set of experiments was performed using ultrasonic bath at 40 Similar trends in terms of lower particle size being obtained with an increase in the ultrasound power can also be observed in the open literature Kurotani et al. Different process intensification approaches based on ultrasonic horn and bath has now been compared in terms of the influence on crystal size distribution, induction time and metastable zone width. Comparison with silent conditions has also been included to establish process intensification benefits. Non-homogenous acoustic fields are typically delivered by the bath with maximum amplitude at the center of the vessel. The non-homogeneity of the acoustic field means that the position of the crystallizing vessel must be selected properly. In probe systems, a high intensity is delivered at the probe tip and the energy density reduces in an axial and radial direction, away from the tip. Typically the intensity is higher in the case of an ultrasonic horn as compared to an ultrasonic bath. Experiments were performed under optimum conditions to compare the results of sonocrystallization using ultrasonic bath, ultrasonic horn and conventional approach of stirring without using ultrasound. The optimum conditions were the frequency of 22 The metastable zone width was also the minimum for the case of ultrasonic horn as compared to conventional approach as depicted in Ultrasonic bath requires the reaction vessel to be immersed into the coupling fluid filled in the bath giving an indirect sonication. Due to this operation a lower cavitational intensity is obtained in the solution as compared to the case of ultrasonic horn. Ultrasonic horn is competent to deliver the power directly in the reaction system with maximum effectiveness close to the horn tip, due to which the intensity is also higher near the tip as compared to ultrasonic horn. Due to the higher availability of the ultrasonic energy, higher intensity cavitational effects are observed in the probe giving enhanced process intensification benefits in terms of lower particle size and narrow size distribution. It has been also established that the intensification benefits obtained in nucleation are higher in the case of ultrasonic horn (due to the direct contact and higher cavitational intensity) as compared to the ultrasonic bath where transducers utilized for insonation are not in direct contact with the solution and energy is not dissipated directly into the solution The obtained results for cooling profile and particle size in the case of using two different cooling approaches have been depicted in Crystallizers frequently include cooling control, considering that uncontrolled cooling results in poor quality product attributed to the production of a large number of crystal nuclei, which cannot grow to the desired size, if the rate of cooling is high at the initial stages. So to obtain a balance between the number and size, the temperature should be decreased at a slow and controlled rate in the prior stages of the cooling process. This also explains the reason for obtained narrow size distribution for controlled cooling as compared to the air-cooling Scale-up of ultrasound based reactors can be achieved using high local intensities delivered using ultrasonic horn used at multiple times in a flow through arrangement or using parallel transducers positioned around the duct. The flow through systems employ a high-intensity horn introduced in a flow cell for continuous processing and the process fluid is in direct contact with the horn. Parallel plate transducer systems are based on flowing fluid through a duct offering low-intensity acoustic energy as compared to the horn and work on the principle of indirect mode of operation. During the studies with ultrasound at large scale operation of 3 The present work has analyzed the crystallization behavior of oxalic acid under the influence of ultrasound using two types of ultrasonic reactors also establishing the effect of various parameters like temperature, irradiation time, crystallization time, power dissipation, frequency, irradiation, type of cooling and type of ultrasound on different performance parameters governing crystallization of oxalic acid. The presented results have clearly established that the average particle size, induction time and metastable zone width were found to be reduced by the application of ultrasound and the extent of intensification was indeed dependent on the type of ultrasound reactor used. The initial temperature and the crystallization time had only marginal effect on average particle size whereas stronger influence was obtained for the case of irradiation time. The average particle size was found to decrease with an increase in irradiation time, and same was the result obtained for induction time and metastable zone width. The influence of different ultrasound frequency of 40 and 22 Authors would like to acknowledge the funding of Center of Excellence in Process Intensification under the Technical Education Quality Improvement Programme (TEQIP) governed by the