Present work reports experimental investigations on simultaneous removal of fluoride and Fe (II) ions from drinking water by electrocoagulation (EC) with aluminium electrode having submerged electrode surface area of 116 cm2. During experimental studies, effects of pH, current density (Cd), inter-electrode distance (Id) and NaCl dose (Csi) were investigated to identify their influence on fluoride and Fe(II) ions removal efficiency. Experimental results infer that pH of 7.0, Cd of 4.31 mA cm−2, Id at 1.0 cm and Csi of 0.33 g L−1 are ideal for highest removal of fluoride and Fe(II) ions from water. Overall, 96 % of fluoride ions and 98.88 % of Fe(II) ions were removed after 60 min of EC. Further it was observed that, presence of Fe (II) increases fluoride removal efficiency and fluoride ions increases Fe (II) removal efficiency. Different other impurities of water such as salinity, TDS, conductivity, turbidity were also decreased in treated water. Kinetic analysis infers that, for same operating condition Fe (II) removal rate (k = 0.0766 min−1) is higher compare to fluoride removal rate (k = 0.0535 min−1). Present study confirmed that EC is an efficient method for simultaneous removal of fluoride and Fe(II) ions along with other impurities with energy consumption of 1.716 KWh m−3.Groundwater is considered as safe source of drinking water in India and in nearby countries. Various metallic and non-metallic ions like fluoride, iron, magnesium, calcium, sodium etc. with varying concentration are found in such ground water [ Till date significant amounts of research work have been carried out by various researcher on removal of fluoride ions as well as Fe(II) ions from water by coagulation [ Present work reports experimental investigations on simultaneous removal of fluoride and Fe (II) ions from drinking water by EC with aluminium electrode. Experimental investigations has been carried out to identify the influence of different parameters of EC like current density (C In EC process, Al In the presence of OH To understand the removal mechanism of both the contaminants, kinetic analysis was done with different initial concentration of fluoride ions and Fe(II) ions. Removal of fluoride and Fe(II) ions were found to follow first-order kinetic models as [ After integration, Eq. Batch EC experiments were carried out using a 5 L cylindrical glass reactor of 25 cm height and 14 cm diameter filled with 3 L of fluoride and Fe(II) ions contaminated water at room temperature (̴ 25 °C). A pair of aluminium (Al) electrode (thickness: 1 mm; width: 58 mm; length: 100 mm), submerged electrode surface area of 116 cm To assess the effect of initial pH on simultaneous removal of Fe(II) and fluoride ions, pH of water was varied from 5 to 9.    To understand the influence of fluoride ions on Fe(II) ions removal, fluoride ions concentrations were varied from 0 to 25 mg L  To understand the influence of Fe(II) ions on fluoride ions removal, Fe(II) ions concentrations were varied from 0 to 50 mg L   To study the impact of inter-electrode distance on simultaneous removal of fluoride and Fe(II) ions in EC process, varying I  To understand the influence of NaCl on simultaneous removal of fluoride and Fe (II) ions, experiments were carried out with varying NaCl dose from 0.33 to 0.83 g L  In this work, simultaneous removal of fluoride and Fe(II) ions by EC are studied to identify the influence of coexisting ions on their removal efficiency. During experiment, 10 mg/L of fluoride ions and 20 mg/L Fe(II) ions were considered to study their simultaneous removal with varying pH, C   The authors declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this paper. This work is partially supported by a grant (