Reinforcing aluminum matrix with much smaller particles, submicron or nano-sized range, is one of the key factor in producing high-performance composites, which yields improved mechanical properties. High-energy ball milling was successfully employed to synthesize nano-crystalline Al7075 alloy powders reinforced with 1, 3 and 5 vol.% Al2O3 at nano-size level. Hot pressing was employed to consolidate the green powder metallurgy products. The nano-composite powders were characterized by SEM, TEM, and XRD. Using Williamson–Hall equation, crystallite size and lattice strain of various Al7075 composite powders were estimated with broadening of XRD peaks. XRD results showed that the crystallite size of aluminum reached 42.30, 36.25 and 32.22 nm, respectively, after 20 h milling in case of Al7075/1, 3, and 5 vol.% Al2O3 nano-composite powder with uniform particle size distribution. TEM observation confirmed the nano-crystalline nature of Al7075/5 vol.% Al2O3 milled powder. Mechanical measurements showed that the hardness and ultimate tensile strength of the Al7075–nano Al2O3 tend to increase with increasing nano Al2O3 volume content at the expense of tensile ductility.Aluminum alloys are preferred engineering material for automobile, aerospace and mineral processing industries for various high performing components that are being used for varieties of applications owing to their lower weight, excellent thermal conductivity properties. Aluminum alloy 7075 possesses very high strength, higher toughness and are preferred in aerospace and automobile sector The high-energy ball milling offers grain size refinement, making the crystals less susceptible to fracture, and hence nanocrystallization process of aluminum MMCs has been the subject of intensive research in recent years. During the milling operation the two essential processes affect the particle characteristics. First, the cold welding process leads to an increase in average particle size of the composite, and secondly the fragmentation process causes breaking up of composite particles. Steady-state equilibrium is attained when a balance is achieved between these processes after a certain period of milling. During high-energy ball milling for synthesizing of Al matrix reinforced with nano SiC particles, showed reduced crystallite size significantly rather than that of micron size Y. Reda et al. The main contribution to the strengthening of MMCs, is not only the grain size refinement and reinforcing particle size, but also the particle addition. Several particle parameters which affect the mechanical properties of MMCs, include the volume fraction, size, shape, and distribution of reinforced particles within the metal matrix. The most influential among these parameters is volume fraction In this paper, an attempt was made to synthesize, Al7075/1 vol.% Al The base matrix and the reinforcing phase for the present studies selected were Al7075 (Alcoa mill products) and particles of Al Al7075/1 vol.% Al The Al7075/1 vol.% Al Crystallite size and Lattice strain during milling have been monitored by X-ray diffraction analysis using a Siemens diffractometer with Cu Kα radiation ( The morphology of nano composite powder particles was investigated by scanning electron microscopy (SEM) using Cambridge Stereo Scan s360 operating at 25 kV. A Philips CM 200 FEG transmission electron microscope (TEM) was used for investigating the nano-crystalline nature of the nano-composite powder. For this purpose, particles were deposited onto Cu grids, which support a ‘‘holey’’ carbon film. The particles were deposited onto the support grids by deposition from a dilute suspension in acetone or ethanol. The particle shapes and sizes were characterized by diffraction (amplitude) contrast and, for crystalline materials, by high resolution (phase contrast) imaging. To study the density changes, the ASTM C373-88 standard was applied using ethanol via the Archimedes method. The density values were obtained by averaging the values of the three specimens for each composition. The samples were polished in preparation for the Brinell hardness test according to ASTM E 10-10 standard. Brinell hardness values were obtained averaging 3 indents of 31.25 kg force; error bars indicate the positive/negative deviation from the average hardness. The mechanical properties were evaluated using universal testing machine of 50 kN capacities. Tensile strengths were measured at room temperature in air with a crosshead speed of 5 mm min   The effect of 1, 3 and 5 vol.% nano-Al The X-ray diffraction patterns of Al7075/1 vol.% Al Noticeable shift in the position (i.e., 2 The change in crystallite size and lattice strain of powders milled for 20 h was calculated using Williamson and Hall Eq.  Density is the physical property that reflects the characteristics of composites. In a composite, the proportions of the matrix and reinforcement are expressed either as the weight fraction ( The above expression can be generalized and its general form is known as law of mixture and is as follows;  From the above table and figure, it can be observed that the density of the composite is higher than the base matrix. Also, the density of the composites increased with increase in filler content. Further, the theoretical and experimental density values are in line with each other. The increase in density of composites can be attributed to higher density of reinforcement particles.  The resistance to indentation or scratch is termed as hardness. Among various instruments for measurement of hardness, Brinell's, Rockwell's and Vicker's hardness testers are significant. Theoretically, the rule of mixture of the type  The morphological and structural changes of 7075 aluminum powder milled for 20 h reinforced with nanometric alumina particles were studied. In the present study, comparisons of individual reinforcement of alumina ceramic particles are realized. Addition of alumina nano particles into the 7075 aluminum matrix sustains the crystallite size reduction, which is due to the increase in fracture tendency. High-energy ball milling method used for the preparation of nano-composite powders with nano particles reinforcement resulted in refined microstructure and randomly oriented interfacial grain boundaries which is the characteristic of particles at steady-state condition. The densities of the composites are found improved than their base matrix. The microstructural studies revealed the uniform distribution of the nano particles in the matrix system. Hardness of the composites found increased with increased filler content and the increase in hardness of Al7075–nano Al