In this study, the kinetics of acid leaching of a spent catalyst containing CuO was investigated. The effect of key parameters such as type of acid (H2SO4, HCl, Oxalic acid), concentration of acid (0.5–2 M), stirring speed (200–600 rpm), liquid to solid ratio (40–200 ml/g) and temperature (27–55 °C) on the rate of leaching was determined experimentally. The treatment of present leaching data using shrinking core model (SCM) revealed that diffusion through the catalyst's ash layer is the rate controlling step. Activation energy values confirmed also the diffusion controlled nature of the leaching process. Kinetics of copper recovery from synthetic leach liquor by electrochemical deposition on square rotating cylinder was studied under different conditions using limiting current technique measurements. The rate of copper electrodeposition was expressed by the mass transfer coefficient. The present results showed that mass transfer coefficient increases with decreasing initial concentration of copper ions and increasing rpm. The present mass transfer data for copper deposition under constant current electrolysis at square rotating cylinder was correlated by the following dimensionless equation: Sh = 0.4557 Sc0.33 Re0.59 for the conditions 657 < Re < 2373, 2165.21 < Sc < 2819.2.The dwindling natural metal resources has made it mandatory to recycle metals from different metal waste in order to satisfy the need of the market for metals beside solving the environmental problems Metal recycling from spent catalysts can be performed utilizing pyrometallurgical Hydrometallurgical processing consist of the following three consecutive steps; (i) leaching of the desired metal from the solid phase to the liquid phase, (ii) purification of the obtained leaching liquor and (iii) recovery of the desired metal from the leach liquor using cementation or electrodeposition Despite the huge amounts of spent catalysts produced annually by many industries, previous studies have focused on copper recovery from e-waste Thus the aim of the present study is to recover copper metal from spent catalyst catalyst namely KATALCO-83-3 which is used in low temperature shift conversion in ammonia synthesis plant. The present work was carried out in two steps; the first was acid leaching of copper from the spent catalyst and the second was electrodeposition of copper from synthetic leach liquor of acidified copper sulphate using rotating square cathode electrochemical reactor. Abdel-Aziz et al. In the leaching stage, the effect of different parameters on the rate of copper leaching was investigated in a batch agitated vessel. Variables studied were type of leaching acid, concentration of acid, l/s ratio, stirring speed and temperature. The kinetic data of the present study were examined using shrinking core model to determine the rate determining step. In the electrodeposition stage, the effect of different initial copper sulphate concentration and speed of the rotating cylinder were investigated. One of the objectives of the present work is to utilize the present data for the diffusion controlled copper deposition to obtain an overall dimensionless mass transfer correlation for the square rotating cylinder electrochemical reactor. This equation would help in the rational design and operation of the rotating square cylinder reactor. The spent catalyst used in the present work has a commercial name KATLCO-83-3 used in low temperature shift conversion in ammonia synthesis, was supplied by AlexFert Company (Alexandria, Egypt). In this research a typical experiment was conducted as follows: certain amount of the crushed catalyst was placed into the Plexiglas cylinder reactor with mechanical stirrer containing 2 L of solution of the selected acid and concentration as shown in It was preferred to use synthetic leach liquor with concentration close to that was obtained from the leaching experiments, so there were no purification steps for the leach liquor. To recover copper from the synthetic leach liquor, electrolysis was conducted at a constant current. In order to maximize the rate of production it was decided to fix the current at the limiting value of copper deposition. To determine the limiting current of copper deposition the apparatus shown in The apparatus used in constant current electrolysis was similar to that used in limiting current determination      Copper (II) oxide is a basic oxide, so it dissolves in mineral acids such as H As shown in In SCM, three models are used to describe the leaching process: For liquid film diffusion control In order to determine the kinetic parameters and the rate controlling step of leaching reaction. The shrinking core model was tested at various temperatures. The validity of the present experimental data was tested by graphical representation of Eqs. According to The estimated activation energies from the slope were as follows: considering the first 5 min in the reaction it was 5.48 kJ/mol, while it was 7.74 kJ/mol in the time between 5 and 40 min. According to Habashi  Copper was recovered by operating the cell with lead anode at constant current equals to the limiting value of copper deposition at the particular CuSO   To appreciate the extent to which turbulence induced by the rotating cylinder increase the rate of production compared to the case of natural convection, the mass transfer enhancement ratio α, was calculated according to the following equation and placed in An overall mass transfer correlation was investigated using the method of dimensional analysis. The mass transfer coefficient can be related to different variables by the following functional equation: Dimensional analysis leads to the dimensionless equation:  A comparison between the present mass transfer coefficient predicted from Eq. In order to assist in assessing the economic feasibility of the present reactor in comparison with other competing reactors, electrical energy consumption (E.E.C) was calculated from the following equation in KWh/kg: The current efficiency (C.E) needed to calculate mass of copper was calculated from the present data using the following equation:  The increase in the amount of copper powder produced per hour (m) owing to the enhancement of the rate of mass transfer according to the following equations:  The stirring tends to decrease the total cell voltage E which is given by the following Eq.  The turbulence generated at the rotating cathode spreads to the stationary lead anode and assist in the early release of O Copper recovery from spent catalyst was carried out using acid leaching followed by electrodeposition on square rotating cylinder. From the results of this study the following conclusions can be drawn: The best leaching acid among the tested acids was H A statistical analysis indicated that the leaching rate was increased by increasing acid concentration, temperature, l/s ratio and stirring speed. Mathematical treatment of the present leaching data using shrinking core model (SCM) revealed that the present kinetic data fit a diffusion controlled mechanism through the ash, the activation energy calculation confirmed the diffusion controlled nature of the leaching reaction. It was found that the mass transfer coefficient increases with increasing rpm of the square rotating cylinder cathode. The mass transfer enhancement ratio as a result of cylinder rotation ranges from 7.5 to 16.49. The present mass transfer data for copper deposition under constant current electrolysis at square rotating cylinder was correlated using dimensional analysis by the following equation: for the conditions 657 < Re < 2373, 2165.21 < Sc < 2819.2 The cylinder rotation not only increases the rate of copper deposition, but also decreases the electrical energy consumption (kWh/kg), energy consumption under the present conditions ranged from 1.181 to 1.659 kWh/kg according to the operating conditions.