In this study, hydrophobic N′-alkyloxypyridine-2-, -3- and -4-carboximidamides were used to extract copper(II) from chloride solutions. The effect of different variables influencing the extraction of copper(II) such as the extractant structure and the concentration of metal and chloride ions have been studied. The shaking time also had influence on copper(II) removal. The discussion also includes the mechanism of complexation and the speciation studies indicated that examined N′-alkyloxyimidamides (L) formed complexes with Cu(II) and chloride heaving a molar ratio of Cu:Cl:L of 1:2:2, 1:2:4 and 1:2:5, or complex has additionally the outer-sphere Cl− anions as was indicated for O-3IA. The loading and selectivity tests indicated that Eh-3IA can be proposed as the extractant from the concentrated copper(II) solutions and the re-extraction can also be realised efficiently with the selected striping agents.Copper, due to its properties (malleable, ductile, good conductor of heat and when is very pure it is a very good electricity conductor, corrosion resistant and durable), is widely used material. Not only electric cables, roofing and water pipes are made from copper but also many electrical products (lighting, computers, mobile phones), all requiring cables, adapters, transformers and motors. Over the last several decades copper solvent extraction-electrowinning has proven to be a cost effective and adaptable technique for producing high grade copper. This technique has become more popular recently as increasingly low grade and dirty concentrates have made smelting less attractive than hydrometallurgical processing. The most important stage of the purification is solvent extraction with selective and efficient extractant, but the choosing of the extractant depends on the composition of a pregnant At present the commercial extractants most often used for this purpose are LIX984N and LIX54 also in the mixture with Acorga CLX50. These compounds are characterised by low selectivity of copper extraction in the presence of iron Kyuchoukov et al. Over the last few years the extraction of metal ions from chloride aqueous solution by hydrophobic pyridine ketoximes has been widely investigated by our team. The studies have mainly focused on extraction of copper(II) In the light of the considerations above and looking for effective and selective complexing compound the aim of this work was to test novel extracting agents, hydrophobic Examined reagents, Aqueous solutions were prepared from CuCl The studied reagents were synthesized according to a procedure described elsewhere The extraction processes were carried out using 50 The effects of various process parameters were studied: chloride and copper(II) ions concentrations in the aqueous feed solution and the extractant concentration in the organic phase. The pH of the aqueous solutions was close to 3.5 and was adjusted using Mettler Toledo T50 Titrator to a value of 3.5 by adding 0.2% HCl or HNO Before and after extraction and stripping processes, the metal ions concentration in the aqueous phase was analyzed with atomic absorption spectrometry AAS (HITACHI Z-8200 Polarised Zeeman). In the extraction studies each experiment was carried out at least in duplicate, and the results agreed within 5%. Cu(II) ions concentration in the organic phase ([Cu(II)] Study of shaking time influence on the extraction was carried out at constant concentration of chloride ions equal to 4 The results illustrated in The effect of the Cl The extraction results presented in The influence of the chloride ions concentrations on the copper extraction is seen for O-3IA and O-4IA. In the case of O-3IA, the accelerating effect was observed in the range of the Cl The obtained results given in Analysing the influence of the chloride ions concentration on the copper(II) extraction with Eh-4IA as the extractant, it can be observed a slight effect of Cl Unfortunately, the worst extraction properties of Eh-2IA are probably combined with a lack of an affinity of the Cu-(Eh-2IA) complex to organic phase. The results of UV–VIS analysis of the aqueous phases after the copper(II) extraction with Eh-2IA presented in The Cu(II) extraction dependence on the extractant concentration in the ranges 0.006–0.1 As expected, the extraction efficiency increased along with the increasing concentration of the extractant, but the linearity of the effect was different for each considered reagent. In the case of O-2IA and O-3IA the copper(II) extraction increases along with the increasing concentration of the extractant achieving maximum at concentration of 0.04 and 0.08 The effect of the initial copper(II) concentration on the extraction by all studied reagents was investigated in the range of 0.02–0.15 The obtained results presented in The re-recovery of copper(II) from the loaded organic phase was investigated using as the extractant selected reagents: O-2IA and Eh-3IA. As stripping agents, solutions of sulfuric, hydrochloric and nitric acid (0.1–5%), sodium sulfate solutions (0.1–5%) and water were used. The obtained results are presented in It has been observed that Eh-3IA forms with copper(II) relatively strong complexes, which are stable after contact with water. The solutions of the mineral acids seem to be ideal stripping agents, but a full re-extraction is possible using minimum 1% solution. The sodium sulfate as 0.1% solutions is enabled to a comparable re-extraction, and that stripping agent can be used as a substitute of the mineral acids. In the case of O-2IA, It was observed that only sulfuric acid has the ability to strip copper(II) efficiently from the loaded organic phase (E The common copper ore, chalcopyrite, often occurs in tandem with other minerals such as pyrite (FeS The selectivity of the selected reagents (Eh-3IA and O-2IA) in the concentration of 0.5 The results of this study are summarized in Orama and Saarinen The studied Copper(II) easily forms chloro-complexes in chloride solutions but only selected species are extracted and next transported to an organic phase. The distribution of the various metal species in solution was determined by considering the metal complex equilibria The overall formation constant If the total metal ion concentration is small in comparison to the total concentration of the anionic ligand, the free anion concentration may be assumed to be that of the total concentration, as the amount of anion complexed with metal ions is negligible. Thus, if the concentration of free anion and the stepwise formation constants are known, and if the total concentration of metal ion in the aqueous phase can be experimentally determined, the free copper(II) ions concentration In this equation X The Eq. The distribution coefficient of copper(II) (D) is a ratio of the total Cu(II) concentrations in the organic phase In the further analysis, Eq. To order to find out the number of chloride that participate in the copper complexes with the studied reagents, the variation of The slopes obtained indicate that in the case of O-2IA, O-4IA, Eh-2IA, Eh-3IA and Eh-4IA the given fitting lines have slopes close to 2 (1.722 (R Effect of the studied reagents concentrations on the Cu(II) extraction at the constant composition of the aqueous phase are shown in The conducted graphical analysis clearly shows that the extraction of Cu(II) can be explained by formation of the following species in the organic phase: CuCl The aim of this work was to establish the relationship between the structure of the extractant, concentration of chloride ions, concentration of copper(II) ions, time of shaking and the efficiency of the extraction process. The results showed that regardless of the extractant structure the copper(II) removal process is relatively quick but the structure and position of the Moreover, for the selected compounds the increase of the concentration of chloride ions showed a positive influence on process of the Cu(II) extraction. Using The conducted graphical analysis indicated that examined Analysis of influence of concentration of copper(II) on extraction percentage indicated that only O-2IA and Eh-3IA can be proposed as the extractant from the concentrated copper(II) solutions and the re-extraction process can also be realised efficiently with the selected striping agents such as 1% solution of sulfuric acid. Eh-3IA also showed very high selectivity towards Cu(II) in the presence of Fe(III). This applicability of O-2IA and Eh-3IA can be combined with the structure of the formed complexes, in which only two ligands and chloride ions participate in extraction. Rest of the reagents probably form less lipophilic complexes, therefore the contact with more concentrated copper solution resulted in the emulsion formation. This work was supported by the Polish Grants: 03/32/DSPB/0700. Supplementary data associated with this article can be found, in the online version, at 