The decolorization and mineralization of solutions containing 230mgL−1 of the food azo dye Allura Red AC at pH 3.0 have been studied upon treatment by electrochemical oxidation with electrogenerated H2O2 (EO-H2O2), electro-Fenton (EF) and photoelectro-Fenton (PEF). Experiments were performed with a stirred tank reactor containing a boron-doped diamond (BDD) or Pt anode and an air-diffusion cathode to generate H2O2. The main oxidants were hydroxyl radicals formed at the anode surface from water oxidation and in the bulk from Fenton’s reaction between H2O2 and added Fe2+. The oxidation ability increased in the sequence EO-H2O2
                     <EF<PEF and faster degradation was always obtained using BDD. PEF process with BDD yielded almost total mineralization following similar trends in SO4
                     2−, ClO4
                     − and NO3
                     − media, whereas in Cl− medium, mineralization was inhibited by the formation of recalcitrant chloroderivatives. GC–MS analysis confirmed the cleavage of the NN bond with formation of two main aromatics in SO4
                     2− medium and three chloroaromatics in Cl− solutions. The effective oxidation of final oxalic and oxamic acids by BDD along with the photolysis of Fe(III)-oxalate species by UVA light accounted for the superiority of PEF with BDD. NH4
                     +, NO3
                     − and SO4
                     2− ions were released during the mineralization.Over the last fifteen years, electrochemical advanced oxidation processes (EAOPs) have been optimized for the removal of toxic and biorefractory organic pollutants from waters under the on-site action of The efficient O The most widespread EAOP is electrochemical oxidation (EO), so-called EO–H The preferred anode in EO and EO–H Nevertheless, the occurrence of such reactions at high current can become dangerous because of the large production of toxic ClO Electro-Fenton (EF) is the best known EAOP with H Irradiation of the solution with ultraviolet A (UVA) light in the photoelectro-Fenton (PEF) process About 70% of the world dye production corresponds to azo compounds that are used in many industries by their unique characteristics including brilliant shades, relative low cost and simple manufacture Many authors have studied the electrochemical destruction of single and multi-component azo dyes in synthetic and real wastewater by EAOPs Allura Red AC (purity 80%) was purchased from Sigma–Aldrich. Anhydrous sodium sulfate, sodium chloride, lithium perchlorate and sodium nitrate used as background electrolytes, as well as iron(II) sulfate heptahydrate used as a catalyst in EF and PEF, were of analytical grade from Merck and Fluka. Solutions were prepared with ultrapure water from a Millipore Milli-Q system with resistivity >18 EO–H The solution pH was measured with a Crison 2000 pH-meter. Samples were microfiltered with 0.45 Generated carboxylic acids were detected by ion-exclusion HPLC by injecting 20 To identify the aromatic products, the organic components of solutions electrolyzed by PEF–BDD were extracted with 3 The degradation of 130  A very different behavior was found for TOC abatement. The oxidation ability of EAOPs then increases in the order EO-H  The above findings highlight that PEF–BDD is the most potent and efficient EAOP to degrade acidic Allura Red AC solutions in sulfate medium. The effect of operating parameters and supporting electrolytes on the performance of this procedure was then examined. Worth noting, the possible application of the PEF process is limited by the high energy requirements arising from the use of commercial UVA lamps. Alternatively, the use of inexpensive sunlight as energy source in the so-called solar PEF process has been proposed elsewhere The applied The influence of the dye content in PEF–BDD was further studied at the most efficient The above study indicates that low Comparative experiments were subsequently performed to clarify the effect of the supporting electrolyte on the PEF–BDD treatment of 230 A different behavior can be observed in The changes in color and TOC removals for different Na According to  The more efficient oxidation by BDD( Inorganic ions released to solutions with 0.05 PEF–BDD was the most efficient EAOP to decolorize and mineralize Allura Red AC solutions. Almost total mineralization with 96–98% TOC reduction was attained for 115–460 The authors thank