The current hydrometallurgical processes used for niobium and tantalum recovery are operated in strongly acidic and fluoride-containing solutions. To avoid the use of these highly toxic media, a fluoride-free process was developed to recover Nb and Ta from low-grade industrial concentrates. The process is based on the caustic conversion of the raw material with NaOH(aq) at atmospheric pressure and at relatively low temperature which then allows the selective dissolution of sodium hexaniobates. Finally, Nb is recovered as purified hydrous oxide by acidification of the hexaniobate solution. The influence of many industry-relevant parameters (temperature, initial NaOH concentration, residence time, impurity content in the initial concentrate, pH of precipitation) was studied in order to optimize the recovery and purification of the valuable metals. Finally, the process was validated in continuous operation at a pilot scale. High recovery yields for Nb and Ta (65%) were obtained as well as high separation factors toward Ti, Fe, P, S, Th and U. The results demonstrate that it is possible to recover and purify Nb and Ta from industrial concentrates without using fluoride solutions.Niobium (Nb; The numerous applications and the expanding market push the industrial and the academic researchers to develop new processes for the recovery of Nb and Ta from their ores and concentrates. Nb raw concentrates or colombo-tantalite concentrates (which typically contain 20–50% (w/w) Ta The fluoride media have been extensively studied for the extraction of the two metals. Actually, the first industrial process for the extraction and purification of Nb and Ta, called Marignac’s process, required concentrated HF solutions The environmental footprint of the current hydrometallurgical processes used for the extraction and purification of Nb and Ta forces ones to device cleaner methods. Especially, it appears essential to replace the fluoride compounds. In this regard, a fluoride-free hydrometallurgical process for the recovery of niobium from the Mabounié mine has been developed since the early 2000s. The so-called Maboumine project aims at recovering niobium, but also, tantalum, uranium and the REE from the Mabounié ore deposit located in Gabon. The Mabounié mine is a secondary Nb–Ta–REE–U deposit associated with carbonatite complexes In the up-stream Maboumine process the non-magnetic fraction of the ore is first leached with concentrated H Although the Nb recovery is high, the Nb concentrate obtained has a low Nb content and still contains lot of impurities, especially Ti and Fe, so that it has no commercial value. Consequently further purification is needed. In the continuity of the up-stream process ( Alkaline media have caught growing attention over the past few decades for the extraction of Nb and Ta. For example, Hongming Zhou et al. In the present paper, an innovative fluoride-free process has been developed for the recovery of Nb from low-grade concentrates like the one described in NbCl The concentrations of Al, Fe, P, S, T, Si, Ta and Nb were determined by ICP-OES using an ICP 720-ES spectrometer (Varian). Quantitative analysis were performed at 396.152 (Al) nm, 238.204 (Fe) nm, 177.434 (P) nm, 180.669 (S) nm, 334.188 (Ti) nm, 251.611 (Si) nm, 268.517 (Ta) nm and 313.078 Powder XRD spectra were collected using Cu K Typically, about 40 A series of tests were carried out on synthetic samples. The Nb–Ti and Nb–Fe concentrates were synthesized as follow: Typically 3–10 Following the Nb leaching step, a series of precipitation tests was performed. Typically, 1000 The primary goal of the process is to solubilize Nb in alkaline media while letting the impurities in the leaching residue. The first step of the process consists of a reaction between the raw concentrate and concentrated NaOH at atmospheric pressure. After reaction with NaOH, the solid is washed and then leached with water. Nb is solubilized during the water leaching step (      The powder XRD analysis of the initial concentrate revealed that it is completely amorphous ( The presence of hexaniobate ions in solution after the water leaching step was also confirmed by UV–visible spectrophotometry ( Taking into account the XRD results, the UV absorbance spectrum of the leaching solution and previous works published on the alkaline processes for the treatment of Nb concentrates ( The effect of the initial concentration of NaOH used for the caustic conversion step on the recovery of Nb was studied.  The results given in Under the conditions given in Preliminary tests suggested that the maximum Nb dissolution yield might depend on the Ti and Fe content of the initial concentrate. In order to determine what was the factor limiting the Nb recovery, two series of caustic conversion tests were performed on synthetic Nb–Ti or Nb–Fe concentrates. Amorphous precipitates with different Ti/Nb and Fe/Nb ratio were synthesized and used as surrogates for our Nb–Ti–Fe industrial concentrate (see Section It was found that increasing the Ti or Fe content of the initial concentrate has, in both cases, a detrimental effect on the Nb recovery ( The XRD powder analysis of the leaching residue obtained from synthetic or industrial concentrates indicates that it contains Na During the water leaching step, Nb is solubilized whereas Fe and Ti remain in the residue so that a purified Nb solution is produced. The typical composition of the solution is given in The hexaniobate ions HNb  In order to validate the hydrometallurgical process developed at laboratory scale ( The average dissolution yield of Nb measured during the pilot campaign varied from 59% to 69% with an average of 65% whereas less than 1% of Ti and Fe were dissolved. The dissolution of Nb was slightly lower than what was observed during the laboratory tests (65% versus 76%) which is mainly due to the higher Fe/Nb ratio of the raw concentrate used for the pilot test. As expected from the laboratory tests, the precipitation yield of Nb during the last acidification–precipitation step was higher than 99.9%. Hence, the total Nb recovery was nearly 65% and the main Nb loss was found in the leaching residue. About 6.8 Unlike the KOH-based processes previously reported The recovery and purification of niobium from low-grade concentrates was investigated. A novel hydrometallurgical process was developed to selectively extract Nb and Ta from Nb–Ti–Fe raw concentrates. The process is based on the formation of sodium hexaniobate by reaction between the initial concentrate and concentrated NaOH at atmospheric pressure. After caustic conversion, the sodium hexaniobate are selectively dissolved in water. The optimum conditions for the caustic conversion step were determined to be [NaOH] Financial support for this work from