Background
                  Despite the advent of locking plate techniques, proximal humeral fracture fixation can fail due to varus collapse, especially in osteoporotic bone with medial cortex comminution. This study investigated the effect of restoring the integrity of the medial column by fracture impaction and shaft medialization with locking plate fixation. This construct was compared with a traditional locking plate construct under conditions of varus cyclical loading.
               
                  Materials and methods
                  Proximal humeral fractures with medial comminution were simulated by performing wedge-shaped osteotomies at the surgical neck in cadaveric specimens and removing 1 cm of medial cortex. For each cadaver (n = 6), 1 humeral fracture was fixed with a traditional locking plate construct. The other was fixed with the locking plate construct plus fracture impaction and shaft medialization, resulting in medial column restoration. The humeral head was immobilized, and a repetitive, varus force was applied to the humeral shaft until construct collapse or until 25,000 cycles were completed.
               
                  Results
                  None of the constructs with fracture impaction collapsed, whereas 5 of 6 of the nonaugmented constructs collapsed before reaching 25,000 cycles (P = .008). Collapse of the 5 nonimpacted constructs that failed occurred after an average of 11,470 ± 3589 cycles.
               
                  Conclusion
                  Fracture impaction increased the ability of the locking plate to withstand repetitive varus loading. This technique provides a construct biomechanically superior to locking plate fixation alone.As the third-most common fragility fracture in people aged 65 and older, treatment of proximal humeral fractures represents a significant portion of current orthopedic trauma practice. A technique has been proposed to restore medial column integrity, without the need for an allograft, in which the humeral shaft is medially translated and impacted into the humeral head with reduction of the medial cortex. This study examined the ability of this construct to resist a cyclic varus loading force. The biomechanical properties of cycles to failure and deformation per cycle were evaluated and compared with fixation with a locking plate alone. Eight embalmed cadaveric pairs of specimens were prepared as described in our previous studies. Treatment allocation to augmented or standard fixation was randomly assigned to left or right humeri within each specimen to eliminate bias related to hand dominance, which was unknown. The medial cortex was reduced anatomically by impacting and medially translating the proximal shaft into the humeral head. The reduction was held with Kirschner wires and then secured with a Synthes 3.5-mm LCP stainless steel proximal humerus locking plate with 3 shaft screw holes (Synthes, West Chester, PA, USA). The plate was placed on the lateral aspect of the humerus, approximately 8 mm distal to the superior aspect of the greater tuberosity. Eight locking screws were placed into the humeral head and 3 locking screws into the shaft. The impacted construct is shown in In the humeri repaired without fracture impaction, the lateral cortex was reduced anatomically, as in our previous study, The loading configuration was designed to simulate the forces on the bone-plate construct in vivo during early healing, when patients are immobilized in a sling or are allowed to begin pendulum type shoulder exercises. Specimen mounting and cyclic loading application was identical to those described in our previous work. The method of data collection is outlined in our previous report. The relationship between For each pair, the slope of the graph of We used χ The study used 6 (1 female and 5 male) embalmed cadavers. The average age was 85 years (range, 62-94 years), with the female specimen being 62 years. None of the constructs repaired using fracture impaction reached our definition of varus collapse. All of these constructs maintained their structural integrity, with minimal to no loosening up to the designated limit of 25,000 cycles. In contrast, 5 of 6 of the nonimpacted constructs reached our definition of failure. The number of specimens that collapsed in the impacted group compared with the nonimpacted group was statistically significant ( The ratio between the number of cycles needed to cause 1 mm of deformation in the impacted specimen vs the number of cycles needed to cause 1 mm of deformation in the nonimpacted specimen was significantly greater than 1 ( Despite the advent of locking plate fixation, osteoporotic fractures of the proximal humerus with medial comminution remain a difficult problem to manage effectively. The importance of restoring the integrity of the medial column has been shown by Gardner et al However, fixation of proximal humeral fractures with an allograft fibular strut is limited by the availability and cost of fibular allografts. Further, insertion of the bone peg may result in a longer, more complicated surgical procedure, as well as a more difficult revision to shoulder arthroplasty in cases of failure. Because many of the patients undergoing such a surgery are elderly with multiple medical comorbidities, an alternate means of restoring medical column integrity without added operative time is needed. Impacting the humeral shaft into the head to reduce the medical cortex restores support medially using the patient’s own bone, eliminating the need for an allograft. No additional operating room time is required for this technique compared with traditional plating, and the risks associated with the use of allograft materials are eliminated. The results of this current work indicate that, as an alternative to using a bone peg, creating a medial support by using fracture impaction also leads to superior results in the ability of the repair to withstand 25,000 cycles with minimal to no screw loosening compared with traditional plating. Of 6 constructs repaired using the locking plate fixation alone, 5 failed within the 25,000 cycles after incurring an average of 11,470 cycles. This is comparable to our previous study For our biomechanical study to be clinically relevant, a relatively small loading level was chosen, namely 110-N. This loading level is aimed at replicating the forces created by the supraspinatus on the fracture-plate construct during the early stages of healing. This loading level is comparable to the results of the biomechanical studies performed by Poppen and Walker. Our study has some limitations. As with our previous work, the humeri were tested under only varus loading to simulate the pull of supraspinatus during early rehabilitation. Further testing, including torsional and sagittal plane forces, might better simulate the mechanical behavior of the construct in vivo. The plate for the medialization technique appears prominent in the test specimens. Because the construct uses a locking plate, it does not rely on plate-to-bone compression, and biomechanical properties are not altered by distance from the shaft. A plate that is prominent clinically can be contoured without compromising the strength of fixation. An example of this technique used in vivo is shown in The specimens included in the study were osteotomized to model a 2-part proximal humeral fracture with medial comminution. This is representative of a small number of proximal humeral fractures that require operative fixation. We chose this model because it accentuates the factors responsible for varus collapse and has been used in previous studies of humeral fracture fixation. Fracture site impaction may also have a theoretic disadvantage because the moment arm of the deltoid is altered and potentially weakened. The literature shows that up to 2 cm of shortening is possible without resulting in significant compromise to deltoid power. Finally, as in our previous study, bone mineral density (BMD) was not determined for the specimens used for testing. This may have explained the single nonimpacted specimen that did not fail by 25,000 cycles. In a previous study, dual x-ray absorptiometry did not show a significant difference in BMD between humeri of the same cadaver. By randomizing the side chosen for fracture impaction, the results should not be biased by side-to-side differences in BMD. A previous study by Zimmerman et al Fracture impaction and shaft medialization to restore the medial column in proximal humeral fractures fixed with locking plates creates a stronger, more durable construct than locking plate fixation alone. The impacted specimens survived 25,000 cycles without collapse and showed decreased deformation with each cycle compared with traditional locking plate fixation. It provides a biomechanically strong alternative construct to fibular allograft fixation, without the need for a more complex surgery. This may provide a good option for improving outcomes in proximal humeral fractures with medial metaphyseal comminution. This study was partially funded by a Natural Sciences and Engineering Research Council of Canada (NSERC) Discovery Grant (Project No.: G121211107). This grant funded the salary of the postgraduate studies student, Farhana Begum, who participated in the biomechanical testing of the specimens and in the statistical analysis, and also funded the purchase of basic laboratory supplies (cleaning agents, laboratory coats, and gloves). Implants for this study were donated by Synthes (West Chester, PA, USA). Synthes was not involved in data collection, data analysis, or the preparation or editing of the manuscript. The authors, their immediate families, and any research foundations with which they are affiliated have not received any financial payments or other benefits from any commercial entity related to the subject of this article.