Calcium ferrite phases have been considered as wonderful bonding phase in iron ore sinters. Plenty of works have reported the formation behaviors of calcium ferrites roasted under various O2 partial pressures. However, the local sintering zone where the coke breeze is combusted is not oxidizing atmosphere but weakly reducing atmosphere, which inevitably affects the formation of calcium ferrites. In the present study the formation of calcium ferrites roasted under CO–CO2–N2 atmosphere was investigated using XRD, SEM–EDS, TG–DSC, etc. It was found that Ca2Fe2O5 (2CaO·Fe2O3) and ternary calcium ferrites (CaO·FeO·Fe2O3 and CaO·3FeO·Fe2O3) were easily formed under 1–10vol.% CO/(CO+CO2+N2) atmosphere, and the formation reactions of calcium ferrites were promoted by increasing the roasting temperature and CO content of the mixed gas. CaO·FeO·Fe2O3 and CaO·3FeO·Fe2O3 had much lower melting point than 2CaO·Fe2O3 which was beneficial to the formation of liquid phases during the iron ore sintering process. The formation of calcium ferrites under CO–CO2–N2 atmosphere can be regarded as CaO substitute for FeO in Fe3O4 (FeO·Fe2O3). It is well known that the combustion reaction of coke breeze takes place at temperatures higher than 600°C to supply the necessary heat for the mineralization reactions during the sintering process. In addition, CO In this study the reaction behaviors of CaO and Fe The materials used in this study were analytical reagents of Fe The roasting tests were conducted in a horizontal resistance furnace, and the schematic apparatus for the roasting experiment is shown in During the sintering process the atmosphere was controlled by passing various gas mixtures into the reaction tube. The roasting temperature was measured by a Pt–Rh thermocouple and controlled by a KSY intelligent temperature controller (accuracy ±0.1°C). The total inlet gas flow rate was fixed at 5.0 The detailed procedures were as follows: first of all, pure N The external shape of the roasted samples and the roasting temperature were recorded by a camera every 2 The fusion temperature–measurement equipment was shown in TG–derivative thermogravimetry (DTG) analyses of the samples were performed using a thermal analyzer (Netzsch STA 449C, Germany) in the temperature range of 20°C–1200°C with a heating rate of 10°C/min under CO–CO The phase diagrams of CaO–Fe The effect of roasting temperature and CO content on the phase transformation were examined. The CO content refers to the CO volume concentration in the CO–CO The effect of roasting temperature varying from 700°C to 1250°C on the phase transformation was first investigated and the XRD patterns of the roasted samples were presented in It was seen from Previous studies reported the phase diagram of CaO–FeO–Fe The microstructural images of the roasted samples were shown in  To identify the formation of low-melting-point calcium ferrite phases, CaO·FeO·Fe The effect of temperature on the liquid phase formation of CaO–Fe The fusion temperatures of CaO–Fe TG–DTG analysis was conducted to study the reaction behavior of CaO and Fe The CaO and Fe The formation process of calcium ferrites between CaO and Fe When the temperature was lower than 1200°C, CaO·2Fe It was the stable existence zone of FeO under 12  The binary calcium ferrite (Ca The melting point of CaO–Fe The formation of calcium ferrites under CO–CO The authors would express their hearty thanks to National Natural Science Foundation of China (No. U1960114 & 51574283).