The PFC3D (particle flow code) that models the movement and interaction of particles by the DEM techniques was employed to simulate the particle movement and to calculate the velocity and energy distribution of collision in two types of impact crusher: the Canica vertical shaft crusher and the BJD horizontal shaft swing hammer mill. The distribution of collision energies was then converted into a product size distribution for a particular ore type using JKMRC impact breakage test data. Experimental data of the Canica VSI crusher treating quarry and the BJD hammer mill treating coal were used to verify the DEM simulation results.
                  Upon the DEM procedures being validated, a detailed simulation study was conducted to investigate the effects of the machine design and operational conditions on velocity and energy distributions of collision inside the milling chamber and on the particle breakage behaviour.Impact-induced rock fragmentation is relevant for many fields of science and technology. The length scale involved in this process span from domain of astrophysics to domain of geophysics and finally to the scale of fragments and agglomerates in the chemical and pharmaceutical industries. Impact crushers have been applied in mineral, food, coal and cement industries for a long time. The literature shows that substantial effort has been expended in understanding the impact crusher performance in relation to machine configuration and operational conditions through experimental work and mathematical modelling ( The discrete element method (DEM) was employed in the present work to study the kinematics of the particle motion within the impact crushers. The DEM was first proposed by The DEM has also been applied to studies of impact-induced particle breakage. Over years the Julius Kruttschnitt Mineral Research Centre (JKMRC) has successfully modelled two types of impact crushers: the vertical shaft impact crusher ( Upon the DEM procedures being validated, a detailed simulation study was conducted to investigate the effects of the machine design and operational conditions on velocity and energy distributions of collision inside the milling chamber and on the particle breakage behaviour. Impact crusher modelling has been performed using the PFC3D discrete element code. This code models the behaviour of particles, which may be enclosed within a finite volume by the non-deformable walls. The code keeps a record of individual particles and updates any contact with other particles or walls. Each calculation step includes application of the law of motion to a particle, a force–displacement law to each contact and constant updating of the wall position ( Two types of impact crushers were modelled using the PFC3D code. The Canica Model 90 is an industrial-scale vertical shaft impact crusher with 5 impellers of 0.48 m in their tip rotating radius. The crusher is fed by a belt feeder. Rocks drop into the centre of the rotor, and are hit or accelerated by the impellers to impact on the surrounding anvils. The distance from the rotor centre to the surface of the anvil is 0.65 m. The Canica crusher was employed to treat quartzite. The rotational speeds of the crusher varied from 650 to 950 rpm in the experiment at an average throughput of 102 tph. The BJD swing hammer mill is a pilot-scale horizontal shaft impact crusher. The hammer tip diameter is 0.38 m, mill width 0.20 m, with a nominal capacity of 3 tph when driven by a 5.6 kW motor. The rotor, rotating at a fixed speed of 3000 rpm, carries four rows of rectangular hammers with a width 0.03 m, two rows of three hammers and two rows of two hammers. The BJD hammer mill was employed to treat coal. The Canica vertical shaft impact crusher is represented by a cylindrical chamber and five rotating impellers in the DEM simulations ( For the Canica vertical impact crusher, test data at 950 rpm was used. The feed (−75 mm +2.36 mm) was converted to the distribution of number of particles in each size fraction. A total of 341 particles were simulated. The fine end of the feed (−2.36 mm) was truncated as there were more than 8000 particles in this size fraction, which takes a very long computing time. The truncated −2.36 mm material (4% by weight of the total feed) was added into the DEM simulation product for comparison with the measured data. For the BJD horizontal shaft crusher, on the other hand, the data from the test of single lithotype coal (the dull coal) of narrowly sized feed (8–16 mm) was used. 340 particles of same size (11.3 mm) were simulated using the PFC3D code. The DEM modelling calculates the total cumulative energy applied to each particle, including various forms of energy due to collisions between impellers and particles, particles and anvils, and particles to particles. The total specific energy for the Canica test at 950 rpm, determined through PFC3D modelling, is 0.43 kW The fragmented product size distributions were then determined from the specific energy using a relationship established from the single particle impact breakage test ( For the Canica vertical shaft impact crusher, the DEM prediction of product size is in good agreement with the experimental data at a size range coarser than 10 mm, but over-predicts for fine product. This may be due to the fact that more than 8000 particles smaller than 2.36 mm were removed from the DEM simulation. Although this fraction of materials only account for 4% by weight in the feed, the cushion effect of these particles on the collision energy may be significant. Thus the total cumulative specific energy should be smaller than the one presented in this work. Similarly, the DEM prediction for the BJD horizontal shaft crusher is good at coarser size fractions (>2 mm), but over-predicts fines. This may be attributed to the over-simplified one-shaft configuration of hammers used in the DEM, while the BJD mill operates with double-shaft swing hammers. Nevertheless, the DEM predictions seem to follow the general trends of the experimental data very well. This verifies that the DEM simulations can provide reasonable insight of the impact crusher performance. A number of simulations regarding the effects of machine design and operational conditions on the impact crusher were then conducted. The impact crushers usually operate at very high rotational speed (1000 rpm for the vertical shaft crusher and 3000 rpm for the horizontal shaft hammer mill in this study). Dynamic motion of particles inside the crushing chamber and the interaction between the crushing element and the particles exerts a dominant influence on product size distribution. However, such knowledge is rare in the literature. Although high-speed cine camera study on the motion of coal particles inside the BJD hammer mill was attempted by researchers (e.g. Investigation was conducted of the effect of particle size on the intensity of the introduced energy and the nature of the energy split for various rotational speeds of the impellers in the vertical shaft crusher. The particle size studied was in the range of 10–70 mm. Single spherical particles were dropped from a height of 1 m, at a position that corresponds to half of the impeller length. The results show that kinetic energy is a dominant form of energy and the amount of specific kinetic energy (kW When the impact crusher operates at a low rotational speed (650 rpm), the specific kinetic and strain energy are almost independent of the particle size. The ratio of strain (deformation) energy to kinetic energy is practically constant (approximately 0.45). However, as the rotational speed increases, both specific kinetic energy and specific strain energy increase significantly below certain particle sizes, but decrease for larger particle sizes. The ratio of strain energy to kinetic energy is basically constant for small particles, but it increases for large particles as the impeller speed increases. The effect of particles feeding position to the vertical shaft impact crusher was investigated numerically for the case of 40 mm-diameter particles in the crusher with impellers rotating at a speed of 650 rpm. The energy introduced to the particles is a function of the position along the impeller where contact with the particle occurs. Radial velocity of the specific point along the impeller is determined by the angular velocity of the impeller and the distance from the rotation centre. In order to minimise the rolling effect of the particles, the friction coefficient between particles and crusher surfaces were increased to a high value. This may be reflected to the effect of irregular particle shape of natural rock material, which often has a relatively high effective coefficient of friction. Results show that both specific kinetic and strain energy increase as the impact point becomes closer to the tip of the impeller ( DEM is a suitable tool for investigation of the particle motion after initial impact, particularly in gaining insight into the particle motion when interception of the particle by the impeller occurs away from the impeller tip. Simulations were performed in the vertical shaft impact crusher using a cube composed from a number of rigid balls bonded together to represent a rock sample. The strength of the sample was kept constant, while the impeller varied.   It is interesting to observe that both large and small fragments tend to migrate along the surface of the impeller towards its tip. When they reach the tip, the fragments take-off with a maximum possible velocity towards the surrounding anvils of the crusher. The dominant phase of fragmentation occurs when the particles hit the anvils. In order to further investigate the effect of the intercept position on the energy introduced into particles, a 25 mm cube made from 125 balls was placed in the vertical shaft impact crusher at a distance of 5 and 45 cm from the centre of the crusher respectively. Rotational rate of the impeller was kept constant (1000 rpm). Resultant (vector sum) velocity and total accumulative specific energy of the cube are given in When particles are dropped close to the centre, the impact velocity is not sufficient to cause fragmentation. Particles are then translated and bounced along the length of the impeller until they reach its tip. They are accelerated at the tip speed towards the crusher anvils. In such cases the initial fragmentation due to impact is missed, but the secondary fragmentation due to impact on the surrounding anvils remains. On the other hand, where the particle is intercepted near the tip of impeller, the initial impact is sufficient to fragment the sample. After the impact, the individual grains are directed towards the crusher anvils where further fragmentation occurs. However, the initial fragmentation due to the impact of impeller is dominant. Although the peak resultant velocity of the ball intercepted near the impeller tip is slightly smaller than that intercepted near the impeller centre (87.4 vs. 89.8 m/s), the total accumulative specific energy introduced into the sample is about 23% higher (0.87 vs. 0.71 kW  An impact crusher fragments the rock by the dynamic strain energy introduced into the feed by the impactor. The process of dynamic fragmentation, by its nature, exploits the existence of flaws and micro-discontinuities. Hence, product fragments tend to be of good quality and shape. Specific fragmentation energy introduced into the rock is a function of the impacting velocity. The initial impact velocity is a function of the rotational velocity of the crusher as well as the position along the impeller, where falling feed becomes intercepted by the rotating impellers. For high velocity crushers, the initial collision is frequently a significant cause of fragmentation. Any subsequent crushing only complements the crushing action of the impeller. The intensity of dynamic stress induced by the impeller and by impact into the fixed surface can be calculated using a simple equation: The peak particle velocity at the contact point of the rock and impeller, for the simplest case, is equal: Impact velocity of the impeller is determined by the angular (rotational) velocity of the impeller as well as the distance from the centre of rotation where impact occurs, described by the formula: Using this simple model, it can be shown that intensity of initial impact stress is determined by the rotational speed and distance from the centre of rotation where collision occurs ( Effect of the initial impact can be calculated based on the theory of dynamic fragmentation developed by Grady’s model has been successfully applied in the modelling of rock fragmentation induced by explosives. The strain rate in the sample is defined as the difference in rock particle velocity at the point of impact and at the opposite, free end of the rock sample. The strain rate can be calculated from the rotational velocity of the impeller and the radial distance between the centre of rotation and impact point: Considering that particle peak velocity Application of this equation for the case of a rock with density Investigation was further carried out on the size distribution of the fragmentation using a PFC3D model of rock sample with cubical shape comprising 343 balls (6 mm diameter). The size of the cube was 42 mm. Balls bond strength was kept constant. The speed of the crusher varied in the range 800–1000 rpm. It was observed that the intensity of fragmentation was a function of the rotational speed of the impeller. For low rotational speeds, fragmentation initially did not occur until it impacts on the crusher anvil. Forces induced into the crusher anvil were always higher than that induced from the impacting impeller. As speed of the impeller increases, initial impact becomes a significant cause of fragmentation. These effects are demonstrated in The DEM technique provides estimates that consider single particles and some particle interactions in the impact crushers. The distribution of collision energies can be converted into a product size distribution for a particular ore type using impact breakage test data. The PFC3D code has been applied to two types of impact crusher: the industrial-scale vertical shaft impact crusher and the pilot-scale horizontal shaft swing hammer mill. Upon the DEM procedures being validated, a detailed simulation study has been conducted to investigate the effects of the machine design and operational conditions on velocity and energy distributions of collision inside the milling chamber. Analytical modelling of rock fragmentation has also been attempted using a strain rate concept. The results show that DEM can be used to model the particle flow behaviour, energy utilisation and product size in the impact crushers, and thus assist in machine and process design. The authors wish to acknowledge the assistance of Dr. Toni Kojovic in providing the breakage data that were used for the Canica crusher modelling. The data of the BJD hammer mill were from ACARP Project C8057, for which the financial support from ACARP and BHP-Billiton Port Kembla steelworks is greatly appreciated. Useful discussions with Dr. Peter Cundall of ITASCA are acknowledged. The work was funded by the JKMRC.