In general, PCM are classified in organic and inorganic groups or families. First group mainly encloses paraffin, fatty acids, and sugar alcohols. Inorganic are mostly represented by salt hydrates, salt solutions, and metals. Eutectics and mixtures are also being formulated to obtain a desired phase change temperature. One of the most important PCM requirements is being stable after a number of repeated melting/freezing cycles, which is known as cycling stability. A PCM should present the same or almost the same thermal, chemical and physical properties after a repeated number of freezing and melting cycles. Thermal cycling tests results and detailed tests procedures are classified by PCM type in this review. Moreover, the parameters that must be considered in order to perform cycling stability tests are highlighted depending on the importance they have on the following four issues: the choice of the equipment to perform the cycling tests; the selection of the techniques to characterize the PCM before and after thermal cycling test and to follow the PCM thermal degradation; the definition of the number of cycles to perform; and finally, the choice of the heating rate and thermal cycling method (pyramid, or dynamic, or others) to perform the tests. It is mandatory to conclude that, based on the literature reviewed, no common standard for thermal cycling stability tests is available at the moment.Current trends in energy supply and use are patently unsustainable – economically, environmentally and socially One way of storing heat is by using the latent heat of phase change of a substance, usually from solid to liquid, as it can provide high energy densities. Then, when this stored heat is needed, it can be released by leaving the material temperature decrease, becoming a solid again. Materials used for this purpose are known as phase change materials (PCM). PCM are being implemented in different systems, active or passive, and for several applications, cold storage, building comfort, medium and high temperatures In general, PCM are classified in organic and inorganic. First group mainly encloses paraffin, fatty acids, and sugar alcohols. Inorganic are mostly represented by salt hydrates, salt solutions, and metals Moreover, to overcome some of these disadvantages, composites, shape-stabilized or form-stable PCM are being formulated and developed. Composites are mainly thought to enhance thermal conductivity, increase cycling stability, and prevent leakage and corrosion The main requirements from the material point of view are, of course, high phase change enthalpy and a suitable phase change temperature, depending on the application in which the PCM needs to be implemented. Furthermore, a PCM is suitable for applications if it is stable after a number of repeated melting/freezing cycles, that is to say, if it has a proper cycling stability. Sometimes it is also called long term stability  Up to now, few reviews found in the literature highlight the importance of thermal cycling stability, but they do not look at the methodology nor the equipment used in such analysis. Data discrepancy suggests that this property is still not assessed in depth. Moreover, some reviews present only differential scanning calorimeter (DSC) as the analytical equipment, but although DSC is used by all researchers to analyse the materials, it is not always used for cycling them. Therefore, this paper presents a review on the thermal cycling stability data of PCM found in the literature, but focusing on the methodologies used by the different researchers, along with the equipment used and the analytical conditions in which the tests were carried out in order to find out the existence of a common and useful methodology to develop these tests. As detailed in the introduction, cycling stability is one key property of PCM to be studied since their lifetime depends on it. A PCM should present the same or almost the same thermal, chemical and physical properties after a repeated number of freezing and melting cycles. Here, thermal cycling tests results and detailed tests procedures are reviewed and shown by PCM type. It is important to point out that authors just present the results of each consulted study, but do not seek for any phenomena explanation as it is clearly explained in each one of the cited papers. As it is already stated in the introduction, the goal of the present paper is to compile information published in order to find out if there is a common pattern to study the thermal stability of PCM or there is not.  Only nine materials are found in this list. The cycled paraffin reported in the literature are both analytical grade and commercial grade, and their melting points range from around 18 to 58 All authors show the melting point and the latent heat of fusion before and after the thermal cycling process. Three of the studies, the one performed by Alkan et al. Four different DSC instruments and analysis methods were used in the different investigations to study the thermal properties of the paraffin. Alkan et al. Paraffin wax 53 is the only material presented in  As an overview of the data presented in Regarding the thermal parameters calculation, the melting point was taken as the onset temperature on the DSC curve and the latent heat of fusion was calculated using the area under the peak in all the studies but the one done by Solé et al Eight different DSC instruments were used in all these different studies but only half of them were also used to cycle the samples. Only acetamide, lauric acid, myristic acid, palmitic acid and stearic acid have been studied by more than one author, thus it is only possible to compare the results regarding these four materials. Sharma et al. Sari Myristic acid was studied by Hasan and Sayigh The same three authors studied palmitic acid with the same experimental setups used in the myristic acid respective studies. Again, studies Five different authors studied stearic acid thermal properties. Sharma et al. Solé et al. The thermal properties of twenty one organic eutectics cycled in thirteen papers of the cited literature are shown in Just four out of the thirteen different authors present information about the latent heat of fusion and the melting point before and after the cycling tests, and the same papers are the only ones that also show information about the latent heat of crystallization. 50% of the authors do not explain how the melting point and the latent heat of fusion were measured. The others took the phase change temperature as the onset temperature obtained by drawing a line at the point of maximum slope of the leading edge of the DSC peak and extrapolating baseline on the same side as the leading edge of the peak. The latent heat of the phase change was calculated by integration of the area under the peak of the DSC curve. Ten different DSC instruments were used to obtain the thermal data of these organic eutectics, but only Zhang et al. The eutectic capric acid (65 Cycling of seven salt hydrates has been reported in the literature. The melting temperature of these materials ranges from 8.5 70% of the authors did not provide data of the final melting point and the latent heat of fusion. Only Fellchenfeld et al. 90% of all the presented studies concerning salt hydrates used a DSC to measure the thermal properties of the different salts. Six different setups were used in these studies to cycle the samples. Porosini Five different authors studied calcium chloride hexahydrate heat storage capacity and gave results on its cyclability. Tyagi et al. Glauber׳s salt was studied by Marks El-Sebaii et al.  The cycling methodology and results of seven inorganic eutectics are shown in None of the authors that studied the inorganic eutectics presented in Kimura and Kai Nagano et al. Thermal cycling stability tests are nowadays performed using a wide variety of equipment and setups. Some researchers use DSC, but ovens, thermostatic baths/chambers and electric hot plates are other kind of equipment also employed to perform PCM cycling tests. Other more specific instruments are thermal cyclers. Up to now, thermal cyclers are designed for biomedical applications, though the available temperature range is set from 0 to 100 Twenty nine different devices and setups were used to study the thermal stability of fifty eight PCM. Seventeen of these twenty nine devices and setups were differential scanning calorimeters (DSC), while the other 41% were setups exclusively designed to cycle the PCM. Only half of the seventeen DSCs were used for both sample cycling and properties analyzing, being the function of the other half to just measure the thermal properties of the already cycled PCM. On the other hand, all the non-DSC equipment displayed in The thermal properties of the materials were in all cases measured by DSC except in Porosini׳s Taking a deeper look on the data presented in The cycling method used to analyse the PCM is explained in thirty out of the thirty eight consulted papers. As Regarding the dynamic method, three different constant rates are used by the authors in the 5–10 Despite of the huge data amount exposed in The analysis methods chosen to measure the PCM thermal properties was reported in twenty five out of the thirty eight consulted papers and are shown in The same method types used to cycle the samples are also the ones used by the authors to measure the thermal properties of the PCM: the dynamic method and the pyramid method. The dynamic method is only used in the two different studies by Sharma et al. The huge variety on the analysis conditions clearly states that there is no common pattern that specifies the conditions in which each one of the material types has to be studied.  A review on thermal cycling stability testing has been performed for paraffins, organic materials, salt hydrates, metal alloys, and inorganic eutectics which are commonly used as PCM. Conclusions are separated in four main aspects according to the main trends to consider when studying the thermal stability of a PCM. These most important parameters are the equipment to cycle the materials, the PCM characterization techniques, the number of cycles to perform and the thermal cycling method. Regarding the equipment used and as shown in The results displayed in the former tables show that DSC is the equipment selected by all authors for PCM thermal characterization. The DSC selection is expected since traditionally DSC has been the most powerful and the most used technique for this purpose. Regarding the analysis conditions, various heating/cooling rates have been used to measure the thermal properties and the 10 Two main cycling methods, the pyramid and the dynamic, have been found as the most used ones within all the consulted papers. Moreover, the pyramid method is, for far, the most applied one. However, a huge variety of heating rates were used with both methods, being the 5 As The missing of a general standard for this type of experiments is also observed when different authors or even the same authors perform experiments under the same conditions and obtain different results. No common pattern has been found either when presenting their results. Authors present melting temperature, latent heat of fusion or latent heat of crystallization randomly. Information about the method used, or the equipment is also missing in some of the papers reviewed. Comparing results obtained under the same exact conditions and evaluating them with the same exact methods is the only way by which the results can be analyzed and improvements can be applied to obtain better and more accurate parameter values, otherwise, it is impossible to make comparisons if every author has each own criteria when presenting results. It is mandatory to conclude that a common standard for thermal cycling stability tests would be very appreciated in the scientific community. The research leading to these results has received funding from the