Three monitoring items, i.e. displacement vector orientation, preceding displacement, and water inflow, were compared to determine which one best provided supplementary and valuable information on the ground ahead of a subsea tunnel face when used with probe drilling. The geotechnical factors affecting tunnel stability were selected from the case studies on the construction of subsea tunnels, and six representative types of adverse ground condition were built with combinations of the factors. The capabilities of monitoring items were compared in depression and weakness zone types that were selected as major adverse ground conditions with three criteria, i.e. the capability of categorizing the type of adverse ground condition, the early-warning time, and the response capability. A three-dimensional finite element analysis program was used to simulate the process of subsea tunnel excavation, and the Analytic Hierarchy Process was used to select the optimum monitoring item. A comparison of the results showed that the vector orientation was the optimum item for categorizing ground type, and the preceding displacement and the water inflow possessed the best capability for early warning according to ground type. The response capability of water inflow was assessed as the best for three types of weakness zones, and that of vector orientation was best for depression type. In 13 cases where the priorities of comparison criteria were different, the vector orientation and the water inflow were respectively chosen in six cases, and there was little difference between the two items in the case where the criteria were equally important. While the application of one item alone may be vulnerable to a specific adverse ground condition, the monitoring capability could be overall improved by the adoption of both items.Continuous monitoring of the ground conditions ahead of subsea tunnel faces is indispensable for safe and efficient excavation. Because a sea floor is covered with deep water, geotechnical investigation is usually conducted in the limited extent prior to excavation, resulting in insufficient geotechnical data available during tunneling. As a similar case, a new investigation method had to be applied for the construction of a LPG storage terminal underneath a lake in South Korea because of limited information on the geological features of bedrock ( The purpose of the present study is to compare existing monitoring items to determine which one can provide supplementary and valuable information on the ground ahead of the tunnel face and reduce the uncertainty of investigation results when used with probe drilling. First, the main geotechnical factors affecting tunnel stability were selected from several case studies on the construction of subsea tunnels, and then six representative adverse ground conditions were built with combinations of the factors. Depression and weakness zone type were chosen as major types of adverse ground, and the monitoring capabilities of each item were assessed under the condition that either of the two grounds was ahead of the tunnel face. Vector orientation, preceding displacement, and water inflow were chosen as the monitoring items. The comparison was conducted with three criteria, i.e., the capability of categorizing adverse ground condition, early warning, and response. The monitoring item must detect the presence of adverse ground and identify its type for planning a detailed investigation, and the detection has to be performed as early as possible to gain more time to prepare for hazardous situations. In addition, the monitoring item should respond to a small-scale adverse ground. A three-dimensional finite element analysis program was used to simulate the process of subsea tunnel excavation, and the Analytic Hierarchy Process (AHP) was used to select the optimum monitoring item. The item that could be the most efficient when a specific capability was required in an adverse ground condition was found, and an optimum item or a combination of monitoring items was proposed by considering the priorities of comparison criteria. During the construction of subsea tunnels, the representative types of weakness zones that exist ahead of the tunnel face and cause a hazardous situation are as follows. Depression due to erosion of bedrock. Fault or weakness zone formed by tectonic activity. Fractured zone at contact area between intrusive dyke and rock mass. Flat and weak sedimentary rock mass. The depression type of ground was found in the Oslofjord tunnel in Norway, where it was formed so deep in the bedrock by glacial erosion and filled with soil that there was no rock cover over a short section of tunnel ( When one of the foregoing weakness zones is present around the proposed alignment of tunnel, it affects the stability of the excavation differently according to its size, orientation, and distance from the tunnel face. The strength of materials filling the weakness zone also influences the stability, and their permeability determines the role of the weakness zone in water inflow. If a recently formed weakness zone is loosely filled with soil, gravel, and crushed rocks, the zone has considerable potential to become a channel connecting excavated space and the sea. However, when the weakness zone is clogged with heavily crushed rocks and clay, seawater flow can be obstructed. The amount of seawater that flowed into the Hitra tunnel was smaller than expected due to the low permeability of major discontinuities ( The surrounding rock mass should have adequate strength for excavation because a subsea tunnel is under high water pressure and additionally have a low possibility of discontinuities that can act as channels for seawater. The in situ stresses of a rock mass may have an adverse effect on tunnel stability in a specific circumstance. A rock cover is the thickness of the rock mass between the tunnel roof and bedrock surface under the sea ( Six representative types of adverse ground condition in subsea tunnels were built with combinations of these geotechnical factors, and they are listed as follows. Water inflow through fractured rock cover (type 1 in Tunnel instability in depression (type 2) – A tunnel face is approaching a bottom of a depression without recognizing the presence of a soil deposit because of limited prior information on the surrounding rock mass. The thickness and strength of the rock cover are insufficient to excavate the tunnel. Water inflow and tunnel instability in depression (type 3) – There exists a fractured zone below the bottom of a relatively shallow depression. The inflow of seawater through discontinuities can be markedly increased by tunnel excavation and lower the strength of rock cover at the same time. Water inflow and tunnel instability by weakness zone ahead of tunnel face (type 4) – The stability of tunnel excavation is influenced by the size, location, orientation, and strength of the weakness zone ahead of the tunnel face. Seawater flows through openings in the weakness zone loosely filled with soil, gravel, and crushed rocks. Water inflow through fractured zone formed during dyke intrusion (type 5) – Seawater flows through the fractured zone at the contact area between an intrusive dyke and a rock mass. Tunnel excavation can make the narrow zone a major channel connecting the working area and the sea. Tunnel instability by flat and weak sedimentary rock mass (type 6) – A tunnel face is advancing without knowing the presence of flat and weak sedimentary rock mass due to the relatively high seismic velocity of the layer in the pre-investigation stage. In the present study, three items were chosen, the displacement vector orientation (hereafter referred to as the ‘vector orientation’), the preceding displacement, and the water inflow, to monitor the ground condition ahead of the tunnel excavation face. While the vector orientation is obtained from the displacements measured in the excavated space behind the tunnel face, the preceding displacement is measured in the unexcavated rock mass ahead of the face. The water inflow is monitored at both the crown and bottom area close to the tunnel face immediately after excavation. The vector orientations are the angles between the longitudinal displacement and the settlement of the tunnel crown and between the longitudinal and horizontal displacement of the tunnel sidewall, which can provide a warning of ground condition change in advance. If the vector orientations are continuously measured at a certain distance from the tunnel face after each excavation, they generally tend to maintain a normal value in homogeneous rock mass. However, they deviate from the normal trend when the tunnel face approaches a zone of different stiffness. From The preceding displacement is the ground displacement occurring before a rock mass is excavated and the measurement of typical items as crown settlement and horizontal convergence is begun. It is measured largely using horizontal inclinometers previously installed ahead of the tunnel face. The primary object of measurement of preceding displacements has been to understand the overall behavior of ground by monitoring ground movement before excavation and after excavation, and additionally the item is able to provide the information on the condition of unexcavated zone ahead of the tunnel face. The water inflow measured at tunnel crown and bottom area was chosen under the assumption that the heterogeneous permeability of the surrounding rock mass would affect the amount of water inflow entering the excavated space. The AHP is a multi-criteria decision-making method, helping decision makers select the most suitable alternative for their goal among several ones by making the problem a hierarchy and establishing priorities based on pairwise comparisons of the elements of this hierarchy. The hierarchy contains a decision goal, the alternatives for reaching it, and the criteria for evaluating the alternatives. The building process of the hierarchy enables the decision makers to define a complex problem clearly and to understand its overall structure. The method has an index indicating the consistency of the judgments that are made in comparing different elements. The AHP has been adopted as decision tool in a large number of studies in civil and mining engineering. The first step in using the AHP is to model the problem as a hierarchy with the overall goal at the top, the alternatives at the bottom, and the criteria in between. In the next step, the pairwise comparison matrices are made to obtain the local priorities of alternatives as shown in To choose the optimum monitoring item for subsea tunnels, the capabilities that the item necessarily embody should be established first, and several items have to be compared with each other in terms of these capabilities. The object of monitoring the ground ahead of the tunnel face is to detect the adverse ground condition unexpected in the pre-investigation and design phase due to environmental restrictions. Hence, it is fundamental that the monitoring item can indicate the change of ground by producing an abnormal response to a fault or depression. The item furthermore must identify the type of adverse ground condition because the information on the ground type can be useful for planning the detailed investigation for determining the shape, size, and location of the ground. The capability of early warning also has to be estimated because the earlier detection can allow more time to prepare for it. In addition, it should be determined whether the monitoring item is able to respond to a small-scale adverse ground. It is natural for a monitoring item to detect large-scale adverse ground such as a very thick fault and extremely thin rock cover, and the superior one should sensitively detect slight changes in the ground condition. Consequently, when comparing the capabilities of monitoring items, it is necessary to consider the following three questions: (a) which item categorizes the type of adverse ground condition clearly, (b) which item detects a change of ground at the earliest time, and (c) which item responds to even slight abnormality. Therefore, three monitoring items were compared using AHP in terms of the capability of categorizing, early warning, and response to select the optimum item for an adverse ground condition, as shown in Among the six adverse ground conditions as described in Section A pressure of 1 While subsea tunnels are mostly constructed in twins, it was assumed that a one-directional tunnel would be first excavated for efficiency of analysis. The width (D) and the height of a tunnel with a horseshoe-shaped cross section were 12.0 Because the present study focused not on evaluating the stability of the subsea tunnel but on finding the distinguishing behavior of the surrounding rock mass due to the changes in geotechnical conditions, an elastic isotropic model was used, and its properties are shown in The ground displacements in the tunnel should be measured as early as possible after excavation to obtain more information on ground behavior, but most measuring equipment is adversely affected by the vibration generated by rock blasting and muck transport. Therefore, it was assumed that the equipment was installed at the crown and sidewall 2.4 In the case of measuring the preceding displacement, it was assumed that horizontal inclinometers with 1.2 Lastly, it was assumed that the amount of water inflow was measured at the area that was 5.0 It can be assumed that the behavior of the rock mass surrounding the excavated space would depend on the type of adverse ground condition ahead of the tunnel face. From this assumption, it is also expected that the type of adverse ground condition can be classified based on the tunnel monitoring results reflecting differences in behavior. The changing patterns of vector orientations at the both crown and sidewall were able to give the information to identify the shape of the four analyzed adverse grounds. In DEPRESSION, when the rock cover became gradually thinner as the tunnel face approached the section closest to the bottom of the soil deposit (0.0D), the decrease of the rock cover caused an increase of the settlement at the crown ( The categorizing capability of the preceding displacement was lower than that of the vector orientation because the item measured only the vertical displacement of the surrounding rock mass. In DEPRESSION and WEAK+45, the settlement mainly occurred at the crown and sidewall due to the influence of the soil deposit or weakness zone. Hence, the product of the slope and average moved downwards with the tunnel face approaching to the adverse ground in The change of water inflow was larger at the crown area than at the bottom in DEPRESSION and WEAK+45 because the amount of inflow was greatly affected by the distance between the excavated space and the more permeable layer, such as the soil deposit or weakness zone. The increase of water inflow in WEAK−45 was larger at the bottom area that had a relatively short inflow path, and the change was slight at the crown. In the case of WEAK+00, the water inflow increased in both areas, as shown in  In the present study, the detection time of the monitoring items was determined using the cumulative sum (CUSUM) control chart. The control chart is one of the statistical process control tools used to routinely monitor manufacturing processes and detect abnormalities in performance. The CUSUM chart has been widely adopted in recent decades to find whether and when a significant change occurred in time series data. For instance, the chart was applied to detect the air pollution levels in Central London, the rainfall in the west of Scotland, and the persistent changes in aquatic resource monitoring such as cod stock in the North Sea ( Assumption of mean Transformation of data: a series of observed values Calculation of one-sided upper and lower CUSUM: if observed values tend to be greater (smaller) than Detection of abnormality: if CUSUM The detection times for each monitoring item identified using the procedure described above are presented in In WEAK+45, the weakness zone was first detected by the water inflows at the −1.3D and −1.0D section and then by the preceding displacements at the −0.9D section. The influence of permeability heterogeneity seemed to be revealed earlier than that of geotechnical heterogeneity due to the existence of the weakness zone. The item having the latest detection time was the vector orientation measured at the tunnel crown and no change was detected by the vector orientation at the sidewall. With WEAK+00 where the weakness zone was not inclined, the item of the earliest detection time was the water inflow exceeding the decision interval at the −1.3D section and −0.9D section. The longitudinal displacement caused by the weakness zone was more dominant than the vertical displacement in this adverse ground condition, and the vector orientation measuring both displacements detected the change earlier than the preceding displacement measuring only ground settlement. In the case of WEAK−45, while the first detection time of each monitoring item was similar in range of −1.5D to −1.4D, there were large differences between the vector orientation and the other two items. It was found that the vector orientation at the sidewall had a limited capability of early warning for the inclined weakness zone. The pairwise comparison matrices for the capability of early warning are shown in The monitoring item should be able to detect a small-scale adverse ground (e.g., very narrow fractured zone, relatively thick rock cover of depression ground) as well as a large-scale one in the circumstance where the higher excavation stability is required due to the potential of indefinite seawater inflow. To compare the capacity of the response of the monitoring items, the numerical simulations were performed by changing the thickness of the rock cover in DEPRESSION (1 The vector orientation detected the presence of a soil deposit most sensitively even in the rather thick rock cover of DEPRESSION. When the values of each monitoring item measured at −2.0D were set to zero for comparison and the four trends were presented in For the capability of response, the pairwise comparison matrices based on these results are presented for each adverse ground condition in The priorities of the criteria for choosing the optimum item depend on the purpose of monitoring. The three criteria in Section When the aim of monitoring was to identify the type of ground, the vector orientation was selected in DEPRESSION and WEAK+45, as shown in The overall priorities of each item obtained in four ground types were totaled, and the monitoring item having the largest sum of priorities was chosen as the optimum in the situation where the type of adverse ground condition ahead of the tunnel face is not known. The vector orientation and the water inflow were respectively chosen in six cases, as presented in In the present study, the geotechnical factors affecting tunnel stability were identified from the case studies on the construction of subsea tunnels, and they were the type of weakness zone, the geotechnical condition of the weakness zone and surrounding rock mass, in situ stresses, and rock cover. Six representative types of adverse ground condition during the construction of subsea tunnels were built with combinations of these factors, and the excavation and monitoring processes were simulated in the ground types DEPRESSION and WEAK. The comparison results of three monitoring items using AHP showed that, in terms of the capability of categorizing ground type, the vector orientation was assessed as the optimum item overall in four adverse ground conditions, and it was much better than the others, especially in DEPRESSION and WEAK+45. In the capability of early warning, the preceding displacement possessed the best capability in DEPRESSION and WEAK−45, and the water inflow was the optimum item in WEAK+45 and WEAK+00. The response capability of water inflow was assessed as the best in three types of WEAK and that of vector orientation was the best in DEPRESSION. In 13 cases where the importance of comparison criteria was different, the vector orientation and the water inflow were respectively chosen in six cases, and there was little difference between the two items in the case where the criteria were equally important. While the vector orientation was selected mainly when the capability of categorizing was considered important, the water inflow was selected in the case where the capability of early warning or response was needed. It was found that the application of one item alone may be vulnerable to a specific adverse ground condition, but the monitoring capability could be overall improved by the adoption of both items. The numerical models used in this study have some limits such as a very short measurement interval and simplified geotechnical structure and properties. Therefore, the studies on the optimum monitoring interval and frequency, the adoption of coupled hydro-mechanical model, and the application of new monitoring item should be pursued in the future. Furthermore, analysis results, including the present study, must be verified by comparing them with the measurement results from model tests or field experiment on subsea tunnels. This research was supported by a grant (05 Construction Core D10) from the Construction Core Technology Program funded by the Ministry of Land, Transport and Maritime Affairs of the Korean government. Final decision matrices of four different adverse ground conditions are as follows (see