Catalytic wet air oxidation (CWAO) is one of the most economical and environmental-friendly advanced oxidation process for high strength, toxic, hazardous and non-biodegradable contaminants under milder conditions, which is developed on the basic of wet air oxidation. Various heterogeneous catalysts including noble metals and metal oxides have been extensively studied to enhance the efficiency of CWAO. The advances in the research on wastewater treatment by CWAO process are summarized in aspects of reaction mechanism investigation, reaction kinetics study and catalyst development. It is pointed out that the preparation of active and stable catalysts, the investigation on reaction mechanisms and the study on reaction kinetics models are very important for the promotion of CWAO application.Rapid development of industry promoted rapid growth of economy, but environmental pollution has become a constraining factor of economic development, and high concentrations, toxicity, harmfulness, difficult in biological treatment of wastewater and sludge are still major factors of environmental pollution. Wet air oxidation (WAO) has been proven as one of the efficient technologies to eliminate highly concentrated, toxic and hazardous organic compounds as CO CWAO adds catalyst into the system of traditional WAO, thus it reduces the harsh reaction conditions, increases the oxidation capacity of oxidants and shortens reaction time and thereby it reduces the investment in operating costs. Usually CWAO can be divided into heterogeneous and heterogeneous CWAO according to different forms of catalysts. Reaction mechanism of CWAO and WAO has no essential difference, and the addition of the catalyst enhances the production of free radicals. Reaction mechanism of WAO is very complicated, and WAO reaction is generally regarded as free radical reactions. The present study is also at a relatively shallow stage, which mainly contains the detection of intermediate and free radicals. Free radical reaction is generally regarded as a chain reaction that is divided into three phases namely chain initiation, chain transfer and chain termination. According to the literature ( Many researchers reported different empirical formula for wastewater ( With Early studies on CWAO are mainly focused on the homogeneous catalyst, and homogeneous CWAO has been studied more in Europe ( Heterogeneous catalyst has the advantages of high activity, easy separation and has no secondary pollution, so studies on heterogeneous catalysts have been widely concerned since late 70s in the 20th century. Heterogeneous catalyst can be divided into two categories namely non-noble metal catalysts and noble metal catalysts. In recent years, carbon materials catalysts have also been reported. Non-noble metal catalysts are mainly one or several of Cu, Mn, Co, Ni, Bi and other metals. The advantage of non-noble metal catalysts is inexpensiveness, but catalytic activity is relatively low, the active component of non-noble metal catalyst is largely leaching , therefore, non-noble metal catalysts mainly are focused on improving their stability. Noble metal catalyst is typically made for one or more of Ru, Rh, Pt, Ir, Au, Ag and other precious metal loaded on the carrier. Although noble metal is high cost, the catalytic activity is better. Components of noble metals are more stable in the CWAO process, so the stability of noble metal catalyst primarily depends on the stability of the carrier. Al Carbon nanotubes (CNTs) are one-dimensional carbon materials, and have gained more attention because of their unique chemical and thermal stabilities. As mentioned above, heterogeneous catalysts have been extensively studied for the CWAO of various model compounds. However, few works have focused on the feasibility of solid catalysts for the treatment of real wastewater. Some of studies on the CWAO of industrial wastewaters are summarized in Pulp and paper industry uses very large amounts of water during processing. Especially, the bleaching process produces refractory organic compounds including lignin and polysaccharide fragments, organic acids, aliphatic alcohols, etc., which are hardly degraded by biological treatment. CWAO is an effective advanced oxidation technology used to treat high concentrations of toxic and hazardous wastewater, and further studies are necessary to develop more active and stable catalysts which can be effectively utilized on industrial scale. Base metal oxide catalysts are more desirable than noble metals in terms of cost and resistance to poisoning by halogen-containing substance, though their activities are still lower than noble metals. Among them, Cu, Mn, and Ce are the most prospective species to compete with noble metals. At present, reaction mechanism of CWAO is lack of study. Detection of free radicals is less reported , but a more dynamic model of the reaction is reported. In short, improving the catalytic activity and stability, studying reaction mechanism and dynamic model in depth play an important role in the promotion of CWAO technology, and these are very significant for the better treatment of high concentrations of toxic and hazardous substances.