In this work, the characterization of a soldering system with wollastonite as filler added as powder to the powdered base glass is shown. A soldering system consisting of the base glass and a coexisting crystalline phase is created which is then pressed to pellets and sintered to maximum density.
                  Wollastonite increases the thermal expansion coefficient of the base glass after sintering the samples. In the present paper, the sintering behavior of the soldering system and possible interactions between glass and filler are analyzed. Also, density and porosity after sintering and the resulting crystalline phases are characterized.
                  The mixtures with wollastonite contents up to 30% showed suitable sintering behavior and good density (low porosity). From 40% wollastonite on, the sintering of the samples was not satisfying and porosity was still high after sintering. The main crystalline phases were anorthite, wollastonite and pseudowollastonite, which occurred in all samples. This shows that all three phases are coexisting phases of the glass composition.For use in aggressive media or at high temperatures, ceramic materials are always the number one choice due to their specific properties like their high melting point and chemical inertness. The bonding of ceramic parts can be performed by using soldering glasses or soldering systems consisting of a glassy and one or more crystalline phases The advantage of soldering systems is that they can be adapted to the needs of an industrial process without changing the chemically simple and easy to control base composition of the glass. For a joining process in general, the coefficient of thermal expansion (CTE) is of particular interest Several authors already showed the possibility of increasing the CTE of a glass by adding different amounts of crystalline phases with a higher CTE As shown in our previous work In this work, the same base components (glass and wollastonite) like in the previous paper are used The characterization of the samples was done using hot stage microscopy, X-Ray diffraction and scanning electron microscopy. Additionally, the density of the samples before and after sintering was determined as well as the density of the powders which served as a threshold for the density of the samples at least before sintering. As the samples were at least partially crystalline after sintering, the density of the powder can only be a very rough estimate of the maximum density after sintering. The studied glass composition is 34.79 CaO, 18.09 Al The viscosity–temperature-curve of the pure glass was determined using the methods of rotational viscometry and hot stage microscopy (HSM). Additionally, the The viscosity of the glass was determined using the rotation method, employing a high-temperature Haake viscometer equipped with a ME 1700 sensor. The rotation procedure was applied for viscosity in the range 10 Hot Stage Microscopy (HSM) was performed in a Leica-EM201 microscope with image analysis for determination of the viscosity in air at a heating rate of 5 Mixtures of the glass and wollastonite powders were prepared containing 0, 10, 20, 30, 40 and 50 The temperature programmes for sintering were chosen from HSM experiments. HSM experiments were performed on all mixtures and the pure glass. From the results, the temperatures corresponding to the maximum change of the area of the samples were determined for every sample ( Each of the pellets was heated to X-ray diffraction (XRD) analysis (Bruker, Germany/USA) was used to determine the crystalline phases after sintering. The patterns were collected with monochromatic CuKα radiation over the range 5≤2 To ensure the gas tightness of the solder and make sure that the claimed properties are still maintained after addition of wollastonite, it is necessary to characterize the resulting soldering system according to porosity and density which was done by scanning electron microscopy (SEM) (Leo Electron Microscopy, United Kingdom). Additionally, the density of the sintered samples was determined using the principle of Archimedes in water. As the unsintered samples were not firm enough, their density could only be estimated by measuring their volume and weight in air. The densities of the original powders were measured using a gas pycnometer (Micromeritics, Germany). The The viscosity–temperature curve of the pure glass can be seen in The area–temperature curves as obtained by HSM can be found in The crystalline phases of the sintered samples with 0, 10, 20, 30 A comparison of the XRD results for the samples with wollastonite contents of 0, 20 and 40 For characterizing the microstructure of the crystallized glass, SEM micrographs were taken. Porosity and occurrence of crystalline phases were evaluated ( As can be seen from the figures, all samples show a certain amount of porosity. For the samples containing 0, 10, 20 and 30 Crystallization can be observed in all samples. The crystallization did not lead to formation of pores or cracks which means that it has no influence on the gas tightness of the solder. With rising amount of wollastonite, the amount of crystals also increases showing that the wollastonite crystals act as a nucleating agent during the crystallization of the glass matrix. The wollastonite grains in all the samples show sharp boundaries which shows that wollastonite is not dissolved in the glass. This was expected as wollastonite is one of the coexisting phases of the glass. Due to their sufficiently high density and their small amount of non-percolating pores it can be said that the mixtures with 0, 10, 0 and 30 At the moment, the sealing properties for the sealing of Al A maximum amount of 30 wt% wollastonite can be added to the studied glass composition in order to obtain well densified composite materials with potential application as solders for ceramic components. The necessary increase of the sintering temperature in order to optimize the final density of the 30 wt% wollastonite-containing samples in comparison to the wollastonite-free material means a decrease of glass viscosity by two orders of magnitude. The ratio of wollastonite to anorthite in the samples increases from 0.4 in the sample without wollastonite to 1.1 (20 wt% wollastonite) and 3.1 (40 wt% wollastonite) in terms of the corresponding intensities of the XRD peaks. Wollastonite grains are not dissolved in the glass as expected since wollastonite is one of the coexisting phases of the studied glass system. This work was supported by the Integrated Action Spain-Germany DE2009-0069 and the DAAD (PPP Spanien, project-ID 50262236).