The present study investigates the silicothermic reduction kinetic and mechanism of the dolomitic charges used in the magnetherm type reactors under inert atmosphere. The dolomitic charges are composed of a mixture of calcined dolomite (dolime) and ferrosilicon pressed in the briquettes form. Initially, these briquettes were sintered under argon at different temperatures 700–1000°C, then reduced in magnetherm reactor. Different technical parameters such as the effect of sintering temperature, the reduction temperature (1450–1550°C) and reduction time (up to 20min) were investigated. The produced slag was characterized using XRD, XRF, and SEM techniques. Maximum reduction extent (about 80%) was achieved at optimum reduction conditions. These optimum conditions were double stoichiometric amount of silicon (2×) which is necessary to reduce all magnesium oxide present in dolomitic charges, sintering temperature of 700°C for1hr, reduction time of 15min and reduction temperature at 1550°C. The results showed that the reduction of the dolomitic charge is controlled by the solid state diffusion process and the calculated value of the activation energy was found to be about 498kj/mol.Pressed at 4.9 Time of sintering 1 Sintering at argon atmosphere passing with flow rate 1 3 CaO·MgO·2SiO 2 CaO·SiO CaO·SiO Industrially, magnesium is produced by several processes, electrolytic and pyrometallurgical techniques. The pyrometallurgical techniques may be subdivided into carbothermic and metallothermic reduction techniques. The most important metallothermic technique used for the production of magnesium is the silicothermic reduction of dolomite ores in which silicon (usually provided in the form of ferrosilicon) is used as a reducing agent. This process may be carried out in special reactors either externally heated retorts the Pidgeon process ( The magnethermic process has many advantages such as the flexibility in the production capacity. This process provides an improved daily magnesium output of 2.5 to 7.5 In the traditional magnetherm processes ( The equilibrium pressure of magnesium vapor should thermodynamically be fixed on condition that the component involved in Eq. In some magnethermic furnaces ( The aim of this work is to study the kinetics of the silicothermic reduction of the briquetted of calcined dolomitic charges which float over the surface of the start-up slag used under the conditions of magnethermic reactor type under inert atmosphere. Moreover, it discussed the reduction mechanism taking place in this case which was not discussed before. The chemical analysis of dolomite ore used (pulverized to − When this dolomite ore is calcined at 1000 The ferrosilicon sample was provided by Egyptian Ferroalloys Company (EFACO), Edfu. This sample was pulverized to − The chemical analysis of start-up slag in weight percentage is SiO The reduction experiments were carried out by using charges composed of dolime and ferrosilicon which were mixed thoroughly, homogenized for 20 The reduction experiments were carried out by adding the dolomitic charges in a laboratory scale magnetherm reactor ( The extent of reduction process was calculated according to the following formula: extent of reduction % To perform the reduction test, about 300 The effect of silicon stoichiometry which needed to reduce the magnesium oxide in dolomitic charge was studied using variable amounts of silicon in the form of ferrosilicon ranging from 1 The experiments were conducted on briquetted dolomitic charges having a molar ratio of CaO/MgO A series of experiments was carried out to study the effect of sintering condition of the briquette on its reduction extent. This study was carried out on briquetted charges containing (2  This reaction is in fact promoted by increasing the sintering temperature to 900 and 1000  Also, the increase of the porosity may be related to the swelling effect suffered by the briquettes. However, the increase of sintering temperature increased slightly the volume of the sintered briquettes which was translated in the increase of its porosity. The no variation of the briquettes' crushing strength is due to that its dependence on the mechanical properties of the binding material developed inside the briquettes during its sintering. From the phase analysis, the only two phases formed during the sintering process are CaSi  The effect of temperature and time on the reduction of dolime was carried out on briquettes previously sintered at 700  As previously mentioned, the reduction process of dolime with ferrosilicon in the form of briquettes floating at the surface of the start-up slag is increased by increasing reduction temperature and time. To determine the reduction kinetics of the extraction process, different solid state diffusion models were applied. It was found that the models belonging to The apparent activation energies were calculated which were found to be about 498 It should be mentioned here that the reported activation energies of self diffusion of Mg To clarify the mechanism of silicothermic reduction of MgO in dolime in the form of briquettes floated over the surface of the start-up slag in magnetherm reactor to produce magnesium metal and determine the possible successive steps which take place during the reduction process. Partially reduced floated briquettes on the surface of the start-up slag at 1450  Also, it could be noticed that the intensities of MgO, Si and C   Collectively the results obtained from kinetic study, X-ray analysis, and SEM analysis the following facts can be concluded. The reaction is diffusion controlled in solid state, the presence of phases in partially reduced briquettes indicated that they suffered semi fusion during the reduction process. C Depending on these facts, the reduction mechanism of the magnesium oxide to magnesium metal which can proceed inside the floated briquettes may be visualized to occur according to the following expected regime. The calcium oxide reacts at phase boundary with silicon to form liquid calcium silicide and solid calcium silicates according to the following equation ( The liquid formed calcium silicide reacts with magnesium oxide to give low melting point intermediate phase composed of calcium, magnesium, and silicon (C The reaction is continued between Ca The overall reaction of reduction process can be written as follows: It should be mentioned that the SiO The kinetic of the reduction process of the floated briquettes in the magnethermic reactor were studied, and can be represented by one of the diffusion models in the form: [1 The overall reduction equation is: From this work we concluded that the magnetherm dolomitic charge should have silicon metal in double stoichiometry with respect to the magnesium oxide present in the ore to give maximum magnesium yield. The magnetherm dolomitic charges should be sintered at 700