Catalyzed magnesium hydride is suggested as a potential absorbent material for hydrogen separation, purification, and other relevant applications. The present study reports an investigation on selective hydrogen absorption using ball-milled VTiCr-catalyzed MgH2 from a gaseous mixture. Temperature oscillation absorption method, thermogravimetric analysis and differential scanning calorimeter techniques are utilized to characterize the VTiCr-catalyzed MgH2, demonstrating a reversible capacity up to 4 wt%H when the temperature is oscillated between 150 and 350 °C. When the hydrogen partial pressure is increased from 0.04 to 0.4 bar the reaction (dehydrogenation and hydrogenation) temperatures increase, and so do the reversible hydrogen capacities. The reaction kinetics are stable during the first 10 cycles. Transmission electron microscopy analysis shows that the VTiCr catalyst is a few nanometers in size and is dispersed uniformly in MgH2 matrix. The results of this study demonstrate that nano-VTiCr catalyzed MgH2 can readily react with low-pressure hydrogen and cycle in the mixture atmosphere.Processes such as hydrogen separation, hydrogen purification, and hydrogen compression are key technologies to realized hydrogen energy economy. Selective hydrogen sorption is one of the techniques that have attracted growing attention in the past decades [ Magnesium hydride (MgH As an important hydrogen storage material candidate, Mg-based hydride received a tremendous attention from the research community in the past few decades and there is a large body of research literature available to the public. It has been shown that the kinetics of the reactions involving MgH In this paper, we focus on low-pressure hydrogen sorption of the catalyzed Mg. The sorption of hydrogen by VTiCr-catalyzed MgH The starting material, MgH TGA/DSC tests were conducted using an SDT Q600 machine (TA instruments). The machine was custom modified for the use of H In the present work, TGA/DSC techniques were utilized to perform hydrogen cycling for VTiCr-catalyzed MgH   Different H  However, the hydrogen capacity of the catalyzed MgH The hydrogenation (T The progression of dehydrogenation and hydrogenation depended also on the H Hydrogen cycling were performed using three different temperature parameters, i.e. oscillating between 100 and 350 °C, 130 and 350 °C, 150 and 350 °C as tabulated in The present work demonstrated that VTiCr-catalyzed MgH The kinetic improvement can be attributed to two factors: (1) the nano-structure of the catalyzed MgH It should be noted that the C As mentioned earlier, the hydrogen sorption using catalyzed MgH MgH Dehydrogenation can be readily achieved by heating the sample above the temperature of the hydrogen pressure (see The hydrogenation and dehydrogenation are highly exothermic and endothermic. Especially, the exothermic hydrogenation of Mg can lead to a strong self-heating effect, which should be taken into account [ It also should point out that metal hydride usually cannot sustain high concentration of impurities such as O Low-pressure hydrogen absorption and cycling behavior of VTiCr catalyzed MgH Chengshang Zhou acknowledges the financial support from the