In this paper, cyclohexyl hydroxamic acid (CHA) was investigated as a new collector for scheelite flotation by the Density Functional Theory (DFT) calculation, mineral flotation tests, adsorption measurement and zeta potential determination. The DFT computation results indicated that the dianion of CHA or benzoylhydroxamic acid (BHA) exhibited stronger chemical reactivity than their anions and neutral molecules, and that the replacement of phenyl group by cyclohexyl group in BHA molecule significantly impacted the electron donating ability of hydroxamate collectors. In alkaline aqueous solutions, the two oxygen atoms in the dianions of CHA or BHA charged more negative charges than other atoms, and hence became their reactive center. The dianion of CHA exhibited higher atomic charge value, HOMO (Highest Occupied Molecular Orbital) energy, bigger dipole moment and binding energy with Ca2+, thus it had stronger collecting ability for scheelite than that of BHA. In addition, the results of flotation tests, adsorption measurement and zeta potential determination validated that the collecting capability of CHA was stronger than that of BHA, which achieved excellent agreement with computational analysis.The hydroxamic acid is a kind of organic compounds containing –CONHOH groups which mainly have two tautomers: keto-form and oxime-form, as shown in In hydroxamic –CONHOH group, both O and N atoms are recommended as coordination atoms in all kinds of complexes, and the characteristic structure determines the strong chelating ability of the hydroxamate with metal ions. In recent years, the chelating performance of hydroxamates with transition metals including Cu, Ni, Zn, Fe, Cr, Mn and Co has been studied through theoretical and experimental methods ( As a matter of fact, the stability constant of hydroxamate complexes depends on metals, so the collecting ability and selectivity of hydroxamates to different minerals varies a lot. Therefore, hydroxamates have obtained more and more attention as oxidized ores collectors ( In scheelite flotation, benzoylhydroxamates (BHA) as effective collectors have been studied in many reports. As widely considered, computational methods such as ab initio and density functional theory (DFT) are valuable tools for understanding the chemical reactivity systems. By using an ab initio method RHF (Restricted Hartree-Fork), To achieve the acceptable flotation performance of fatty and aromatic hydroxamates serving as collectors in oxidized ores flotation, a new naphthenic hydroxamic acid, cyclohexyl hydroxamic acid (CHA) was first introduced as a collector for scheelite flotation in this paper. Its collecting performance would be investigated by DFT calculation, mineral flotation tests, adsorption measurement and zeta potential determination. Additionally, the flotation efficiency of CHA and BHA would be compared and analyzed in terms of the structure–activity relationship of collectors. In this paper all the computational analysis was performed by Chemoffice 2005 and Gaussian 03. The initial molecular structure of BHA and CHA was drawn by Chemoffice and optimized by MM2 (a modified version of Allinger’s MM2 force field) and PM3 (Parameterized Model Revision 3) methods. The molecular geometry obtained was further optimized by Gaussian with DFT methods at B3LYP/6–311 The flotation tests were carried out in an XFG-type laboratory flotation cell (Jilin Prospecting Machinery Factory, China) with a volume of 40 The adsorption quantity of collectors on mineral surface was measured by Total Organic Carbon analyzer (Shimadzu, Japan). The sample (0.5 Zeta potential of scheelite was measured by JS94H electrophoresis apparatus trophoresis (Beckman Coulter INC, America). Finely ground scheelite (−5 There are keto and oxime tautomers of hydroxamates and their ionization equilibrium in aqueous solutions. These tautomers of BHA and CHA and their ionic species were listed in From The selected structure parameters of bond length, bond angle and dihedral angle of BHA and CHA were listed in As shown in The dihedral angle According to frontier molecular orbital (FMO) theory put forward by Fukui Kenichi in 1952, the molecule reactivity is mainly determined by the highest occupied molecule orbital (HOMO) and lowest unoccupied molecule orbital (LUMO). The HOMO value reflects electron-donating ability, and the LUMO value reveals electron-accepting ability. When collectors react with minerals, the HOMO of collectors donates their electrons to the LUMO of minerals to form normal covalent bond. In certain case, the LUMO of collectors can accept the d-orbital electrons from the HOMO of minerals to form back donation bond if the metal atoms in mineral surfaces have rich d-orbital electrons. In this study, we paid little attention to the back donation bond because there are no d-orbital electrons in Ca The dipole moment ( The results in  The calculated Mulliken and natural charge values were given in  In previous studies, the first grade ionization constant (p The calculated results showed that O1 and O4 atoms were of the active center in hydroxamic group, and the dianion had the strongest reactivity in the molecule, anion and dianion forms. Therefore, we proposed the possible bonding configuration of the hydroxamate with Ca In alkaline aqueous solutions, the molecule species of BHA and CHA ionized to their anion species, then the anion species further ionized to the dianion species (see For comparing the interaction force of BHA and CHA with Ca The results in The effect of pH on scheelite flotation with BHA or CHA as collectors (150 The influence of collector dose on scheelite flotation at pH The adsorption quantity of CHA or BHA on scheelite surface at different pH was presented in It was shown in The zeta potential of scheelite in the presence and absence of BHA or CHA was displayed in In this work, the structure details, charge population and frontier molecular orbital of BHA and CHA in aqueous solution were studied by using DFT. The flotation tests were carried out and also the adsorption quantity and zeta potential were determined. Based on all the results above, following conclusions could be drawn: In aqueous solution the keto tautomer was more stable than oxime tautomer. Water could change the dipole moment of BHA and CHA noticeably, and the dipole moment values of CHA ions were larger compared with BHA ions. That the HOMO values of CHA were higher than BHA indicated that CHA had stronger electron donation ability. The charge population showed that the electrons were mainly dispersed on two oxygen atoms of BHA and CHA, thus the two atoms were the reactive center and would bind with calcium in scheelite surface to form a five-member ring structure. In alkaline solutions, the dianion of CHA exhibited higher atomic charge value and HOMO energy, bigger dipole moment and binding energy with Ca As a result, CHA was proved to have stronger collecting ability than BHA in scheelite flotation by theory and experimental investigation in this work. Consequently, we believe that CHA is a justified candidate collector in scheelite and other oxidized ores flotation. The authors would like to thank the