CBM has been recognized as a significant natural gas resource for a long time. Recently, CO2 sequestration in coalbeds for ECBM has been attracting growing attention because of greater concerns about the effects of greenhouse gases and the emerging commercial significance of CBM. Reservoir-simulation technology, as a useful tool of reservoir development, has the capability to provide us with an economic means to solve complex reservoir-engineering problems with efficiency. The pore structure of coal is highly heterogeneous, and the heterogeneity of the pores depends on the coal type and rank.The effect of increasing atmospheric carbon dioxide (CO Our proposal is applying CO CO Among these techniques, CO According to Sing et al. The origin, formation, and structure of coal have been studied and an enormous amount of literature is available Higher rank coals typically contain more CH Through-going cleats formed first and are referred to as face cleats; cleats that end at intersections with through-going cleats formed later and are called butt cleats Cleats are sub vertical in flat-lying beds and are typically oriented at right angles to stratification even where beds are folded. In many cases cleats are confined to individual coal beds, or to layers composed of a particular maceral type. Commonly they are uniform in strike within an outcrop or core and arranged in sub parallel sets that have uniform regional trends CO The adsorption isotherms for CO Yang and Saunders However, some early adsorption isotherms indicated that the adsorption capacity of coal to methane was not proportional to the ambient pressure applied thus the Langmuir equation was incapable to describe them. For example, Moffat and Weale The amount of gas adsorbed by a solid sample is a function of the mass of the sample, the temperature and pressure, and the nature of both the solid and the gas Because coal is a microporous solid, the adsorption isotherms of gases, including N For primary production, gas desorption is caused by dewatering. Once the pressure in cleat system decreases to critical desorption pressure, gas desorption from matrix to cleats begins. This process is illustrated in Gas transfer in primary storage system is dominated by diffusion. Diffusion phenomenon in coal matrix driven by gas concentration gradient is demonstrated in There are a few of studies on the swelling/shrinkage of coal due to the adsorption/desorption of gas under constraint conditions. Czaplinski and Gustkiewicz Harpalani and Schraufnagel Adsorption of CO Coalbeds have a large internal surface area and serve as favorable sites for adsorption of gases, particularly CH Primary recovery using depressurization induces desorption by lowering the overall pressure of the reservoir. The depressurization is achieved by dewatering the reservoir. Unfortunately, such primary methods typically recover less than half of the CH According to Palmer and Mansoori Porosity is referred as the portion of the total coal volume that can be occupied by water, helium, or a similar molecule According to structure of coal, it is characterized by dual porosity system. Coal contains primary porosity system and secondary porosity system. The primary porosity system consists of micro poresand mesopores. The secondary porosity system is made up of macro poresand natural fractures. The dual porosity model constructed by Warren and Root in 1963 is given as Permeability is known as the ability of a material (generally an earth material) to transmit fluids through a porous medium when subjected to pressure. It represents one of the most important and crucial properties to produce gas at an economical rate. In US absolute permeabilities can range from 0.1 to 250 millidarcies. In coalbed methane, there are two major fluids flowing in the interconnected cleat network which result in a two phase flow regimen. In this case, effective and absolute permeability take place in order to differentiate two fluid flows in the porous media. The effective permeability is referred to each individual fluid. The effective permeability of individual flowing phase is always less than the absolute permeability of the porous media, and the sum of the effective permeabilities of all flowing phases is less than or equal to the absolute permeability In coals, permeability is very pronounced and stress-dependent. Horizontal stress perpendicular to the face cleat can close the face cleat openings and cause low permeability. When the stress conditions are low, natural fractures can be opened and provide permeability for flow through rock strata. Folding and faulting cam enhance coal permeability through formation of natural fractures. The tensional forces often cause fractures more intense along the axis a fold which produces fractures and keeps them open. In this way, the identification of faulting previous to drilling the coal will contribute to recognize those areas with lower stress near a fault or in a fault block. These areas represent possible locations of increased permeability. Lower permeability occurs at greater depth of burial and the higher values are found near geologic structures. Cleat spacing also influences coalbed permeability greatly. The spacing of face cleat fractures may range from one tenth of an inch to several inches. It is influenced by coal rank, petrographic composition, mineral matter content, bed thickness, and tectonic history. Permeability can be higher in Medium-Volatile Bituminous than in semi anthracite. In anthracite and semi-anthracite coals the permeability can be low to nonexistent because of the destruction of the cleat Furthermore, mineral fillings in cleat may also affect the permeability in the coals. Common minerals like calcite, pyrite, gypsum, kaolinite, and illite can fill the cleats, thus lowering the permeability values of the coals. If a large proportion of the cleats are filled, absolute permeability may be extremely low. Therefore, knowing the major properties and its effects in coalbed methane reservoirs is an important procedure in describing how the methane is stored in the coal, released and the flowing characteristics. Basically there are two basic concepts in the understanding of CBM; these are the methane storage and the methane flow. Permeability is a key parameter to judge fluids flow efficiency in coal. For coal, the matrix can be regarded as relatively impermeable. Most gas and water flows through the coal cleat system. Cleat is formed during coalification process. Typically, there are two types of cleats. One is face cleat and the other one is butt cleat shown in In ECBM recovery, coal preferentially adsorbs CO Typically, compared with ordinary gas reservoir, the porosity and permeability of unconventional reservoirs are relatively low. When it comes to coalbed methane reservoir, commercial production is dominated by well-developed natural fractures which is called cleat system. But, only depending on natural fractures is not enough to obtain a high level of CH For ECBM recovery, in the regions where injection gases have not reached the mechanism of methane recovery is the same as the above mentioned pressure depletion method of coalbed methane recovery and pressure differences provide the drive energy for fluid movements from coalbeds towards production wellbores. However, in the regions where injection gases have reached, the production mechanism depends on the type of injection gas. For simplicity, the following discussions are restrained to the situations of pure N When CO Once the gas content of a coal seam is deemed significant in a coalbed methane project, coalbed permeability likely remains the most important factor impacting the success of the project. Since intact coal has extremely low permeability, cleats are the main pathways for the flow of methane from a coal seam to wellbores. During the production life of a coalbed, its permeability does not keep constant. It changes as methane production progresses, or moreprecisely, it changes with the variations of in situ stresses, fluid pressures and gas content, etc. The change of coalbed permeability mainly results from: (a) the deformation of coal rock due to the effective stress changes caused by pore pressure variations; (b) the shrinkage and swelling of coal matrix due to the desorption/absorption of gases; and (c) the opening and closing of cleats. In the following sections we will discuss how these factors influence the changes of coalbed permeability. Coalbeds presents a highly heterogeneous pore structure with a wide varying scale of pore sizes. It is generally assumed that the flow of gas (and water) through the cleats is laminar and obeys Darcy’s law. On the other hand, gas transport through the porous coal matrix is controlled by diffusion, see The gas transport within large scale fractures and cleats is driven by pressure gradients and described using Darcy’s law; while within small scale pore structures in matrix blocks, transport is diffusion dominated. Several kinds of diffusion mechanisms may be present, subject to in-situ pressure conditions and pore sizes Gas adsorption takes place primarily in the micro pores of the coal matrix. Thus, a detailed modelling of gas transport in the matrix blocks is important for accurate prediction of ECBM recovery. Keeping this fact in mind, in the ensuing modelling task a significant amount of work has been invested to model the complicated gas transport occurring in the pores within the matrix blocks. Once the gas transport within the matrix pores is modelled and verified, we go ahead and model the matrix fracture transfer functions. The matrix-fracture transfer functions couple the diffusive gas transport within the matrix blocks with the bulk flow in cleats and fractures. The transport of gases through coal seams is generally a two-stage process. With water production (primary CBM recovery) or with gas injection (ECBM recovery), CH The coal mass can be considered as a naturally fractured reservoir (or dual porosity medium) for gas movement. The movement of gases through this highly complex coal mass structure depends on the permeability of the secondary porosity system which consists of cleat and other natural fractures, which can be described by Darcy’s law and also the intrinsic permeability of the coal matrix, which is governed by Fickain diffusion. There are three types of diffusion mechanisms, which can occur in the coal matrix as follows: (1) bulk flow, with dominant molecule-molecule interaction; (2) Knudsen flow, with dominant molecule–surface interaction; and (3) two-dimensional surface diffusion of the adsorbed gas layer The motivation for addressing this topic has been the high potential of ECBM recovery by injection of CO