Flow past a yawed circular cylinder in the vicinity of a plane boundary is investigated numerically by solving the three-dimensional Navier–Stokes equations using the Petrov–Galerkin finite element method. Simulations are carried out at a constant Reynolds number of 500, two gap ratios of 0.4 and 0.8 and six cylinder yaw angles (α) ranging from 0° to 60° with an increment of 15°. The gap ratio is defined as the ratio of the gap between the cylinder and the plane boundary to the cylinder diameter. The focus of the study is on the effects of α and the gap ratio on the vortex shedding flow and the hydrodynamic forces of the cylinder. It is found that increasing the cylinder yaw angle weakens three-dimensionality of the flow. The root mean square lift coefficient decreases at α=60°, indicating that the vortex shedding is suppressed more than that at small yaw angles. The independence principle, which states that the drag and lift coefficients based on the velocity component perpendicular to the cylinder axis are independent on the yaw angle of the cylinder, applies to the flow at the gap ratio of 0.8 better than that at the gap ratio of 0.4. Because of the strong influence from the plane boundary on the flow, the force coefficients for the gap ratio of 0.4 do not follow the independence principle if the yaw angle is greater than α>30°.Flow around circular cylinders has been studied extensively due to its engineering importance. It has been well known that vortex shedding starts to appear when the Reynolds number is approximately above 40. The flow transition from two-dimensional (2D) laminar flow to three-dimensional (3D) turbulent flow occurs at a Reynolds number of about 140–190 ( In offshore oil and gas engineering, cylindrical structures such as subsea pipelines are generally laid on seabed. Due to the unevenness of the seabed or the erosion of the sediment, a gap between a subsea pipeline and the seabed surface occurs. Flow around a subsea pipeline has been modeled as flow past a circular cylinder near a plane boundary in many studies. When a circular cylinder is located near a plane boundary, vortex shedding flow depends not only on the Reynolds number but also on the gap ratio Numerical method is also popularly used to predict flow past a cylinder near a plane boundary. When a cylinder is placed in a fluid flow at an inclined angle to the flow, the independence principle is commonly used in practical applications to estimate the vortex shedding frequency and hydrodynamics forces on the cylinder. The independence principle states that the force coefficients and the Strouhal number, which are normalized by the velocity component perpendicular to the cylinder, are approximately independent on the inclination angle of the cylinder. Hereafter, the yaw angle is defined as the angle between the incoming flow and a plane perpendicular to the cylinder axis as shown in The study of flow past a yawed circular cylinder close to plane boundary is relatively rare. The incompressible Navier–Stokes (NS) equations are solved for simulating the flow. The non-dimensional NS equations are written as  Hydrodynamic forces on the cylinder and the vortex shedding frequency are studied extensively. The sectional force coefficients are examined. The sectional drag and lift coefficients are defined as Numerical simulations were carried out at a constant Reynolds number of Re=500 with cylinder yaw angles (defined in   The vortex shedding flow is discussed by examining the time histories of the force coefficients and vortex shedding flow structures, which are visualized through vorticity contours and the iso-surface of the second negative eigenvalue of the tensor For The vortex shedding patterns shown on the left column of    It has been shown in   By comparing  Flow past a yawed circular cylinder near a plane boundary at yaw angles in the range of 0°–60° was investigated numerically at two gap ratios (i.e. The three-dimensionality of the flow becomes weak as the gap ratio is reduced from The independence principle is well followed by the mean drag coefficient at The Authors would like to acknowledge the support from