The isomorphism of W and Mo is strong in scheelite-type ores but quite limited or even not existent in wolframite. These differences inspired us to develop some new separation methods by imitating the formation of wolframite, for the precipitation processes are similar to the mineralization processes. Through experimental studies, the reliability of such ways was verified by the precipitation behaviors of W and Mo with different divalent ions. Furthermore, MnSO4 was chosen as a valuable reagent for the separation and then effects of several variables were evaluated. The results showed that this method worked well in the neutral solution. The optimal temperature was 50°C. Further prolonging the addition time of the precipitation reagent was beneficial. As W concentrations were fixed 0.1M, with increasing Mo in the range from 0.0125 to 0.8M, the precipitation of W decreased slightly but was still above 80%. In addition, the method also performed well in industrial solution. All these demonstrated that this method was simple but promising for separating macro amounts of W and Mo.Tungsten resources mainly exist in the form of wolframite ((Fe,Mn)WO The chemistry of Mo and W is characterized by their remarkable resemblance ( Any method for the separation of resemble elements must be based on the fine difference of their characteristics. In fact, the differences in geochemical characteristics between molybdate and tungstate are still obvious ( The typical simulative solution contained Na In each experiment, unless stated otherwise, a certain volume of 1 The molar distribution coefficient of W and Mo was calculated as follows. Where: Separation factor was also calculated as follows. Where: Precipitation experiments were carried out at 30 All these indicated that the mineralogical researches can indeed provide considerable predictive leverage for developing new separation methods. Moreover, the separation factor was the highest when adding MnSO In each experiment, 12.5 Based on these results, 50 The effect of the MnSO The effect of the acid or base addition on the precipitation was studied by adding 2.5 As is well known, the most important intermediate products of W and Mo (such as APT and ATM) are obtained from ammonium-salt solutions, so it is necessary to investigate the effect of ammonium concentration on the precipitation. Therefore, a series of tests were conducted with NH In order to study the effect of Mo/W molar ratio in the solution on the precipitation, a series of solutions containing different Mo concentrations were used. The results presented in In this set of tests, the Mo/W molar ratio in solutions was set 1/1 and the concentrations of W and Mo varied from 0.1 to 0.5  The industrial solution was adjusted to pH 7.8 by adding 50%v/v H Some researchers reported that micro amounts of W could be deeply removed from molybdate solution by various hydroxides and hydrated polyvalent metal oxides such as Fe(OH) Based on the similarities between precipitation and mineralization processes, a novel method is proposed here whereby MnSO It was found that the separation factor decreased with increasing the feed concentration, which might be attributed to an insufficient diffusion. Besides, when W concentrations were 0.1 This work has been jointly supported by the