A study that focussed on the effects on agglomeration of changing the rotational speed of a vertical-axis high shear mixer is reported. The design of the mixer was such that, at high impeller speeds, the power input was high. The agglomeration behaviour was found to vary greatly with impeller speed. At low impeller speed, the extent of size enlargement increased with power input. At high impeller speed, the extent of size enlargement was low relative to the large power input. From examination of the changes in size distributions of the granules and of granule morphology, it was concluded that, at high speed, size enlargement was limited by granule breakage. The observation is important as it may provide an improved means of controlling the process.This paper is concerned with size enlargement brought about by mixing a powder with a liquid in a mechanical mixer, of a type sometimes known as a vertical-axis high speed or high shear mixer-granulator. There is a considerable body of knowledge on their application In the case of rolling drum granulation, size enlargement is said to occur by crushing and layering or coalescence mechanisms. The former mechanism is thought to be important with granules that abrade or fragment easily and the latter with granules that have sufficient strength to coalesce with other granules without breakage From a technological aspect, granule breakage is important because it has the potential to provide a means to improve the control of both mean granule size and granule size distribution. In view of the difficulties in controlling granulation processes, such developments would have high practical value. Granule breakage can be expected to increase in magnitude with increase in rotational speed of the impeller. Impeller rotational speed is therefore a very important parameter. The extent of breakage can be expected to depend also on the design of the impeller and mixer bowl, on the properties of the solid and liquid materials and on the rheological properties of the paste. Here, we report a phenomenological investigation of the effects of impeller rotational speed on granule size distribution and growth. The mixer used had large impeller blades that, when operated at a rotational speed of 1500 min The calcium carbonate powder was substantially non-porous and had been produced by comminution and classification of a calcite mineral. Its weight median size, measured by dispersion in air and presentation to a laser light scattering instrument (Sympatec), was 23 μm. The density of the powder, measured with a helium pycnometer, was approximately 2730 kg m  The mixer was charged with 1.5 kg of the solid and 180 g of the molten binder (liquid-to-solid ratio=0.12 by weight). The solid was heated to 55°C by dry mixing within the mixer before the molten binder (approximately 60°C) was poured directly onto the surface of the powder with the impeller stationary. After addition, the lid was closed and the mixer started immediately. The mixing time was taken from the start of mixing. The granules were sampled at different mixing times with the impeller stationary by scooping small (e.g., 5–10 g) quantities of material from different positions within the bowl. The samples from different positions were then combined to make one sample. The hot granules were cooled by spreading them in a thin layer within a metal container and by agitating them gently until they had solidified. The sample (typically 20–30 g) was then used for sieve analysis without sub-division.  During granulation at a constant impeller speed, the mixer power consumption was almost constant. Because the power consumption changed by almost an order of magnitude with increase in impeller speed between 450 and 1500 min At the end of the granulation experiment at an impeller speed of 800 min  It is notable that at each impeller speed, the proportion of granules in the smaller mode of size range 100–500 μm decreased with time of mixing, whilst the modal size changed little. For example, at 800 min Examination of granule morphology was made by both optical and scanning electron microscopy. Optical microscopy revealed that granules formed at an impeller speed of 450 min  Granulation is a very complex process involving liquid distribution, granule consolidation, dilation, breakage and coalescence. The mechanisms of size enlargement remain uncertain. Coalescence mechanisms may be important under some conditions and breakage or abrasion and layering mechanisms under other conditions. The relative importance of these processes can be expected to vary not only with changes in material properties affecting the strength of the granules, but also with changes in impeller rotational speed and with the design of the impeller blades. Interpretation of kinetic data using theories of coalescence that do not include breakage (e.g., Ref. The present study was made with constituent particles that had a fairly coarse particle size. Such particles consolidate in a time that is small relative to the granulation time, to give granules with a constant degree of liquid saturation. Consequently, at constant speed, the power input remains nearly constant and the mean size is found to vary approximately linearly in time. In comparison, much finer particles consolidate slowly so that the saturation state varies throughout the mixing time, making interpretation more difficult. Secondly, a binder of fairly low viscosity was used. The mixing of a binder of low viscosity is more rapid than that of a very high viscosity Much of the previously published work has shown that the extent of granule growth increases with increase in impeller speed. Furthermore, the relative increase in growth rate is usually larger than the relative increase in speed The present work differs from much previous work in that, at the highest impeller speed, the mixing was very intensive. The power per unit mass was of the order of 500 W kg A study focussed on the effect of changing the speed of the impeller in a vertical-axis high shear mixer on agglomeration behaviour. The mixer used had large blades and could operate at impeller rotational speeds up to 1500 min The agglomeration behaviour was found to vary greatly with rotational speed. At low impeller speeds, the behaviour was similar to that observed previously. At the highest impeller speed, the extent of size enlargement was low relative to the large power input. It was concluded that the extent of granule breakage was significant and that it limited growth. Equilibrium between the rate of enlargement (or growth) and the rate of breakage was not obtained. At all impeller speeds, a bimodal distribution of granule sizes was formed initially and persisted throughout the granulation. It is suggested that, although the initial formation of a bimodal distribution is produced by the immersion mechanism of liquid distribution, at large granulation times, granule breakage makes a significant contribution. Granules formed at an impeller rotational speed of 450 min At the highest impeller speed, the mean granule size varied little with mixing time. However, true equilibrium was not obtained and the size distributions produced were rather wide. For critical manufacturing processes, such as pharmaceutical pelletization, these processing conditions cannot be recommended. Thus, there is a need for further work to elucidate the inter-relationships between the design of the equipment, processing conditions and properties of the materials to be granulated. In particular, investigations with granulation equipment capable of high (>15 m s