The aim of this new work was to improve the dissolution rate of poorly water-soluble cilostazol (CLT) by adsorbing dissolved drug molecules onto the surface of undissolved carriers via reprecipitation and deposition process as the solvent (methylene chloride) was evaporated. The adsorption mixtures of CLT with Aerosil 300 and lactose monohydrate provided better drug dissolution rate as compared to mannitol. However, Aerosil-based adsorption powders were unable to be compressed into tablet due to low and unsatisfactory compressibility. The optimized CLT-loaded tablets containing lactose-based adsorption powders displayed almost complete dissolution within 90 min and showed significantly higher dissolution in intestinal fluid (pH 6.8) containing 0.2% sodium lauryl sulfate than the control tablet and the commercial reference product Pletaal
                     ® (Otsuka). Differential scanning calorimetry (DSC) and powder X-ray diffraction (PXRD) indicated that the crystalline property of CLT remained in adsorption powders with diminutive peak intensity. Fourier transform infrared spectroscopy (FT-IR) spectra indicated that the intermolecular hydrogen bond was formed between drug molecule and lactose monohydrate. Field-emission scanning electron microscope (Fe-SEM) clearly confirmed that CLT crystals with reduced size around 10 μm were adsorbed and deposited onto the surface of adsorbent material.The poor aqueous solubility of drug has remained a hardship that limits the development of highly potential pharmaceutics for years, especially when the drug discovery net has been widened. According to the Biopharmaceutics Classification System (BCS) from FDA, a drug substance is considered poorly soluble when the highest dose strength is not soluble in 250 ml water over a pH range of 1–7.5 CLT [6-[4-(1-Cyclohexyl-1H-tetrazol-5-yl) butyloxy]-3,4-dihydroquinolin-2(1H)-one] is a selective type III phosphodiesterase inhibitor that suppresses cyclic adenosine monophosphate (cAMP) degradation, with a resultant elevation of cAMP in blood platelets and blood vessels, thus leading to an inhibition of platelet aggregation and vasodilation Various formulation techniques have been studied to surmount the challenge of limited aqueous solubility and dissolution rate of active pharmaceutical ingredients with no spring-like precipitation, including solid dispersion in which one or more APIs dispersed in a carrier or matrix at solid state In case of CLT, several methods were employed in the effort of solubilizing as well as enhancing CLT dissolution. It was found that particle size has remarkable effect on dissolution rate as well as bioavailability of CLT Hereafter, an adsorption system deposited reprecipitated CLT crystals on the surface of carriers was newly designed to improve the dissolution rate without changing its crystalline property which generally possess better stability than amorphous state. The dissolution rate of CLT was improved by reprecipitating dissolved drug molecules on the surface of undissolved adsorbents in smaller particle size as a result of solvent evaporation process CLT was purchased from Chemagis Co. Ltd. (Ramat Hovav, Israel). Aerosil In adsorption method, drug was adsorbed onto the adsorbent surface by employing conventional grinding. Initially, 5 g of CLT was completely dissolved in a glass bottle containing 35 ml of dichloromethane (DCM) to get a transparent drug solution. The achieved solution was then slowly dribbled to the adsorption carrier and mixed homogenously using mortar and pestle. The mixture was then placed in dry oven at 40 °C in 2 h for further solvent evaporation. Hereafter, the entity comprising drug/solvent/adsorbent is defined as adsorbent system. Three kinds of pharmaceutical excipients including Aerosil Reprecipitated CLT was also fabricated without using carrier for comparison. Firstly, 5 g of CLT was dissolved in a minimum amount of DCM. The solution was then continuously stirred using magnetic stirrer until solvent evaporated. Finally, reprecipitated powder was placed in dry oven at 60 °C in 60 min for complete evaporation of DCM. CLT 100 mg immediate release tablet formulations were presented in To prepare control tablet for comparison, CLT and carrier were physically mixed before being processed as mentioned above in the same condition. The solubility of CLT in various samples were determined in triplicate in distilled water, pH 1.2 buffer, pH 4.0 buffer, pH 6.8 buffer and pH 6.8 buffer containing SLS 0.2%. A sample equivalent to 100 mg CLT was added to approximately 10 ml of medium in 20 ml glass vial. The resulting mixture was sonicated before shaking at 200 rpm in an incubator at 37 ± 0.5 °C for 24 h. An aliquot of about 3 ml of the suspension was collected and immediately filtered through a hydrophilic PTFE membrane filter with 0.45 μm pore size. The initial 1.5 ml of filtrate was discarded and the subsequent 1.5 ml was used for HPLC assay. To define the effective solubilizer for improving CLT solubility as well as dissolution rate, the solubility of CLT in water, pH 1.2 buffer or pH 6.8 buffer with the presence of different kinds of solubilizing agents were investigated in triplicate. About 100 mg of pure CLT was added to glass vial containing 10 ml of 1% (w/v) solution of the solubilizer in three media above. All samples were processed and quantitated as mentioned in solubility study. The release characteristics of powder and tablet samples were determined in triplicate using a dissolution tester (D-TWELVE, DCM, Korea) at 37 ± 0.5 °C at a rotation speed of 75 rpm based on the USP dissolution Apparatus II paddle method for 90 min. Dissolution tests were performed in 900 ml intestinal fluid (pH 6.8) with the presence of sodium lauryl sulfate 0.2%. Samples were withdrawn from the dissolution medium at pre-determined time points and filtered immediately, and the same volume of fresh media was added to compensate. The concentration of CLT was then analyzed by HPLC and the dissolution rates were calculated based on a standard solution. Thermal analysis of pure drug as well as processed samples was conducted using a differential scanning calorimeter (Netzsch, DSC 200F3, Germany). The sample cells were purged by nitrogen at a flow rate 50 ml/min. An aliquot of approximately 5 mg was weighed and sealed in an aluminum pan, and an empty pan was used as a reference. The thermal behaviors of all samples were scanned from −10 °C to 240 °C at a heating rate 10 K/min. PXRD patterns of samples were recorded at room temperature by an X-ray diffractometer (SmartLab, Rigaku, Japan) with Cu K-alpha radiation. Samples were measured over a diffraction angle 2θ range of 5-50° with an interval of 0.01° at a scanning speed 10°/min. FT-IR spectra of CLT samples were obtained using an FT-IR spectrophotometer (FT-IR 4700 type A, Jasco, USA). The measurements were carried out over a wavelength range of 600–4000 cm The morphology of sample was characterized using a FE-SEM (Jeol, JMS-6700F, Japan) operated at an accelerating voltage of 5 kV. To make conductive samples, aliquots were placed on an adhesive carbon tape before being sputter-coated with platinum using ion sputter. To characterize the surface area as well as porosity of adsorption mixtures, nitrogen adsorption isotherms of samples at 77 K were measured by employing BELSORP-max (Tokyo, Japan) gas adsorption analyzer. The Brunauer-Emmett-Teller (BET) surface area was obtained by using standard BET equation based on multilayer adsorption of N A reverse phase HPLC system (Waters Alliance 2695, USA) was operated for the measurement of CLT concentration. The assays were conducted with a Gemini 5 μm C CLT was generally recognized as poorly soluble in different media, hence the incorporation of solubilizer in formulation was attempted to improve CLT wettability as well as solubility. It can be seen from the solubility result in Generally, for active pharmaceutical ingredients which have pH-independent solubility, pH-based solubilization approaches seem to be ineffective to improve drug solubility as well as dissolution rate. Therefore, adsorption method which was expected to reduce CLT particle size and thus improve drug release rate was employed in this study. Solubility profiles of pure drug, powder obtained by milling reference drug using mortar and pestle as well as three kinds of adsorption powders were compared in  Based on the dissolution results of adsorption mixtures at drug-carrier ratio of 1:1, Aerosil and lactose monohydrate were chosen for further experiment. Adsorbent systems using Aerosil or lactose monohydrate as adsorption carrier were prepared at various drug-carrier ratios (1:1, 1:2 and 1:4) to investigate the effect of drug-carrier ratio. The physical properties of adsorption powders are also very important to elucidate the more detailed explanation of dissolution-enhancing mechanism. The micromeritics properties such as BET surface area, pore diameter and total pore volume of adsorption mixtures are given in Regardless of good micromeritics properties (see CLT immediate release tablets using the adsorbent system of lactose monohydrate were successfully prepared as aforementioned procedure with the manipulating hardness of all tablets in the range of 9–11 kg/m The effect of SLS on drug release characteristic of CLT IR tablets was displayed in The effect of PVP K30 on drug dissolution is shown in Among five designed formulations L1-L5 which released almost 100% CLT after 90 min in pH 6.8 containing SLS 0.2%, L2 tablets presented the fastest dissolution rate with over 65% drug released just after 5 min while others released less than 40% after the same time. Although the result of To clarify the mechanism for enhancing CLT solubility and dissolution rate of adsorption method, DSC, PXRD, FT-IR and FE-SEM techniques were employed to analyze 5 types of powders: pure drug, lactose monohydrate, physical mixture, reprecipitated CLT and adsorption powder (the tested drug-carrier ratio was 1:2 for all samples).  PXRD patterns of the tested samples such as pure drug, lactose monohydrate, reprecipitated drug, the physical mixture and adsorption mixture of drug and lactose monohydrate are shown in To prove molecular interaction between drug and carrier, FT-IR spectra of pure drug, lactose monohydrate, reprecipitated drug, the physical mixture and adsorption mixture of drug and lactose monohydrate are illustrated in FE-SEM was performed to visualize the structure and morphology of adsorption mixtures at two different magnifications of ×200 and ×1000 ( It was known that the dissolution rate of the model drugs (carbamazepine and nifedipine) was improved by adsorbing solutions of the drugs in hydrophilic nonvolatile or volatile solvents onto carriers In this research, CLT dissolution was substantially ameliorated by adsorbing dissolved drug molecules onto the surface of undissolved carriers via reprecipitation and deposition process as the solvent was evaporated. Based on micromeritics properties and dissolution rate of CLT-loaded adsorption mixtures, the IR tablet containing optimized adsorption powders were successfully developed by utilizing adsorbent system of lactose monohydrate with drug-carrier ratio of 1:2. The resultant tablets exhibited superior dissolution rate compared to the control tablet or commercial reference product ( The authors declare that there is no conflict of interests regarding the publication of this paper. This research was supported by a grant from the The following is the supplementary data related to this article: Supplementary data related to this article can be found at