The treatment of 0.348 mM carbofuran solutions in 0.050 M Na2SO4 at pH 3.0 has been studied by electrochemical oxidation with electrogenerated H2O2 (EO-H2O2), electro-Fenton (EF) and photoelectro-Fenton (PEF). The trials were performed in a 2.5 L pre-pilot plant equipped with a filter-press cell, which contained a RuO2-based anode and an air-diffusion cathode, connected to an annular photoreactor with a 160 W UVA lamp in PEF. The oxidizing species were the 
                        
                     OH generated at the anode from water oxidation and in the bulk from Fenton’s reaction between added Fe2+ and H2O2 produced at the cathode. The oxidation power of treatments rose in the order EO-H2O2 ≪ EF < PEF, demonstrating the preponderant role of 
                        
                     OH in the bulk. The drug decay always obeyed a pseudo-first order kinetics. Similar TOC abatements of 82%–88% were found in PEF operating at different current densities and carbofuran concentrations, ascribed to the additional photolytic action of UVA light to remove photoactive intermediates, also allowing a gradual detoxification. In matrices with Cl−, active chlorine was also produced as oxidant and its quick reaction with carbofuran caused its faster decay at increasing Cl− content. However, lower mineralization was achieved because of the accumulation of recalcitrant chloroderivatives. GC–MS analysis of treated solutions with 0.070 M NaCl corroborated the formation of 6 chloroderivatives, whereas 5 heteroaromatics were detected in 0.050 M Na2SO4. Oxalic acid was accumulated in the latter medium since its Fe(III) complexes were stable in EF and rapidly mineralized by UVA light in PEF. The mineralization of urban wastewater spiked with carbofuran by PEF in the pre-pilot plant was partial due to the recalcitrant chloroderivatives formed from carbofuran and natural organic matter.Remediation of wastewater contaminated with agricultural pesticides has been recognized as a major environmental concern because of the ineffectiveness of traditional physicochemical and biological methods used in municipal wastewater treatments plants (WWTPs) Over the past three decades, different advanced oxidation processes (AOPs) have been developed to treat wastewater contaminated with toxic and biorefractory organic compounds. They are chemical, electrochemical (EAOPs) and photo-assisted processes characterized by their ability to produce highly reactive hydroxyl radical ( This paper aims to clarify the degradation of carbofuran in aqueous matrices by EAOPs like EO with electrogenerated H Carbofuran (98% purity) was purchased from Sigma-Aldrich and used as received. Anhydrous sodium sulfate and sodium chloride, used as background electrolytes, and iron(II) sulfate heptahydrate, used as catalyst, were of analytical grade supplied by Fluka, Merck and Sigma-Aldrich, respectively. The solutions were prepared with deionized water. Concentrated sulfuric and hydrochloric acids, used for pH adjustment to 3.0, were of analytical grade supplied by Panreac. The other chemicals were either of HPLC or analytical grade purchased from Merck and Panreac. A single set of urban wastewater was collected downstream after the secondary treatment in a WWTP in Gavà (Barcelona, Spain) in October 2016. It was preserved in a refrigerator at 4 °C before use and presented the following characteristics: pH 7.9, specific conductivity of 3.2 mS cm A scheme of the 2.5 L pre-pilot plant used to degrade the insecticide is presented in The solution pH was determined with a Crison pH 25 portable pH-meter and the conductivity was measured on a Mehrom 644 conductometer. Samples were collected at regular time intervals and before analysis they were alkalinized to stop the mineralization process and filtered with 0.45 µm PTFE filters purchased from Whatman. The mineralization of carbofuran solutions was assessed from their TOC decay, by injecting 50 µL aliquots into a Shimadzu VCSN TOC analyzer (Kyoto, Japan), yielding reproducible values with ±1% accuracy. The insecticide concentration abatement was monitored by reversed-phase HPLC employing a Waters 600 LC fitted with a Waters Spherisorb ODS2-C18 5 µm, 150 mm × 4.6 mm (i.d.), column at room temperature and coupled with a Waters 996 photodiode array detector set at λ To identify the primary intermediates generated, several carbofuran solutions in 0.050 M Na To assess the toxicity of untreated and treated carbofuran solutions, acute bioluminescence inhibition assays were performed using the marine bacteria First, the decay of 0.348 mM carbofuran (corresponding to 50 mg L  In contrast, The above concentration decays fit very well to a pseudo-first order kinetics, as presented in The influence of Once assessed the decay kinetics of the insecticide in 0.050 M Na The initial N of carbofuran is completely accumulated as ammonium ion upon the action of The specific energy consumption per unit TOC mass (EC For subsequent discussion, the values of EC  The change in acute toxicity of the above treated carbofuran solutions was determined from the assessment of the bioluminescence of To check the oxidation power of PEF treatment of carbofuran solutions in 0.050 M Na  The Fe The effect of insecticide concentration was tested using 0.050 M Na The above findings allow concluding that best MCE and EC Since the composition of pesticide wastewater usually includes large amounts of both, SO  The inset panel of The TOC abatement of 2.5 L of 0.348 mM insecticide in chloride + sulfate mixtures and 0.070 M NaCl at pH 3.0 by PEF using the pre-pilot plant at The change in acute toxicity during the PEF treatment of the carbofuran solution in 0.070 M NaCl was determined as well. The initial EC GC–MS analysis of the treated solutions with 0.348 mM insecticide in 0.050 M Na In 0.050 M Na The treated solutions with 0.348 mM carbofuran in 0.050 M Na A last assay was made by spiking 0.348 mM carbofuran into 2.5 L of an urban wastewater sample that contained 15.0 mg L It has been shown that, in 0.050 M Na The authors acknowledge financial support from project CTQ2016-78616-R (AEI/FEDER, EU) and FONDECYT project 3160753 (CONICYT, Chile). Supplementary data associated with this article can be found, in the online version, at 