In this work we present chemical looping and simulated chemical looping as a new reactor concept for the oxidative coupling of methane over Na2WO4/Mn/SiO2. As a consequences of an alternating feed of oxygen and methane to the catalyst bed side reactions are avoided and the selectivity of the coupling reaction is greatly increased. By variation of methane pulse contact time and temperature a maximum yield of 0.25 is obtained. Although this does not exceed the often discussed yield limitation of OCM, it is achieved from a substantially lower amount of converted methane. A time on stream experiment were carried out at 775 and 800°C for 150min and showed stable performance and C2 yield.The oxidative coupling of methane (OCM) is an attractive alternative concept for ethylene production from methane based feedstocks, as natural gas or bio gas. Major issues for this reaction are high temperatures and therefore competing combustion reactions in the gas phase. Industrial application of OCM is currently not economically viable due to an apparent yield limitation of 0.25 achieved usually at around 0.6 conversion and 0.4 selectivity The basic principle of OCM is the activation of methane by a catalyst material which leads to methyl radical formation by C Chemical looping was applied as a reactor concept in the chemical industry for the first time around 100 A design layout for CLC is shown A basic concept for a simulated chemical looping process on the lab scale is presented in The Na The chemical looping concept was realized by two pneumatic six-port diaphragm valves (Vichi Valco DV22-2116). The concept of such a valve and its operation is shown in the A detailed flow chart of the complete setup is shown in A scheme of the tubular fixed bed reactor is in the A detailed preparation and analysis of the Na All chemical looping experiments were performed between 700 and 800 The pulses were detected by a quadrupole mass-spectrometer (QMS, IPI GAM 200). A small amount of the gas flow was send through a capillary into the QMS high vacuum system, ionized by yttrium filaments and the signal was amplified and detected by a secondary electron multiplier (SEM). All compounds (Z The measurement of CH Repetitive continuous simulated chemical looping was carried out at 775 The steady state experiments were carried out in a fixed bed reactor. 250 For a comparison of steady state and looping experiments performing OCM reactions, the characteristic contact time (t) of each methane pulse was determined by Eq. The carbon balance for each methane pulse was 0.88 in all experiments or better. During the oxidation treatment of the catalyst, after each methane pulse, no carbon oxides were detected. This indicates that there is no carbon deposition on the catalyst surface. All values for conversion (Eq. The results of methane conversion, C2 selectivity and yield for flowrate and temperature variation are shown in A similar yield limitation was observed for this Na As mentioned before, the direct oxidation of methane is also possible on the catalyst surface. Lunsford and coworkers found that the formation and coupling of methyl radicals leads to ethane formation A detailed overview about reactant and product spectra at 775 The amount of formed ethane stays constant, as the amount of ethene decreases slightly and carbon dioxide formation decreases clearly. The results for methane conversion, C2 selectivity and yield for both temperatures over the whole period of experiments are presented in The results of steady state experiments are shown in For a direct comparison of steady state and chemical looping experiments, similar results for methane conversion should be considered as presented in The consequence of these results is that the chemical looping process clearly produces less CO This becomes clear by a detailed discussion of the complete OCM process design, which is shown in It has to be noted that the manganese oxide system of the Na A well-known problem of fluidized bed reactors is the comminution or abrasion of the catalyst particles In our work we tested the Na This work is part of the UNICAT excellence cluster, which is coordinated by the Technische Universität Berlin. The funding of this cluster by the Supplementary data associated with this article can be found, in the online version, at 