Standing column wells can provide energy savings at lower first-costs than conventional vertical ground heat exchangers while having a higher potential in dense urban areas. Unfortunately, operating these open wells with groundwater near the freezing point has limited so far their use in northern climates and studies illustrating their successful operation in heating mode are limited. The objective of this study is to provide insights on the various operating conditions affecting the performance of heat pumps linked to standing column wells and demonstrate their potential in cold climates. This work relies on a major research infrastructure designed to operate water-to-air heat pumps connected to a standing column well and its companion injection well under realistic dynamic heating and cooling conditions. During its first operating year, the laboratory was operated continously in heating mode for 26 days. Results show that combined use of a plate heat exchanger and heat pumps allows heat extraction from the ground at significant rates (between 120 W/m and 160 W/m), while keeping the groundwater temperature above 0 °C during peak heating periods. This is approximately two times more than typical values reported for conventional closed loop borehole heat exchangers. Such efficiency was possible owing to the bleed control used, which allows transferring to the injection well part of the groundwater pumped and thus promotes advective heat transport towards the standing column well. Our measurements indicate that bleed was required only 30% of the time and represented 4.6 m3 of groundwater per day on average. These results should dimiss doubts raised in the literature and demonstrate the potential usability of SCWs for cold climates.bleed flow (m well length (m) volumetric heat capacity (MJ m coefficient of performance (–) energy (kWh) entering groundwater temperature (°C) entering propylene glycol temperature (°C) entering source temperature (°C) gravitational acceleration (m s heating seasonal performance factor (–) hydraulic conductivity (m s leaving groundwater temperature (°C) leaving propylene glycol temperature (°C) leaving source temperature (°C) extra pumping power (kW) heat extraction rate (kW) time (s) flow rate (m hydraulic drawdown (m) specific storage (m work (kW) density (kg m pump efficiency (–) condensor evaporator heat pump groundwater propylene glycol distributed temperature sensor borehole heat exchanger ground source heat pump plate heat exchanger standing column well In cold climates, heating energy demands make buildings one of the largest energy end-use sectors. In Canada, the total energy consumption for space heating of buildings represents 61% of energy used in homes and 55% of energy used in commercial buildings One particular technology which has proven capable of producing large reductions in energy consumption and peak demand in buildings is ground source heat pump (GSHP) Among all the existing types and configurations of GHEs, the conventional vertical closed-loop GHE has attracted the most interest, both in terms of research and practical applications, owing to its simplicity and reliability A less common GHE, namely the standing column well (SCW), which enacts superior heat exchange rates by recirculating groundwater in a single uncased vertical borehole, has gained research attention due to its high energy savings potential SCW systems, however, present more complexity than conventional closed-loop GHEs as they deal with groundwater and require more field investigations and elaborate design tools. For this reason, several authors developed models, in recent years, all with different degrees of complexity, from simple one-dimensional The majority of existing experimental projects have focussed on the analysis of short-term thermal response tests for evaluating the effect of groundwater flow The first experimental study investigating the feasibility of SCW operation in heating conditions published in the literature was completed by Minea Recently, Beaudry et al. Considering their reported performance in the literature, the energy saving potential of SCWs in cold climates is substantial. Unfortunately, concerns about operating these GHEs with groundwater near the freezing point has limited so far the wide use of this efficient and cheaper solution. Also, the published studies illustrating the successful operation of a SCW in heating mode are limited. To fill that gap of knowledge, we performed a detailed performance analysis of the experimental data published by Beaudry et al. The research project benefits from a mobile geothermal laboratory connected to an experimental SCW. This installation was put into place in 2016 in the city of Varennes at 10 km east of Montreal with the aim of studying the behaviour of SCWs in cold climates. The detailed setup as well as the results of a comprehensive field investigation are presented below. A 215-m-deep SCW ( Detailed information about the site characteristics was acquired during a comprehensive experimental program that was conducted in 2017 The two experimental wells are connected to a mobile geothermal laboratory assembled in a 12.2-m marine container. This infrastructure was designed primarily to study various types of GHEs under dynamic conditions. Thus, using a complex valve and pipe layout, the infrastructure can mimic the heating and cooling operation of a small commercial building connected either to an open- or closed-loop GHE (See Between January 26th 2018, and February 21th 2018, a 26-day dynamic heating operation experiment was conducted using the mobile geothermal laboratory. Heating demands for the experiment were simulated by activating sequentially the four GSHPs through the control system on board and the profile used aims to emulate the effect of daily cycles, including one peak period per day. The sequence of activation of the four GSHPs is presented in To maintain the groundwater temperature above the freezing point, a three-level bleed control and an on–off sequence were implemented as suggested by Nguyen et al. Heat is extracted from the ground by the SCW and collected by the heat pump at the PHE. Thus, the heat extraction rate of the SCW is used as the main metric for the evaluation of its thermal performance. This value can be calculated at two locations: (1) at the groundwater loop, and (2) at the propylene glycol loop. To verify the correctness of the experimental measurements, an energy balance analysis is conducted at the PHE, between the groundwater loop and the propylene glycol loop. The heat exchange rate When bleed is activated, the water table drops in response to change of pressure in the aquifer. This is referred to as the hydraulic drawdown ( In the field of hydrogeology, The additional pumping power at the submersible pump is then calculated by: The time evolution of the heat pumps consumption ( The heat pumps’ instant coefficient of performance (COP) at a given time is calculated by: Finally, the heat pumps’ heating seasonal performance factor (HSPF) is defined as following: First, This efficacy was possible owing to the three level bleed control implemented. Recall that bleed was activated only when the EGT dropped below 7 °C. The cumulative distribution of the bleed ratio illustrated in During this test, the 215 m SCW was able to maintain impressive heat extraction rates of 120 W/m to 160 W/m owing to the use of a bleed control. Recall that the SCW is installed in a bedrock with a measured thermal conductivity of 2.74 W/mK, which is on par with average values reported in the literature for SCWs of similar depths The power required for pumping groundwater in this case is relatively low as the water table is only 2 m below the ground surface. Using bleed generates a small drawdown of the water table and thus increases the required pumping power. However, this additional lift is not significant, approaching 2.5 meters at peak bleed flow, as shown in To verify the reliability of the measurements, For the first period, 94% of the points are within the 30% error, to only 77% for the second period. The RMSE is calculated to 1.96 kW in the first period, and 3.01 kW in the second period, a 50% increase. Notice that the error reduces as the load increases. This is expected as the relative measurement uncertainties become less significant at higher loads. It is important to stress that measurements during lower load periods have less significance on the overall energy analysis of the system. Therefore, one can have confidence on the validity of the measured data. Scatter plots between the load at the heat pumps evaporators and the load at the PHE ( By conservation of energy, the remaining 14% of the glycol load was presumably provided by the ambient air temperature, which was very high during the test as discussed in Section  The HSPF during the test, calculated with Eq. In this paper, the potential utilization of standing column well systems for cold climates was studied. Experimental data published by Beaudry et al. To validate the precision of the data, the energy balance between the groundwater loop and the glycol loop was evaluated at the PHE. The latter showed a 3% relative error on the cumulative thermal load, with 94% of measurements between 01/26 and 02/09 under the 30% relative error. A noticeable drift in the measurements on the groundwater loop was observed between 02/09 and 02/21, presumably due to deterioration of the probes. Fortunately, the presence of a PHE allowed the system to operate continuously over the 26-day heating cycle without interruptions. Results show that the SCW system was able to extract heat from the ground at rates between 120 W/m and 160 W/m while maintaining the leaving groundwater temperature above 0 °C during peak periods. This value is two times more than typical capacities of conventional vertical GHEs. The additional pumping power required when bleed was used was calculated at 0.3 W/m, an insignificant amount. These results should eliminate any doubt previously raised in the literature, including ones from Minea Bleeding generated approximately 120 m The heat pumps operated without faults during the test. However, the HSPF was altered due to high ambient temperatures inside the mobile laboratory, resulting in higher condensing temperatures. The interpolated COP at heating conditions according to ISO Standard 13256–1: 1998 (20 °C dry bulb) would be around 4.2, which is close to the heating COP of 4.3 reported by Trane in their product catalog for the same model. The findings in this study provide insight about the importance of various operating conditions and controls on the performance of SCW systems and demonstrate their real energy saving potential for dynamic heating conditions in cold climates.  The authors declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this paper. The authors would like to acknowledge the funding, support and equipment provided by the Office of Energy Research and Development (OERD) of Canada through the Energy Innovation Program (EIP), the Canada foundation for innovation, the Natural Sciences and Engineering Research Council of Canada (NSERC), FTE Drilling, Marmott Energies, Richelieu Hydrogeology, Bouthillette-Parizeau, Trane, Belimo, Mecanicaction and Eautec.