This study aims to determine the influence of mill type and pellet wood composition on particle size and shape of milled wood. The size and shape characteristics of pellets comminuted using power plant roller mills were compared with those obtained by using laboratory-scale roller- and hammer mills. A 2D dynamic imaging device was used for particle characterization. It was shown that mill type has a significant impact on particle size but an almost negligible effect on the shape of milled wood. Comminution in the pilot plant using a Loesche roller mill requires less energy than using a hammer mill, but generates a larger fraction of coarse particles. The laboratory-scale roller mill provides comparable results with the power plant roller mill with respect to particle size and shape.particle area (m particle projection area (m particle convex area (m aspect ratio particle width (m) convexity diameter (m) particle length (m) number of size classes perimeter of a particle projection (m) frequency particle distribution, based on volume (% mm histogram (% mm cumulative particle distribution, based on volume (% mm distances from the area center to the particle edges (m) circularity (sphericity) symmetry volume (m Martin minimum diameter (m) Feret maximum diameter (m) number of the size class with upper limit x Biomass firing is used for power generation and is considered as an important step in the reduction of greenhouse gas emissions. The anthropogenic CO The common method for preparing biomass for suspension firing is to pelletize lignocellulosic materials, and then pulverize the biomass pellets using coal roller mills In this study, the impacts of mill and feedstock type on particle size and shape were investigated. Wood pellets are comminuted using a laboratory-scale roller mill, a laboratory-scale hammer mill, and power plant roller mills. Particle size and shape of milled pellets were characterized using sieving and 2D dynamic imaging analysis. The objective of this study was to gain knowledge concerning the impact of mill type, fuel type, and pelletization method on both particle size and shape of milled biomass. Raw pellets, without additives or binding agents, were provided by the companies LatGran (Latvia) and Heatlets (Estonia). The pellets were produced in the process shown in The pellets were produced using ring die pellet machines in which a die ring runs around fixed rollers The pellets were transported to three power plants including Herningsværket (HEV), Avedøreværket (AVV) operated by DONG Energy A/S, and Amagerværket (AMV) operated by HOFOR A/S (formally Vattenfall). Secondary comminution was then carried out either in the hammer (HEV) or in the horizontal Loesche roller mills (AMV and AVV). Pulverized wood was sampled from the pipeline (running to the burners) through a side opening by using a vacuum cleaner or a rotorprobe. The pellets underwent additional milling in the laboratory-scale roller mill at TU Clausthal. The particle size and shape of the milled pellets were characterized by light microscopy, scanning electron microscopy (SEM), sieving and 2D dynamic imaging. Light microscopy of sawdust and disintegrated pellets was conducted using a Microscope Heating Stage 1750 (Leica Microsystems, Germany) in order to characterize the particle shape. SEM analysis of milled pellets was conducted using an Inspect microscope (FEI Company, USA) with a tungsten filament under high vacuum in order to obtain information on char structural properties. Prior to the analysis, milled pellet samples were coated with a thin layer of carbon (40 Prior to the particle size and shape analysis, biomass samples were divided into equal 100 A vibrating sieve shaker Retsch AS 200 (Retsch Technology, Germany) comprising seven sieves ranging from 0.25 to 4 The particle size and shape were measured using the CAMSIZER (Retsch Technology, Germany), designed for particles ranging from 0.03 to 30 The Martin minimal (x In the present study, particle shape is characterized by both sphericity (SPHT) and aspect ratio (AR). Sphericity is one of the most commonly used parameters to express the deviation of a two-dimensional particle image from a sphere and is defined as Convexity (Conv) is defined as the square root of the ratio of the real area of a particle projection area (A Particle symmetry (Symm) is defined as The results are presented as a cumulative particle size distribution, based on volume. The cumulative particle size distribution is described in EN ISO 9276-1:1998, and is defined as The particle size distributions obtained from sieving and 2D dynamic imaging were defined based on three sizes within the entire population: d10, d50, and d90. The d50 value is the median particle size within the population, with 50% of the population greater than this size, and 50% smaller than this size. Similarly, 10% of the population is smaller than the d10 size; while 90% of the population is smaller than the d90 size Mills of varying sizes were used in this study and are presented below in order from largest to smallest mill in terms of throughput. The horizontal LM 19.2 Feedstock is directed onto the center of the table and is thrown outward by rotation under the rollers and into a rising air flow at the periphery which is directed by means of a louvre ring that surrounds the grinding table and conveys the air flow to the classifier. Fine fuel particles pass with the air flow through an integral rotary classifier, whereas coarse fuel particles remain on the feed table In this study, Andritz 650–450 hammer mill (Andritz GmbH, Germany) was used. A hammer mill consists of hammers installed on a rotating disk which is enclosed within a liner The speed of the hammers produces kinetic energy that is dissipated on the material, leading to its disintegration. Feedstock is hammered until it is small enough to pass through the screen, and then is removed by shovels, augers, or a chain elevator A laboratory-scale roller mill at TU Clausthal was applied in this study, which is designed as a roller table mill with a single roller. A sketch The grinding table is circular and driven by an electrical motor. The conical grinding roller is placed over the grinding table and mounted at the lever system with a spring. The adjustable stop limits the lever's movement to avoid contact between the roller and the table. The feeding system, consisting of a funnel and shaft, is mounted opposite to the roller. The distance between the table bottom and the shaft outlet can be varied to control the feeding rate. The tube positioned behind the roller serves to discharge the lignocellulosic materials. The mill is equipped with transducers for adjusting the torque, the grinding force and the gap between the roller and the table bottom The material, comminuted in the power plant roller mills, was sampled from the mill exit tubes using a rotorprobe and a vacuum cleaner. The rotorprobe method is described in EN ISO 9931:1991. Samples were extracted using a sampling probe consisting of four nozzles; each nozzle extracts from an equally sized area of the pipeline to ensure uniform collection. A vacuum cleaner entrains pulverized material from a pipeline, which supplies fuel to the burners. A vacuum cleaner hose was placed perpendicular to the direction of flow. The principle of the vacuum cleaner sampling is shown in In hammer mills, air is drawn at the top of the mill to cool the mill components and draw the milled material through the screens into the outlet hopper. The air and fine fuel particles are drawn to the air exhaust via a bag filter. The remaining coarse material is collected at the bottom of the outlet hopper. Both coarse and fine fractions are discharged from the mill using screw feeders.  The 8 The 4 In this work, both sieving and 2D dynamic imaging were used. Therefore, it is instructive to compare the samples using both methods. Samples (DE 1658-4, DE 1663-16, VF 21 8 Sieving and 2D dynamic imaging produced very similar size distributions, as shown in The effect of sampling method on particle size and shape was investigated using samples VF 21 8 Disintegration of 8 The sphericity (mean SPHT of all samples Typically, the sphericity and the aspect ratios of the original sawdust, disintegrated pellets and comminuted pellets increase with particle size, indicating that particles become more spherical and less elongated as their size increases. However, the results from particles Bond In The primary cause for the particle size differences among samples milled in the roller mill are: pellet wood composition and differences in the classifiers of the mills. The comminution in the roller and hammer mills led to similar shaped-particles. The particles were rectangular (SPHT The impact of fuel mass flow rates in the pipelines, which supply the wood dust to the burners, was studied by examining powder flow rates of 4, 6, and 8 A kilogram of VF 21 8 The investigations showed only a small difference (less than 5%) in a particle size of the original wood powder (used to produce the pellets) and the powder obtained after disintegrating of the pellets. The results obtained from material derived from the power plant roller mills clearly demonstrated that most pellets were broken down to sizes from 0.75 to 0.1 The impact of different mill types on both particle size and shape was studied using the roller- and hammer mills. The results showed that mill type has the most significant influence on the size distribution of the pulverized wood. The analyzed hammer-milled samples contained a large fraction of fine particles compared to the roller-milled samples. The particle size was affected by sampling methods; the vacuum cleaner sampling was biased towards small particles. Further studies are required to determine the effect of sampling method on pulverized wood particle size and shape. The pellet samples from DONG Energy which contained a large percentage of softwood (90%) produced finer particles after milling than the AMV pellets which were made out of a mixture of 50% softwood and 50% hardwood. The shape of milled wood was only slightly influenced by the mill type. The results showed a small variation in sphericity, aspect ratio and convexity. The sphericity and aspect ratio for particle fractions of size The hammer and the roller mills require different energy inputs for conducting comminution. The input energy of the hammer mill was 29 Pellets, comminuted in a power plant roller mill, were compared with the pellets comminuted in the laboratory-scale roller mill at TU Clausthal. The particle size and shape of milled wood, after milling the pellets either in the laboratory-scale or in the power plant roller mill, were similar. Thus, the results from the laboratory-scale mill represented well by the pilot plant size roller mill. This comparison was made for one sample only. Further systematic studies are needed to establish a confident relationship between the laboratory-scale and power plant milling processes. An experimental study was carried out to investigate the milling characteristics of biomass pellets milled in Danish power plants. Several samples, comminuted in hammer- and roller mills, were analyzed to establish a relationship between mill type, pellet wood composition (softwood/hardwood) and the size and shape of milled wood. The particle size and shape characterization was conducted using sieving and 2D dynamic imaging. The mill type and pellet wood composition strongly affected particle size and to a lesser degree particle shape. The secondary comminution of pellets in the hammer and roller mills produced milled wood that contained particles from 0.75 to 0.1 Hammer mills were shown to require more energy than roller mills. The comminution in the roller mill generated more coarse particles ( The pellets comminution, in the power plant and laboratory-scale roller mills, resulted in very similar particle size distributions. The authors would like to acknowledge the financial support received from the  Supplementary data to this article can be found online at