The ability to carry out pyrolysis of entire wood chips and rods instead of small particles would be of great value for mobile pyrolysis units, because of the large possible savings in grinding costs (7–9% of total process costs). With this goal in mind, we designed and constructed a novel lab-scale ablative reactor for fast pyrolysis of entire wood chips and even wood rods, converting those directly into a high yield of bio-oil for the first time. The bio-oil yield from fast pyrolysis of wood chips (10×20mm) was as high as 60wt.%, similar to that from wood crumbles (2×2mm). Additionally, the yield and composition of bio-oil from ablative pyrolysis were in the same range as those obtained from a fluidized bed reactor using <1mm particles, with the small differences (slightly lower yield and HHV, and higher water content) attributed to the longer vapor residence times in the ablative reactor, which promote secondary reactions. We modeled the heat transfer characteristics of this semi-batch system, and comparison with experimental measurements confirmed that radiation from the hot components does not significantly decompose the wood prior to direct contact with the hot metallic surface in ablative pyrolysis. The findings of this work have the potential to lead to new developments for small-scale, mobile pyrolysis units for the disposal of forest residues.Lignocellulosic biomass is an abundant renewable energy resource. The use of biomass for energy leads to carbon neutral processes, and the chemicals and fuels derived from it have a tremendous potential to reduce the problems caused by our dependence on fossil fuels Fast pyrolysis has been extensively studied for different feedstocks, including agricultural, woody, and algal biomass The reactor is the key component of the mobile pyrolysis system. Reactors for fast pyrolysis of biomass include the bubbling fluidized bed reactor, circulating fluidized bed reactor, free-fall reactor, auger reactor, and ablative reactor. For most pyrolysis reactor configurations, the biomass feedstock needs to be ground into small particles of around 2 To date, only a few ablative pyrolysis reactors have been developed. The first pioneering experiments with ablative pyrolysis were reported by Diebold Thus, we herein designed and constructed a prototype lab-scale ablative reactor to convert entire wood chips and wood rods into high yield of bio-oil in a single step. The goal is to experimentally verify if high yields of bio-oil can be obtained from large particles via ablative pyrolysis. To the best of our knowledge, our work is the first to report bio-oil production from fast pyrolysis of entire wood chips and wood rods. The results from the ablative reactor were compared to those obtained using a lab-scale fluidized bed reactor. In addition, the effect of pre-heating in this semi-batch reactor prior to ablative pyrolysis of wood chips was evaluated using both modeling work and experimental measurements. As shown in The ablative pyrolysis reactor designed and constructed in the present work is shown in  During the pre-heating time, the wood chips on the bowl exchanged heat with the upper plate, the reactor wall, and the N Employing Newton’s law of cooling, The radiation heat that reaches the wood chips includes radiation components from the upper plate and reactor wall. Employing the Stefan-Boltzmann law, Details of the energy balance for each component and the selection and calculation of the parameters in Eqs. The feedstock used in this study was beetle-killed lodgepole pine ( The ablative pyrolysis reactor system described in Section For comparison purposes, fast pyrolysis of beetle-killed lodgepole pine samples was also carried out in a lab-scale continuous bubbling fluidized bed reactor (the most common reactor used for fast pyrolysis). The schematic diagram of the reactor is shown in The bio-oil samples were used for analysis as collected, since no solid char was observed. Prior to the analysis, all bio-oil samples were stored in a refrigerator. The moisture content of bio-oil was determined using a Karl Fischer titrator (V20, Mettler Toledo). The test method followed the ASTM GC/MS-FID (QP2010, Ultra, Shimadzu) was used to determine the chemical composition of bio-oil using methanol as solvent. The separation of different compounds was achieved by a SHRXI-5MS capillary column (30 The elemental composition of bio-oil and biochar were measured using an elemental analyzer (Series II 2400, PerkinElmer). The collected non-condensable gases were analyzed using GC/TCD-FID with a SUPELCO 60/80 Carboxen-1000 packed column (4.6 The ablative pyrolysis reactor we designed is a semi-batch reactor. Prior to heating up the system, wood chips are loaded on the wood chip bowl. Due to the radiation from the hot components, the temperature of the wood chips may increase as we pre-heat the upper plate and reactor wall to the operating temperature. However, biomass has been reported to slowly decompose at about 200  A short vapor residence time is necessary to achieve a high yield of liquid bio-oil in fast pyrolysis. Long vapor residence times promote secondary reactions of pyrolysis vapors, favoring gas and char production The use of vacuum in fast pyrolysis has been investigated by previous works and showed advantages of shortening vapor residence time and reducing occurrence and intensity of secondary reactions, thereby improving bio-oil yield Feedstock particle size is one of the important parameters affecting bio-oil yield in fast pyrolysis, and usually very small (1–2 The fluidized bed reactor is one of the most popular reactor configurations for fast pyrolysis of biomass due to its high bio-oil yield and easy scale-up The composition of the bio-oil and char from both processes were also analyzed and compared. The water content of bio-oil from the ablative pyrolysis reactor and fluidized bed reactor were 34% and 26%, respectively. This water came from both the original moisture in feedstocks and the products of dehydration reactions during the pyrolysis process In general, compared to fast pyrolysis of <1 A novel prototype lab-scale ablative fast pyrolysis reactor was designed and constructed in this study to convert entire wood chips and wood rods into bio-oil. Prior to ablative pyrolysis, the temperature profile of wood chips during the pre-heating time in this semi-batch reactor was evaluated and controlled to minimize the extent of slow pyrolysis. The results from our calculations were in good agreement with experimental measurements and verified that the extent of slow pyrolysis of wood chips during the pre-heating time was small in the ablative pyrolysis unit. The beetle-killed lodgepole pine wood samples with different particle sizes (i.e. 2 The authors would like to acknowledge the financial support from Supplementary data associated with this article can be found, in the online version, at 