A summary of a research program covering a period of two years on the performance of a TBM in a very complex and difficult geology is presented in this study. The formations in the study area varied from alluvium, sludge, mudstone, shale and limestone to quartzite with strengths from soft to very hard. The dykes frequently intruded the sedimentary rocks resulting in different degrees of weathering and fracturing in the country rock causing tremendous delays in progress rate of the TBM. The disc cutters started cutting inefficiently in clayey medium strength ground with extreme water income, at where also excessive disc consumptions started due to insufficient friction between the disc cutters and very soft (sludgy) formation, and it was decided to replace all disc cutters with chisel tools (ripper, scraper). Before making this important decision that could affect totally the excavation efficiency and production rate, some theoretical estimations were performed using the Evans’ cutting theory after some modifications based on the previous experimental studies for relieved cutting mode and wear flat, front ridge and vee-bottom angles found in complex shapes of chisel tools to estimate deterministically the torque and thrust requirements of the TBM.
                  Field measurements of the torque and thrust requirements of the TBM equipped with the chisel tools validated the theoretical considerations and the deterministic model used for predicting the performance. Statistical analysis indicated that the model could be used reliably for performance prediction. This study also gave a unique opportunity to compare the performance of disc cutters and chisel tools used on the same TBM at variety of grounds and to analyze the effect of replacing disc cutters with chisel tools on the performance of the TBM. The field measurements indicated that the chisel tools were superior to the disc cutters in especially soft to medium strength rocks.The disc cutters and the chisel tools (sometimes named scrapers or rippers) are used together in the most cases in a TBM to cut hard and soft formations in mixed ground conditions. In blocky ground where boulders are frequently encountered, the discs are located a few centimetres in front of the chisel tools to cut the boulders and/or hard rocks ( Rock cutting mechanics is a new science, which started developing in 1960s for chisel tools with emerging new technologies in coal mining industry. This paper is a typical example for application of the theoretical rock cutting concepts developed for chisel tools used in a TBM operation for the case of replacing disc cutters with chisel tools to cut soft and medium strength rock formations in a complex geology. Description of Beykoz-Istanbul sewerage tunnel project including the geology of the alignment is presented first. After summarization of the overall performance of the TBM, theoretical and experimental studies are summarized for use in a deterministic model suggested for estimating the torque and thrust requirements of the TBM equipped with chisel tools in place of disc cutters. Evans’ cutting theory (1962) is modified based on the previous experimental studies to estimate the forces acting on a complex shape of chisel/ripper/scraper tool (cutting and normal forces), which are the basic inputs of the suggested deterministic model. Performance of the TBM is measured in situ to validate the model. Relative efficiency of chisel tools and disc cutters are compared for cutting a variety of grounds and the effect of replacing disc cutters with chisel tools on the performance of the TBM are discussed in details. The sewerage tunnel which has being excavated between Kavacik and Beykoz in the Northern part of the Istanbul Strait (Bosphorus) is a part of an environmental protection project concerning of renewing the inadequate sewerage network around Beykoz, collecting the waste water in a treatment plant and cleaning the polluted water for discharging to the Bosphorus. The ground conditions change from soft ground to hard formations and excessive water income was expected in some areas. Total length of the tunnel is 7253 A Robbins TBM having diameter of 3.175 The project area is situated in Beykoz in the Northern part of the Istanbul Strait. Paleozoic aged Gozdag, Dolayoba and Kartal Formations and alluvium are found in the area. The general geological cross section of the tunnel between shafts AT2 and S6 is given in Rock formations in the tunnel alignment consist of carbonated shale, sandstone, mudstone, clayey limestone, coral limestone, diabase dykes and frequently quartzite veins and some alluvial materials. Some water income was also encountered in the tunnel. Boulders were also encountered frequently during excavation of alluvium. The TBM started running on the 5th February 2007 and the advance rates of the TBM until the end of the 26th January 2009 between the shafts AT2 and S6 (between the chainages 0 and 4267 The machine passed 1200 Cutting mechanisms of disc cutters and chisel tools are different in some way although the both act as an indenter over the rock surface. Disc cutter, which is a type of roller cutters, breaks the rocks by rolling action. Chisel tool, which is a type of pick (drag) cutters, breaks the rocks by dragging action. Understanding these mechanisms would help to improve models for predicting performance of any type of mechanical excavator. Disc cutters are the main cutting tools of TBMs. The single disc cutter was the key innovation influencing the successful development of the modern TBMs. In 1956, the tunnel advance record of 35 Modern TBMs use 17, 18, 19 and 20 A mathematical model for the performance prediction and cutter life estimation of tunnel boring machines is given by    A number of the scientists have formulated mathematical models for chisel cutters to improve the design of the excavation machines and find the best configuration of the cutting tools for more efficient cutting processes. The pioneering work on coal cutting mechanics performed by  Experimental studies carried out by All theoretical works consider, as explained above, unrelieved cutting mode taking into account the cutters in isolated (unrelieved) mode without any interaction of grooves generated by another tool. However, in a rotary cutterhead of any mechanical miner, the cutting tools are placed in an array that there is always interaction between the groves generating a relieved cutting condition. There is always an optimum ratio of cutter spacing to depth of cut ( Optimum ( Disc cutters are undoubtedly inevitable cutting tools of TBMs. Wear flat is a very important factor affecting the cutting performance of chisel tools. A sharp chisel tool deteriorates quickly when cutting abrasive rocks and that is why they are usually manufactured with a wear flat as seen in   An extensive study on the effect of wear on performance of chisel tools was carried out by Most of the commercially available chisel tools have complex shapes with front ridge and vee-bottom angles ( All theoretical models give peak force values, since these models represent the forces acting at the moment that a major chip occurs just in front of the cutter; thereafter, the tool forces drop suddenly and increase steadily until another major chip occurs. It was reported in the past that the peak cutting force values estimated by using the Evans’ cutting theory were in good agreement with the measured values for some medium strength rocks. However, all theoretical works were developed with many simplifications and assumptions, and usually for simple chisel cutters and unrelieved cutting mode. Therefore, the theoretical models must be modified for different tool geometries and cutting conditions used in practice. Evans’ cutting model given in Eq. The difficult ground conditions encountered in the alignment of the Beykoz Tunnel forced the decision makers to replace the disc cutters with chisel tools. Before any replacement, it was necessary to predict the torque and thrust requirements of the TBM if chisel tools were used. Estimations of torque and thrust requirements of a TBM lead to prediction and optimization of the cutting performance of these machines ( One of the most important parameter in designing cutter layout is the spacing between the cutters where the interaction between the grooves is expected to be a maximum for a given depth of cut. Specific energy, as well as cutter consumption, is a minimum at the optimum ratio of cutter spacing to depth of cut ( The line spacing between the tools is estimated to be 2 for The length of the tunnel to be excavated with chisel tools was planned to be between the chainages 1772 and 2115 Torque of a TBM can be estimated by: A series of in situ tests were carried out as explained by The total power of the cutterhead is 400 Total thrust force requirement ( The most problematic point in Eq. The problem of estimating total thrust force requirement of a TBM, which is directly related to the normal force acting on the tools, can be solved by using some experimental coefficients and making some assumptions as in the following equation: In Eq. Total thrust force requirement ( Performance of the TBM equipped with chisel tools in different strength rock formations and comparison of the measured (in situ) and estimated TBM thrust and torque values are presented in The results presented in A statistical analysis by hypothesis testing with student’s The model suggested in this study to predict performance of a TBM does not take into account the fractures, joints and any other discontinuities usually found in the rock masses affecting seriously the cutting performance of any mechanical miner, since it is based on a cutting theory, although it is in the modified way. It is a known fact that the increasing frequency of the discontinuities increases instantaneous production rates, although it may reduce machine utilization time, and thus overall advance rates, due to time spent for support installation ( Although the findings of The parameters related to the friction ( Performance of the TBM equipped with disc cutters in different strength rock formations and the measured (in situ) TBM thrust and torque values and estimated TBM specific energy and instantaneous production rate values are presented in One of the most important factors determining the efficiency of an excavation process is the energy spent to excavate a unit volume of rock or specific energy. To estimate the specific energy, the cutting power of TBM is first calculated by using recorded torque values, and then, the cutting power is divided by the instantaneous production rate.  The results and comparison would be more detailed if the performance of chisel tools and disc cutters could be measured for the same type of rock. The decision makers of the contractor company always gave the decision to replace the tools whenever the operational conditions required, since it was a time consuming and performance reducing job. Therefore, it was impossible to replace the tools for the same type of rock. It should be concluded that the disc cutters are unavoidable tools for cutting especially hard and abrasive rocks, since they have high thrust and wearing life capacity. However, it may be better to use chisel/ripper tools in relatively softer rocks in order to reduce torque and thrust requirement of the TBMs resulting in higher instantaneous production rates. The most important disadvantage of chisel tools is their limited durability and wearing life in relatively harder rocks. The deterministic methodology developed in this study can be used for making decision on when to use chisel tools. Disc cutters are the main cutting tools of TBMs. However, chisel (ripper, scraper) tools are also used together with disc cutters in mixed faces or alone in soft to medium strength rock formations. Theoretical rock cutting concepts are the primary tools used in designing any mechanical miners. Rock cutting theories developed for chisel tools are only for simple shaped cutters and unrelieved cutting mode. Chisel tools used in practice have usually complex shapes, with a wear flat, front ridge and vee-bottom angles. Some theoretical estimations were performed using the Evans’ cutting theory after some modifications based on the previous experimental studies for relieved cutting mode and wear flat, front ridge and vee-bottom angles found in complex shapes of chisel tools to estimate deterministically the torque and thrust requirements of the TBM. Field measurements of the torque and thrust requirements of the TBM equipped with the chisel tools validated the theoretical considerations and the deterministic model used for predicting the performance. Statistical analysis indicated that the model could be used reliably for performance prediction. This study also gave a unique opportunity to compare the performance of disc cutters and chisel tools used on the same TBM at variety of grounds and to analyze the effect of replacing disc cutters with chisel tools on the performance of the TBM. The field measurements indicated that the chisel tools were 3–4 times superior to the disc cutters in especially soft to medium strength rocks. It is inevitable to use chisel tools in soft rock formations, since disc cutters do not turn freely in soft formations due to insufficient friction between the disc cutter and the rock resulting in high cutter consumption. The authors are grateful to the continuous support of ISKI (Istanbul Water and Sewerage Authority) and Zafer Guclucan, project director, Yasar Eren and Firat Eren from NTF Construction Company without their support this work could be impossible to be realized.