Steel has been the dominant construction material in passenger and commercial vehicles for decades. Recently, the position of steel in vehicle construction has been challenged by low-density materials such as aluminum, plastics, and magnesium in either body-in-white as well as chassis. This challenge motivated the steel industry to develop new steel grades that can compete with low-density materials in the race for lighter, safer, better performing, and cost-efficient body structures. In recent passenger cars a broad variety of high-strength steel grades has been introduced at the expense of mild steel grades. Often the share of mild steel is now below 50% of the total body weight and, in more advanced vehicles, even below 30%. Accordingly, the share of high-strength steel has significantly increased. The focus in recent years has been much on multiphase steels (DP, CP, TRIP), which typically accounts for around 10-20% of the body weight in current vehicles. Press-hardening steel has become very popular and is found in many of the current car models in areas where a combination of good formability and highest strength is required. In commercial vehicles, high-strength, hot-rolled steel has been widely used in frame and chassis parts.
               The automotive processing chain consists of forming, assembling, and painting. Each process demands specific properties and characteristics from the material. However, the optimum material characteristic for one process may not be necessarily suitable for another. Therefore, compromises have to be made, and these are for a considerable part based on the alloy design and the microstructure of the material. A feasible methodology in this sense is a reverse approach starting from detailed knowledge of the manufacturing process and translating it back into the most suitable metallurgical and microstructural design of steel.
               Modifying steels toward better manufacturing performance typically involves innovative alloying and metallurgical processing concepts. Niobium and molybdenum are two of the most powerful alloying elements in helping to adapt microstructures and properties with regard to downstream manufacturing processes. The present contribution will highlight several examples of how a reverse metallurgical engineering approach can be successfully applied in optimizing the efficiency of subsequent manufacturing processes for passenger as well as commercial vehicles, thereby contributing to an improved sustainability over the entire life cycle.No other industrial sector has pursued weight reduction as vigorously as the automotive industry. This has been motivated by the need to reduce fuel consumption and emissions as well as the requirement to improve crash safety, and these continue to be major technical targets. The total vehicle weight has an important impact in this respect as indicated in Much attention has been paid to the economic advantages that high-strength low-alloy steels have to offer. These advantages include lower structural weight, better economies during construction and transportation as a result of lower cost in handling lighter sections, fewer worker hours of welding, and lower electrode consumption as a result of reduced gauges. However, light weighting is not only a question of the strength level of the steel in question: The steel selection is determined or limited by the ease of forming, welding, and other fabrication procedures. Service conditions require that the candidate steel should possess adequate durability under loading, impact resistance at the lowest temperatures anticipated in service, stiffness, and corrosion resistance. Besides the pure technical benefits coming from material upgrading, the related cost is always a key concern severely influencing decision making in the automotive industry. This explains why HSS remains the preferred material for vehicle construction because its extensive use not only reduces the vehicle weight and increases the technical performance, but it also lowers the total fabrication cost. The trend away from traditional mild steel (defined as having a yield strength of max. 200 The efficiency of down gauging steel by increasing its strength depends to a significant degree on the part geometry as well as the acting load collective. In commercial vehicle construction HSS has been established for a relatively long time, especially in the frame structure of trucks and trailers. The use of hot rolled steel with yield strength ranging from 235-355 One of the major advantages of using HSS in vehicle manufacturing is that existing manufacturing technology and equipment can be further used to a large degree. This is in sharp contrast to alternative materials that usually require a completely new manufacturing approach and cause significant capital investments into novel manufacturing equipment. Nevertheless, also for HSS some specific upgrades have to be made and specific processing knowledge has to be gained. Typically a larger press force is required due to the higher strength, tooling materials have to be upgraded, and welding procedures have to be adapted. More recently the so-called hot-stamping technology has been widely introduced to the production of car body panels. This technology provides a solution to the classic conflict of high strength and good formability. With hot-stamping technology it became possible to produce steel components of the highest strength level (i.e., from 1500 Detailed understanding of the manufacturing process in vehicle making allows optimizing steel grades for better performance. It has to be noted that these improvements are beyond the minimum-specified properties, and often they concern even nonspecified properties. Forthcoming improvements will increase the efficiency along the manufacturing chain resulting in less scrap as well as avoiding downtime and reworking efforts. The metallurgical optimization typically involves microstructural fine- tuning that can be achieved by modifying the chemical composition and/or the thermomechanical processing in the steel mill. In this respect two specific alloying elements have proven to be particularly beneficial: niobium and molybdenum. These elements are added to steel in very small amounts, typically up to 1 kilogram of Nb (0.1 Chassis and frame components are typically subjected to high static and dynamic loads. Often such components involve intensive welding operations. Hence, a low carbon equivalent of such steel is mandatory for good weldability. Accordingly, high-strength low alloy (HSLA) steel is usually the preferred material. Specifications of HSLA steels typically limit the maximum carbon content to 0.1%. HSLA steel for automotive applications is currently applied with yield strength of up to 700 With respect to avoiding or minimizing edge damage and related failure upon peripheral stretching, a ferritic or bainitic single-phase microstructure is preferable. In metallurgical terms the specific task is to adjust alloy composition and processing in the rolling mill to obtain the desired microstructure and mechanical properties. Strengthening in a polygonal ferritic microstructure has to be achieved by grain refinement and precipitation hardening. Both methods have a potential of increasing the yield strength by up to 300 The so-called nano Hi-Ten steel is a specific example for reverse metallurgical engineering with the target of designing steel that has very high strength and simultaneously an extremely high hole expansion ratio [ Austenite pancaking by Nb microalloying in combination with thermomechanical rolling (TMCP). Fast cooling after the last rolling pass into the range of ferrite formation providing additional grain refinement supported by the delay of austenite-to-ferrite transformation caused by solute Nb, Ti, and Mo. Quasi-isothermal holding in the ferrite range to obtain complete transformation and precipitation of the microalloying elements Ti and Nb. An alloy concept based only on Ti addition does not provide sufficient strength because TiC precipitates coarsen during prolonged holding time at high temperature as is the case during coiling. Combined alloying of Ti, Mo, and Nb significantly enhances the strength by grain refinement and precipitate size control even after extended holding at high temperature. Steel produced with an optimized combination of alloy and process was found to have a hole expansion ratio of more than 150% and total elongation of around 20%. However, the processing window to reach such properties is narrow and the producible sheet gauge is limited in thickness. For the bulk of applications, being less demanding in terms of hole expansion ratio, it would be preferable to have a more robust process and metallurgical concept. A robust process design would lead to a low scattering of mechanical properties, which is beneficial with regard to avoiding springback after forming; springback can be the cause of expensive rework. The scattering of mechanical properties is related in a major way to temperature control on the runout table after rolling is finished. Temperature variations along the coil and also across the strip commonly occur. Hence a robust alloy design is needed that is insensitive to such temperature variations on the runout table. An alloy design employing competing metallurgical strengthening mechanisms is a suitable solution ( Production of grade S700MC is possible by some modifications of the alloy concept still using the same strength-balancing strategy. This was achieved by increasing the carbon and manganese content as well as by adding molybdenum. Also this concept shows stable properties over coiling temperature, varying in the range of 580-500 Dual-phase (DP) steels consist of a ferrite-martensite microstructure and have been developed to combine very high strength with increased elongation. Thus, DP steel allows forming rather complex part geometries that are not possible to manufacture with conventional HSLA steel of the same strength level. The volume fraction of hard martensite islands determines the strength of DP steel, whereas the ductile ferrite matrix provides good formability. The characteristic of as-delivered DP steel is a relatively low-yield strength and high initial work hardening resulting in a high Although DP steel allows forming of complex shapes, practical experience repeatedly reveals unexpected failure even when manufacturing quite simple geometries [ Dislocation pileup causing micro damage under the condition of localized straining cannot be avoided in DP steel. Nevertheless measures can be taken to reduce the criticality of this phenomenon. Most important in this respect is refining the microstructure, that is, reducing the size of the ferrite and martensite grains. Consequently the size of initial damage is reduced due to the smaller phase boundary area raising the critical stress for crack propagation to a higher level. Furthermore, it is important to homogenize the microstructure, that is, to avoid the formation of martensite clusters as these provide an easy path for crack propagation. Both microstructural characteristics, a refined grain size as well as homogeneous phase distribution, can be achieved by Nb microalloying in combination with appropriate hot-rolling conditions. Application of this concept leads to a refined ferritic-pearlitic microstructure of the hot-rolled strip. The final cold-rolled annealed DP microstructure is in a significant way determined by the prior hot-strip grain size although some coarsening usually occurs during annealing [ The effectiveness of microstructural refinement by Nb microalloying is demonstrated in Besides better bendability and hole expansion behavior, microstructural refinement also results in an increase of yield and tensile strength [ Most of the currently produced standard DP steels use over-peritectic alloy designs, that is, the carbon content is higher than 0.14 However, producing DP steel of increased strength level such as DP780 or DP980 with reduced carbon content is challenging, particularly when using a hot-dip galvanizing process. The enrichment of austenite with carbon is relatively low in such an alloy concept and, hence, the risk of partial bainite formation during the holding period at around zinc bath temperature is increased ( The addition of molybdenum to low-carbon DP steel most efficiently delays the formation of bainite ( Reducing the overall carbon content in DP steel to below 0.1 Press-hardening steel, often also designated as “hot-stamping” steel, has seen a remarkably increasing market in automotive body construction over the recent years. For the majority of applications steel with a tensile strength of 1500 Good formability at low stamping force. Low wear of forming tools. Reduced elastic springback resulting in high shape accuracy. Extensive use of press-hardening steel—carmakers consider 45% of the total structural weight to be an upper limit—could bring the weight of a steel body structure to the same low level as would be achieved with a full aluminum body. The alloy concept of 22MnB5 was originally designed for providing a cost-efficient abrasion-resistant steel but was not used specifically for automotive applications. Hot-stamping technology was first applied in the 1980s using grade 22MnB5 for producing automotive safety components such as door anti-intrusion beams and bumper beams with a tensile strength level of 1500 Press hardening technology as currently being practiced in the majority of applications produces full hard (i.e., nontempered, martensitic microstructure). This microstructure provides the highest possible strength for a given carbon content and simultaneously the lowest elongation. Although this low elongation is not relevant for the forming process some carmakers have been demanding an increased minimum elongation in the press-hardened component. This was perceived to be beneficial with regard to energy dissipation during a crash impact. An increased elongation can be achieved by tempering the press-hardened component (known as “tailored tempering”) or by adjusting a small fraction of softer phases such as ferrite, bainite, or austenite in the martensitic matrix (known as “tailored quenching”). However, achieving a significant increase in elongation by either approach inevitably results in a severe loss of strength. Yet, it is questionable whether elongation, being a property derived from a low-speed uniaxial tensile test, is really relevant with regard to the cracking behavior under a high-speed impact load. In this context toughness is a much more appropriate material property. Test procedures measuring toughness reveal two relevant characteristics: the upper shelf energy (USE) and the ductile-to-brittle transition temperature (DBTT). USE indicates the potential of the microstructure to arrest a propagating crack and should be as high as possible. In full hard martensitic steel improvements to toughness can be made by minimizing the effects that lead to embrittlement. This particularly addresses the occupation of grain boundaries by impurities or precipitates as well as hydrogen embrittlement. With regard to the actual performance of a press-hardened component, specific details of the microstructure are important. USE in martensitic steel achieved under ductile failure mode is naturally lower than in softer ferritic or bainitic steels. However, it has been established over decades that microstructural refinement is always beneficial to toughness in any type of steel. More precisely, microstructural refinement increases the USE and simultaneously lowers DBTT. Components made from press-hardening steel are typically located in areas where high-impact loads occur during a crash, such as A-pillar, B-pillar, bumper beam, door anti-intrusion beam, and the like. The primary requirement is that these components minimize intrusion and redistribute the crash load into areas where the kinetic energy can be dissipated by plastic deformation without threatening vehicle occupants. Such a passive safety concept demands that press-hardening steel should have the following general features: Sufficient toughness to avoid cracking or even rupture during crash over the entire operating temperature range. Ability to allow certain amount of localized deformation (bendability) during crash in order to absorb crash energy. High resistance to hydrogen-induced cracking. These specific characteristics were not considered in the initial alloy design of 22MnB5. Therefore it has to be investigated how these specific properties can be optimized by metallurgical modification and particularly how toughness of the present alloying concept can be improved. The target of the improvement is primarily to decrease DBTT to lower temperature for the safe crash performance in cold climate regions and to increase the USE as schematically shown in Bending is a form of highly localized deformation providing micro-cracks, which can grow into macroscopic fracture if the prevailing stress level is above a critical value. Due to the very high-yield strength of martensitic steel the stress level can indeed attain such high values. Fracture mechanics theory describes the relationship between critical stress level and the initial crack size to be inversely proportional (similar to the Hall-Petch relationship). Assuming that the initial defect size is related to the microstructural scale (“effective grain size”), microstructural refinement is beneficial for raising crack propagation stress and lowering DBTT according to Equations Accordingly, the means of optimizing press-hardening steel for obtaining better crash relevant performance are refining the relevant effective grain size and reducing the chance of micro-crack initiation. Car components subjected to crash impact often experience sharp bending or buckling deformation. Accordingly, despite the thin material gauge the outer fiber in the bending zone is subjected to highly localized deformation and simultaneously very high tensile stress. A specific three-point bending test has been designed to evaluate the maximum bending angle of the material without obvious cracking as specified by VDA238-100. European OEMs require press-hardening steel to achieve a minimum bending angle that is typically in the order of 60 degrees. A low critical bending angle indicates that the steel easily forms micro-cracks, which readily propagate. A high bending angle indicates that either crack initiation is retarded and/or the critical stress level for crack propagation is enhanced. Which of the two phenomena is more relevant can be derived from a detailed analysis of the force-displacement curve as well as from acoustic emission measurements made during the bending test. To improve the bending performance, tempering treatment after press hardening was sometimes considered as a possible solution. Considerable research work on tempering press-hardened components revealed that both toughness and bending angle could be improved to some extent. For instance, by tempering quenched 22MnB5 at 500 Considering the fracture mechanisms in martensitic steels with regard to crack initiation and propagation three strategies have been worked out to optimize conventional alloy design based on 22MnB5: Grain refinement by Nb microalloying. Removal of B and Ti to avoid hard TiN particles and complex grain boundary precipitates. Strengthening austenite grain boundary by Mo addition to impede intergranular fracture. Alloying concepts related to these strategies have been explained in detail in [ The relationship between the microstructural features of martensite and its failure behavior have been extensively researched and comprehensively summarized by Morris et al. [ Considering the entire processing sequence of press-hardening steel, the following steps have an influence on the PAGS: Reheating of the slab—austenite grain growth. Roughing rolling in the hot strip mill—austenite grain homogenization and moderate refinement. Finish hot rolling—austenite grain refinement depending on rolling schedule (current practice gives little refinement). Annealing after cold rolling—recrystallization and ferrite grain growth (severity increases with temperature and duration). Reheating before hot stamping induces austenite grain coarsening (severity increases with temperature and duration). In the aforementioned process, the step that finishes hot rolling is the one that allows the largest grain size reduction provided the rolling conditions are adequate. In all subsequent steps grain coarsening can only be obstructed, but further grain refinement can actually not be achieved. Current hot rolling practice in the production of press-hardening steel is typically applying an uncontrolled rolling schedule, which focuses on high productivity but not on austenite conditioning, resulting in grain refinement. The means of inducing grain refinement during finish rolling are well established in the production of HSLA steels and require a reduced finish entry temperature in combination with Nb microalloying that effectively prevents recrystallization of austenite [ Nb precipitates formed during hot rolling as well as in situ formed precipitates during the reheating process before hot stamping are stable and have the capability of pinning the austenite grain boundary preventing grain coarsening. The reheating temperature of 22MnB5 for the press hardening process is usually 950 By increasing the Nb content in press-hardening steel the grain size of prior austenite decreases (  Besides the PAGS being an average value, uniformity of the austenite grain size becomes better by Nb addition ( Generally it was observed that the prior austenite grain size in final components made from standard press-hardening steel (22MnB5) is often in the range of ASTM 5-6. By niobium microalloying the grain size refines to typically ASTM 7-9 under conventional hot rolling conditions, that is, uncontrolled rolling. When applying a TMCP rolling schedule PAGS of ASTM 10 or finer have been shown feasible in recent trials producing press-hardened components of an Nb microalloyed variant of 22MnB5. The positive effect of Nb microalloying and the accompanying PAGS refinement on the critical bending angle could be demonstrated for numerous press-hardening steel grades. Several improvement programs were performed at different steel producers on the 1500 Weight reduction delivers an important contribution with regard to reducing the fuel consumption and thus the CO Considering available materials for vehicle construction, steel has by far the lowest primary production CO The production of steel is highly efficient, approaching the thermodynamic minimum energy consumption in state-of-the-art mills. Thus, further improvements in this respect will have marginal impact on the primary production CO Optimized HSSs reveal a larger processing window and higher robustness during production and manufacturing. This results in a more efficient use of the material with simultaneously lower scrap rates, thus reducing CO