The use of microwave radiation as an energy source in mineral processing and extractive metallurgy has demonstrated both the instantaneous generation of heat by microwaves in a number of compounds and minerals, and the achievement of high temperatures for an efficient time period enable the heating and reduction of metallic oxides and ores. In the present study, the carbothermic reduction of copper oxide (CuO) and one malachite [Cu2CO3(OH)2] concentrate were investigated. To explore feasibility, the dielectric constants [real (ε′) and imaginary (ε″) permittivities] of both materials were measured at the frequencies of 2.45GHz and 912MHz, in the temperature range from 25 to 800°C using the cavity perturbation method. The high ε″ values (between 1.9 and 36.3) observed in the case of CuO suggest strong microwave absorption, while the malachite concentrate values (between 0.1 and 0.4) indicate limited microwave absorption. Experiments showed the microwave heating rate of CuO was considerably higher than that of the malachite concentrate.
                  The carbothermic reduction of CuO oxide was examined, and the effect of power supply, carbon source, carbon content and granularity of the reducing agent on the reduction rate was studied in detail. Using an 800W power supply, and with addition of lignite as a reducing agent (with carbon content two times stoichiometric), almost complete reduction of 10g of CuO was achieved in 4min.
                  The carbothermic reduction of one malachite concentrate was attempted with the same experimental procedure, but the reaction was not possible using only lignite as the reducing agent, since the poor microwave absorption of malachite concentrate–lignite mixture produced a maximum temperature of 200°C. This difficulty was overcome by the addition of 5% by weight of graphite powder to the mixture. The rapid heating of the malachite concentrate–lignite–graphite mixture (800°C after 2min) resulted in sequential malachite calcination and CuO reduction reactions. After 8min at a power supply of 800W, the reduction degree of CuO produced by the calcination of malachite was about 90%.During the last two decades, several researchers explored microwave applications in the sector of extractive metallurgy. The carbothermic reduction of NiO, ZnO and Fe The aim of the present work was to study the carbothermic reduction of pure copper(II) oxide and a malachite concentrate under the effect of microwaves. Initially, the dielectric properties of CuO and malachite concentrate were determined in order to understand their heating behavior under microwave radiation, and then a detailed study on their reduction with different carbon reducing agents was carried out. Copper oxide and carbonate ores represent 10% of the total world copper reserves. Today, copper recovery from oxide and carbonate ores is almost exclusively achieved through hydrometallurgical processing (heap and dump leaching with sulfuric acid) ( The generally accepted mechanism of CuO carbothermic reduction in the temperature range 800–1000 The carbon combustion The above analysis indicates that the formation of CO through the Boudouard reaction is the critical requirement for the achievement of CuO carbothermic reduction, while its concentration in the system determines the kinetics (the rate) of the reduction. Microwave radiation generates heat instantaneously inside absorptive materials. This heat spreads through the volume via conduction ( In non-magnetic media, microwave heating at 2.45 The average power ( Eqs. The microwave heating and reduction of CuO oxide and malachite concentrate were done using a Ceralink ThermWave 1.3 microwave furnace ( The CuO oxide powder used in the experiments was supplied by Merck Company. The powder has a 99% purity and particle size diameter smaller than 50 The chemical analysis of the malachite copper concentrate was determined by XRF (Spectro – Xepos) and the results are presented in The Differential Thermal analysis (DTA) of CuO and the malachite concentrate was performed using a TG Labys–DS-C system in the temperature range of 25–1300 In The endothermic peak at 1161 The DTA curve of the malachite concentrate is presented in The particle size distribution of malachite concentrate and lignite was measured by a Malvern Mastersizer laser particle analyzer. Cumulative particle size data showed that the 90% of the malachite concentrate particles have diameter smaller than 100 Three reducing agents were used in the experiments: graphite, coke (81.71% The measurements of the real and imaginary permittivities of CuO and of the malachite concentrate were done using the cavity perturbation technique ( The degree of copper oxide reduction was determined from the metallic copper content in the residue of each experiment. Two different techniques were used for the determination of metallic copper in the reduced samples. In the case of CuO reduction, the analytical method used to determinate the amount of metallic copper was based on thermogravimetry that has been successfully applied in the case of Cu/CuO mixture ( In the case of the malachite concentrate, the metallic copper content of the reduced specimens was determined using the XRD Method of Known Additions. The method is based on adding a known concentration of the component to be determined in the mixture ( The change in the dielectric constant values ( The real ( The imaginary permittivity of malachite concentrate ( The heating response of materials to microwave radiation expressed as a temperature/time diagram can be an empirical and quantitative way to determine their microwave absorption efficiency. In The thermal behavior of the reducing agents used in this study is shown in The particle size of the reducing agents seems to play an essential role in their heating characteristics. The heating behavior (under microwave radiation) of three graphite samples of different particle size (90–110 The effect of the four factors; type of reducing agent, amount of reducing agent in the sample, granulometry of the reducing agent and input power, on the reduction degree of CuO were studied. The effect of the type of carbon compound on the CuO reduction rate is shown in  In The effect of input power on the CuO reduction rate is shown in Microstructural examination of some samples at early reduction stages (120 The study of the thermal behavior of the malachite concentrate under microwave radiation showed that the temperature of the sample cannot exceed 180 It was therefore necessary to add an adequate quantity of a high permittivity reducing agent to the concentrate in order to achieve satisfactory heating rates and temperatures. In this respect, the effect of the addition of graphite on the heating behavior of malachite concentrate was studied under 800 In  The thermal behavior and reduction of pure copper(II) oxide and one malachite concentrate under microwave radiation was studied. The main conclusions drawn from this study are the following: The values of the imaginary permittivity Graphite proved an excellent microwave absorber, while lignite and coke present relatively low microwave absorption. However, the realization of the Boudouard reaction, which is an essential step for the progress of copper oxide reduction, is possible for all CuO/reducing agent (lignite, coke, graphite) mixtures as the high value of CuO Granulometry is a critical factor for microwave absorption. An increase in the particle size diameter of graphite powder results in the increase of the samples heating rate due to more efficient microwave absorption. The type of carbon source, the excess of carbon added in the sample and the input microwave power affect the heating behavior and the reduction degree of CuO. Lignite is the most efficient reducing agent and an amount two times of the stoichiometrical is required to achieve a satisfactory reduction. An increase of 23% of the input power (from 650 to 800 A 90% reduction degree of malachite concentrate to metallic copper can be achieved after 440