This paper describes studies of preparation, activation and physical characterization of a Chilean zeolite (Ch-zeolite) employed as adsorbent for manganese ions from aqueous solutions. The zeolite sample, composed mainly of clinoptilolite and mordenite, had a specific surface area of 118m2
                     g−1 (N2 adsorption), the particles were negatively charged in a wide pH range and presented a cation-exchange capacity of 1.09meq 
                        
                           
                              
                                 NH
                              
                              
                                 4
                              
                              
                                 +
                              
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 g
                              
                              
                                 -
                                 1
                              
                           
                        
                     . The medium pH influenced significantly the Mn2+ ions adsorption capacity and best results were obtained at pH 6–6.8. The adsorption onto the activated zeolite followed the pseudo-second-order kinetic model and activation of the Ch-zeolite with NaOH resulted in the highest reaction rate. The equilibrium data showed excellent correlation with the Langmuir isotherm model. Ch-zeolite modification by treating it with NaCl (0.77meqMn2+
                     g−1), NaOH (0.76meqMn2+
                     g−1), Na2CO3 (0.72meqMn2+
                     g−1) and NH4Cl (0.67meqMn2+
                     g−1) increased its uptake ability when compared with the natural Ch-zeolite (0.26meqMn2+
                     g−1). These data contribute to the understanding of mechanisms involved in zeolite activation and provide some practical clues to improve the adsorption efficiency (uptake capacity and kinetics) of manganese ions.Manganese is usually present in groundwater as a divalent ion (Mn Zeolite is a natural porous mineral in which the partial substitution of Si Summaries of some reported studies of manganese ions adsorption for different materials are presented in Natural zeolites have relatively low ion-exchange capacities, and are commonly treated (activated) by chemical or physical methods before use ( The aim of this work was to study the comparative adsorption of manganese ions onto a natural and activated Chilean zeolite (Ch-zeolite) whereby the main parameters were the type of activation, kinetic parameters and adsorption isotherms. This work is part of a series of adsorption studies in a well characterized zeolitic adsorbent ( Granulated Ch-zeolite from the Minera Formas Synthetic ammonia solutions were prepared with ammonium chloride NH HNO Solutions of 1 Manganese ion concentration was determined using atomic absorption (SpectrAA 110, Varian The particle size distribution of the Ch-zeolite was measured using laser diffraction equipment (CILAS The mineralogical composition of the natural Ch-zeolite was determined by X-ray diffraction (XRD) equipment (Siemens, Bruker-AXS D5000) equipped with Cu Kα radiation. The chemical composition of Ch-zeolites samples was studied by X-ray fluorescence (XRF) (Shimadzu, XRF – 1800) and SEM photomicrographs of the external surface of zeolite were taken using a Jeol (JSM-6060) microscope. Zeta potential measurements of zeolites as a function of medium pH were determined in Zeta Plus Zeolite activation was carried out by mixing zeolite and 1 The cation-exchange capacity of natural zeolite was determined by chemical modification (activation) with NaCl. A known quantity of the zeolite (5 Batch ion-exchange experiments were carried out in glass flasks (0.1 The adsorption studies of Mn The effect of medium pH in Mn The Mn The kinetics of Mn The Lagergren pseudo-first-order kinetic model for the adsorption of liquid/solid system is based on solid uptake capacity. This model assumes that the rate of uptake with time is directly proportional to the difference in the saturation concentration and the amount (cumulative) of solute uptake with time. The general equation is expressed as: The pseudo-second-order kinetic model is based on the amount of adsorbate on the adsorbent. If the rate of adsorption is a second-order mechanism, the pseudo-second-order chemisorption kinetics rate equation is expressed as: Metal ions are transported from aqueous phase to the surface of the adsorbent and subsequently they can diffuse into the interior of the particles if they are porous. The intra-particle diffusion is governed by Eq. When the transport of the adsorbate from the liquid phase up to the solid phase boundary plays the most significant role in adsorption, the liquid film diffusion model, Eq. The determination of the adsorption capacity at various equilibrium concentrations ( Langmuir and Freundlich data fitting were done by linearization of Eqs. Langmuir parameters  Results show that activation by treatment with NaOH and Na The specific surface area (BET model) was found to be 118 The mean values obtained for zeta potential of activated and natural Ch-zeolite, as well as their respective polynomial curves of third-order polynomial used for zeta potential data fitting ( Results obtained show that zeolite surface groups are mainly negative in the pH range studied and that the alkaline ion uptake does not interfere much in the zeta potential measurements, confirming that the adsorption mechanism is not electrostatic (charge neutralization) but a result of an ion-exchange reaction. The cation-exchange capacity for the Ch-zeolite, obtained through activation of the natural sample with NaCl, was 19.6 This activation process of the Ch-zeolite clearly increases the ammonium uptake capacity by about 59%. The equivalent-based capacity was calculated according to the equivalent number of ammonium cations exchanged (18 The pH of the aqueous solution is an important controlling parameter in the adsorption processes ( This The increase in Mn Four adsorption models were applied to evaluate the experimental data and results are shown in The correlation coefficients for the pseudo-second-order kinetic model were greater than 0.99 for all activated Ch-zeolite and the theoretical In aqueous solutions, zeolite pore surfaces are hydrated, allowing the formation of water layers (films) onto pores walls yielding “micropores”. Thus, the intra-particle diffusion such as liquid film diffusion may play an important role in the adsorption mechanism ( The kinetic data for the Mn  The values of the constants in the models and correlation coefficients obtained are summarized in  Increase in Mn Increasing Mn The essential characteristics of Langmuir isotherm can be described by a dimensionless constant called equilibrium parameter, Under similar conditions, the adsorption capacity slightly decreases in the following manner: activated zeolite with NaCl Results shows that the natural Ch-zeolite had a high specific surface area (118 The authors would like to thank Minera Formas by supplying the zeolite sample. The authors also thank all colleagues for the friendly atmosphere at the LTM – Universidade Federal do Rio Grande do Sul and to all Institutions supporting research in Brazil (CNPq, Finep and UFRGS).