This book reflects a significant effort to present most of the topics traditionally covered in Physical Chemistry textbooks as well as fast developing subjects (biophysics, supramolecular machines) in a novel and unconventional manner. Thus, the book constitutes an alternative approach to Physical Chemistry not only with respect to its content but, more importantly, with respect to the method of presentation and structure of its material. The traditional sequence of introductory courses in Physical Chemistry, which involves the coverage of classical thermodynamics first, followed by that of classical and quantum mechanical statistical thermodynamics, is now reversed and the postulates of quantum mechanics are introduced right from the beginning (noticeably, the very first chapter of the book is devoted to wave-particle duality). The authors choose to treat Physical Chemistry subjects with emphasis on the microscopic origin of the macroscopic properties of the matter. Modelling the behaviour of atoms and molecules as well as their interactions by means of quantum and classical mechanics leads to the prediction/interpretation of the macroscopic behaviour of systems of increasing complexity. The principles of Physical Chemistry thus derived are checked and applied to experimental facts throughout the text. The first third of the book (Chapters 1–10) is, in my opinion, the best part of it and deals with quantum mechanics basics, atomic properties, the chemical bond and intermolecular forces. It introduces all basic types of spectroscopy in connection with predictions of atomic and molecular behaviour. The underlying mathematics is rigorous but excellently presented, in a clear and step-by-step manner (this is a general feature of the mathematical content of the entire book). The chapters on atomic and molecular orbitals are very comprehensive and contain sufficient drawings, while emphasis is given in π-electron systems and the application of the Hückel molecular orbital method to a number of systems. Also, the chapter on light absorption and emission is full of useful examples. The second part of the book (Chapters 11–21) deals with the more traditional aspects of Physical Chemistry such as equilibrium thermodynamics, chemical and phase equilibrium and chemical kinetics. Again, emphasis is put on the microscopic models describing the macroscopic properties of matter, with the help of quantum and classical statistical thermodynamics. Although the presentation of the principles (especially in the case of the laws of thermodynamics) is skilfully done based on a number of typical examples, some secondary but standard subjects (for example activity coefficients, azeotropes, electrochemical kinetics, etc.) are either only briefly discussed or not presented at all. Obviously, this was due to space limitations since the book contains extensive material on quantum mechanics and new areas of interest (see final chapters), but I still feel that the material omitted is required for undergraduate level studies. The final part of the book (Chapters 22–24) covers, in a very concise way, organised assemblies (films, liquid crystals and polymers) with particular emphasis on their applications and discusses two brand new topics in Physical Chemistry, namely that of supramolecular assemblies and the correlation of supramolecular engineering with the origin of life. Many fascinating examples of supramolecular machines (that is of systems of co-operating molecules) such as sensors, transducers, processing devices, memories and energy converters are described. The principles of tailoring the behaviour of matter by using the lock-and-key technique and programmed environmental change (supramolecular engineering) are extended to the rationalisation of the origin of life, the living form of matter. This last chapter, although profound and thought provoking is rather too advanced and demanding to be included in an undergraduate textbook. This work contains a number of numerical problems and their solutions, aiming at the application of the presented principles to characteristic cases. Other useful insets include ‘Boxes’ containing the discussion of specific topics that are not covered in the main text body, and ‘Foundations’ which contain detailed proofs of relationships and in depth analysis of important points. Finally, an extensive list of up-to-date further readings is given for each chapter. Summarising, ‘Principles of Physical Chemistry’ by Kuhn and Försterling is a very interesting and truly novel approach to the subject which could be used as an auxiliary textbook for undergraduate science students (chemists, physicists, biologists) and should also be useful to teachers who want to get familiar with a modern look into Physical Chemistry.