The two communities of the open Pinus banksiana — Cladina forest have contrasting nitrogen (N) cycles. While the ‘lichen patches’ occurring on bedrock surfaces have high rates of net N mineralization and net nitrification, nearby ‘forest islands’ have low rates of net N mineralization and no net nitrification. Using buried soil bag incubations, we compared the changes in net N mineralization and net nitrification in forest islands and lichen patches during a short-term experimental addition of N (40kgNha−1
                     per year as NaNO3) to a small catchment. While in N-amended lichen patches net nitrification increased or remained similar to references, N-amended forest islands had a strong tendency to consume NO3
                     − and produce NH4
                     +. We hypothesize that assimilatory NO3
                     − reduction coupled with a decreased gross NH4
                     + uptake rate was the combination of mechanisms generating the net conversion of NO3
                     − into NH4
                     + in forest islands. Observations from the open P. banksiana — Cladina forest suggest that boreal ecosystems may respond in a heterogeneous fashion to anthropogenic N inputs.There remain many uncertainties about the potential impacts of culturally-derived increases in the deposition of nitrogen (N) to the boreal forest ( Predicting the effects of perturbations, such as increased N deposition, is complicated by the mosaic of plant, moss, and lichen communities commonly found in boreal landscapes. Perturbations such as forest fires ( The potential for the open The Experimental Lakes Area (ELA; 49°40′N, 93°43′W) is a group of 57 small lakes and watersheds set-aside for whole-ecosystem research ( The experiment was carried in a small catchment (U3; 0.40 Forest islands occur in small depressions with 10–50 Bedrock surfaces cover approximately 70–80% of the catchments and are composed of two features. About 2/3 of the bedrock surface is only covered with crustose lichens such as The NaNO Three-week buried soil bag incubations ( The net N mineralization rate (MIN There were notable differences in the ambient soil-exchangeable NH Soil-exchangeable N concentrations increased in U3 forest islands and lichen patches following the addition of NaNO During one incubation in July–August 1994 (i.e., prior to N addition to U3), MIN The soil microbial community of forest islands and lichen patches responded in opposite fashions to the increased NO The response of U3 lichen patches to the NO To evaluate the contribution of forest islands and lichen patches to changes in whole-catchment N mineralization, yearly MIN Yearly MIN Soil microorganisms in the two communities of the open Two fundamentally different processes could account for the net tendency to convert NO A second pathway to convert NO The fate of the ∼56 There remains several uncertainties about the mechanisms generating the contrasting N cycles within forest islands and lichen patches. Higher soil temperature ( The design of the experiment was not meant to recreate elevated N inputs under field conditions. The NaNO Although the two communities of the open Logistical support was provided by R.J. Elgood, K. Peebles, and J. Adams. We thank T. Lyng for performing the soil N analyses. This project was funded by a NSERC strategic Grant to S.L.S., R.O. Aravena, and B. Hecky, and by Fisheries and Oceans Canada. S.L. received funding through scholarships from OGS, FCAR, and the Ontario Federation of Anglers and Hunters. Two anonynous reviewers contributed to clarify an earlier version of the manuscript.