Calcium pyrophosphate dihydrate (CPPD) crystals are commonly found in osteoarthritic joint tissues, where they predict severe disease. Unlike other types of calcium phosphate crystals, CPPD crystals form almost exclusively in the pericellular matrix of damaged articular cartilage, suggesting a key role for the extracellular matrix milieu in their development. Osteopontin is a matricellular protein found in increased quantities in the pericellular matrix of osteoarthritic cartilage. Osteopontin modulates the formation of calcium-containing crystals in many settings. We show here that osteopontin stimulates ATP-induced CPPD crystal formation by chondrocytes in vitro. This effect is augmented by osteopontin's incorporation into extracellular matrix by transglutaminase enzymes, is only modestly affected by its phosphorylation state, and is inhibited by integrin blockers. Surprisingly, osteopontin stimulates transglutaminase activity in cultured chondrocytes in a dose-responsive manner. As elevated levels of transglutaminase activity promote extracellular matrix changes that permit CPPD crystal formation, this is one possible mechanism of action. We demonstrate the presence of osteopontin in the pericellular matrix of chondrocytes adjacent to CPPD deposits and near active transglutaminases. Thus, osteopontin may play an important role in facilitating CPPD crystal formation in articular cartilage.Pathologic matrix mineralization is a common occurrence in joints affected by late stage osteoarthritis. Of synovial fluids sampled at the time of knee replacement, for example, 60% contain pathologic calcium-containing crystals ( While BCP crystals are similar in structure and composition to mineral found in normal bone and at many sites of pathologic mineralization, CPPD crystals are relatively unique to hyaline and fibro-cartilages ( CPPD crystals are formed when several conditions are met. High local concentrations of extracellular inorganic pyrophosphate, the anionic component of the crystal, are clearly necessary for CPPD crystal formation ( While considerable attention has been paid to other modulators of CPPD crystal formation, such as pyrophosphate production, relatively little is known about the role of extracellular matrix in this process. CPPD crystals are rarely found in areas of normal articular cartilage matrix ( Although extracellular matrix composition plays an important role in CPPD crystal formation and growth, the cartilage matrix components that modulate mineralization remain largely unidentified. Osteopontin is a 44–66 kDa calcium-binding matricellular protein present in articular cartilage ( Osteopontin is almost ubiquitous at sites of both normal and pathologic mineralization. However, its role in mineral formation remains poorly understood and somewhat controversial. Osteopontin typically inhibits growth of calcium-containing crystals in models of bone mineralization and nephrolithiasis ( A commonly invoked explanation for the varied effects of osteopontin both The present studies were designed to determine whether osteopontin modulated CPPD crystal formation in articular cartilage. We first determined the effects of osteopontin in a well-characterized model of CPPD crystal formation by chondrocytes ( Purified milk and recombinant bovine osteopontin were from R&D Systems (Minneapolis, MN). The integrin-binding antagonist GRGDS and a control peptide GRGES were from NeoMPS (Strasbourg, France). Porcine chondrocytes were isolated from hyaline cartilage removed from the patellar and femoral surfaces of 3–5 year old pigs (Johnsonville Foods, Inc., Watertown, WI) by sequential enzymatic digestion ( In this model, the precipitation of Purified bovine milk osteopontin was de-phosphorylated using alkaline phosphatase attached to agarose beads (Sigma Chemical Co., St Louis, MO) according to the method of To determine the effect of thrombin treatment on osteopontin, osteopontin was treated with thrombin attached to agarose beads (Sigma Chemical Co.) for 15 min at 37 °C. Beads were removed and protein levels were measured to correct for protein lost during processing. SDS-PAGE was performed to confirm quantitative cleavage. Transglutaminase activity in chondrocytes was inhibited with 125 μM cystamine or 1 mM monodansylcadaverine. We have shown previously that these concentrations of inhibitors reduce transglutaminase activity in chondrocytes by 50–90% without significant toxicity ( Osteopontin levels were measured in the cell layer using a commercial ELISA (Assay Designs, Ann Arbor, MI). Levels of aggrecan were measured in an identical manner using an ELISA kit (Biosource, Nivelles, Belgium). Media were removed from chondrocyte cultures. After washing, the cell layer was scraped into the assay buffer supplied with each kit. Levels of specific proteins were corrected for total cell layer protein as measured by the Lowry assay. Inorganic pyrophosphate levels were measured in chondrocyte conditioned media as previously described ( ( Transglutaminase activity was measured using a standard radiometric assay based on incorporation of Chondrocyte viability under various experimental conditions described was measured with a standard assay based on leakage of LDH with cell injury (Genotech, St. Louis, MO). Preserved, de-identified, paraffin-embedded human knee cartilage samples were obtained from patients with CPPD deposition disease. These tissue specimens were obtained from hospitals affiliated with Iwate Medical University Hospital, Morioka, Tohoku University Hospital, Sendai or Kumamoto University Hospital, Kumamoto, Japan from 1995 to 2003. Informed consent was obtained from each patient. The study has been carried out in accordance with the Declaration of Helsinki (1989) of the World Medical Association, and has been approved by the IRBs of the hospitals involved. After de-paraffinization, sections for osteopontin immunostaining were pretreated at 37 °C for 10 min with 1 mg/ml of trypsin diluted in 9 mM calcium chloride at pH 7.4. Sections for N ε-(γ-glutamyl) lysine isopeptide immunostaining were pretreated at 37° C for 30 min with 40 mU/ml of chondroitinase ABC (Seigagaku, Rockville, MD) diluted in 30 mM sodium acetate and 10 mM Tris–HCl at pH 7.4. Washed sections were treated with 0.3% (V/V) hydrogen peroxide for 30 min at room temperature and with 10% (V/V) normal goat serum for 40 min at room temperature. Sections were incubated with anti- All experiments were repeated at least 3 times. A student's To explore the role of osteopontin in CPPD crystal formation, we employed a well-characterized model based on the ATP-dependent accumulation of calcium in articular chondrocyte cultures. In this model, The phosphorylation state of osteopontin may have dramatic effects on its behavior in mineralization models. For example, several studies have shown that highly phosphorylated osteopontin had opposite effects on mineral formation compared to un-phosphorylated forms ( Thrombin cleavage may also alter the behavior of osteopontin ( To confirm that osteopontin is a substrate for endogenous transglutaminases in articular chondrocytes, we determined the effects of transglutaminase inhibitors on osteopontin levels in chondrocyte cell layers. Transglutaminase inhibitors reduced osteopontin levels in chondrocyte cell layers ( Further evidence that osteopontin is a transglutaminase substrate in articular cartilage is evidenced by the direct measurement of the transglutaminase-specific dipeptide ε -(γ glutamyl) lysine in osteopontin isolated from porcine cartilage. Osteopontin was isolated from porcine cartilage using immunoprecipation. This resulted in two bands on SDS-PAGE gel. Both were immunoreactive with anti-osteopontin. (Data not shown.) Levels of crosslink were 202 We next explored the hypothesis that transglutaminase-mediated binding of osteopontin to chondrocyte matrix affects its ability to promote CPPD crystal formation. We incubated chondrocytes with milk osteopontin in the presence of transglutaminase inhibitors and measured CPPD crystal formation. As shown in The mechanisms through which osteopontin participates in crystal formation are unclear. Osteopontin, particularly at high concentrations, directly inhibits hydroxyapatite crystal growth by coating existing crystals with highly anionic protein ( Interestingly, maximally stimulatory doses of osteopontin had little effect on protein levels for the transglutaminases present in articular chondrocytes. One μg/ml of milk osteopontin did not increase protein levels of either type II transglutaminase or factor XIIIA as measured by Western blotting. (Data not shown). Thus, it is likely that osteopontin increases activity of these enzymes without altering their levels. Both enzymes are often regulated at post-translational levels ( Wozniak et al. elegantly demonstrated that mineralization in bone cell cultures occurs in plaques containing large macromolecular complexes of osteopontin crosslinked by transglutaminases. They showed this early pericellular mineralization process was dependent on the αvβ3 integrin ( If osteopontin participates in CPPD crystal formation, it should be present in the extracellular matrix of articular cartilage from patients with CPPD deposition disease. Immunohistochemistry with osteopontin antibody demonstrated the presence of osteopontin protein in the pericellular matrix near CPPD crystal deposits ( We show here that osteopontin is present in the extracellular matrix near CPPD crystal deposits in articular cartilage and that it stimulates CPPD crystal formation by articular chondrocytes These findings contrast with the role typically assigned to osteopontin in most mineralization models, where it often acts as an inhibitor of crystal growth and/or nucleation ( A great deal of work focuses on the phosphorylation state of osteopontin in mineralization models. Tissue osteopontin is generally not as highly phosphorylated as milk osteopontin, but it is highly unlikely that completely de-phosphorylated osteopontin would be encountered by chondrocytes. We showed that highly phosphorylated forms of osteopontin were slightly more potent stimulants of CPPD crystal formation compared to less phosphorylated forms. In many mineralization models, de-phosphorylated osteopontin had opposite effects to those seen with highly phosphorylated osteopontin ( Osteopontin is clearly a transglutaminase substrate in articular cartilage and cultured chondrocytes. We proved this by demonstrating that transglutaminase inhibitors decrease its levels in chondrocyte matrix, that specific transglutaminase crosslinks are easily measurable in isolated cartilage osteopontin, and that active transglutaminases reside in the pericellular matrix of CPPD affected chondrocytes in a distribution similar to that of osteopontin. Transglutaminase-mediated incorporation of osteopontin into matrix augments the effect of osteopontin on CPPD crystal formation. Indeed, when transglutaminase activity is suppressed, osteopontin fails to stimulate CPPD crystal deposition. We postulate that the high levels of active transglutaminases in osteoarthritic cartilage trap osteopontin in the extracellular matrix, where it stimulates mineralization. The dose response curve for both milk and recombinant osteopontin demonstrates a bell shaped curve, with a maximum effect occurring at about 1 μg/ml. We hypothesize that chondrocyte matrix can only incorporate a certain quantity of osteopontin. At doses which exceed the capacity of the matrix to incorporate osteopontin, osteopontin remains soluble and may actually begin to inhibit CPPD crystal growth. One could postulate several mechanisms through which osteopontin might contribute to CPPD crystal formation. Osteopontin might stimulate production of pyrophosphate, the anionic component of the CPPD crystals. We show here, however, that osteopontin has minimal effects on pyrophosphate production by chondrocytes. It is also possible that osteopontin modulates cell death, which then leads to CPPD crystal formation ( Mirroring work done in osteoblasts, we showed that the effect of osteopontin on CPPD crystal formation was partially abrogated by a peptide which blocks integrin binding. Thus, we propose that crosslinked complexes containing osteopontin acting via the αvβ3 integrin serve as foci of CPPD crystal nucleation. This is further supported by the effect of thrombin on osteopontin, as the thrombin cleavage site is near the integrin binding locus of the protein. It is likely that chondrocytes are capable of assuming a phenotype similar to the hypertrophic phenotype responsible for bone formation in the growth plate, particularly in the setting of osteoarthritis ( These studies are not without limitations. For example, there is not a simple way to determine if the effects of osteopontin are mediated by the protein itself, or by osteopontin-induced increases in transglutaminase activity, and a consequent increase in the quantity of cross-linked matrix. In either event, however, the actions of osteopontin clearly stimulate CPPD crystal formation, and this protein may represent a therapeutic target in this disease. In addition, non-specific effects of chemical transglutaminase inhibitors are always a concern. Monodansylcadaverine, for example, did reduce protein levels of both aggrecan and osteopontin secreted into the media. However, its effects on osteopontin levels in the matrix were quite specific, and aggrecan levels were unaffected. We have considerable experience with these inhibitors and approach their limitations by using at least two inhibitors with different mechanisms of action, by ensuring the absence of toxicity, and by comparing their effects under various conditions such as the presence and absence of ATP. Unfortunately, because there are at least two active transglutaminase enzymes in articular cartilage, the use of more specific inhibitors such as antibodies or siRNA becomes too unwieldy to be practical. We have shown here that osteopontin promotes CPPD crystal formation in a well-characterized, chondrocyte-based model. Osteopontin is present in articular cartilage affected by CPPD deposition and may be an important factor in the development of CPPD crystals We would like to acknowledge the thoughtful assistance of Drs. Lawrence M. Ryan and Jeffrey Wesson in reviewing this manuscript. This work was supported by the National Institutes of Health AG015337 (AKR), and AR 052615 (AKR) and the Veteran's Administration Research Service (AKR).