Circular sawing with diamond segmented sawblades is a machining process that represents a major cost item in the processing of marbles and other natural stones. Therefore, determining the optimum sawing conditions for a particular stone is of major importance in stone processing industry. In this work, utilising a fully instrumented block-cutter, an experimental study was carried out to investigate the sawing performances of seven different types of marbles during circular sawing with a diamond segmented sawblade. The sawing tests were performed in the down-cutting mode. The two main sawing parameters, depth of cut and workpiece travel speed were varied in the pursuit of optimum sawing performance. Considering specific energy as a criterion of sawing efficiency, optimum sawing conditions valid for the tested marbles have been determined. Finally, statistically reliable equations were established to predict specific energy of sawing from simple laboratory rock property test procedures.Processing of natural stones by using circular diamond sawblades has a wide field of application in stone industry. With the growing use of natural stones as a construction material, there is an increasing demand on optimizing the various processing parameters to improve productivity and reduce costs. The performance and life of a circular diamond blade are affected by many factors. Some of these major factors are: the physico-mechanical and mineralogical properties of the workpiece; diamond type and size; diamond concentration; the hardness of the metal bond formulation; the mode of sawing (up-cutting or down-cutting); the peripheral speed of the blade; the depth of cut; the traverse speed; cooling efficiency; the condition of the machine and operator's skill. Obviously, most of the above-mentioned parameters are interrelated. Therefore, it is extremely difficult to make precise judgments on these factors without the use of systematic sawing trials, in order to be able to determine the best cutting conditions for any given workpiece. Due to its complex nature and the needs of the industry, various aspects of stone machining have been investigated over the years The influence of processing parameters on sawing performance varies from one rock type to another (marble, granite, limestone, travertine, sandstone, etc.). Consequently, it is very hard to establish optimum process parameters valid for all rock types. Therefore, considering this fact, the main purpose of this study was to focus on a particular group of rocks. This paper describes the laboratory work carried out to determine the relationships between various rock properties and cutting performance of a full-scale block-cutter for marbles of medium hardness. To achieve this goal, cutting trials were made by using a computer-controlled block-cutter designed to record cutting forces and calculate specific energy values under various testing conditions. The obtained specific energy values were then correlated with mechanical and main mineralogical properties of the tested marbles. Statistical analysis of the test results has shown that specific energy, which is an indication of cutting performance, can be predicted by the use of a set of multi-regression equations. Circular sawing experiments were conducted on a high-precision block-cutter ( The three-dimensional forces acting on the sawblade during the cutting process were measured by means of platform type (single point) load cells. In order to be able to control the main units of the experimental set-up, and also to facilitate recording of the experimental data, a 16 The diamond sawblade used in the tests was of 400 Seven different types of marbles which have substantial market demand were selected for the sawing experiments. All the samples used in the sawing tests were approximately 28–30 Considering the previous works of other researchers Sawing experiments were conducted in the down-cutting mode. The horizontal ( The total included angle of the contact zone ( Specific energy (SE) which is defined as the energy consumed per unit volume of material removal, was calculated as: Experimental results are presented in The general conclusions drawn from For each tested marble type, specific energy decreases (cutting efficiency improves) as the depth of cut increases to some limiting depth. In practice, for each marble type, a depth of cut will be reached beyond which there can be little expectation of improvement in cutting efficiency. At shallow depths, the rate of specific energy reduction is much steeper than that of the larger depths. In each case, cutting efficiency improves with increasing workpiece travel speed. This improvement, however, shows a tendency to level off at higher travelling speeds. This part of the presented work deals with the prediction of likely sawability efficiencies of the tested marbles from simple laboratory rock property test procedures and their main mineralogical properties. In the general field of rock excavation, specific energy is a commonly accepted measure of cutting efficiency when obtained under standardized conditions. However, a standardized sawing test procedure applicable to marble sawing does not exist in the literature. In this study, specific energy values obtained under optimum sawing conditions for the tested seven different types of marbles were considered as a reference for the statistical analysis to be conducted. Consequently, from Using SPSS Windows Release 8.0 package program, a multiple regression analysis was carried out to determine the relationships between dependent variable (specific energy) and independent variables (mechanical and mineralogical properties of the tested marbles). The prediction equation obtained from multiple regression analysis was: The correlation coefficient of Eq. Specific energy can also be calculated from only three independent variables as follows: The correlation coefficient of Eq. An experimental study was carried out to investigate sawability during the circular sawing of seven different types of marbles with a diamond segmented saw blade. Valid for the types of marbles and employed operational conditions, the following conclusions may be made: It is clear that shallow cutting depths and low workpiece travel speeds are highly inefficient. Although efficiency (specific energy) improves with cutting depth and workpiece travel speed, the improvement does not continue indefinitely and levels off at certain values. Statistically reliable correlations found suggest that it is possible to predict specific energy of sawing by combining the effects of dominant workpiece properties. Therefore, if supported by further test data, it is likely that sawability evaluation of large number of samples can be realized rapidly without conducting direct sawing tests which involve lengthy and complicated testing procedure.