This chapter examines current challenges faced by the food industry in delivering meat products with desired characteristics and how hydrocolloids could be used to meet these challenges. Hydrocolloids perform a number of functions, including; thickening, gelling and binding, coating, stabilisation of foams, emulsions and dispersions and stabilisation of pH. Previous research carried out with hydrocolloids from many different sources, such as plants (trees, seeds, tubers and pulses), animal (milk, meat, animal by-products) and microorganisms (bacteria, fungi and yeast) is also discussed.The overall objective of this chapter is to examine the fundamental properties of processed meat products, to explore the challenges in delivering meat products with desired characteristics and to review recent research on the roles of hydrocolloid additives in meeting these challenges. Examples of current challenges faced by the food industry in the area of ingredient interaction include the need for improved meat product formulation in relation to cost and added value, in relation to reformed product development, in relation to salt, fat and phosphate reduction and in relation to exploring the potential of meat products as delivery mechanisms for health-promoting compounds. These challenges must be addressed while retaining or improving technological functionality (water-holding capacity and preservation) and sensory performance (appearance, mouthfeel, texture, juiciness and flavour). Today’s consumers are health and nutrition conscious and prefer to avoid food products with high fat or salt contents. Ground beef or pork In order to achieve favourable product characteristics in reducing fat and salt content, several hydrocolloids capable of improving water binding and texture are of interest to meat processors (  Comminuted meat products are complex mixtures that form gels in response to heat treatment. Raw and cooked meat products can be thought of as a complex ‘matrix’ of interacting components. The raw material, muscle tissue, is a biological system comprising muscle fibres, connective tissue, fat and water in variable proportions. Beefburgers and emulsion-type sausages differ with respect to factors such as meat content and the degree of comminution, but they also have much in common. A coarse ground beefburger is composed of randomly distributed intact meat fibres and fibre bundles (50–70%), fat, seasoning and water. Sausages are made by chopping meat with the addition of water and salt into a fine homogenate, in which the pork fat is usually further dispersed and emulsified ( Reforming muscles from pieces of whole muscle to form an intact product which has intact fibres and therefore characteristic of a whole The cooking step is the final key process in the development of the matrix, with the type of matrix formed dependent on the relatively dispersed or aggregated state of the protein, prior to gelation. The structure of the cooked matrix is therefore different in burgers and sausages. Upon cooking, the higher occurrence of whole fibre and pieces of fibres in burgers causes more shrinkage in burgers compared with emulsion-type sausages (  Based on scientific information, the meat industry and consumers have become aware of the relationship between sodium and hypertension (high blood pressure) and as a result the demand for low salt meat products has increased ( The use of functional ingredients in meat products offers meat processors the opportunity to improve the nutritional and health properties of their products. However, if such ingredients are added at too high a concentration, they can have a negative effect on the quality attributes of the product. For example, The most widely accepted fully international system to regulate the safety of food is the Joint FAO/WHO Expert Committee on Food Additives (JECFA). Clearance of food hydrocolloids by the European Commission was first introduced in 1995 under Directive 95/2/EU for food additives (other than colours and sweeteners). This is known as the Miscellaneous Additives Directive (MAD), which provides usage authorisation for a large number of additives from the hydrocolloid group. An amendment (Directive 98/72/EC) to MAD was introduced in 1972 which affected the status of many hydrocolloids. This directive authorises the use of sodium alginate, potassium alginate, carrageenan, pectin and guar. Each has controlled conditions associated with their approval. Often the desired functional characteristic (e.g. thickening; gelling; adhesive; binding) cannot be achieved by using a native hydrocolloid, e.g. starch. Hydrocolloids may be altered physically, chemically or enzymatically to produce modified versions with improved functional properties. However extraction or modification methods may affect the molecular makeup of the hydrocolloid and consequently, the modified hydrocolloid may have different safety regulations associated with its use and possess a different labelling status. Allergies and intolerances have become very important in food safety during the last few decades. Allergic reactions to foods/food ingredients can generate clinical symptoms ranging from mild urticaria and oral allergy syndrome to life-threatening anaphylactic reactions. For this reason, it is crucial that the food industry take this into consideration when formulating products using hydrocolloids. The foods most commonly causing serious allergic reactions on a worldwide basis are cereals containing gluten, milk, egg, tree nuts, peanuts, soybeans, fish and crustacea.  Hydrocolloids can control moisture in meats throughout processing, distribution, cooking, holding and consumption. In whole-muscle products hydrocolloid applications are generally directed at attempting to retain moisture and/or improve yield, reduce drip loss, and protect against freeze/ thaw conditions in which the formation of ice crystals can lead to greater weeping and the destruction of the muscle tissue. The hydrocolloid chosen for usage during meat processing is based on the attributes desired in the finished product and processing capabilities, as well as distribution, holding and reconstitution requirements. For example, carrageenan is one of the primary hydrocolloids used by the processed meats industry and is used in the manufacture of comminuted products, but it also works well in reformed meat products when it is injected via the brine during meat pumping. Deciding which hydrocolloid to use can be a complex decision as each hydrocolloid affects product yield, texture and mouthfeel in a slightly different manner and thus would not be interchangeable in meat formulations ( Mixtures of hydrocolloids are commonly used to impart novel and improved rheological characteristics to meat and food products generally. As previously highlighted, choosing the right hydrocolloid is critical to getting the balanced performance required in order to manufacture a processed meat product that is acceptable in terms of its composition, quality, sensorial acceptability, stability and shelf-life. Consequently, there is a requirement to understand the nature and characteristics of the hydrocolloid being considered for formulated use, and from where and how it was derived. Soy protein is generally regarded as the storage protein held in discrete particles called protein bodies which are estimated to contain at least 60–70% of the total soybean protein. In finely ground meat products soy protein gels to form a matrix entrapping moisture and lipid droplets resulting in improved emulsion stability ( Wheat gluten is a co-product of wheat flour that is used to improve the rheological properties of bread-making properties. Gluten proteins consist of two main groups, gliadins and glutenins in approximately equal proportions. When gliadin is mixed with starch and water a purely viscous material Whey protein is a mixture of globular proteins isolated from whey, the liquid material created as a by-product of cheese production. Whey proteins are soluble at any pH and show extensive denaturation at temperatures greater than 70 Caseinates are made from lactic or acid casein. Sodium caseinate is the most widely used in processed meats, whereas calcium and potassium caseinates Gelatin is derived from collagen by processes which destroy secondary and higher structures with varying degrees of hydrolysis of the polypeptide backbone ( Gelatin has an extraordinary wide field of application in the food industry as it is widely known for its gelling properties, clean flavour profile and clear appearance ( Gelatin is used in meat products such as corn beef and luncheon meat where it is used to retain the meat juices. It is also used in pasteurised canned hams where it is added (in the form of granules or sheets) prior to cooking, so that water released from the meat during cooking dissolves the gelatin, which on cooling, forms a gel that fills spaces caused by cook loss (  Carbohydrates, such as starches or gums, can be solubilised or dispersed in water. Polysaccharide gums represent a category of functional ingredients useful for fat replacement in processed foods owing to their ability to provide water control by thickening and/or gelling ( Starches are produced from the seeds of plants such as corn, wheat, rice, from tubers, pulses or from roots of plants such as cassava. Starch is a polmer comprising a range of molecular sizes. The basic monomeric unit is Investigations carried out by Cellulose, the most abundant biopolymer in the world, is found in the cell wall of almost all land plants. Cellulose is composed of two repeating anhydroglucose units joined through 1,4 glucosidic linkages. There are several ranges of modified celluloses that are approved as food additives. Carboxy-methyl cellulose is soluble in both hot and cold water, giving a clear, colourless solution with neutral flavour. Manufacturing generates little variation when compared to natural gums. The fact that modified celluloses cannot be labelled ‘natural’ might be a detriment to some food applications. However, synthetic gums offer more than just consistent supply, including numerous particle sizes and viscosities. The EU permitted the use of modified celluloses as food additives rather than colours and sweeteners (Directive 95/2/EC). Investigations carried out found that carboxymethyl cellulose is not as effective in improving texture in sausage products that contain high salt levels. Carrageenan, which is derived from seaweed, is possibly the most widely used binder in low fat meat products ( The dominant hexose unit of carrageenans are galactose and anhydro-galactose carrageenans. Sulphated polymers of galactose and anhydroga-lactose are produced from red seaweeds by extraction (three principal carageenan types or main fractions have been defined: kappa, iota and lambda, which generally differ depending on plant origin). Iota and kappa carrageenans have been used in a wide variety of meat products with considerable success. As a result of the interaction with water through both ionic and hydrogen binding, carrageenans are capable of restructuring water and thus have a high water-binding ability ( Other authors have found carrageenan to be suitable for use as a water-binding agent in reduced fat hamburgers, reduced fat frankfurters and low salt sausage products ( Beta (β)-glucan is made up of complex carbohydrate glucose molecules (polysaccharides) which are joined by P bonds linking carbons (1–3/1–6) to other glucose molecules. β-glucans are a major component of starchy endosperm and aleurone cell walls of commercially important cereals, such as oat, barley, rye and wheat ( Barley β-glucan is a non-starchy polysaccharide which shows potential as a fat replacer in meat products owing to its highly viscous nature and its water binding, foam and emulsion stabilising capabilities ( Konjac glucomannan (KGM) is a polysaccharide extracted from tubers of the devil’s tongue plant ( Locust bean gum and guar gum are high molecular weight galactomannans used by the food industry as food additives. The compounds, although closely related chemically, do not have the same functional properties when used in foods, and the substitution could change the desired qualities of the final product ( Locust bean gum is obtained from carob bean ( Alginates, the major structural polysaccharide of brown algae (Phaeophyceae), are widely used by the food industry to increase viscosity and function as emulsifiers. They are unbranched copolymers composed of β- Pectin is the name given to water-soluble pectinic acids capable of gel formation. Pectins are high molecular weight heteroploymers consisting mainly of galacturonic acid methyl ester units which are located in the middle lamellae of plant cell walls (  Shellfish waste consisting of crustacean exoskeleton is currently the main source of biomass for chitosan production ( In the past, chitosan has received increased attention for its commercial applications in the biomedical, chemical and food industries including preservation of food and formation of edible-biodegradable film ( Xanthan is an extracellular polysaccharide gum produced by the microorganism  A synergistic interaction occurs between xanthan gum and galactomannons such as guar gum, locust bean gum and glucomannons such as konjac mannan. This interaction results in enhanced viscosity or gelation. Xanthan gum is recognised as a food additive under the provisions of the US FDA regulations (21 CFT 172.695) for use as a stabiliser, thickener or emulsifier. Xanthan gum is designated by the European Union as E415 with a non-approved acceptable daily intake (ADI). Keltrol® and Keltrol® F xanthan gums are both approved for Kosher use. Gellan gum is an extracellular polysaccharide secreted by the bacterium  Curdlan is an extracellular microbial polysaccharide which was first discovered and investigated by Microbial transglutaminase (TGases) ( Studies carried out by Sugars are carbohydrates consisting of carbon, hydrogen and oxygen, and are used in meat products because of their contribution to flavour, their role in browning during the frying process and also their ability to disguise high levels of salt in a meat product. Sugars can be divided into monosaccharides, disaccharides and oligiosaccharides. Lactose is a disaccharide consisting of In general, sweeteners are not often used in the production of meat products as sugars are generally not added to meat products to obtain a Maltodextrins are non-sweet products obtained by starch hydrolysis and consist of β The application of hydrocolloids in processed meat products has continued to grow and evolve over the past 20 