In general, plastics are exposed to different degrading agents in every procedure involved in their recovery from waste mixture and from subsequent recycling. In this study, two methods of pre-flotation conditioning were used to determine how these methods affect the general properties of the pre-conditioned PET particles to be recovered from the PET-PVC mixture. The first method comprised the conditioning of PET samples using an alkaline solution of nonionic surfactant (Triton X-100) based on the patent by the Goodyear Tire and Rubber Company. The second method, developed in this study, was a conditioning process which used an alkali-less solution of the same nonionic surfactant (Triton X-100) used in the first method. The following analytical methods were used to characterize properties of the pre-conditioned PET samples that were correlated to relative degradation of the samples: differential scanning calorimetry (DSC), for thermal behavior of the samples; FT-IR spectroscopy, for functional groups present in the samples; and, Pohl’s method, for carboxyl end-group concentration count. Results show that in addition to water the presence of NaOH in the conditioning solution contributes to the further degradation of the polymer.Concurrent with the growing demand and supply of PET, accumulation of products made from PET in waste streams has become one of the most important environmental concerns in recent years ( Both PET and PVC are inherently hydrophobic and as a consequence of their having “low-energy surfaces” it is thermodynamically favorable for air to displace water from their surface. Interestingly, this characteristic of a plastic surface can be altered by adsorbing on it or reacting with it surface-active agents resulting in “destroying” the hydrophobicity of the surface, consequently, making it hydrophilic ( In 1992, the Goodyear Tire and Rubber Company patented an effective process for separating PET from PVC, where flakes of these polymers were conditioned prior to flotation in a solution containing a nonionic surfactant and an inorganic base ( In general, plastics are exposed to different degrading agents in every procedure involved in their recovery from waste mixture and subsequent recycling. It should be noted that, in addition to contact with water, mechanical stresses, light and air ( This study has determined how an alkali-enhanced surface modification (e.g., the Goodyear Tire and Rubber Company method) and this study’s method of pre-flotation conditioning of PET would affect the properties of the recovered PET. The properties evaluated were those related to determining the recyclability of the polymer and those that can be used to predict (or are related to) the properties of the recycled PET. The two methods of pre-flotation conditioning were used and their effects on the properties of the conditioned PET were determined. The effect on PVC properties was not considered since, for the recovery process, this study will be interested only in PET. The conditioning solution was prepared by dissolving Triton X-100 or octylphenol ethylene oxide condensate (Rohm and Haas) and reagent grade NaOH pellets in deionized water. The surface tension of the conditioning solutions was measured using SensaDyne 6000 Bubble Tensiometer at 22 The PET pellets were supplied by Aldrich Chemical Company. In preparation for contact angle measurements using Cahn Contact Angle Analyzer (Model DCA-322), PET pellets were dissolved in phenol (Fisher Chem. Co.) to saturation. Thin square glass slides (44.2 The ground PET samples used in the conditioning experiments were prepared by cryogenic grinding under liquid nitrogen. Particles of size range −18 The conditioned PET samples were repeatedly washed using distilled water and were oven-dried at 120 The properties of the conditioning solution are given in  The FT-IR spectra also provide insight into the changes in the crystallinity of PET that has been conditioned using a solution with NaOH. One of the major bands sensitive to configurational changes is the C–O stretch at 1108 The summary of DSC test results is shown in The glass transition temperature ( ( In every step of the pre-flotation conditioning process, PET samples were exposed to different factors that would contribute to degradation – size reduction, contact with water and presence of alkali (NaOH) in the conditioning solution. The degrading effects of these would be expected for PET that would eventually be recovered and then recycled from the mixture. The presence of water in the alkali-less conditioning solution has contributed to the degradation of the polymer by hydrolysis, as could be concluded from decreased crystallinity supported by data obtained from FT-IR spectra, DSC thermograms, and Pohl’s carboxylic end-group determination. However, NaOH could have further contributed to degradation resulting to a more degraded sample, which would result in the poor performance of the material during recycling. This study recommends the use of the “less-destructive” technique, which requires reducing PET into smaller particles to compensate for the addition of an alkali that will improve surface properties required for flotation. It is expected that the information this study provides will make useful insight and contribution to the further development of the technology of froth flotation for mixed plastics in post-consumer waste stream. The authors would like to acknowledge the following for their support (in a way or another) to the completion of this project: Department of Science and Technology (Philippines), Mapúa Institute of Technology (Manila, Philippines) and Dr. James F. Rathman of The Ohio State University (Columbus, OH).