Railways can inevitably cause railway rolling noise, which is induced by both wheel and rail roughness. Due to the deformation and wear between the wheel/rail at the contact patch, the rail roughness may grow in amplitude after a number of wheelset passages. This results in increasing railway rolling noise. Rail roughness is a common aspect in all transit systems and much research has been pursued to predict and mitigate its growth on track but prediction of resultant noise growth has not been a focus. This paper provides the experimental validation of the modified Railway Rolling Noise Prediction Software (RRNPS) model for the prediction of rail roughness growth and corresponding noise growth. The model is a new framework to enable noise growth predictions due to rail roughness growth mechanics. It is validated by means of several experiments that have been performed along a straight railway line. Through comparisons between predictions and measurements, it is shown that the RRNPS model gives reliable predictions on rail roughness growth and corresponding noise growth. Subsequently this model is used to predict how speed, normal force, wheelset traffic and ballast vertical stiffness affect rail roughness growth and corresponding noise growth.When a wheel rolls over a rail, an elliptic contact patch (the size of a coin) is formed due to the local deformations of the wheel and rail around the contact point Over the past few decades, research has been undertaken to understand the physics behind railway noise induced by roughness growth. Kaper In this paper, field measurement methods and simulation methodology are introduced first in To investigate railway rolling noise growth due to rail roughness growth, both field tests and simulations were performed in a typical railway rolling noise situation in Australia. The field measurement methods and the simulation methodology are introduced in this section. In order to obtain the relevant parameters for the simulation and validation purposes of the RRNPS model, field tests were performed to obtain wheel and track parameters including track receptance (the displacement per unit force as a function of frequency) and decay rate, wheel and rail roughness as well as measurements of sound during the passage of trains. Four different types of train were tested, as listed in The track, located on a narrow-gauge line, has a rail of 50 Important parameters in deﬁning the track vibration are the pad stiffness, the decay of vibration with distance along the track and the level of coupling between vertical and lateral vibration To evaluate the effect of tangent rail roughness growth over time on railway rolling noise, rail roughness spectra are required. Three rail roughness measurement campaigns (a total of 8 months interval) were performed at the same testing site with the Corrugation Analysis Trolley (CAT) When trains passed by, sound pressure level (SPL) measurements were performed with a microphone at 7.5 Three SPL measurement campaigns were carried out at the same testing site (each campaign was performed closely after the rail roughness measurement campaign). The measurements were used to determine the measured railway rolling noise growth due to the rail roughness growth. A total of 93 sound measurements have been obtained. Since train speeds are always different even when the same train passes over the same site, in order to investigate the direct effect of rail roughness growth on noise, comparisons were taken between vehicle/track combinations under the same conditions (e.g., same train type and speed). This is to make sure that apart from rail roughness, measurement conditions are the same. The RRNPS model As can be seen from No systematic differences were found between the wheels that were almost the same for the four train types. As shown in The wheel flexible modes of vibration are important for sound emissions, especially at higher frequencies. In order to characterise the vibration modes of wheels, a finite element free vibration analysis was carried out. This was performed using a modal analysis in ANSYS. The model was assembled using solid elements (the maximum element size is 20 In the RRNPS model, a Timoshenko beam The following sub-sections provide field measurement and simulation results, followed by the validations of rail roughness growth and corresponding noise growth predictions over time.   Predicted wheel receptances are shown in Measured and predicted rail roughness and combined wheel/rail roughness are detailed in this section. The comparisons show the reliability of the RRNPS model in predicting tangent rail roughness growth.  To predict rail roughness growth over time, the initial measured rail roughness and the wheel roughness shown in Through comparing predicted and measured rail roughness growth in Since railway rolling noise is determined by the combination of both wheel roughness and rail roughness As shown in As seen from the comparisons in During the three measurement campaigns (93 cases in all), 8 cases meet the requirement that the vehicle/track combinations were under the same testing conditions (e.g., same train type and speed). The train type was EMU with the speed of 75.9 From From Through comparison of the results from To show these comparisons more explicitly, To analyse the sensitivity of the RRNPS model, some of the key input parameters were changed. As shown in To analyse the speed effect, it was set to 37.5 A higher speed does not always give higher wear amplitude of the railhead. It depends on the wear phase angle (in phase or not), which is mainly influenced by speed Since rail corrugation grows in amplitude as an exponential function of the number of wheelset passages, increasing the number of wheelset passages will in general increase the rail roughness levels and noise levels. From the predictions by the RRNPS, the growth of rail roughness expressed in dB has a linear relationship with the number of wheelset passages (or time span). For example, the largest increases between 40 and 80 When the normal load is increased, there are mainly two effects on the rolling noise: the wheel/rail contact stiffness is increased, which tends to increase the noise slightly; and the contact patch length is increased and hence the contact filter rolls off at a lower frequency, which reduces the noise. The overall effect is a reduction in noise To investigate the effect of varying ballast vertical stiffness, the stiffness was set to 2.5×10 As seen from the above comparisons with experiments, it is clear that the RRNPS model can reasonably predict tangent track roughness growth and relevant noise growth over time. The RRNPS can be utilised as a predictive tool to investigate new strategies to control and mitigate railway rolling noise growth due to corrugation and rail roughness growth. It is also shown that the increased SPL is directly determined by the combined wheel/rail roughness levels growth, and is almost the same in dB. The sensitivity analysis results show that increasing train speed increases railway rolling noise growth as well as overall rail roughness growth. The noise clearly increases when the rail roughness grows; up to 1.6 The work described has been supported by CRC for Rail Innovation under the Project no.1-105 Improved Noise Management and by the Commonwealth. The steering committee led by David Anderson from RailCorp and Richard Dwight in UoW are greatly appreciated for their expertise and comments. The first author is also very grateful for the financial support of living allowance from China Scholarship Council. As mentioned in When the train runs at speed To calculate the sound power, Apart from the sound power, the directivity can also be important. It describes the proportion of sound radiated in particular directions, which is independent of the distance from noise source. For the wheel a dipole directivity is used for axial motions and a monopole is used for radial motions. Similarly for the rail, a monopole is used for vertical motion and a dipole for lateral motion. In addition, when sound propagates in air above a ground plane it is also reflected by the ground. Since the ground covering at the testing site is hard, the sound absorption is not taken into account. The ground is relatively 0.3 In the RRNPS model, the 2D variable speed corrugation model serves as an output of vertical wheel/rail dynamic forces as well as an input for sound radiation. The critical components for this feedback corrugation model are the vibrational dynamics (I), the contact mechanics (II) and the wear process (III) as outlined in The constant speed tangent track corrugation model is summarised in the following. The feedback process for corrugation development between successive passes given by, That is, the growth rate is deﬁned by the maximum of the absolute value of the transfer function in the frequency domain. Inspection of Eq. See