The effect of chemical flotation reagents on the zeta potential (ζ) of particles is well known, but their effect on bubbles is practically unknown. This study characterizes the ζ of air bubbles conditioned with typical froth flotation reagents and presents a novel experimental setup and method for estimating the electrophoretic velocity. It was observed that collectors strongly affect ζ in the following order from more to less anionic: xanthate, dithiophosphinate, deionized water, mercaptobenzothiazole and dodecylamine. By contrast, frothers affect ζ only slightly. In this study, it was also observed that pH affects the microbubble diameter and that under acidic or basic conditions, the bubble diameter decreases.Once the chemical reagents used to condition particle surfaces in froth flotation processes are hydrolyzed, the ions in the aqueous solution distribute themselves between the particles and bubbles according to the laws of electrostatics and thermodynamics. The ions that carry the opposite charge to that of the particle or bubble surfaces are preferentially attracted to these surfaces. Consequently, an electric potential produced by each charged surface arises in the solution and decreases with increasing distance from the surface because of the “screening” of its electric field by mobile ions. A charged surface and the diffuse layer of mostly oppositely charged ions that surrounds it comprise an electrical “double layer”. Generally, the zeta potential (ζ), also called the electro-kinetic potential, is defined as the value of the electric potential at the “shear plane” of the particle (or, in this case, the bubble). At this point, it is important to discuss briefly the state of the art of zeta potential measurements, which have been analyzed and sometimes questioned by several authors. The electrical double layer (along which separation of charge occurs) consists of the Helmholtz condenser-like layers of opposite charges. This assumption would apply only to concentrated electrolyte solutions. When a steady-state condition is reached, the charges carried away by convection in the flowing liquid are supposed to be compensated by an electronic current (the flow of which has never been defined or identified). Such compensation is not likely to take place in every solid–electrolyte system without an extraneous charge buildup on some solids. According to the same author, a large number of side effects (such as changes in viscosity caused by the applied potential gradient, surface conductance, “electrode effect,” etc.) have been introduced into evaluations of the zeta potential for the purpose of overcoming the difficulties of irreproducible measurements. According to Returning to the main issue of this paper, there are four basic types of electrokinetic effects, and each one can be utilized to evaluate the zeta potential for a given set of conditions: electrophoresis, streaming potential, electro-osmosis, and sedimentation potential. Of these four electrokinetic effects, the electrophoretic effect is most frequently used in studies relating to minerals. The effect of chemical surfactants on the ζ of particles is well known, but their effect on bubbles is practically unknown (   In streaming potential, different pressures ( In electrophoresis the ζ of a charged particle or bubble can be estimated when it is electrically displaced by a field of direct current and the velocity of displacement is known, using the follow equation (Eq. In general, the literature concerning the ζ of bubbles is oriented toward a) developing an experimental setup for the measurement of this variable, b) determining the ζ of air bubbles, c) determining the ζ of bubbles of gases different than air or d) measuring the ζ of air bubbles immersed in chemical reagents such as surfactants and electrolytes. One of the difficulties in measuring the ζ of bubbles is the lack of a specialized ζ meter intended for the measurement of bubbles. Some of the pioneers in designing a cell for the measurement of the electrophoretic velocity of bubbles were   Related to the characterization of the ζ induced by chemical reagents, the following reports are particularly notable. Using an electrophoretic technique, An experimental setup was proposed ( To reduce the number of bubbles entering the electrophoretic cell, the volume of the bubbling cell was greater than that of the electrophoretic cell (see The electrophoretic cell was constructed out of five acrylic plaques (0.2 Another important element of the experimental setup was the image-acquisition system, which was composed of a digital camera equipped with a macro lens (Navitar® 12 To obtain reliable images, it was necessary to follow several steps: (1) visualization of the target zone to capture a reference of a known size (in this case, a thin Nylon® wire of 230 The froth flotation reagents that were investigated were a) xanthate ethylic of potassium (C Prior to each experiment, the electrophoretic cell was prepared using the following procedure: the cell was soaked for a period of 10 Once the aqueous solution (3.5 Once the image close to the front wall was focused, the image-acquisition system was ready to visualize the bubble dispersion and to record the bubble trajectory upon application of the electric potential. When the voltage was applied to the platinum electrodes, the microbubbles were attracted to the electrode of opposed polarity. To acquire images of sufficient quality for ζ estimation, several images were collected to permit the selection of at least 40 single bubbles with the following characteristics: those with small diameters moving near the front wall and exhibiting free flotation. Once the time and the horizontal displacement were recorded, the electrophoretic velocity and ζ could be estimated. For each ζ estimation, the electrophoretic velocities of approximately 40 bubbles were measured. The following sequence of images illustrates the bubble movement (see To evaluate how many ζ measurements should be performed to obtain a good estimation, the standard deviation of the arithmetic average was evaluated as a function of the number of measurements. To validate the experimental setup and the methodology, select chemical reagents were chosen for which ζ has already been reported in the literature.   One phenomenon that has not been reported in the literature is that pH affects bubble diameter. It was observed that even when the collector or frother concentration was held constant, any non-neutral pH (acidic or basic) caused a decrease in bubble diameter, which reached its maximum at pH A novel procedure and experimental setup were proposed and validated for the measurement of the electrophoretic velocity and the ζ of air bubbles. This validation was performed by comparing the results obtained using the proposed approach with those reported in the literature. The ζ was characterized in the presence of typical froth flotation reagents, and it was observed that this potential is strongly affected by collectors but only slightly modified by frothers. Even when frother or collector concentration is held constant, changes in pH affect the diameters of the microbubbles; under acidic or basic conditions, the bubble diameter decreases. The authors are grateful to   