Production of food ingredients from natural sources has attracted a great attention since people tend to consume foods prepared with natural additives. In the present study, potential usage of tulip petal waste was investigated to produce alternative food colorants. This study involves three parts: (i) solvent optimization (ethanol and water), (ii) process optimization (temperature and time) for anthocyanin extraction and (iii) determination of stability of anthocyanins extracted under optimum conditions determined with respect to pH and temperature. Optimum solvent was found as 35% ethanol and 65% water using mixture design. Response surface methodology was applied to determine optimum extraction process for obtaining maximum anthocyanin amount which was extracted at 54°C for 116min. Stability tests were perfomed to determine stability of anthocyanins at different temperatures (60–90°C) and pH levels (2, 4 and 6). An increase in temperature and pH levels caused an increment in the degradation kinetics of the anthocynains. The results of the present study highlighted that tulip petal wastes could be utilized as a novel natural source for the recovery of the natural food colorant.Appearance of the food products is one of the most important preference criteria determining consumer acceptability of the product. The first impression associated with the food products is appearance; therefore the rejection or acceptance of the products is mainly dependent on the appearance. Among the appearance parameters, color is one of the most important one. Due to the significance of the color during the consumer acceptability of the product, producers exert an effort to improve the color of the corresponding material by adding natural or synthetic colorants according to the regulations. Synthetic colorants are widely used in the food industry due to their physicochemical properties. Although they surpass the natural ones considering their characteristics such as encoloring performance, color ranges, stability properties, producers tend to substitute them with the natural ones due to the toxic effects of some of the synthetic colorants (  In order to increase extraction yield, optimization of extraction solvent is required. The influence of different solvent or solvent combinations on the phenolic content of the extracts obtained from different materials was found as statistically important in different studies ( In this study, it was aimed to produce natural food colorants from the tulip petal waste which could be used as a novel source. This study is composed of three parts: i.) Extraction solvent will be optimised performing mixture design, ii.) Extraction temperature and time will be optimised using response surface methodology and iii.) Determination of temperature and pH stability characteristics of the anthocyanins extracted with optiumum solvent under optimum conditions. Tulip ( Optimum solvent concentration for the extraction of maximum amount of anthocyanin was determined using simplex lattice mixture design. Water and ethanol were selected as independent variables in the mixture design, and total anthocyanin content was selected as the dependent response. Each solvent concentration was ranged from 0 to 100% concentration. Total solvent concentration was adjusted to 100%. Eight experimental points determined using model are shown in After determination of optimium solvent mixture, process optimization was carried out using response surface methodogy (RSM) for aquiring maximum amount of anthocyanin. The design is composed of two factors, namely temperature and time of extraction process between 25 and 55 Extraction procedure was carried out according to the method described by Total anthocyanin content analysis of the tulip petals was performed according to the pH differential method described by In order to determine the heat stability of the extracted tulip anthocyanins at different pH (2, 4 and 6), anthocyanin extracts were subjected to different temperatures (60, 70, 80 and 90 The temperature dependency parameters of anthocyanin degradation was determined by the Arrhenius equation: The aim of the present study was to extract food colorant from tulips. When considering the fact that anthocyanins are colorific compounds, we tried to extract anthocyanins from tulips in maximum amounts. For this aim, firstly optimum solvent was determined using mixture design since solvent directly influences the extraction yield of the target compound. As seen from In the second part of the study, after determination of optimum solvent response surface methodology was performed to increase yield of the anthocyanin extracted from tulips. Temperature (25 and 55 After solvent and process optimization, in this part of the study, stability of anthocyanins with respect to pH and temperature was investigated to determine usage potential of tulip anthocyanins or usage aims of them. The production process such as temperature and characteristics of the food sample, color and pH, plays an important role in determining the potential usage of the extracted anthocyanins. Results of the stability tests could also provide beneficial information about the alternative usage ability of them to artificial colorants. By considering importance of the stability tests in many aspects as mentioned above, stability of the anthocyanins extracted from tulip petal under optimum conditions was determined. Degradation kintetics of the anthocyanins were observed at different temperatures (60, 70, 80 and 90 As seen from the findings, anthocyanin content of the tulip petals showed that they could be used as a novel source for the production of food colorants. Moreover, according to the stability analysis results, tulip anthocyanins were found as more stable than many anthocyanins extracted from the different sources, which is also very crucial for the usage possibilities of the anthocyanins in the food formulations. When considering the stability tests, it could be concluded that the amount and type of the anthocyanins to be used as food colorant could be carefully determined based on their acidic and thermal stabilities. Therefore, pH of the food materials and production processes of them should be taken into consideration prior to the usage of them. Otherwise, the addition of anthocyanins can not meet producers’ expectations. Moreover, the evaluation of tulip by-products for the extraction of anthocyanins as a natural food colorant source provides economic gain to the countries where tulips are widely grown. Color is one of the most important attributes of the food products related with appearence directly affecting consumer acceptability of the product. When considering the fact that people tend to consume food products prepared with natural additives due to the understanding of the strong relation between health and diet, it is important for the food industry to find novel sources which could be used for the production of the food additives. In the present study, tulip petal by-products were used as an anthocyanin sources for the production of natural food colorants from them. For this aim, solvent and extraction process optimizations were carried out in the present study using mixture design and response surface methodology, respectively. Regarding solvent optimization, water extracted more anthocyanins than ethanol and the optimum solvent combination was determined as 35% ethanol and 65% water. Results of the response surface methodology showed that generally temperature and time resulted in increasing anthocyanin levels. However, at high temperature levels extraction rate decreased at time levels higher than 75 We would like to thank Istanbul Tree and Landscape Corporation (Istanbul Agac ve Peyzaj A.S.) for providing the tulips flowers. This work was supported by the