The use of a draft tube fluidized bed bioreactor (DTFBB) has been successfully demonstrated for the bioleaching of a chalcopyrite concentrate (Mousavi, et. al., 2005). In the present paper this technique was used for the bioleaching of zinc from a sphalerite bearing low-grade ore. A strain of the thermophilic bacterium, Sulfobacillus, has been isolated from the Kooshk lead and zinc mine near the city of Yazd (Iran) and is tested at temperatures 47°C–72°C. This is compared to leaching with a strain of the mesophile Acidithiobacillus ferrooxidans, which has been adapted to the high levels of zinc and the presence of the low-grade ore, and which was tested at temperatures 18°C–42°C. The effects of using the two temperature ranges, as well as varying pH in the range 1.2 to 1.8, and solid concentration in the range 1–20% w/v, on Zn recovery, ferrous, ferric and total iron concentrations and cells number were investigated in two batch DTFBBs with external recycling streams. The best conditions for leaching by mesophilic and thermophilic strains occurred at 10% w/v pulp density, giving 87% and 91.4% Zn recovery respectively, after 9days.Ore concentration by flotation is the most common approach in the base metal industries to enrich feed material for subsequent treatment through pyrometallurgical or pressure hydrometallurgical routes. During the last decade, bio-hydrometallurgical concentrate processes, such as tank bioleaching and the Geocoat™ process have been introduced ( The key step of any bioleaching process is the conversion of ferrous to ferric iron, according to Eq. The objective of this work was to investigate the potential of zinc recovery from a low-grade sphalerite mineral ore by comparing the performance of a mesophilic and a thermophilic microorganism in a draft tube fluidized bed bioreactor (DTFBB). The effects of varying certain process parameters, such as pulp density and initial pH were also tested. A complex zinc–lead sulfide ore supplied by Kooshk lead and zinc mine (Yazd, Iran) was used. Chemical analysis of the sample revealed: 22.8% S; 8% Fe; 9.32% Si; 8.9% Zn; 2.9% Pb; 2.3% CaO and less than 0.2% Cu. X-ray diffraction analysis of the ore showed sphalerite (ZnS) (13%), pyrite (FeS A thermophilic strain was isolated from sphalerite low-grade mineral ore. By direct observation, the thermophile For the comparison of leach performance, the mesophilic strain The isolation of thermophilic bacteria proceeded in the first step by adding 2 This isolation procedure was not required for the mesophilic strain as it was prepared from the German Collection of Microorganisms and Cell Cultures. The microbes were only passed through 3–5 During adaptation, 10 In the bioleaching tests, two draft tube fluidized bed bioreactors (DTFBB), as shown in In the second reactor control bioleach tests were carried out using low-grade mineral ore sterilized by autoclaving at 121 Microbial counting was done in a Thoma chamber of 0.1  Although more efficient at low pulp densities, too little solid material is processed in a given reactor volume, making the process economically less likely to be feasible. From this point of view, 10% pulp density is the best choice because it has an acceptable rate of Zn recovery and may still be justifiable economically. The fact that (32 The comparison of zinc recovery between mesophilic and thermophilic bacteria at 10% w/v pulp density and the respective standard conditions is shown in As was mentioned before, the variation of ferrous, ferric and total iron could be a good approach for investigating the performance of the system, since rapid conversion of ferrous to ferric is a sign of high bacterial activity, and consequently rapid zinc leaching should result. In The effect of initial pH on zinc recovery is shown in The bacterial populations measured in the bioreactor at pH Because the decline of mineralogically simple, high grade and easily exploitable ore deposits, there is a need for the base metals industry to investigate alternative methods for extraction from low-grade ore bodies. The present paper discussed a comprehensive investigation of the microbial leaching of low-grade sphalerite ore in a draft tube fluidized bed bioreactor. The thermophilic strain used, The comparison between the two microbial cultures did not indicate significant differences in leach performance, with the thermophile strain performing only marginally better. This would indicate that a high temperature leach process may not be required in the present context. A detailed techno-economic analysis of the present process at a full process scale is now required to determine whether the direct treatment of a low-grade material indeed represents a viable alternative to existing concentrator process route.