Experimental data on thermal expansion of rocks are necessary for many applications involving wellbore stability analysis, designing radioactive waste repositories, etc. Such information is especially actual for organic-rich shales that exhibits significant thermal anisotropy and heterogeneity and were not studied comprehensively previously. The coefficient of linear thermal expansion (CLTE) of 23 shale samples from three wells of three oilfields of the Bazhenov and Abalak formations (West Siberia, Russia) was studied with a quartz dilatometer specially adapted for the measurements on standard core plugs. Differential CLTE of shales was determined within temperature range 25–300 °C through every 25 °C for directions parallel and perpendicular to rock bedding. Strong correlations between the CLTE, thermal conductivity, and total organic carbon were established. Detailed profiles of CLTE along studied wells were obtained due to application of the optical scanning technique. These profiles fit well with total organic carbon obtained with pyrolysis. CLTE anisotropy was assessed for organic-rich shale samples together with thermal conductivity anisotropy. The thermal conductivity measurements before and after heating allowed estimation of structural changes in rock samples during heating.Information about the coefficient of linear thermal expansion (CLTE) of rock samples is necessary for estimation of thermal stress of rock mass that is caused by thermal expansion of rocks. Knowledge of CLTE allows predicting how rocks will behave under thermal stress A lot of factors can influence thermal expansion of rocks: temperature, pressure, mineralogical composition, crystal orientation, texture, porosity, pore fluid properties, and micro-fracturing. In general, the published data on rock thermal expansion are not numerous and involve a narrow range of minerals and rocks. Previously published CLTE data often do not provide the necessary quality of CLTE measurements for oil-rich shales. Particularly, the CLTE measurements with different orientation of principal axes of CLTE were previously performed only on several shale samples drilled from full-size core samples that cannot allow accounting for the influence of essential heterogeneity of organic-rich shales on quality of rock anisotropy characterization. Very often, CLTE anisotropy is not considered in previous publications at all. In most publications, experimental data on CLTE is given as average values within wide temperature ranges (50 °C and more), while results of differential CLTE measurements with a heating interval of 20–25 °C were not published previously, although a detailed information on CLTE vs temperature variations for different temperature ranges is necessary for rock stress modeling. In this paper, we present the experimental data on CLTE of organic-rich shales, obtained on 23 core plugs from three wells drilled through the Bazhenov and Abalak formations (West Siberia, Russia). A new methodology was used when the CLTE measurements were combined with high-precision continuous thermal conductivity profiling along all full-size core samples recovered during the well drilling. The optical scanning technique provided thermal conductivity profiling with a spatial resolution of 1 mm, determination of principal thermal conductivity tensor components on every core plug, and estimation of thermal anisotropy coefficient. The experimental data on CLTE of shales with different orientation of rock samples relatively bedding plane and within a wide temperature range (up to 800 °C) were published earlier. The data demonstrate that CLTE of shales increases with temperature, but sometimes CLTE stops its increasing within a particular temperature range. For example, for Devonian formation (USA) some shale samples went deformation above 200 °C, and CLTE started to decrease. heating rate has a little effect on thermal rock expansion; organic matter content has no effect on CLTE behavior with temperature before kerogen starts decomposing; perpendicularly oriented shale samples have the largest CLTE values. The previous results of CLTE measurements on shales and characteristics of the experimental procedure for different shale formations are shown on An effect of oil grade on thermal expansion was observed for the Anvil Points Mine shale samples cut at a different orientation to bedding. Shale samples have a high degree of thermal anisotropy Our analysis of published experimental data on rock CLTE showed insufficient information on thermal expansion of shales at different temperatures, namely: non-representative collections of investigated samples for organic-rich shale formations; lack of CLTE anisotropy analysis; the absence of standard procedure of sampling core plugs for CLTE investigation (the sampling point significantly influences results of shale formation characterization as most shale samples and formations are highly heterogeneous); lack of combined integrated investigations of CLTE together with other physical characteristics of shales (density, thermal conductivity, total organic carbon, etc.). The CLTE measurements at elevated temperatures were performed with a quartz dilatometer ( Quartz dilatometers are widely used for both laboratory and industrial studies of CLTE that is related to the following reasons dilatometers design is simple enough for construction; studied rock samples do not require complicated special treatment as the main requirement for the tested samples is the presence of two plane-parallel surfaces; the dilatometers provide sufficient elongation sensitivity for satisfactory quality of the CLTE measurements. The instrument used in our experiments has been developed specially for the CLTE measurements on rock samples temperature range is 20 … 300 °C; accuracy of the elongation measurement is 0.05 ÷ 0.1 μm; accuracy of the temperature measurement is ±0.1 °C; range of the heating rate is 0.1 ÷ 3.0 °C/min; precision of the CLTE measurements is not more than 4%; uncertainty of the CLTE measurements is not more than 1.8·10 The procedure of the CLTE determination is described in For studying CLTE anisotropy of shales a measurement methodology was developed that consists of two stages. At first stage, the CLTE measurements were carried out for the heating temperature range of 25–50 °C on the core plugs with different bedding orientations relatively to the dilatometer axis for anisotropy estimation (detection of main axis direction and values of principal components). Such heating temperature range of 25–50 °C for the CLTE anisotropy study is chosen to avoid irreversible changes of structure and properties of studied shale samples. At the second step, the CLTE measurements were carried out within a wide temperature range 25–300 °C when the bedding orientation of core plug corresponded to the principal axes of the CLTE established in the first stage. The high-precision measurements of the thermal conductivity (TC) of shale samples under study were performed within the CLTE investigation. The principal TC tensor components were determined for every core plug and additional measurements were performed with several optical scanning lines inclined to the rock bedding plane with different angles to determine principal axes of the rock TC. The complemented TC measurements were performed for every core plug twice - before and after the CLTE measurements. The goals of the TC measurements were as follows: to fix changes in the shale sample properties happened during the CLTE measurements when the shale samples were heated up to 300 °C; to determine principal axes of the rock TC to compare the principal TC axes directions with the principal CLTE axes directions. The laser thermal conductivity scanner was used for the TC measurements and thermal anisotropy investigation including detection of principal axes of the studied core plug TC ( TC components parallel (λ coefficient of thermal conductivity anisotropy К = λ thermal heterogeneity factor calculated separately for scanning parallel (β The laser thermal conductivity scanner (TCS) allows the measurements on standard core plugs prepared for the CLTE measurements and on full-size core samples as well that gives the possibility for comprehensive studying correlations CLTE vs TC excluding influence of essential heterogeneity of shales if the correlation studying is performed with CLTE and TC measurements on different core plugs. The laser thermal conductivity scanner was used for the same shale collection in combination with the quartz dilatometer for the following objectives: control of thermal anisotropy and heterogeneity of shales from the measurements on full-size core samples and core plugs as well; selection of a representative collection of full-size core samples along a well under study for the following CLTE investigations; selection of representative areas with the full-size core samples selected for the following core plug drilling accounting for heterogeneity and variations in TC anisotropy coefficient within the full-size core samples selected; detection of the direction of TC main axes; investigation of the correlation TC vs CLTE. Measurement of total organic carbon (TOC) for each studied rock sample was provided with the new-generation HAWK pyrolysis instrument ( The method of the TOC determination was also applied when the high resolution (1 mm) TC profiles inferred from the continuous optical scanning on all full-size core samples recovered during the well drilling are transformed into high resolution (1 mm) profiles of TOC. Twenty-three standard core plugs were prepared from full-size core samples recovered from three wells drilled through the Bazhenov and Abalak formations in different regions of West Siberia, Russia ( For the CLTE measurements, 23 cylindrical core plugs with diameter and height of 30 ± 1 mm were drilled from full-size core samples perpendicularly to full-size core axis (i.e., parallel to bedding). Core plug dimensions were controlled by triple measurements of diameter and height with a slide-gauge. The preparation procedure included quality control when the core plugs having damages and cracks were excluded from the following measurements. Surfaces of studied core plugs were cleaned from dust particles, surfaces of dense samples and standard samples were cleaned with ethanol. For the CLTE measurements on core plugs in radial direction polishing of side surface was performed in contact points with a sample holder of the dilatometer. Sampling of small pieces of core plugs was done and TOC measurements with the pyrolysis method for each small core piece were performed before the CLTE measurements. Measurement workflow on the core plugs included the following Density measurements with the gas volumetric method. The measurements of TC, thermal heterogeneity and anisotropy on both flat surfaces of every core plug with the laser optical scanning instrument at seven different directions of the optical scanning (including directions parallel and perpendicular to bedding). The measurements of mass of every core plug before the CLTE measurements. Measurements of CLTE values on six core plugs (BF, well 1, 2) at seven different directions (including directions parallel and perpendicular to bedding) at temperature range 25–50 °C. Measurements of CLTE within a temperature range of 25–300 °C in the direction parallel and perpendicular to the bedding plane. The measurements of mass of every core plug after the CLTE measurements and cooling the core plugs up to room temperature. Results of the TC measurements on core plugs of shale formations are presented in CLTE values for temperature range 25–50 °C for core plugs drilled from the full-size core samples of the BF and AF in the direction perpendicular to bedding are shown on Measurements of CLTE anisotropy were carried out for six core plugs in reduced temperature range (25–50 °C) to prevent any changes of physical parameters of studied core plugs. Results of CLTE measurements on samples №2, 3, 8 at different directions relative to the bedding plane are shown on The results given in CLTE measurements at high temperatures (25–300 °C) were performed for each studied core plug. The measurement results are shown on Comparison results of TC profiling before and after CLTE measurements for wells 1 and 2 showed no significant changes in thermal conductivity parallel perpendicular to bedding (less than uncertainty of thermal conductivity measurements) for most of core plugs. Only for sample №2 thermal conductivity perpendicular to bedding is decreased by 10%. As TC is sensitive to any changes in rocks, Integration of CLTE (parallel to bedding at temperature range 25–50 °C) and TC measurements on core plugs allows obtaining new correlation TC vs CLTE ( Obtained correlations allow predicting CLTE of BF rocks using density and TC data. The observed correlation TC vs CLTE for studied core plugs (α = 52.82·λ Reliable information on thermal expansion of particular shale formation could not be obtained from literature data and requires experimental investigation of CLTE on particular representative rock samples collection with advanced equipment and methodology, accounting for rock anisotropy. Quartz dilatometer allowed us obtaining CLTE values of Bazhenov and Abalak formations rocks and CLTE of studied rocks within temperature range 25–300 °C. Integration of quartz dilatometer and TCS gave the possibility to establish relations between studied parameters (including anisotropy). Obtained experimental data showed a high degree of CLTE anisotropy for the Bazhenov and Abalak formation rocks. The range of thermal expansion values of the BF rocks is much higher than values of carbonates, limestones and clay minerals. It is caused by high TOC in studied rock samples (while the thermal expansion of organic matter is much higher than the thermal expansion of rock mineral matrix). Directions of CLTE anisotropy main axes were obtained for each rocks sample by multiple measurements in different directions in a short temperature window with following using the least square method. Found directions correspond closely to the direction of the main axes of TC tensor, that can be used in practice (e.g., for express evaluation of main CLTE directions with optical scanning and correct positioning of a sample before performing time-consuming CLTE measurements). New correlations between CLTE, thermal conductivity, TOC and density were established and explained by high sensitivity of these parameters to the presence of organic matter in studied rock samples. Correlation CLTE vs TC showed that core plugs for CLTE investigations should be sampled according to the results of continuous thermal profiling on full-size core samples. Temperature behavior of thermal expansion of the Bazhenov and Abalak formations rocks turned out to be complex. It agrees with previous observations and differs from CLTE behavior of other sedimentary rocks (demonstrating a monotonous increase of thermal expansion with temperature). The non-monotonic behavior is, probably, related to bitumen exudation and evaporation of volatile components during heating or non-linear behavior of CLTE of organic matter with temperature. New experimental data showed that the investigation of thermal expansion of organic-reach shales requires an integrated approach to explain observed features like anisotropy and non-monotonic behavior with temperature. The authors declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this paper. The following is the Supplementary data to this article: Supplementary data to this article can be found online at Average CLTE is calculated from the following formula: Considering that transmitting elements of dilatometer (tube and push bar) can be made of different quartz glass with unknown CLTE values and temperatures of push bar and tube are different, it is necessary to correct expansion of dilatometer quartz system. Such correction is made with a standard sample of quartz glass with a calibration certificate. CLTE of quartz glass is calculated with the following formula: 