Alunite tailings, a secondary resource from copper metallurgy industry in China, are considered a potential resource for both the production of alumina and potash fertilizer, since alunite tailings contain abundant alunite with associated impurities of kaolinite, dickite and quartz. In this work, the direct leaching of alunite from alunite tailings in the highly concentrated KOH solution is proposed. Under appropriate leaching conditions, such as temperature below 90°C and KOH concentration above 13.5mol·L−1, most of alunite is dissolved while kaolinite, dickite and quartz are still remained in the residue. Mastersizer, X-ray diffraction, infrared radiation spectrometer, Raman spectrometer and scanning electron microscopy/energy-dispersive spectroscopy are used to characterize alunite tailings samples before and after leaching. The leaching kinetics of alunite from alunite tailings in the concentrated KOH solution is described using a shrinking core model controlled by the surface chemical reaction. The key kinetics parameters, such as the activated energy and the reaction order, are determined based on the leaching experimental data. The dissolution mechanism of alunite from alunite tailings in the concentrated KOH solution is considered, and is used to account for the reaction order.With the rapid economic and population growth, the consumption of grain has increased significantly, thus affecting the demand of potash fertilizer ( The crystal structure of alunite KAl A great many of investigations have been made on the utilization of alunite and recovery of its valuable products ( Knowledge of mechanisms and kinetics of dissolution to predict the behavior of minerals in solutions is beneficial to understanding the leaching reactions. There are four models that are currently used to interpret the rate of dissolution reactions, including the adsorption model, the surface complexation model, the precursor-species model and the ion-transfer model ( The dissolution kinetics of calcined alunite in NaOH solution has been studied. This reaction was found to be controlled by diffusion through the solid product layer with the apparent energy of 18.29 The mineral reserve of copper mine at Zijing Mountain is nearly 428 million tons. Nowdays, about 18,000 The alunite tailings, which contain abundant alunite with associated impurities of kaolinite, dickite and quartz are potentially economical resources for both alumina and potash production. In this work, we intend to recover potassium and aluminum from alunite contained in alunite tailings using the KOH direct leaching process at low temperature (less than 100 Through mineral flotation from copper tailings, alunite tailings were obtained from the Zijin Mining Group Co., Ltd. (Shanghang, Fujian, China). The chemical composition of alunite tailings was measured using the inductively coupled plasma optical emission spectroscopy (ICP-OES, Spectra ARCOS, Germany), as listed in The particle size distribution of alunite tailings was measured by the Mastersizer (Mastersizer 2000, Britain), and the result was shown in Potassium hydroxide was of analytical grade (Sinopharm Chemical Reagent Co. Ltd., China) and was used without further treatment. Deionized water was used to prepare solutions in all experiments. The leaching reactor used in this work was a 500 For each experimental run, a given amount of KOH solution with 10.0 After the leaching process of alunite tailings, the slurry was quickly filtered under a vacuum. The leaching residue was washed with the hot distilled water for at least three times and then dried at 100 According to XRD analysis for alunite tailings, as shown in Since the whole potassium element is contained in alunite and the aluminum element is contained in alunite, kaolinite and dickite, here the potassium content is used to represent the dissolution rate of alunite. Furthermore, the aluminum and silicon content is also used to evaluate the leaching conditions. The potassium, aluminum and silicon leaching ratio from alunite tailings, Firstly we shall find the appropriate leaching conditions for the dissolution of alunite in KOH solution, and control the dissolutions of kaolinite, dickite and quartz as small as possible to reduce the expensive KOH consumption. And then, the dissolution mechanism and leaching kinetics of alunite from alunite tailings in highly concentrated KOH solution is investigated in detail. The KOH direct leaching experiments of alunite tailings are carried out with the different particle size, stirring speed, leaching temperature, leaching time, KOH concentration and alkali-to-ore mass ratio, and the potassium, aluminum and silicon leaching ratios from alunite tailings are measured. The effects of these leaching parameters on the potassium leaching ratio are investigated, as shown in In In  In order to find an appropriate condition for the dissolution of alunite and control the dissolutions of kaolinite, dickite and quartz in KOH solution, it is needed to evaluate the effect of temperature on potassium, aluminum and silicon leaching ratios. As shown in When the leaching temperature is controlled below 100 The alkali-to-ore mass ratio (KOH mass/alunite tailings mass) is also required to set a high value in order to keep a high concentration KOH solution during the leaching reaction process. The amount of KOH used during the leaching reaction is an important factor, influencing mass transportation and chemical reaction as well as economy of the whole process because of the recycling procedure in the whole process ( In order to understand the dissolution behavior of alunite, kaolinite, dickite and quartz from alunite tailings in a high concentration KOH solution, the leaching residues are characterized using Mastersizer, XRD, IR spectrometer, Raman spectrometer and SEM-EDS respectively. The particle size distribution of leaching residues with different time at 90  To further confirm the structural changes of alunite tailings framework during the leaching process, IR spectra and Raman spectra are recorded for alunite tailings and residues after KOH leaching with different time at 60 The infrared vibration peaks of tetrahedron structure in alunite crystal, v The Raman characteristic peaks of translation of potassium ions (162.2 The morphological images and the related EDS results of the residues with 20 Through the analysis of the potassium, aluminum and silicon leaching ratio from alunite tailings, and the characterization for the leaching residue by Mastersizer, XRD, IR spectrometer, Raman spectrometer and SEM-EDS, we have found that alunite in alunite tailings can be individually dissolved into KOH solution under the above recommended leaching conditions, while the kaolinite, dickite and quartz impurities in the alunite tailings are still kept in the leaching residue with similar particle size and morphology. Furthermore, the experimental results demonstrate that the mineralogical relation of alunite with other minerals (kaolinite, dickite and quartz) in alunite tailings is not the inter-growth or interlock. These minerals might be independent and liberated forms, and are mainly hosted in intergranular position of other minerals. In this section, we study the dissolution mechanism of alunite from alunite tailings in KOH solution. Based on the characteristic analyses of the leaching residue using IR and Raman spectrum, it can be indicated that the bonds of alunite are attacked by hydroxide ions during the dissolution process in concentrated KOH solution. Since the sulfur–oxygen bond energy, with a value of about 30,147 On the basis of the novel theory proposed by Crundwell ( The rates of formation of cations and anions from the surface in the rate determining step ( Since the dissolution is congruent and stoichiometric, the rate of formation of cations is equal to the rate of formation of anions. Therefore, Eqs. The order of reaction with respect to OH According to the kinetics theory of classical shrinking core model for the liquid–solid reaction ( Liquid boundary layer diffusion control: Chemical reaction control: Residual layer diffusion control: In Eq. The controlling step for the leaching reaction of alunite tailings in the concentrated KOH solution is determined by fitting Eqs.  As shown in Eq. As shown in Eq. The direct leaching of alunite from alunite tailings in highly concentrated KOH solution is proposed. Under the appropriate leaching conditions, such as temperature below 90 The dissolution mechanism of alunite from alunite tailings in highly concentrated KOH solution is proposed, where individual aluminum atoms at the surface react with hydroxide ions to form activated complexes and sulfate tetrahedral at the surface depart intact. According to the proposed dissolution mechanism, the predicted order of the reaction with respect to OH Through the comparison between the experimental results and the predicted values, a shrinking core model with the surface chemical reaction control can be used to predict the leaching kinetics of alunite from alunite tailings in the concentrated KOH solution at 50 The authors wish to acknowledge