Enhancement of foam formation and stability by solid particles has been attributed to particle hydrophobicity and size. In this article it is shown that particle shape is a significant factor affecting foam formation and stability. Silica (spherical) and sepiolite (fibrous) particles with diameter d
                     90
                     =38μm, and contact angle of 66° and 60°, respectively, were used to form foams by stirring the particle suspensions in the presence of 1×10−4
                     M sodium dodecyl sulphate at 1000rpm. Measurements of foam volume versus time and different particle concentrations (0, 0.01, 0.1, 1.0, 2.0 and 4.0% by weight) during the foam generation and decay show that the silica spherical particles did not affect the foamability significantly whereas the fibrous sepiolite particles substantially increased the foamability, reaching a maximum beyond 0.1wt% particle concentration. Both micron silica spheres and sepiolite needles increased the rate of foam decay, reaching maximum at 0.1wt% concentration. Overall, the lifetime of foams stabilized by sepiolite fibres was significantly longer than the lifetime of foams stabilized by silica spheres. It is hypothesised that the difference in the foam formation and stability is related to the contact between the particles. For example, two spheres can contact only at one point, while two fibres can entangle to increase contact area. Under such conditions, aggregates of fibrous particles can have a large amount of hydrated water, leading to increased suspension viscosity and the formation of an interfacial crosslink network to stabilize foams.Foam is important in many industrial processes such as pharmacology, foods, the chemical industry, oil and mineral recovery technologies The effect of particles on foam formation and stability has been studied intensively during the last four decades Experiments on foam films stabilized by solid particles This article aims to investigate the multi-facet roles of the particle hydrophobicity, size, shape and concentration, and the surfactant concentration in the formation and stability of foams which are employed in the mineral separation industry worth trillions of dollars annually A sepiolite sample (PANGEL S9, Tolsa Group, Spain) was supplied by Omya Australia Pty Ltd. and was used as received. Sepiolite is a hydrated magnesium silicate with the ideal formula Mg A high purity silica was obtained from Commercial Minerals Ltd. (the Gold Coast, Australia). The silica particles were powdered by wet grinding to mimic the size distribution of the sepiolite sample. The size distribution was measured using a Malvern Mastersizer 2000E (Malvern Instruments Ltd., UK). The SEM micrographs of the sepiolite sample were obtained using a JEOL JSM-6300 (JEOL Ltd., Japan) Scanning Electron Microscope with accelerating voltage of 12 The water contact angle on the sepiolite and silica particles was measured using the gravimetric version of the Washburn method As the liquid penetrates into the particle bed by capillary pressure, the position of the wetting interface can be determined from the measured mass, Sodium dodecyl sulphate (SDS) was supplied by Fluka Chemical Corp. (USA) and was purified by multiple re-crystallizations with ethanol. The purity of SDS was tested by measuring the surface tension isotherm by the pendant bubble method, which showed no minimum and was compared with the literature data A foam tester device, named Foam Tester R2000 (SITA Messtechnik, GmbH, Germany), shown in Prior to the measurements, the foaming solutions of 1 Sepiolite mineral structure consists of two typical structural units (see Unlike other plate-like clay minerals, sepiolite is non-swelling clay and its granules do not desintegrate even when saturated with water and other liquids. Colloidal grades of sepiolite can be dispersed into water or other liquid systems using intensive mixing. Shown in The silica particle size distribution is shown in Mercury porosimetry shows that the contact angle of the sepiolite with the mercury was about 140°, the (BET) surface area of the sepiolite particles was 230  It is interesting to note that the particle suspensions did not produce any foam in the absence of SDS (results not shown). This feature indicates that, under the experimental conditions, the surfactant was needed to create air bubbles and thus foam. Once foams were generated, the particles played an important role in stabilizing the foam bubbles and increasing the foamability. The experimental results of foam generation are presented in     The contact angle (66°) of both sepiolite and silica particles is below the critical value for spherical particle (90°). In such case, the particles should prevent the foam films from rupturing only in the spot of their locations. Therefore, the overall effect should depend on their concentration in the foam. According to Ref. The effect of the particle shape on the foamability and foam stability was studied using fine sepiolite micro-needles and silica micro-spheres with similar size distributions and contact angles (intermediate hydrophobicity), and concentrations of 0.01 The foam tests were conducted using a commercial foam tester, which allowed separate studies on foamability (maximal foam volume) and foam stability (rate of foam decay). The sepiolite micro-needles increased significantly both foamability and the rate of foam decay reaching a maximum effect at 0.1 Stoyan Karakashev thanks the EC/‘Marie Curie Actions’ for the financial support through the