The study focused on the use of sulfurdioxide on the cobalt electrowinning and its advantages over conventional electrowinning cell practice are reported. The results indicated that addition of sulfur dioxide in the electrowinning cell reduces the sludge formation with small increase in the current efficiency. SEM response showed an improvement in morphology and DSC analysis gave an idea of the microstructure which is close to FCC lattice system.About 70% of the world's total cobalt production is obtained from cobalt sulfate solutions through hydrometallurgical routes ( Thus, there is a need of an additive which can improve morphology without disturbing the cobalt metal production. Sulfurdioxide is a versatile reagent for processing cobaltic oxide minerals where it reduces Co The electrowinning experiments were performed in an acrylic cell of 1.4 Varying volumes of 50 As studied by In the conventional electrowinning cell, at the anode, oxidation of cobalt and generation of acid takes place as per Eqs. Oxidation of SO From the above Eqs. Addition of sulfur dioxide in the electrowinning cell reduces the sludge formation with small increase in the current efficiency. The cyclic voltammograms of 45 In the cyclic voltammogram in presence of SO The DSC thermogram of cobalt metal produced by conventional electrowinning practice is given in  Comparison of the two SEM images indicates that metal deposition in presence of small amount of sulfurdioxide as additive leads to a uniform and fine distribution of deposits where as the deposition without sulfurdioxide leads to a random distribution with uneven growth of metal particles. From the above study, following points can be concluded. Addition of sulfur dioxide in the electrowinning cell reduces the sludge formation with small increase in the current efficiency. This will avoid reprocessing of the sludge, cleaning of the cell and result in the increased productivity. The mechanism of sludge reduction is proposed on basis of cyclic voltammograms where SO The addition of SO