There is little in-depth study on the downstream processing characteristics of granulated PGM-containing converter matte, particularly related to grinding and liberation behavior closely associated with leaching, and also as a function of iron endpoint specific mineralogy. Moreover, there is limited physical property data available, such as hardness and breakage of converter matte mineral structures that allows for considering a possible dependence between the mineralogy and the downstream processing characteristics of converter matte. The aim of this study was to investigate a relationship between indentation hardness, breakage and the mineralogy of two different iron end point converter mattes namely Fe_0.15% and Fe_5.17%. This also allowed for a subsequent investigation to relate the mineralogy to the integrated downstream processing characteristics of granulated converter matte.
                  A Nano-indentation tester was used to measure the indentation hardness of mineral structures. The indentation system also had the ability to test the breakage characteristics of the respective mineral structures by applying a preset load. Laboratory batch grinding tests were conducted at various specific energies with respect to granulated high and low iron mattes. A high resolution field-emission scanning electron microscope was utilized for mineralogical analysis. The perfect mixing ball mill model was subsequently used to assess the breakage rates of matte particles and minerals. A mineral liberation analyzer was used to investigate the liberation characteristics of mineral structures of interest.
                  The investigations revealed that the minerals and associated boundaries showed relatively different indentation hardness. The indentation-induced breakage of nickel sulfide, copper sulfide and NiCu-alloy structures appeared preferential and related to the iron end point. The softest mineral was found to be copper sulfide, which exhibited the average indentation hardness of 1975 and 2978MPa within the low and high iron matte respectively. The increasingly harder minerals were nickel sulfide and NiCu-alloy in both low and high iron mattes with mean values around 5000MPa. The laboratory batch grinding of the converter mattes at specific energy inputs resulted in product size distributions correlated to the underlying mineralogy. Although the trends for the breakage rates was found to be similar for both mattes, the matte with Fe content of 5.17% exhibited higher breakage rates in the specific energy ranges from 5kWh/t to 25kWh/t. This indicated that the matte with 5.17% Fe produces finer product than that of the 0.15% Fe matte at the same energy level. Moreover, a higher degree of overall liberation was achieved for copper sulfide and NiCu-alloy present within the high iron matte particles compared to particles within the low iron matte. 40% of particles within the high iron matte are completely liberated at 5kWh/t specific energy, in contrast to about 20% within the low iron matte. However, Ni extraction achieved during leaching of minerals within the high iron matte was lower as opposed to minerals of the low iron matte. This was attributed to favorable Ni mineralization and chemistry of the low Fe matte which appears to be the most important driver for the downstream processing.The most significant PGM-rich sulfide ore is located within the Bushveld Complex of South Africa. The major ore hosting platinum group elements (PGEs), nickel, copper and cobalt is Merensky, with lesser amounts of base metals in the UG-2 horizon, and larger amounts, in the Platreef horizon ( The process route for the production of base and platinum-group metals from natural sulfide concentrates commonly requires the conversion of high‑iron furnace matte into an iron-lean converter matte. This is followed by pre-treatment through cooling of the iron-lean molten matte, physical processing of the solidified matte and hydrometallurgical metal extraction. The matte grinding and classification section at Lonmin is located within the Base Metal Refinery (BMR) and includes a ball mill in closed configuration with a hydrocyclone, followed by thickening of the matte slurry. A pictorial flow diagram illustrating the relevant batch grinding operation and unit leach process within the BMR is shown in First stage atmospheric and second stage pressure leaching is utilized to produce nickel sulfate crystals, copper cathode and a PGM concentrate at the BMR ( Despite considerable industry context, limited in-depth and coherent studies concerning the effect of converter matte mineralogical quality on downstream processes such as grinding and leaching were found in both industrial and scholarly literature. Physical property knowledge of granulated converter matte mineral structures was hardly available and even less so in relation to grinding, liberation and leaching processes. A systematic investigation was required to address these extensive knowledge gaps with respect to solidified converter mattes in an industrial framework. The initial aim of this study was to investigate the micro hardness and breakage characteristics of two dissimilar iron endpoint converter mattes towards establishing an empirical dependence with underlying mineralogy. Such a dependence would be the basis for further investigations with respect to the grinding, liberation and leaching characteristics of the converter mattes, as a function of iron endpoint. Detailed descriptions of the matte characteristics and associated mineral assemblages can be found in series of publications ( Ten primary granulated converter matte samples, each having a mass between seven and eight kilograms, were representatively sampled by means of the automated sampling system at the Western Platinum Smelter. These samples were initially distinguished by the production date, blow numbers and preliminary bulk chemistry obtained from the in-house laboratory at Lonmin. The primary matte samples are indicative of variable final stage converting practice and also reflect dissimilar final iron endpoint compositions. Focus was placed on three primary production samples, representing the range in iron endpoints. A multi-step mass reduction procedure was subsequently followed to generate representative samples ( Laboratory batch grinding tests were conducted to investigate the grinding characteristics of converter matte particles in relation to mineralogy. Each representative feed or test sample of the high and low iron matte had a mass of approximately 1.9 The modified size-mass balanced equation for the perfect mixing ball mill model ( Three representative analytical samples were obtained from the respective ground products after each specific energy grind for liberation analysis. Each sample was split into three aliquots of approximate equal amounts. Graphite was mixed into each aliquot and jointly embedded in 30 The principal results of the mineral indentation hardness testing of both the high and low iron mattes are reported in  In the literature, there is sparse micro-hardness data available pertaining to converter matte mineral structures with which to compare the results in In order to verify whether there are differences in hardness values between different phases as well as different iron end points, F-test and The copper sulfide/NiCu-alloy boundary found to be the softest, and displays the highest average indentation hardness of 3124  The indentation-induced breakage of the low iron matte was previously illustrated and discussed in The following sub-sections include the specific energy-particle size reduction relationship, in addition to the particle and mineral breakage rates.  The cumulative mass percentage passing sieve size is plotted against the feed particle size in  Most interesting in   Examination of the ball mill-induced breakage in  The product size distribution plot for the low iron matte in   In most cases it is difficult to separate the breakage rate from the discharge rate expressed in Eq.  The decrease in breakage rates for product particles above 3.35 The breakage rates are subsequently compared with respect to the different iron endpoints at constant specific energy.  During particle grinding of both mattes at 15 The breakage rates of minerals influence that of the host particles and are therefore considered below. The effect of specific energy on the logarithmic r/d versus grain size relationship of copper sulfide present within the high and low iron mattes is illustrated in  The breakage rates of copper sulfide in the high iron matte, observed in  The r/d ratio of the NiCu-alloy for the low iron matte, displayed in In summation, the initial matte feed of the high iron matte is characterized by a coarser particle size distribution than that of the low iron matte. The laboratory batch grinding of the converter mattes at specific energy inputs resulted in iron endpoint related product size distributions. A significant finding is that a smaller measure of specific energy would be necessary to produce the required product size for the Lonmin BMR using the high iron matte. It would appear that most of the specific energy available for grinding is expended breaking the nickel sulfide matrix. A higher degree of breakage is achieved for the nickel sulfide matrix of the high iron matte. Considering copper sulfide and alloy phase structures in a nickel sulfide 3D volume illustrated in An FEI 600F FEG MLA conducting the GXMAP (Grain X-ray Mapping) and the more advanced XBSE (Extended Backscattered Electron) analytical routine was used for mineral grain size distribution and liberation measurements. The liberation classes, displayed in 10% intervals in The mineral liberation distributions are consequently compared with regard to iron endpoints at different specific energy levels in   The degree of NiCu-alloy liberation at 25 The purpose of the first stage atmospheric leach within the BMR is to optimize Ni extraction, while at the same time precipitate all Cu in the spent electrolyte circulated from the electrolytic tank house. According to It was proposed that converter matte particles, characteristic of variable iron endpoints, will affect the selective leach chemistry of Ni dissolution and Cu cementation with measurable variations in metal extraction. The aim of the related study was therefore to quantify and characterize the dissolution kinetics of Ni into solution and the cementation kinetics of Cu onto converter matte as a function of iron endpoint as well as spent electrolyte composition. The conditions in the first stage atmospheric leach within the BMR were experimentally simulated as closely as possible (  High iron matte particles are expected to attain a higher degree of particle fragmentation due to grinding than particles of the low iron matte. This means that more surface area of the nickel sulfide matrix of the high iron matte would be available for the enhancement of Ni dissolution kinetics. The complete liberation of NiCu-alloy within high iron matte particles would most likely be low, but marginally higher than from those within the low iron matte. This will therefore also expose completely free NiCu-alloy surface area for the promotion of Ni dissolution kinetics. It is further supposed that the elevated concentration of Fe in high iron matte permits for the reaction with Cu in solution, which may result in undesirable iron compounds. The investigation of the physical property, batch grinding and mineral liberation characteristics of the high and low iron mattes with connection to leaching revealed the followings; The relevant minerals and associated boundaries showed differences in indentation hardness. The minerals and boundaries within the high iron matte were found to be harder than within the low iron matte. The indentation-induced breakage of nickel sulfide and copper sulfide appeared preferential and related to the indentation hardness. The resultant particle size distribution of granulated matte could be associated with the specific iron-containing matte. The high iron matte obtained a coarser particle size distribution than the low iron matte. However, the application of various specific grinding energies to solidified matte grinding resulted in the high iron matte obtaining a finer product size distribution than the low iron matte. Particles of the high iron matte were found to break at a faster rate with an increase in the application of specific energy to grinding than particles of the low iron matte. Copper sulfide minerals present within the low iron matte particles were found to break at an overall slower rate than those within the high iron matte particles with an increase in the application of specific grinding energy. The overall liberation of copper sulfide and NiCu-alloy within particles of the low iron matte was found to increase with the application of more specific energy to grinding. It was also observed that a higher degree of overall liberation was achieved for copper sulfide and NiCu-alloy present within the high iron matte particles compared to particles within the low iron matte. A lower degree of Ni extraction was achieved from minerals within the high iron matte as opposed to minerals from the low iron matte. It is believed that although the higher Fe matte produces product size requirements faster than the low Fe matte and produces better liberation and availability of surface area for leaching, favorable Ni mineralization and chemistry of the low Fe matte is the most important driver for the downstream processing. Our colleague, friend, Dr. Elton Thyse, passed away on 14 April 2015. Dr. Thyse, a graduate of the Department of Mining Engineering at the University of the Witwatersrand, and with industrial experience at De Beers, joined the Department of Process Engineering at Stellenbosch University, South Africa, in 2003. Dr. Thyse completed his Master's Degree by Research in 2008 and his PhD in December 2014. His PhD study combined high temperature thermochemistry, mineralogy, microscopy techniques on the effect of iron end point on downstream processing of Peirce-Smith Converter matte. Dr. Thyse published number of peer reviewed journal papers as well as refereed conference proceedings. From January 2015 Dr. Thyse worked as Senior Lecturer in the Department, fulfilling his dream of using his wide knowledge and experience to teach and help others. His patience and tolerance were exemplary. Liked and respected by all, Dr. Thyse tragic and sudden passing at a young age has left a painful hole in our lives as colleagues and friends. We miss him profoundly. Lonmin (Western Platinum) is thanked for providing converter matte samples and permission to publish the results of this study. The contributions of the staff at the High Resolution TEM Unit at Nelson Mandela University and Prof. F. Viljoen of University of Johannesburg are gratefully acknowledged.