Recycling of waste polymers by the combination of polymer wastes with metallic precursors is a thread which has not been given wide attention by researchers. In this study, we reported on the evaluation of mechanical properties of hybrid nanocomposites via nanoindentation technique. Hybrid organic/inorganic nanocomposites consisted of recycled expanded polystyrene (rEPS) (organic polymer); Fe(NO3)3·9H2O and Zn(NO3)2·6H2O (metallic precursors) were developed through solvothermal method. The hybridized nanocomposites obtained were characterized by different techniques, comprising X-ray diffraction (XRD), Fourier transform-infrared (FTIR), scanning electron microscopy (SEM), transmission electron microscopy (TEM) with particle size distribution (PSD) and Selected area (electron) diffraction (SAED) pattern, thermogravimetric (TGA) analysis and nanoindentation technique. The results obtained showed the hybrid Fe2O3 NCs under the 20 mN indentation load were having the best indentation depth of 0.5 nm, nanohardness of 1.20 GPa, reduced modulus of 8.20 GPa, elastic strain recovery of 0.18 GPa and anti-wear resistance of 0.025 GPa. The applicability of the hybrid NCs was demonstrated via the enhancement of their mechanical properties.The multi-hydra facets challenges of recycling of plastic waste has been ‘a thorn in the flesh’ issues confronting many nations of the world with respect to production and consumption of plastic materials. It has become very crucial to design a new and functional hybrid materials such as nanocomposite (NC) with enhanced properties Furthermore, one of the vital inorganic precursors that has been of valuable usage is Iron (III) Nona hydrate nitrate [(Fe(NO Similarly, zinc nitrate hexahydrate [Zn(NO Therefore, it is expected that this present study would be helpful in addressing the issue of the structures of plastic polymer material (PPM) which is often degraded thereby leaving poor thermal and mechanical properties resulting from poor PW management. Taking into consideration the importance of the development of nanocomposites using organic-inorganic material, it can be said that there has been little, or no study carried out till date on the fusion of recycled expanded polystyrene (rEPS)/inorganic metals via solvothermal technique to produce nanocomposites while evaluating the mechanical properties of the nanocomposites. Iron (III) nitrate nonahydrate [Fe (NO The samples were prepared according to Youssef et al. XRD analysis was used to investigate the crystallinity of the synthesized samples. This was carried out on X- ray diffractometry (PANalytical Empyrean) with Cu-Kα1 radiation. The chemical structures and functional groups present in the rEPS, Fe Nanoindentation methods are used for the evaluation of mechanical characteristics of polymeric materials. To estimate these properties via nanoindentation technique, several factors are put into consideration, some of which are shown in The following parameters are defined as: the indentation depths, Also, according to the Oliver-Pharr approach, the contact stiffness (S), the indented area (A) at maximum load and the reduced elastic modulus E Equating Eqs. The elastic modulus (E) is therefore evaluated as; Furthermore, In the same way, hardness, H, is obtained from the loading curve and is represented as the maximum normal load, P Besides, there is an expression connecting hardness H, reduced modulus The preparation of the synthesized recycled expanded polystyrene (rEPS) material (control experiment) and the hybrid nanocomposites (NCs) was carried out using a solvothermal method as shown in XRD analysis is used to determine the crystallinity and crystalline phases of materials. The chemical structures and functional groups present in the NCs were studied using FTIR spectroscopy. The FTIR spectra ( The morphology and elemental compositions of rEPS (control), hybrid Fe TEM was used to gather information on the incorporation of nanoparticles (NPs) within the polymer matrix and to determine the particle size diameters (PSDs) of the NCs. TGA was used to determine the influence of the introduction of NPs into polymer matrix and the thermal stability of the polymers. The TGA and first derivative curves for the rEPS and the NCs are shown in The mechanical characterization of materials are extremely challenging to evaluate because of the prevalent upshot of the triggering substrate The load-displacement tests carried out on Fe Furthermore, the reduction of indentation depth with the rise in hardness corresponds with the fact that hardness rises with an upsurge in weight percent of Fe The nanohardness and elastic modulus of the synthesized hybrid Fe In addition, The elastic strain recovery and anti-wear resistance for Fe In this study, a simple solvothermal process was utilized to prepare Fe The raw/processed data required to reproduce these findings cannot be shared at this time as the data also forms part of an ongoing study. The authors declared that there is no Conflict of Interest. This work was supported by the Supplementary data to this article can be found online at The following are the Supplementary data to this article: 