Minerals are now being extracted from deep mines due to drying up of resource in shallow ground. The need for suitable supports and ground control mechanisms for safe mining necessitates proper pillar design with filling technology. In addition, high horizontal stress may cause collapse of hanging wall and footwall rocks, hence designing of suitable crown pillars is absolutely necessary for imposing overall safety of the stopes. This paper provides a methodology for the evaluation of the required thickness of crown pillars for safe operation at depth ranging from 600m to 1000m. Analyses are conducted with the results of 108 non-linear numerical models considering Drucker-Prager material model in plane strain condition. Material properties of ore body rock and thickness of crown pillars are varied and safety factors of pillars estimated. Then, a generalized statistical relationship between the safety factors of crown pillars with the various input parameters is developed. The developed multivariate regression model is utilized for generating design/stability charts of pillars for different geo-mining conditions. These design charts can be used for the design of crown pillar thickness with the depth of the working, taking into account the changes of the rock mass conditions in underground metal mine.Most of the underground metal mines in India and abroad are being operated at depths beyond 600 The stability of deep high stress rock masses is influenced by many factors, among which the structural characteristics and mechanical states of rock masses are the primary parameters. Stability of structures in deep underground mines can be broadly divided into three different categories; global, regional and local depending on volume of rock involved Although a thick crown pillar provides support for the hanging wall and aid with overall stability of the stopes, but at the same time it may be uneconomical from the mineral conservation point of view. Thus, optimization of pillar dimension is very important for metalliferous mines In India, as well as in abroad, there has been very few works devoted for the comprehensive design of dimension of crown and sill pillars and also to perform stability analysis of the entire stope for deep seated deposits. Existing design methods are limited in scope and the mostly used ones are the empirical techniques or the “rules of thumb” approach. Some researcher suggested a methodology for the evaluation of sinkhole hazard in soft carbonate rocks, combining seismic and mine engineering methods The main purpose of this research is to develop a statistical model for the safety factor of crown pillars followed by development of simple design charts which can be used for the design of crown pillar thickness with the depth of the working, taking into account the changes of the rock mass conditions in the studied underground metal mine. The charts is prepared in such a way that it is easy to use for field personnel and contains rock mass conditions, thickness of ore body, thickness of pillars, rock mass properties and depth variables. In this study, numerical analysis are conducted based on parametric study considering a steeply dipping ore body having reducing width with depth of mining (the most common type of orebody shape in India), changing rock mass conditions such as geological strength index (GSI), uniaxial compressive strength (UCS or The ore body of the case study mine has varying dip as well as width as shown in Geotechnical study of the drives, drifts, and pillars has been conducted to determine the condition and spacing of joints so that RMR of hanging wall, footwall and orebody rock mass can be obtained. It may be noted that hanging wall of drives and pillars are cracked and fractured at the deeper level as observed visually in the mine as shown in Geotechnical study shows that the variation of GSI of the orebody rock mass ranges between 42 and 75, uniaxial compressive strength lies between 46.23 Rock mass, orebody and openings are modeled with 6-noded quadratic triangular elements. These elements have two degrees of freedom at each node: translations in coordinate axes, i.e., The solid models as well as the finite element meshes are developed using ANSYS software tool. The bottom boundary of the models is roller-constrained. A uniform load distribution of gradient 0.053 In-situ model is developed to analyze the stress conditions of rock prior to excavation of the mine. For this purpose, in-situ models of same dimension as the solid models (previously mentioned) have been developed, which includes orebody, hangwall and footwall. In-situ models provide the ideas about stress and displacement of rock mass prior to mining or excavation. Openings or excavation in rock mass causes re-orientation of stress regime and change in displacement in the rock mass. A total of 27 in-situ finite element models are developed by varying the material properties of rock mass. An additional pressure of 16.98 Results of finite element models are analyzed in terms of stresses, displacements and extent of yield zones in the pillars. Based on these results, safety factor are determined in the middle of crown pillars and relationship between safety factors and input parameters are determined using multiple regression analysis technique. The major and minor principal stresses represent the maximum and minimum normal stresses at a particular point in the rock mass. The values of major and minor principal stresses at a point in the rock mass along with mechanical and rock mass properties determine whether yielding or failure may occur at that point. Major Principal stress profiles along the paths Yield or failure zones are defined based on the plastic strain intensity factor around an excavation or in the pillars. In general, higher plastic strain intensity value represents more severe yielding or failure condition. In this study 4  The novelty of the study lies in developing relationship between input parameters such as UCS,  In general, the safety factor (  Combined effect of depth and width of excavation for different thicknesses having geo-mining conditions as GSI Incremental effect in Incremental effect in The rest 64 cases of geo-mining conditions are the variations of both GSI and UCS from 50   In the previous section, it is mentioned that GSI of rock mass directly influences the extent of yield zone around an excavation. Similar influence of GSI on To investigate this further, change of safety factor i.e., Δ Variability of As mentioned before, from the 108 finite element models, 432 The In the following, several examples are presented to validate the results obtained from the regression model. Results of regression model have also been compared with those obtained from FEM models in terms of effect of Based on the regression model, safety factor in the middle of the crown and sill pillar can be forecasted for various combinations of,  A stability chart signifies the relationship between In the following, stability charts are prepared as ZONE-1 represents unstable conditions ( ZONE-2 represents potentially unstable conditions ( ZONE-3 represents stable conditions ( Development of stability/design chart (Example 1. An ore body having decreasing width with depth of working similar to the case study mine). Let’s consider two different geo-mining conditions, i.e., (1) GSI From the regression models Eq. The motivation of this study has been obtained from the demand for development of a suitable design method of crown pillars especially for deep underground hard rock mining in varying geo-mining conditions. This study has comprehensively analyzed stresses, displacements, yield zones for a variety of geo-mining conditions pertaining to deep hard rock mining in India and develops multivariate regression models for generating design charts of crown pillars. It has been observed that a 5 This study develops multivariate regression models based on results obtained from series of finite element models. This development is unique in the sense that the both finite element and regression models incorporate mining and geological parameters such as depth of the workings (