Physicochemical properties for the arsenopyrite-Acidithiobacillus ferrooxidans system were studied to evaluate different factors involved in bacterial adhesion. The system was evaluated for electrokinetics and hydrophobicity of the bacteria/mineral/solution interface in an acid M2 culture medium. At the optimum pH for bacterial growth (pH=1.8), adhesion of Acidithiobacillus ferrooxidans should be favored according to hydrophobic and electrostatic interactions. While for pyrite this holds true, in the arsenopyrite case that does not seem to occur and a bacterial adhesion delay is observed. This effect is explained in terms of an acid dissolution process affecting the surface characteristics of arsenopyrite. To further support the acid dissolution effect, results from an electrochemical study of the phenomena involved in this process as well as a surface characterization of arsenopyrite are presented.Biological oxidation of sulfide minerals such as pyrite (FeS In the light of recent publications regarding the possibility of an acid-soluble leaching path for metal sulfides such as sphalerite, galena, chalcopyrite, hauerite and arsenopyrite ( Bacterial attachment to mineral surfaces has been shown to be dependent on the biochemical properties of the microorganisms as well as on the physicochemical properties of the bacterial/mineral/solution interface ( Alteration of the mineral surface, however, could influence the physicochemical properties of the mineral and modify the degree of bacterial adhesion. Electrochemical techniques, such as voltammetry, are recognized as powerful tools for studying the behavior of minerals under different redox conditions and to characterize the surface state of the mineral ( An The amount of planktonic cells in solution was measured regularly by direct microscopic counting using a Neubauer cell. For bacterial concentrations <5 The arsenopyrite used in this study came from the metasomatic deposit in El Monte Mine at Zimapan, Hidalgo (Mexico). Mineral purity was determined by microprobe analysis, giving the following composition: Fe The electrophoretic mobility of bacterial cells and mineral particles was determined in a Zeta-Sizer 4 apparatus from Malvern Instruments. Electrokinetic measurements were conducted on bacterial suspensions at 1.0 Bacterial surfaces for measuring the contact angle were prepared as previously described ( The cyclic voltammetry technique was used for these experiments. A typical three electrode cell was employed. To control and register the voltammetric response an EG&G PAR 273 potentiostat coupled to a PC with the M270 software were used. The electrode system consisted of a carbon paste-arsenopyrite working electrode (CPE-FeAsS) 50% Mineral dissolution tests were carried out in a double compartment reactor made of Pyrex glass to isolate the arsenopyrite from bacteria. The feasibility and performance of this reactor for biological assisted oxidation has been previously demonstrated ( Arsenopyrite dissolution was followed by measuring the iron concentration in solution. Total iron in solution was determined spectrophotometrically by measuring light absorbance for a complex formed with ortho-phenanthroline in a Beckman DU 650 Spectrophotometer (  To establish the basis for the delay observed in  Arsenopyrite exhibited an isoelectric point (IEP) at a pH of approximately 2.5, indicating that arsenopyrite is positively charged in the nutrient medium at a pH below 2.5. According to The contact angle of a drop of M2 medium at pH 1.8 on a smooth surface of arsenopyrite was 64.33° The adhesion “delay” of To demonstrate that arsenopyrite is altered in the presence of M2 medium, dissolution experiments were carried out in a double compartment reactor. The first compartment contained arsenopyrite in contact with the M2 medium, the second compartment contained only M2 medium. The natural dissolution of arsenopyrite was demonstrated by an immediate and constant increase in the ferrous iron concentration in solution during the first 250 To demonstrate that bacteria used the ferrous iron coming into solution from arsenopyrite as energetic substrate, The fact that pyrite does not present the behavior observed on arsenopyrite, has been explained on the basis of a “direct attack” of pyrite by The ability of electrochemical techniques to characterize the surface state of arsenopyrite is well known. Therefore, a systematic electrochemical study was performed for arsenopyrite grains in presence of the M2 medium. In the electrochemical study of arsenopyrite in M2 medium, it was found that the open circuit potential (ocp) varied with time ( In order to characterize the surface changes in arsenopyrite because of acid dissolution, a voltammetric study was performed. In order to confirm the likelihood that process A in According to the proposed mechanism, the arsenopyrite surface is initially altered in the nutrient M2 medium to a solid phase deficient in iron and sulfide. The Fe(II) available in solution limits bacterial attachment and promotes non-contact biological dissolution. To further support these findings, a comparison was made of the electrochemical behavior of arsenopyrite obtained when this mineral has been exposed to chemical ferric dissolution ( The biological oxidation of arsenopyrite by The authors gratefully acknowledge the financial support of CONACyT (Grant 3658-A9312) and the UASLP Research fund (Grants C93-FAI-10-1.75 and C94-FAI-04-3.34). Arsenopyrite and realgar samples were supplied, respectively by Servicios Industriales Peñoles and the Mineralogy Museum of the Institute of Geology, UNAM.