This study addresses the hydration mechanism of a P.II 52.5R cement in the presence of triisopropanolamine (TIPA), glucose or both. Calorimetry tests showed that the interaction effect of TIPA and glucose significantly enhanced the degree of hydration of the cement after 7days. X-ray diffraction analysis confirmed that the addition of glucose promoted C4AF dissolution by TIPA. The accelerated C4AF hydration yielded a reduced CH content and an increased amount of chemically combined water. Due to the delayed acceleration effect of glucose, the hydrate products were characterised by a high surface area. Furthermore, our results showed that the addition of TIPA promotes the formation of carboaluminate and the AFm phase when the limestone is in the presence of cement.Chemical additives are introduced to Portland cement during manufacturing to improve the quality of the finished cement. Triisopropanolamine (TIPA), a tertiary alkanolamine invented in recent years, is widely used as a grinding chemical in the clinker comminution process to reduce agglomeration in the ball mill and to modify the particle distribution of the finished cement In a recent publication by Huang et al., the authors employed response surface methodology and found an interaction effect between triisopropanolamine and a monosaccharide that strongly contributed to the strength development of cement at 28 A P.II 52.5R Portland cement (Coded as 525 cement, composed of 90% clinker, 5% natural gypsum and 5% limestone) was used. It was analysed by X-ray diffraction (XRD) and X-ray fluorescence (XRF) methods. The XRD pattern and other information for the cement are shown in Approximately 6 An approximately 5 Thermogravimetric analysis was performed on a NETZSCH STA 449C by heating from 50 to 850 To clarify the interaction of TIPA and glucose, another typical alkanolamine, triethanolamine (TEA), was introduced for comparison with the effect of TIPA on the heat evolution of the cement. The hydration heats of the pastes with different chemicals ( The addition of glucose to the pastes significantly delayed the formation of the first main heat releasing peak by approximately 4–5 The cumulative heat released reflects the degree of hydration of the paste. When the paste in the presence of glucose was hydrated for 24 The thermal analyses of the pastes with TIPA, glucose or both compared with the plain paste are shown in According to To further identify the types of hydrates, different pastes were investigated by XRD analysis, as shown in The main differences in the XRD patterns were observed at low angles, where the AFm phase, carboaluminate, and C The addition of glucose alone inhibited the hydration of C The CH content calculated from thermal analysis is presented in The gel pore structures of the pastes were determined by a BET test, the result of which is shown in  The initial portion of this study compared the effect of TIPA with that of TEA and glucose on the heat evolution of a P.II 52.5R cement containing 5% limestone. Tests showed that these two alkanolamines behave differently during the course of hydration: TEA promotes a renewed aluminate reaction, whereas TIPA accelerates the AFt to AFm conversion. Another difference between TEA and TIPA is that the former does not contribute significantly to the total heat release. In contrast, TIPA tends to markedly enhance heat release after 7 Our study also confirmed that monocarboaluminate and ettringite were present, but no AFm phase existed in the plain paste or the paste with glucose. This is because the CaCO Furthermore, we found that the interaction effect of TIPA and glucose was able to enhance the degree of hydration of the cement at 28 In the above investigation, compared with the paste containing only TIPA, the cement with both TIPA and glucose was characterised by greater heat release and by more chemically combined water in the course of hydration after 3  The addition of glucose to cement delayed the C The hydration products were determined by the presence of TIPA or glucose. In the cement with glucose alone, the AFt and monocarboalunimate were identical to the hydration products in the plain paste. For the pastes containing TIPA, the hydration products comprised AFt, AFm and hemicarboaluminate. Glucose alone inhibited the hydration of C The interaction effect of TIPA and glucose promoted the hydration of cement up to 28 The authors are grateful for the support from the