This paper presents a numerical approach for the design of rockfall catchfence based on the study of the rockfall stabilization works at Route 5 state highway in NJ, US where severe rockfalls have been periodically occurring. For the optimal design of rockfall catchfence, statistical rockfall analysis has been performed to estimate critical impact conditions and impact energy in the study area. Then, the design criterion of the rockfall catchfence has been validated by means of 3D finite element analysis featuring explicit dynamic capabilities. A series of parametric studies indicate that the rockfall barrier system can be optimally designed by controlling the design parameters such as the stiffness and configurations of net barrier system and impact conditions. The paper illustrates how detailed numerical analyses can be applied practically to optimize the design of the rockfall barrier system under a given field condition.For the mitigation measure of rockfall hazards, rockfall catchfences are widely adapted in the potential hazard area to intercept and hold the falling materials. As opposed to rigid structures such as rocksheds ( Since the impact response of the rockfall catchfence has complicated phenomena caused by material elastic and plastic behaviors of each member (i.e., steel post, nets and cables, etc.) and also influenced by various factors; such as impact angle, impact energy, dimension of block, strength of the each member, mechanical stiffness of rockfall catchfence, etc.( However, these limitations of the full scale tests have been partly resolved by dynamic discrete numerical analyses recently. Those numerical studies mentioned above successfully validated the usage of supplemental means for the full scale field tests and also contributed to develop and optimize new type of rockfall barrier system effectively. However, very little research has been devoted to the more practical analysis of the optimal rockfall barrier system over the various unfavorable impact conditions which can usually happen in actual field conditions. The study area is located along route 5 in the boroughs of Fort Lee and Edgewater, Bergen County, NJ where high level of cliff, 10 to 27 This study mainly focuses on the procedure of the optimal design of the rockfall barrier system at the given unfavorable field condition and also evaluate the feasibility of rockfall catchfence as a part of preliminary design purpose. The paper discusses a fundamental geology and geomechanics of the study area first and then statistical rockfall analysis using Colorado Rock Fall Simulation Program (CRSP 4.0) ( The study area is mainly composed of Palisades Diabase which is an early Jurassic age igneous sill and extends as a ridge for more than 64 Palisades Diabase is gray to dark gray and composed primarily of pyroxene, and plagioclase feldspar with minor amounts of quartz and olivine, and many accessory minerals. The medium to coarse grained Diabase is slightly weathered to unweathered, very strong to extremely strong ranging from 150 to 200 An olivine-rich layer having up to 5 The differential weathering process of the olivine-rich layer locating at the middle of the cliff has caused upper solid block to be progressively collapsed down as the olivine-rich layer is weathered out. Hence, a typical bench structure throughout the study area is observed as illustrated in The rock mass on the cliff site exhibits four main joint sets estimated by 110 of joints gathered from nearby sites. Three sets have sub-vertical dip and one set has sub-horizontal dip ( Vegetation density is variable, but is concentrated at the top and base of slope on sub-horizontal joint surfaces with exposed surface area and within the moderately to highly weathered olivine-rich zone ( The southeastern fault blocks (F1, F2) as shown in The CRSP is based on the rigid body mechanics and statistically analyzes the impact energy, bounce height, and run-out distance of falling blocks. The dynamic interaction between falling blocks and slope of the CRSP is calculated by empirically driven functions incorporating velocity, friction and slope material properties ( The major input properties of slope material in the CRSP include restitution coefficients in normal, The required restitution coefficients for each material including the competent Diabase, weathered olivine rich layer with vegetation, and talus, have been selected as representative values obtained from available literature resources ( In the study area, most potential blocks have a rectangular shape formed by the combination of the sub-vertical and sub-horizontal joint sets as shown in In order to get appropriate surface roughness, a set of passing analyses has been performed on the basis of the measure of the fallen rockfall distribution in the site. A few boulders sizing from 0.2 Rockfall analyses using the calibrated input properties are subsequently conducted at the four critical sections as presented in  Further statistical rockfall analysis at Sat. 3 A series of 3D FE analyses is carried out to complement the design criterion made by CRSP analysis and suggest the detailed design parameters to accommodate to the specific field conditions. First, the 3D FE model is calibrated by means of a full scale field test performed by The reference structure, TSB6 for the calibration of the FE model is composed of the galvanized woven wire rope (8 The lateral and upstream cables of TSB6 are equipped with a frictional energy dissipator as illustrated in Those cables and barrier nets are supported by the steel post (HEA160, Fe360) in 3 The test block having the weight of 3000 The net barrier system in the FE model is similarly composed of the beam post, longitudinal support cable, lateral cable and upstream cable. The steel post is modeled by Belytschko–Tsay reduced integration shell element with six degrees of freedom (DOF) per node with an elastic-perfect plastic constitutive model ( In order to properly capture the sliding of the longitudinal support cable along the steel post as well as the sliding of the net barrier along the longitudinal support cable, a discrete contact algorithm (CONTACT_GUIDED_CABLE in LS-DYNA) is adapted in the model. But, there is no interaction between the net barrier and the steel post. The friction coefficients between the longitudinal support cable and steel post denoted by The frictional energy dissipators attached in the lateral and longitudinal cables are modeled by a nonlinear plastic discrete beam (MAT 068 in LS-DYNA). Since there is no available information about dynamic behavior of the frictional energy dissipator, the device is developed based on the research from The boulder is made by spherical solid element having The impact energy for the calibration of the FE model is assigned to be 660  During the impact of the boulder, the longitudinal support cable slips along the steel posts and at the same time the net panel also slips and gets squeezed along the longitudinal support cables. Therefore, the impacting boulder is to be more favorably captured by the net barrier panel as like a pocket shape as shown in  The local reaction forces acting on the anchorages of the lateral and upstream cables, and the foundation of the steel post measured at the point (A), (B) and (C) denoted in The comparison of the boulder's trajectory of the field test and a series of FE analysis with the various friction coefficients is presented in Among the series of the sensitivity studies with various combinations of the friction coefficients, the case of The calibrated FE model is employed to perform a series of parametric studies to investigate the capability of the catchment subjected to the critical impact conditions including the maximum deflection of the net panel. The dimension and impact condition of the FE model are adjusted on the basis of the result of CRSP analysis in the previous section such that the height of the net barrier for the FE model is set to be 4 Various configurations of rockfall catchfence and impact conditions are investigated as summarized in Three different impact angles, 45°, 60° and 65° at a height of 3.0  The effect of the various spaced posts is investigated by comparing with the global resultant forces of boulder, maximum deflection of net barrier and local reaction forces acting on each anchorage. The resultant maximum force of the boulder tends to gradually increase with the shorter spaced steel post as shown in The effect of various capacity of energy dissipate device (i.e. 45 This paper presents a numerical approach for the design of the rockfall catchfence in conjunction with the field investigation. The paper illustrates how detailed numerical analyses can be applied practically to optimize the design of the rockfall barrier system in the critical field condition. The study area is characterized by a typical bench structure generated by the fast differential weathering process onto the olivine rich layer. In addition, as a result of the fractured columnar natured slope condition with post tectonic joints, this area has been exposed to high potential rockfall hazards. Due to the restricted space, there are limited outside shoulders or no medians. Furthermore, the allowable catchment area measured from the toe of the slope to the edge of the road is restricted as well, ranging from 2 To determine the optimal configuration of the rockfall barrier system and evaluate the critical impact condition at the site, statistical rockfall analyses have been performed by using Colorado rockfall program (CRSP 4.0). Then, 3D FE analyses have been carried out to validate the design criteria of the rockfall catchfence. The FE modeling approach was developed on the basis of the TSB6 performed by It was concluded that the inclination of the steel post (i.e., 10° to 20°) provided the better catchment performance in the rockfall barrier under the high angle of the impact condition since it could make the larger contact area between the boulder and the net panel such that the impact load is effectively transferred to the net barrier system. However, the impact angle higher than 60° might be considered as a margin of the maximum allowable impact angle between boulder and net barrier based on the parametric study. The configuration of the spacing between steel posts played important roles on controlling the global stiffness of the net barrier system. Based on the parametric study, the maximum horizontal deflection of net panel for the case of 7 Lastly, the capacity of energy dissipator equipped in the lateral cable was one of governing factors for the global stiffness of net barrier system. 100 Likewise, the unfavorable rockfall conditions in the study area, i.e., high angle of impact of boulder and the shortage of the catchment area would be effectively controlled by the optimized rockfall barrier system. On the other hand, the area where the maximum allowable deflection of net panel is less than 3