This paper reports on the characterization of a rare earth oxide obtained by hydrometallurgy of the mineral xenotime, an yttrium phosphate containing other rare earths, and comparison with mixtures of rare earth oxides prepared in different ways. The results indicated that hydrometallurgy from xenotime yielded a solid solution of the rare earth oxides. However, when the pure rare earth oxides were simply mixed physically then heat-treated at 1000 °C, a similar solid solution was not obtained. On the other hand, when the mixtures were prepared using a co-precipitation process, subsequent heat treatment did produce oxide solid solutions similar to that produced by hydrometallurgy of xenotime.The lanthanide or rare earth elements (REE) comprise all the elements from Because of their unique physico-chemical properties, the rare earths are attractive for a very wide number of applications in modern science and technology. The increasing use of both LREE and HREE in industry, particularly for high temperature super conductors and permanent magnets, has led to growing interest in the exploration and exploitation of new sources and techniques for extraction Monazite and xenotime are relatively abundant in nature and are the main raw materials for the commercial production of rare earths Separation of REE is a complex process because it relies on small differences in chemical properties, such as the solubility and chemical stability. The first practical procedures for large-scale REE separation used complexation-enhanced ion exchange processes, which were developed in the 1950s. The REE are eluted from a cation exchange resin in order of increasing size from Lu to La. The separation is enhanced by complexing agents such as á-hydroxybutyric acid and ethylenediaminetetracetic acid, which prefer the smaller lanthanide ions. The REE are precipitated as oxalates from the eluents and then ignited to the oxides. Some specific practical applications, such as refractories or in structural ceramics, do not require pure individual REE This conclusion, however, does not explain how the solid solution is formed and does not also correlate the lattice parameters and the molar composition among the involved oxides, as established by the Vegard's Law The aim of the present work is the characterization (by X-ray diffraction and scanning electron microscopy) of the REEO product obtained by hydrometallurgy from xenotime and by physical and co-precipitated mixtures of pure oxides. The data thus acquired is used to determine the correlation of the lattice parameters with the molar composition of the representative oxides, thus testing Vegard's Law and verifying the formation of REEO solid solution. The oxides used in this work were Y For the comparison testing, three materials (designated FM80, FM60 and FM40) were made using physical mixtures of the four main oxides listed in In addition, co-precipitation products of the mixtures FM80, FM60 and FM40 were obtained by initially dissolving in a 5 N HCl solution, after which the pH was adjusted to 1.5. The subsequent addition of oxalic acid solution resulted in the co-precipitation of the rare earth oxalates. These were then washed with water, dried and calcinated at 1000 °C in air for 1 h, in order to obtain the respective oxides CP80, CP60 and CP40. Following the thermal treatment, all the samples were subjected to phase identification using a Siemens D5000 X-ray diffractometer (XRD) with CuK The REEO, the physical mixture FM40 and the co-precipitated mixture CP40 were also examined with a scanning electron microscope (SEM) and through element mapping analysis using an electron-probe microanalyzer with an energy-dispersive spectrometer (EPMA/EDS). In order to determine the chemical element distribution in the materials, the Leo 1450 VP SEM was operated at 15 kV, together with a light element detector for B-U; other parameters included: magnification around 1000×, < The four REE oxides under investigation have closely related physical and chemical properties and their X-ray diffraction spectra are very similar, as can be seen in  When the physical mixtures were dissolved in 5 N HCl, co-precipitated in oxalate medium and calcinated at 1000 °C, the subsequent X-ray spectra appeared very similar to those, seen in The four pure oxides of interest have cubic systems with the following lattice parameters EPMA/EDS analyses demonstrated that, in the physical mixture FM40, heat-treated at 1000 °C, the various rare earths oxides (Y In addition, the rare earth elements that make up the oxides possess very nearly ionic arrays, satisfying the rules for obtaining solid solutions (difference ≤ Mixtures of rare earth oxides have been prepared from pure oxides by physical mixing followed by heat treatment at 1000 °C and through an oxalate co-precipitation process and subsequent heat treatment. The different products were then characterized by X-ray diffraction and by EPMA/EDS analysis, and compared with each other and with a similar product obtained by hydrometallurgy of the mineral xenotime. The results indicate that simply mixing the oxides physically then heat-treating the mixture at 1000 °C does not produce a solid solution of the oxides. However, when the mixtures were prepared using a co-precipitation process, subsequent heat treatment did produce oxide solid solutions that were similar to that produced by hydrometallurgy of xenotime. Correlation of the lattice parameters with the molar compositions of the different oxide mixtures showed that Vegard's Law was obeyed in the formation of the REEO solid solution.