An ilmenite concentrate was reduced with graphite under argon gas between 1250°C and 1350°C by using a thermogravimetric analysis (TGA) system. Specimens were reacted for various periods of time during which the mass loss values were recorded. Samples representing different reduction stages were examined by optical microscopy, image analyzer, X-ray diffraction and SEM (EDAX) techniques. Reduction of Fe3+ to Fe2+, Fe2+ to Fe and Ti4+ to Ti3+ took place within 50% reduction during which a secondary oxide phase was formed and replaced the natural ilmenite. Reduction of Ti3+ to Ti2+ took place after 50% reduction which altered the composition of the secondary oxide phase by decreasing its oxygen content. Reduction of Ti2+ took place while the oxygen deficient TiO1−x
                      phase formed. Formation of any titanium carbide or oxycarbide phases depended on the completion of the reduction which was not possible at the specified temperatures.The ilmenite ore is the main source for production of metallic titanium and titanium containing compounds. It is composed of ilmenite mineral as the valuable part and mainly silica as the gangue part. Although the ilmenite mineral is expressed as FeO  The system of Fe–Fe  Carbothermic reduction of ilmenite and rutile was investigated by  Reduction of ilmenite by carbon monoxide was studied at temperatures between 500  The aim of the present investigation is to establish the carbothermic solid state reduction of a natural ilmenite by experimentally determining the possible stages of reactions taking place and the sequence of phase changes together with a mechanistic approach to the kinetics. Experiments were conducted by using a TGA system which consisted of a vertical furnace, an electronic balance attached to a computer which recorded the mass change with respect to time, a de-oxidation furnace and a gas manometer system for controlling the atmosphere. The details of the experimental set-up can be found elsewhere ( Both ilmenite and graphite were ground and screened to particle size ranges of (−125 The formula for the natural ilmenite can be calculated from its chemical composition as follows: (Fe Stoichiometric amount of carbon was calculated for the formation of Fe The specimens were prepared by mixing 4.5 The phases formed were examined using optical microscope. Microphotographs of the specimens were taken by an image analyzer. The phases were identified by X-ray diffraction analysis. The electron images of the particles were taken by SEM and the point analysis of elements were obtained by EDS. A typical result is illustrated in graphical form in As expected, the reduction rates increased with increasing temperature and decreasing particle size. The reduction proceeded through two distinctive stages; the first stage with a higher and the second with a lower rate indicating changes in reduction mechanism due to the different reactions taking place during each stage. The first stage which proceeded until about 50% reduction involved the reduction of iron oxides to the metallic iron and iron carbide and a partial reduction of Ti XRD revealed the formation of phases with decreasing oxygen content in the order of FeTiO Point analyses were conducted using EDS attachment of SEM on the particle surfaces. The back scattered images of corresponding particles were obtained with SEM. The results presented here are qualitatively in good agreement with the earlier results of The solid state carbothermic reduction of ilmenite consisted of two stages: First stage: until 50% reduction level: Reduction of Fe Second stage: after 50% reduction level: Reduction of Ti As expected, reduction rates increased with increasing temperature and decreasing particle size. Effect of temperature was higher in the first stage which was a topo-chemical shrinking core type of process. Reduction rate decreased considerably in the second stage. The metallic phases formed contained high Fe and low Ti whereas the oxide phases were rich in Ti and lean in iron. Further work is recommended to model the kinetic data.