Ionic liquid (IL) based on tetraheptylammonium cooking oil (TC) was used for the first time to recovery rare earth elements (REEs) from leaching liquor of ion-adsorbed-type rare earths ores. Firstly, extraction performances of tetraheptylammonium oleate (TO) and tetraheptylammonium linoleate (TL) type ILs were investigated. It was shown that these ILs had good extraction performances, such as short equilibrium time less than 1 min, good extraction capacity of 0.225 mol/L and high stripping efficiency of 99%. Additionally, REEs extraction occurred in the solutions with high acidity (pH = 0.24) because the cation (C7H15)4N+ of TO and TL could form a strong amine salt with hydrogen ion to decrease acidity of the feed solution. Also, an ion association mechanism of REEs extraction was proposed by FT-IR spectra, 1H NMR investigation and slope analysis method. Secondly, TC was synthesized in water bath by mixing tetraheptylammonium bromide with saponified peanut oil. Then, comparative study of commercial extractants showed that TC had the highest REEs recovery yield of 100% from the leaching liquor. The sustainability, biocompatibility and non-toxicity, as well as simple synthesis route and well extraction performances make these cooking oil based ILs promising for REEs recovery from the leaching liquor.Rare earths elements (REEs) and their compounds are widely used in audio systems, electric and hybrid vehicles, wind turbines and some other high-tech fields ( Since first discovered in 1960s in the south of China, ion-adsorbed-type rare earth ores are the most representative REE resource, which contain almost all the REEs (La, Ce, Pr, Nd, Sm, Eu, Gd, Tb, Dy, Ho, Er, Tm, Yb, Lu and Y), especially the abundant middle and heavy groups (Sm, Eu, Gd, Tb, Dy, Ho, Er, Tm, Yb, Lu and Y). The formations of these ores can be attributed to chemical weathering decomposition and dissolution of granite and granite porphyry, then adsorbed and enriched on clay minerals during the migration and penetration processes of REE mineral solutions ( The traditional liquid-liquid extraction processes are usually used for enrich and recovery REEs, adopting organic phosphonic acids and alkylated carboxylic acids as extractants ( Recently, the nonfluorinated oleate and linoleate-based ILs have been reported ( The ILs used in this research were synthesized with reagents purchased from Aladdin. Linoleic and oleic acids had a purities of >95%. Tetraheptylammonium bromide had a purity of 99%. Sodium hydroxide, and ethanol (70%) was purchased from Sigma-Aldrich. YCl The concentrations of REEs in aqueous phase were determined by Inductively Coupled Plasma Optical Emission Spectroscopy (ICP-OES) Horiba Ultima 2. The All the ILs used herein were synthesized under the same experimental conditions by a two-step synthesis. Taking tetraheptylammonium oleate (TO) as an example, sodium oleate was first synthesized by adding an equimolar amount of sodium hydroxide (2.464 g, 61.6 mmol) to oleic acid (19.46 ml, 61.6 mmol) dissolved in 70% ethanol (125 mL), stirring overnight at room temperature. Afterwards, a metathesis reaction was performed between the tetraheptylammonium bromide (30.23 g, 61.6 mmol) and the sodium oleate (18.76 g, 61.6 mmol) for 3 h at room temperature. A viscous liquid was obtained after the purification of organic phase. The water phase was separated and the organic phase was washed with water (3 × 100 mL). A brown viscous liquid was obtained after removal of the solvent under vacuum with a yield of 98% (41.79 g). Tetraheptylammonium linoleate (TL) was prepared as the same procedure as TO. A pale goldenrod viscous liquid was obtained after removal of the solvent under vacuum with a yield of 98% (41.67 g). One mL of viscous liquid contains 1.35 mmol of TO or TL, meaning that the concentration of synthesized ILs was 1.35 mol/L, which is little higher than that in former literature (1.29 mol/L) ( Tetraheptylammonium cooking oil (TC) was prepared with the same procedure as TO, reducing to 70% amount of sodium hydroxide due to about 70% unsaturated fatty acid content in the peanut oil. A yellow viscous liquid was obtained after removal of the solvent under vacuum with a yield of 68% (28.28 g). Firstly, the REE solutions were prepared by diluting or mixing individual RECl The extraction efficiency (E), stripping efficiency(S) and extraction capacity (EC) were determined by mass balance as follows ( Using one-pot preparation method, we first synthesized the ILs of TO and TL with oleic and linoleic acid, respectively. As shown in To reveal the extraction ability and selectivity of TO and TL, their extraction efficiencies for different RE ions were compared. TL indicates better extraction abilities for all of the REEs on the experimental conditions in The max metal loading capacities of TO and TL were studied by mixing 0.4189 mol/L NdCl Because the leaching liquor is always at a low REEs concentration of 0.1–5 g/L, serials of NdCl In this study, the cation of TO and TL is (C  FT-IR spectra of fresh TO and metal loaded TO, as well as TL and metal loaded TL in the range of 500–4000 cm TO and TL are constituted of cation (tetraheptylammonium) and carboxylate anions (oleate or linoleate). The extraction mechanisms of ILs (such as [N Modification of Eq. On the basis of Eq. Similarly, the linear relationship between logD and log[ Slop analysis method is commonly used for the determination of extractant molecule numbers involved in the extraction process ( Stripping property is an indispensable feature for evaluating extraction efficiency in the solvent extraction system. As shown in Serials experiments were developed to evaluate the efficiency of TC for REEs recovery from the leaching liquor. Peanut oil was chosen as the test cooking oil because it is cheap, common and rich of oleic acid (49.9% ± 12.5%) and linoleic acid (34.4% ± 12.4%) ( As can be indicated in Based on the extraction investigations of tetraheptylammonium oleate (TO) and tetraheptylammonium linoleate (TL) type ILs, the IL of tetraheptylammonium cooking oil (TC) was used for REEs recovery from the leaching liquor of ion-adsorbed-type rare earths ores. It is shown that these ILs reveal some potentials for REEs extraction from aqueous solution, such as short extraction equilibrium time less than 1 min, good extraction capacity of 0.225 mol/L, REEs extraction at low pH value of 0.24 and well stripping performance by concentrated HCl. Additionally, an ion association mechanism was proposed by slope analysis method, FT-IR spectra and Fujian Li and Xiaoqi Sun designed the research, analyzed the data, and wrote the paper; Fujian Li, Zhong Xiao, Jingyao Zeng performed the research; Fujian Li, Zhong Xiao, Jingyao Zeng, Jinqing Chen, Xiaoqi Sun participated in data collection and discussion. The authors declare no competing financial interest. This work was supported by