Two organic acids were trialed for the extraction of calcium from steelmaking blast furnace slag for the purpose of precipitated calcium carbonate (PCC) production: succinic and acetic acids. While the leaching performance of succinic acid was superior, carbonation of its leachate did not result in the production of PCC, but rather the precipitation of calcium succinate, and only after the use of pH buffering agents (sodium hydroxide or bicarbonate). In contrast, carbonation of the acetic acid leachate resulted in the production of PCC, also with the aid of buffering agents. This discrepancy highlights the need for a combination of chemical, mineralogical and morphological analytical techniques for the accurate characterization of carbonation precipitates for future publications in this field. Additional effects observed in this study were the low atom-efficiency of the acids for calcium leaching, at ~20–30% of the stoichiometric value, the low extraction selectivity but high carbonation selectivity between calcium and magnesium, and the contamination of the formed PCCs with small amounts of co-leached aluminium and silicon. Further work is warranted on the purification of this PCC synthesis route.The production of precipitated calcium carbonate (PCC) from natural and waste-derived alkaline materials has been a major focus of research due to the numerous commercial uses for this material such as: filler, pigment and color stabilizer in papers, paints, polymers and pharmaceuticals applications; pH buffer and neutralizer in environmental and water treatment applications; and as a component of foodstuffs, fertilizers and animal feed (  The initial aim of the present study was to confirm if succinic acid also performs better than acetic acid in the case of PCC synthesis using BFS as the calcium source. In the course of the study, upon extensive characterization of the precipitates, discrepancies were found between the materials formed from the different leachates. These findings have not been reported in existing literature and present some important insights to the field. The focus of this technical note is the reporting of these discrepancies and the description of techniques for the accurate characterization of carbonation precipitates. Granulated blast furnace slag (GBFS) from a steelwork was used as the starting material. Its chemical composition, determined by X-ray fluorescence (XRF, Panalytical PW2400), consisted mainly of CaO (41.0 Analytical grade succinic acid (HOOC-(CH The leachates from the first and second extraction steps were combined and split into two equal fractions. Each fraction was subjected to carbonation in the Ecoclave reactor for 60 The extraction leachates and post-carbonation filtered solutions were analyzed for pH and for aqueous concentrations of Al, Ca, Mg and Si by inductively coupled plasma mass spectrometry (ICP-MS, Thermo Electron X Series). The mineralogical, chemical and morphological properties of the post-carbonation precipitates were characterized by XRD, XRF, thermal gravimetric analysis with differential scanning calorimetry (TGA–DSC, TA Instruments Q500), Fourier transform infrared spectroscopy (FTIR, PerkinElmer Frontier), and scanning electron microscopy with energy dispersive X-ray spectroscopy (SEM–EDX, Philips XL30 FEG). A comparison is made between the extraction efficiency of acetic and succinic acid, using 0.5 The leachates from the extraction stage were subjected to carbonation treatment with the intent of producing precipitated calcium carbonate (PCC). In the tests performed, besides using leachates produced using the two different organic acids (succinic and acetic acids), three additional parameters were varied for investigation: temperature, CO The first test conducted used the same carbonation conditions that To induce precipitation, all other experiments performed in the present study used NaOH or NaHCO For succinic acid leachates, no precipitate was obtained at 60 The precipitation extent was significantly better from acetic acid leachates ( The precipitated solids were analyzed to characterize their mineralogical and morphological properties. It was discovered during the present study that the precipitates from the succinic acid leachates differed substantially from those produced from acetic acid leachates. The succinic acid leachate precipitates had a distinct XRD pattern (  To confirm the evidence from the TGA results, the FTIR spectrum of the succinic acid leachate precipitate was obtained, and is shown in  This discrepancy may also explain why The results of this study show that when researching new leaching agents with the intent of extracting calcium from alkaline materials for subsequent production of precipitated calcium carbonate, two things are essential. First, it should be experimented if the carbonation of the leachate results in the formation of precipitates, and if to achieve this pH buffers are required, which will have an effect on processing costs and complexity. In the present study, it was found that precipitates did form when using both succinic and acetic acid leachates, but in both cases a buffering agent was required. Sodium hydroxide and sodium bicarbonate were tested; both induced the precipitation of calcium from the carbonated solution, and they were found to perform similarly, with NaOH being marginally more effective. Second, the precipitates formed must be characterized by one or more appropriate analytical technique, with XRD, TGA and/or FTIR being essential. Several works in existing literature omit extensive characterization of carbonation precipitates, under the assumption that precipitates are invariably carbonate minerals. In the present study, XRD provided the first evidence that the succinic acid leachate precipitates were not carbonates. Due to the lack of a matching compound in the available databases, further characterization by FTIR and TGA-DSC was required to identify the compound as being calcium succinate (likely mono-hydrate). SEM–EDX also pointed to discrepancies between the precipitates, but this analysis was not sufficient since chemical composition is not a unique identifier. Hence, even though the leaching performance of succinic acid was found to be superior to that of acetic acid, of the two leaching agents, only acetic acid is suitable for the production of PCC. With acetic acid, further research and development are required for the production of marketable PCC. The results presented herein were not optimized, and greater calcium leaching extents are reportedly achieved using higher acid concentrations and lower temperatures ( This work was supported by the KU Leuven Industrial Research Fund (IOF), through the Knowledge Platform on Sustainable Materialization of Residues from Thermal Processes into Products (SMaRT-Pro