Background
                  Fracture shaft of femur is amongst one of the commonest major diaphyseal injuries in school going children presenting to us at emergency rooms of our hospitals. The presence of a growing proximal and distal physes imposes a real challenge in management of these fractures. The use of titanium elastic nails has gained wide acceptance for stabilizing these fractures.
               
                  Materials and methods
                  A sample of 53 children of age group 6 to 12 years were included in the study according to the inclusion and exclusion criteria. The mean age of subjects was 8.87±1.64years of which 39 were males and 14 were females. The femoral shaft fractures were stabilized using titanium elastic nails and followed up for a mean duration of six months. The outcomes were evaluated based on Flynn’s criteria.
               
                  Results
                  We obtained excellent outcome in 75.5% of our cases, satisfactory outcome in 17% and poor outcome in 7.5% of cases. We found no statistically significant difference in outcome in patients of age 9 years or less compared to 10 years or older.
               
                  Conclusion
                  Patient selection is important to obtain good results using titanium elastic nails. Mid diaphyseal femoral shaft fractures with minimal comminution are ideal fractures for treatment using titanium elastic nails.Femoral shaft fractures are amongst one of the commonest major injuries occurring in the diaphysis of long bones in school going children presenting to us in the emergency rooms of our hospital. Though the treatment in toddlers and adults is standard protocol in form of spica casting and medullary interlocking nailing respectively, the management in school age children has always presented a challenge and dilemma situation as to what can be the better option. The presence of a growing proximal and distal physes has presented a challenge in treating these injuries and hence the use of elastic intramedullary nails has gained popularity worldwide. The study population comprised of school going children (between 6-12 years) A total of sixty subjects were included in our study. All the cases were operated within 24 The data summaries were presented as absolute and relatives frequencies for quantitative measures and are presented as means, frequencies (%), and standard deviations. Statistical analysis was performed using the chi square test and ANOVA (Analysis of Variance) test on SPSS version 18 for Windows. p-values A total of sixty subjects of school going age satisfying our inclusion and exclusion criteria were included in the study. Seven out of sixty patients could not be traced for follow up. Fifty three patients who came for regular follow up were included for statistical analysis. Study population comprised of thirty nine (73.6%) male and fourteen (26.4%) female subjects. The average age of patients was 8.87 The final outcome as analyzed by Flynn’s criteria in our study was better in short oblique radiological variety ( The management for fracture shaft of femur in children has always been controversial and debatable, as till date there is no consensus in the treatment for this fracture in pediatric age group. On considering school going age group (6yrs. to 12 yrs.) there are numerous options available to treat this fracture pattern which we have included in our study. Treatment options range from conservative spica casting to operative i.e elastic intramedullary nailing, dynamic and locking compression plates and use of external fixators. Plaster of paris spica casting in school age children is associated with complications like cast breakage, loss of reduction, malunion, skin complications, prolonged immobilization, quadriceps weakness, loss of education and associated psychological burden. Due to these complications the trend has shifted towards operative stabilization of these fractures. Out of all available options (hip spica casting, traction on thomas splint, dynamic compression plate, external fixator, trochanteric femoral interlocking nail and intramedullary elastic nail), we in this study have used TENs for fixation of Winquist type-1 closed/Gustillo type-1 fracture shaft of femur presenting to us in emergency department within 72 This surgery is less demanding and requires a shorter operative time as shown by Basant et al. in their study which reported a duration ranging from 20 to 45 As all our subjects were operated within 24 Existing literature shows that almost all fractures heal well with TENs. Flynn et al. reported age as a strong predictor of poor outcome. Odds ratio for poor outcome was 3.86 for children aged greater than 10 years as compared to those younger. We did not find statistically significant difference in outcomes with different fracture patterns (transverse, short oblique, and comminuted) which were included in criteria of subject selection. The use of pop thigh corset extending from the iliac crest to the femoral condyles was used in our setup in post-operative phase till callus is radiologically visible. This probably has a role in preventing angulation at the fracture site and in the maintenance of limb length and alignment across fracture patterns. The problem of significant shortening was also not observed because of the fact that we took only Winquist type-1 fractures. Higher complication rates were initially observed with the use of these nails due to improper use in bigger, older and heavier children. We had two patients with malunion beyond acceptable criteria. Both the patients came to us with a broken POP thigh brace. Malunion observed in both the cases was angular deformity. Probably this can be attributed to non-compliant attitude of the patient. However follow up till skeletal maturity is needed to reaffirm this finding. Children have good remodeling ability and most of the minor mal-alignment gets corrected as age progresses. We too confronted four cases of knee stiffness and the same set of subjects was also having persistent tenderness at site of nail insertion even at 6 months follow up. Three of the above had superficial infection and ulceration at site of nail insertion initially which was taken care of by oral antibiotics and local care of the site. Flynn et al. reported 8 cases of nail-tip irritation near the insertion site, 1 re-fracture caused by premature nail removal, and 1 case of nail bending after a fall. Moroz et al. reported major complications in 17.5% and minor complication in 30% of patients. We in our study did not encountered deep infection, limb length discrepancy greater than 1 Thus to have best results with TENs one has to be very specific with patient selection as too young or too old a patient can pose problems. We do have better options available for these age group population. Our study findings are limited by its small sample size and lesser follow up (as we could not comment upon long term outcomes). On radiological consideration, TENs is best suited for diaphyseal fractures having Winquist type-1 pattern. The authors have none to declare.