The mechanism of silver ion cementation with copper in acidic sulphate solutions has been investigated. It was found that oxygen present in solutions can strongly modify the mechanism of the process. In the first stage of the reaction, the Cu+ ions appear in the solution independently of the presence or absence of oxygen. In deoxygenated solutions Cu+ ions generated in the first stage can be transferred partially into the bulk of the solution. The migration of the reaction front results in a loosely adhering silver deposit. The reaction between Ag+ and Cu+ ions occurring in the bulk of the solution can be initiated in the deoxygenated solutions after reaching a certain value of the Cu+/Ag+ concentration ratio. This reaction occurring in the bulk of the solution, parallel to the cementation reaction, consumes an additional amount of silver ions and produces a silver colloid in the deoxygenated solution. In oxygenated solutions saturated with oxygen the front of the reaction is located on the copper surface. As a result, tight and well-adherent silver deposit is formed. The morphology of the silver deposit is independent of the presence of oxygen in the solution. The tendency of silver deposition on already deposited silver cement was observed in the oxygenated solutions. This phenomenon is attributed to the fact that the surface area of anodic sites is more developed in the presence than in the absence of oxygen in the system due to the corrosion of copper. The anodic sites develop their surface into the bulk of the copper substrate and create cavities under the reaction surface.The cementation reaction has been widely used in industry for many years for recovering metals, for example, copper from dump leach liquors using iron Generally, cementation reactions are considered as heterogeneous processes limited by diffusion through the mass transfer boundary layer. However, unlike many other heterogeneous reaction systems, cementation reactions are unique in that the reaction product usually does not impede the reaction progress but rather frequently enhances the reaction kinetics. Researchers usually attributed this phenomenon to the electrochemical nature of the cementation reaction and also to the structure of the cemented deposit. In essence, it was observed that rather smooth, coherent deposit usually inhibits the cementation reaction but dendritic or botryoidal cement significantly enhances kinetics of the reaction (e.g. The complete study of the morphology of deposit and its influences on the cementation kinetics has been elaborated for the Cu For the Cu Despite the fact that the kinetics of cementation has been studied by many authors and described in the literature, the exact mechanism of the process is not known. It appears from the examination of the literature that silver cementation with copper can result in either a smooth, coherent deposit or in a dendritic cement but the nature of the deposit is closely dependent on the composition of solution In order to establish a mechanism of the silver ion cementation with copper in acidic sulphate solutions, the literature background of various processes occurring in the system should be presented. Anodic dissolution of copper in the deoxygenated H It should be pointed out that Cu As a continuation of these considerations the level of deoxygenation of studied solutions should be also taken into account. The important question is what the concentration of oxygen is in the deoxygenated solution. According to The equilibrium equation for the disproportionation reaction of Cu In our recent articles Before use the laboratory glassware was purified from any possible traces of silver by immersing for 24 h in ammonia solution of 13 mM EDTA and pH 10, then washed and dried. All chemicals and materials used in this study were of analytical reagent grade. All the solutions were prepared using water distilled four times. The experimental setup for the cementation kinetic study using a rotating cylinder has been described previously in detail The volume of the solution used in the cell was 200–220 mL. The temperature of electrolyte was maintained with an ultra-thermostat MLW U 15 The general measuring procedure consisted of two stages: pretreatment of the steel cylinder before cementation and measurement of the cementation stoichiometry. Before each experiment the rotating steel cylinder was immersed in HNO The conditions of the electrodeposition of copper on the rotating cylinder were strictly established in order to obtain a compact copper layer with the estimated thickness of about 24 μm thick. The electrodeposition of copper was conducted from a 0.5 M CuSO The deposited copper layer was electropolished in phosphoric acid solution (3:1 in volume) before each experiment. Then the chemical polishing of copper was conducted in a 0.5 M H The stoichiometry of the cementation reaction was investigated in deoxygenated solutions containing 0.5 M H It is worth noticing that during the silver cementation with copper the parallel corrosion reaction of the copper cylinder occurs in the studied solutions. It is obvious that the concentration of copper ion determined during the cementation experiments is a sum of concentrations of copper ions, which appear in the solution as a result of cementation reaction of Ag The experimental setup used for the study of the reaction between Ag The procedure of measurements consisted of three steps: preconditioning of a 0.5 M H The preconditioning cell filled with 1 L of a 0.5 M H The ion-selective electrode before titration tests was kept for 1 h in the solution containing 1000 mg/L of Ag The reaction cell was deaerated with high purity argon before each run and 20 mL of a nonconditioned electrolyte containing 0.5 M H These experiments were carried out in the same way as broken-off experiments previously described in the kinetics study of the process After each experiment the copper cylinder with deposited silver was rinsed thoroughly and dried. Then the copper layer with silver was cut and removed from the cylinder. The surfaces of two samples of the copper sheet with the cemented silver were characterized by scanning electron microscopy. The images were obtained with secondary electrons (SEM) or with backscattered electrons (SEM-BSE). The backscattered electrons technique allowed to observe directly silver deposit on metallic copper because of big difference in molar mass of both elements. Additionally, a few cross-sectional views of the samples were done. During these experiments the concentrations of Ag The silver ion cementation with copper can be expressed by the following reaction: Assuming that the cementation reaction between Ag From the study of the cementation reaction stoichiometry the experimental factor The main objective of these investigations was to prove the possibility of the occurrence of The typical results of three experiments conducted at 25 °C are shown in On the basis of average silver ion concentration precipitated from the solution the equilibrium concentration of Cu It is noticeable that the factor  The morphology of cemented silver depends on the concentration of silver ion in the solution.  The mechanism of silver ion cementation with copper in a 0.5 M H  The mechanism of silver ion cementation with copper in the deoxygenated sulphate solutions can be represented by the following schematic diagram: In the case of the oxygenated sulphate solutions the mechanism of the process is simpler and can be represented by, From these studies the following conclusions can be drawn: The mechanism of silver ion cementation with copper in acidic sulphate solutions is strongly dependent on the presence or absence of oxygen in the system. The first step of cementation reaction generates Cu In the deoxygenated solutions Cu In the oxygenated solutions generated in the first step of the process, Cu The presence of oxygen in the system does not modify the morphology of cemented silver. In the oxygenated solutions silver preferentially deposits on already deposited silver. This phenomenon is attributed to the fact that the surface area of anodic sites is more developed in the presence than in the absence of oxygen in the system due to the corrosion of copper. The anodic sites are located just under the reaction surface and develop their surface area into the copper material with creation of cavities. This work was partially funded by KBN (The State Committee for Scientific Research) (KBN 3 T09A 106 16). The authors would like to thank Dr. P. Nowak from Polish Academy of Science for his constructive discussions and help during the preparation of the manuscript.