Purpose
                  Technique for the fixation of two, three, and four part proximal humerus fractures has rapidly shifted towards the use of specially contoured proximal humerus locking plates. The purpose of this study is to evaluate the short to medium term functional results and common complications associated with the fixation of proximal humerus fractures with locking plates.
               
                  Methods
                  The PubMed and EMBASE databases were used to perform a systematic review of the English literature to assess the functional results and complications associated with proximal humerus locking plates. Our inclusion criteria were proximal humerus fracture due to trauma (excluding pathologic fractures), patients greater than 18 years of age, more than 15 patients in the study or subgroup of interest, at least 18 months follow-up, at least one relevant functional outcome score, and quality outcome score of at least 5/10. Studies that did not meet these criteria were excluded. All institutional, author, and journal information was concealed to minimize reviewer bias.
               
                  Results
                  Twelve studies including 514 patients met the inclusion criteria. At most recent follow-up patients achieved a mean Constant score of 74 and a mean DASH score of 27. The overall rate of complications was 49% including varus malunion, 33% excluding varus malunion, and reoperation rate was 14%. The most common complications included varus malunion 16%, AVN 10%, screw perforation of the humeral head into the joint 8%, subacromial impingement 6%, and infection 4%.
               
                  Discussion
                  Fixation of proximal humerus fractures with proximal humerus locking plates is associated with a high rate of complications and reoperation. Further study is needed to determine what technical errors and patient characteristics are risk factors for failure of this now common fixation technique.Displaced and comminuted fractures of the proximal humerus pose difficult management problems for the orthopaedic surgeon. There is different consensus concerning the best treatment option for each patient, either by non-operative management, internal fixation or by prosthetic replacement. Initial results with plate fixation were promising, although there was a high incidence of avascular necrosis, axillary nerve lesions, and failure of the construct. The purpose of this study was to critically evaluate the literature relating to locking plate fixation of displaced 2-, 3- and 4-part proximal humerus fractures to determine the expected outcomes and complication rate from this procedure. To minimize reviewer bias and cover all reports in the literature, we established a rigorous review procedure by following strictly published protocols. The PubMed search engine and EMBASE database were utilized with the search terms: proximal humerus fracture, open reduction internal fixation, shoulder fracture, bone plate, fracture fixation, fracture healing, shoulder surgery, osteosynthesis, shoulder joint, bone screw, shoulder dislocation, shoulder fracture therapy, shoulder fracture rehabilitation, shoulder fracture surgery, proximal humerus fracture, closed reduction, and external fixation. The search was originally performed in June 2009 and then repeated in October 2009 to include the most recent literature. The selected studies were limited to English only. The results of the search were critically evaluated and assigned to one of the three categories: relevant, possibly relevant, or irrelevant. Inclusion criteria for the study included: Proximal humerus fractures due to trauma (excluding pathologic fractures). Patients greater than 18 years of age. More than 15 patients in the study or subgroup of interest. At least eighteen months follow-up. At least one relevant functional outcome score such as range of motion, pain, patient satisfaction, or complications. Quality outcome score of at least a 5/10 according to a previously published scoring system. Studies were excluded if they did not meet the above criteria. All institutional, author, and journal information were concealed to minimize reviewer bias. If there were multiple publications on the same patient population, then the most recent follow-up study was retained while the previous studies were excluded. Articles were reviewed for patient demographics, follow-up reports, fracture pattern, outcome score, complications, treatment specifics, pain, range of motion, complications, radiographic healing, and quality of the reporting. Articles that included patients treated with different techniques were only included if clearly separated data for locking plate fixation could be extracted, and those with inconsistent data were excluded. Disagreement between two independent reviewers was resolved by consensus and arbitration of the senior author. Intraobserver agreement on article score was determined with a kappa statistic. The electronic search through the PubMed and EMBASE databases yielded 61,306 citations, by mapping to the described terminology, searching for related articles, and by expanding on the preferred terminology. From this initial search, 133 studies were found to be possibly relevant. Following critical review, there were twelve studies that satisfied the inclusion criteria and were subject to further analysis. All twelve studies included for analysis can be classified as level IV evidence case series based on the Centre for Evidence-Based Medicine published guidelines. Four studies were performed prospectively while five studies were retrospective reviews of clinical database records. The remaining three studies did not indicate whether the data was collected prospectively or retrospectively. None of the studies included a control group, randomization, or blinding ( There was a high level of correlation between the reviewers in terms of study inclusion ( There were 514 patients with proximal humerus fractures included in our study. Of these 66.3% (341) were female and 33.7% (173) were male. The average age was 62 years. The average follow-up was 29.2 months. By fracture type there were 34.0% (175) two part fractures, 44.7% (230) three part fractures, and 21.2% (109) four part fractures ( The standard deltopectoral approach was used in all 12 studies, but one study included cases where a deltoid splitting approach The rehabilitation protocols differed considerably between studies ( The overall healing rate in the reviewed studies was 96.6%. Of the 514 fractures in the series, 498 were considered either clinically or radiographically healed depending on the study. The outcome measure most often used was the Constant score which was used in 9 of the studies. The average constant score at final follow-up for patients who have undergone open reduction internal fixation of a proximal humerus fracture is 73.6 ( There were a total of 251 reported complications ( Management of proximal humerus fractures remains a difficult problem for the orthopaedic surgeon. In the setting of displaced fractures, there is no consensus on the best treatment option, with some studies favouring prosthetic replacement Successful osteosynthesis of the proximal humerus can be difficult to achieve. The metaphyseal bone of the humeral head has been described as an egg shell as there is little bone in the centre of the head. Shoulder range of motion following open reduction internal fixation with a proximal humerus locking plate is one of, if not the most important outcomes with regards to post-operative patient function. Therefore, it was surprising that only two studies specifically commented on range of motion as one of the outcomes of interest. Not surprisingly, patients with two-part fractures had better outcome scores than patients with three-part fractures who in turn had better outcomes than patients with four-part fractures. Compared to previous studies evaluating the constant score after hemiarthroplasty for proximal humerus fractures, patients undergoing open reduction internal fixation with a fixed angle proximal humerus locking plate had better outcomes. In a series by Zyto et al. the constant score after hemiarthroplasty at an average follow-up of 39 months for three-part fractures was 51, while for four-part fractures it was 46. Avascular necrosis is one of the most feared complications following open reduction internal fixation of proximal humerus fractures. AVN can develop as long as five years after injury. This phenomenon is supported by the observation that studies with longer follow-up usually also report higher rates of AVN. Similarly, the adverse outcomes associated with AVN including pain, decreased range of motion, and glenohumeral joint arthritis can take years to develop. This may explain why so few of the patients in this review required joint replacement surgery given the average follow-up was only 29.2 months. Fixation technique has also been implicated as a contributor to AVN, especially in plate fixation given the need for extensive soft tissue dissection. The rate of avascular necrosis seen in our review was 10%, with only a small fraction of these requiring conversion to a joint replacing device. This would appear to question the clinical significance of radiographic AVN. Gerber et al. evaluated a series of 25 patients who developed AVN following ORIF of a proximal humerus fracture at an average follow-up of 7.5 years and found the average Constant score in this group was 46. Screw cutout or perforation of the humeral head into the glenohumeral joint occurred with a rate of 7.5% and was the most common reason for early revision surgery in this review. Screw perforation can be primary, an unrecognized perforation that occurred intraoperatively, or secondary, occurring late as a result of collapse of the humeral head due to AVN or varus malunion. Primary screw cutout is clearly a technical error on the part of the surgeon and therefore is preventable. Secondary screw cutout can be either the result of technical errors in fixation or due to the fracture type and subsequent development of AVN. Owsley evaluated a series of 53 patients with proximal humerus fractures treated with proximal humerus locking plates and noted the rate of screw cutout to be 23%. The most common complication seen in this review is varus malunion, which was seen in 16.3% of cases reviewed. Loss of the medial cortical buttress from fracture comminution at this location is the most important risk factor for varus malunion. Surgical technique may also play a role in the high rate of varus malunion seen. Some surgeons have advocated accepting mild varus alignment when there is medial comminution in order to allow inferomedial cortical abutment to gain stability at the fracture site. This review represents a significant addition to the data recently reported by Thanasas et al. in the only other systematic review on this topic. In conclusion, fixation of proximal humerus fractures with fixed angle locking plates is a relatively new advancement in the field of orthopaedics that has rapidly increased in popularity. Biomechanical studies certainly show potential benefits over standard plating techniques including improved rigidity and stability at the fracture site, especially in cases of severe comminution or osteoporotic bone. Despite promising clinical results, there remains a high rate of complications that require further surgery, suggesting that the surgical technique should be used carefully and only in well-selected patients. Patients should understand the risks and limitations of this promising surgical technique to repair displaced proximal humerus fractures. None.