The effect of borehole inclination on ground temperatures and the practical implications it has for the designs of ground-loop heat exchangers (GLHE) systems is studied. We present a general formulation allowing computation of ground temperature for any number of boreholes, each borehole having its own thermal load, dip, direction, depth (of its head) and length. It is shown with an actual design that a slight tilt of the boreholes can substantially improve the theoretical performance of the GLHE.ground volumetric heat capacity (J depth of borehole head (m) distance between points complementary error function Fourier number (Eq. ground thermal conductivity (W borehole length (m) number of boreholes heat input (or loss) (J rate of heat input (or loss) (W) borehole surface ( distance between two arbitrary points (m) borehole radius (m) time (s) change in ground temperature (°C or K) change in temperature at borehole wall (°C or K) dimensionless change in temperature at borehole wall (Eq. underground points (m) points at the beginning and end of the real borehole (m) dimensionless distance to the beginning of the borehole (Eq. points at the beginning and end of the image borehole (m) thermal diffusivity (m   borehole corresponding to borehole total wall Geothermal heat pumps (GHP) coupled to ground-loop heat exchangers (GLHE) are gaining popularity due to increase in energy costs. A typical underground heat exchanger has one or several vertical boreholes about 10–15 In a system with multiple geothermal wells, the interactions between wells need to be computed to forecast with precision the behaviour of the system over time. For a given load, the most important factor controlling these interactions, besides the thermal parameters of the ground, is the distance between the wells. The smaller the distance, the larger the thermal interference and thus, the longer the total borehole length needed to extract (or inject) the same amount of energy. In some cases, the borehole heads need to be clustered due for example to the presence of underground service utilities limiting the available surface for drilling. One possible solution to reduce borehole interactions is to drill inclined boreholes. Although the interactions close to the surface will be important, the average thermal interference can be low enough to significantly reduce the total borehole length compared to the length required for vertical boreholes. When the interactions close to the surface constitute a problem (e.g. risks of freezing), one approach is to thermally insulate the top portion of the pipes inside the boreholes. One model to compute the ground temperature perturbation caused by a geothermal well is the finite line-source model ( A point in an infinite homogeneous medium emitting instantaneously When the source is emitting continuously By making the change of variable The last equality stems from If a large number of point sources of intensity The above formulation is general and applies to the case of an infinite homogeneous medium. The solution for a semi-infinite medium with surface boundary having a constant temperature can be obtained considering the surface to be a mirror. The image segment of Eq. Eqs. Extension for a geothermal well field is straightforward as the variation of mean wall temperature in borehole We compare the temperature response obtained with Eqs. We consider the case with two 30 In order to obtain the fluid temperature of the GLHE under operational conditions, one needs to evaluate the wall temperature for each borehole at each time step (e.g. hourly) using Eqs. We define the following dimensionless variables: First, we examine the influence of various configurations and parameters on the dimensionless temperature profiles for a single borehole.   In some instances, the space to build the GLHE may be restricted. For example, the boreholes can be located under the building. In that case, it can be advantageous to tilt the boreholes in order to increase the average distance among boreholes and diminish their interactions. We consider the case of four boreholes with heads forming a square with 3 A residential building (undisclosed for confidentiality reasons) uses geothermal as a main source of energy for cooling and heating. We consider a 10-year period. Because of the HP specifications, temperatures shown in  Based on the finite line-source model ( When the borehole heads are close to one another, the thermal interactions can result in increased temperature variations along the boreholes, therefore requiring an increase in total borehole length. We have shown that a slight tilt of the boreholes toward the outside of the borefield can help reduce the interactions, and hence the required borehole length for a given heat load profile. Imposing various dips on the boreholes can be done at almost no cost for contractors. In our case study, the use of slightly inclined boreholes would have reduced the total borehole length by 20% for the same energy provided by the geothermal system. Part of this research was financed by the Natural Sciences and Engineering Research Council of Canada (NSERC). We thank two anonymous reviewers and the editor for helpful comments and suggestions.