The main waste product generated during the bauxite flotation in China is the aluminosilicate tailings. It is desirable to develop an application of these aluminosilicate tailings for the treatment of waste streams containing dissolved heavy metals. The Cr(VI) adsorption capacity and mechanisms of the bauxite tailings modified by FeCl3
                     ·6H2O are investigated in the present study. A maximum removal rate of Cr(VI) by the modified bauxite flotation tailings is obtained at 99.3% in batch experiments. The IEPs of the unmodified and modified bauxite tailings are 3.6 and 5.0, respectively. The IEP of the modified bauxite tailings shifts to lower pH value in the presence of Cr(VI), which indicates that an adsorption of anionic species happens on the modified bauxite tailings. A new band of 
                        
                           
                              
                                 Cr
                              
                              
                                 2
                              
                           
                           
                              
                                 O
                              
                              
                                 7
                              
                              
                                 2
                                 -
                              
                           
                        
                      appears in the FTIR determination of the modified bauxite tailings, which shows that Cr(VI) adsorbs on the modified bauxite tailings in the form of chemical adsorption. Furthermore, the adsorption data of Cr(VI) on the modified bauxite tailings are well described by both Langmuir and Freundlich models. The pseudo-second-order kinetic model also fits experimental data for the adsorption of Cr(VI).Hazardous species, such as Cr(VI), As(V), Pb(II) and Cd(II), exist in aqueous waste streams of metal plating facilities, mining operations and tanneries ( Silicate minerals have great potential applications as inexpensive and efficient adsorbents in the treatment of wastewater because of availability of large quantity, chemical and mechanical stability, high surface area and special structure property. In recent years, a number of researches have been carried out using silicate minerals for adsorption of hazardous substances ( The main waste product, generated during the aluminum production from bauxite by a combined method of flotation followed by the Bayer process, is aluminosilicates tailings. It is reported that 0.2 The adsorption of Cr(VI) from aqueous solution by unmodified and modified bauxite flotation tailings are investigated in the present study. The adsorption mechanisms of Cr(VI) onto the bauxite tailings are determined by the measurement of zeta-potential and FTIR spectroscopy. The bauxite flotation tailings sample is obtained from Zhongzhou bauxite flotation plant in China. These samples are dried at 85 Solution of Cr(VI) (40 The adsorption percentage is determined as below: A zeta meter (Brookhaven Zeta plus, USA) is used for the determination of zeta-potentials. The samples are ground to 5 The infrared spectra for powder samples of bauxite tailings with or without reagents pretreatment are measured using FTIR-750 Infrared Spectrophotometer from Nicolet Co., USA. The samples are air-dried at room temperature (25 The adsorbent dosage is an important parameter for the determining of the adsorbability of adsorbent at a given initial condition. The influences of modified and unmodified bauxite tailings on the adsorption of Cr(VI) are shown in The effects of the shaking time on the adsorption of Cr(VI) are shown in The solution pH is another important parameter and it has a strong effect on the adsorption of metal ions on the surface of the minerals. The effect of pH on the adsorption of Cr(VI) is investigated in the pH range of 2–12, and the results are shown in Form The objective of this study is to investigate the adsorption mechanisms of Cr(VI) by the bauxite flotation tailings. The zeta-potential, FTIR spectroscopy, adsorption isotherm and kinetic studies are carried out. The pH–zeta potential curves of unmodified and modified bauxite tailings in the presence of distilled water and 30 The value of negative charges on the surface of both modified and unmodified tailings decreases in the presence of Cr(VI) in the pH range of 2–12. The removal percentage of Cr(VI) is high in acidic condition which is in agreement with the previous results in As shown in According to the results in Langmuir and Freundlich isotherm models are applied to establish the relationship between the adsorption density of Cr(VI) on tailings and its equilibrium concentration in aqueous solution. The experimental data conform to the linear form of Langmuir model expressed as the following equation: The adsorption equilibrium data are also applied to the Freundlich model in logarithmic form given as follows ( The isotherm constants and correlation coefficients are calculated from the linear Langmuir and Freundlich plots by the plotting The adsorption pattern of Cr(VI) on tailings is well fitted by both Langmuir and Freundlich models with The Adsorption kinetics, the solute uptake rate, is one of the most important characteristics that represent the adsorption efficiency of the modified tailings. As shown in Based on the present study, the following conclusions can be drawn. The modified bauxite tailings by FeCl The pretreatment of bauxite tailings with FeCl The IR spectra results reveal that the hydrated iron oxide is basically held on the unmodified tailings by the appearance of a strong band of O–H–O at 3431 Both Langmuir and Freundlich models fit well the experimental data of the adsorption of Cr(VI) on the modified tailings and the adsorption kinetics is well represented by the pseudo-second-order kinetic model. The authors thank for the financial support provided by the “National Key Basic Research Program (973)” of China (No. 2005CB623701).