A numerical simulator based on RFPA (Rock Failure Process Analysis) is used to study the deformation and failure process of a Brazilian disk of heterogeneous rock when subjected to static and dynamic loading conditions. In this simulator, the heterogeneity of rock is considered by assuming that the material properties of elements conform to a Weibull distribution; an elastic damage-based law that considers the strain-rate dependency is used to describe the constitutive law at mesoscopic scale; and a finite element program is employed as a basic stress analysis tool. The simulator is firstly validated by simulating the dynamic spalling of a homogeneous rock bar and by comparing with the theoretical and experimental results. Then, the failure process of a Brazilian disk of rock subjected to static and dynamic loading is numerically simulated, and the numerical results are compared with the available experimental results. Particular attention is given to the typical failure patterns of the rock disk when the incident compressive stress waves with different amplitudes are applied. The numerical simulation also identifies the failure mechanisms of rock during dynamic failure processes that are closely related to the propagation of the stress wave.parameter to reflect the stress rate effect on strength width of load-bearing strip damping matrix diameter of rock disk damaged and undamaged (initial) elastic modulus of element dynamic compressive and tensile strengths, respectively, of element residual dynamic compressive and tensile strengths, respectively, of element static uniaxial compressive strength ratio of tensile and compressive strength stiffness matrix homogeneity index, shape parameter of Weibull distribution mass matrix applied incident stress amplitude of stress wave vector of externally applied loads parameter of elements that conforms to Weibull distribution, such as elastic modulus and strength displacement, velocity, and acceleration vectors of elements scale parameter of Weibull distribution strain strain at peak stress principal strain strain at the peak compressive stress strain at the peak tensile stress ultimate tensile strain equivalent strain internal friction angle ultimate tensile strain coefficient residual strength coefficient Poisson's ratio stress principal stress damage variable Better understanding of the dynamic fracture processes of rocks promises benefit in many areas from rock mechanics to mining engineering and earthquake prediction. It is essential to understand how fractures initiate and propagate under different loading conditions in order to provide understanding of rock fracture process that occur in the engineering fields. During the past several decades, researchers have carried out many dynamic tests of rock using the apparatus such as the Split Hopkinson pressure bar (SHPB). From these experimental investigations, it has been understood that the mechanical properties (or responses) and failure characteristics of rock are sensitive to the strain rate. It is also a well-established fact that rocks exhibit increases in strength as the loading rate or strain rate increases With regard to the SHPB experiments, they are widely used to determine strain-rate dependency of the dynamic strength of rock, but not to study the failure process and failure mechanisms that are closely related to the stress wave propagation in heterogeneous rock. Continuum damage mechanics is considered to be appropriate to describe the failure process resulting from dynamic loading. Based on this approach, many theoretical models were developed to study the dynamic damage evolution of brittle materials such as rock and concrete with microstructures In the numerical simulation with the discrete element method, the basic fracture patterns of rock and concrete subject to dynamic tension are captured In fact, the stress distribution and damage initiation in the rock is closely related to stress wave propagation; moreover, the local damage in rock can in turn affect the propagation of the stress wave. Numerical simulation of rock subjected to dynamic loading conditions requires the implementation of a constitutive relation capable of capturing the major features of the failure process during the propagation of stress waves. The Rock Failure Process Analysis (RFPA) Code, which had been developed and introduced by Tang The contribution of this work is to validate the simulator by reproducing the dynamic spalling of homogeneous material bar, and then to investigate the failure processes and related failure mechanism of a Brazilian disk of rock under static and dynamic loading. Based on the numerical simulations, the different failure processes are captured, and the related failure mechanisms of rock under static and dynamic loading are identified. Briefly, the simulator used in this work is a two-dimensional (2D) code that can simulate the fracture and failure process of rock under static or dynamic loading conditions. To model the failure of rock material (or rock mass), the rock medium is assumed to be composed of many mesoscopic elements whose material properties are different from one to another and are specified according to a Weibull distribution In RFPA, the solid or structure is assumed to be composed of many mesoscopic elements with the same size, and the mechanical properties of these elements are assumed to conform to a given Weibull distribution as defined by the following probability density function (pdf):  Initially an element is considered elastic, with elastic properties defined by Young's modulus and Poisson's ratio. The stress–strain relation for an element is considered linear elastic until the given damage threshold is attained, and then is modified by softening. Under a dynamic stress state, the elements undergo damage when one of the following damage criteria is satisfied at the element level: In this study, the following relation between dynamic uniaxial compressive strength and loading rate, which has been proposed by Zhao The first part of Eq. When the mesoscopic element is in a uniaxial stress state (both uniaxial compression and uniaxial tension), the constitutive relation of elements is as illustrated in The constitutive relation of the mesoscopic element under uniaxial tension, as shown in the third quartile of From Eq. Additionally, it is assumed that the damage of a mesoscopic element under multiaxial states of stress is also isotropic and elastic. The constitutive equation described above can be extended for application to 3D stress states when the tensile strain threshold is attained. In multiaxial stress states, the element is still subject to damage in the tensile mode when the equivalent major tensile strain For an element subject to a multiaxial state of stress, the constitutive law can be easily obtained by substituting the strain In the same way as for uniaxial tension, when the element is under uniaxial compression but damaged according to the Mohr–Coulomb criterion, the expression for damage variable If an element is under a multiaxial stress state and its strength satisfies the Mohr–Coulomb criterion, damage occurs, and it is necessary to consider the effect of the other principal stress in the model during damage evolution. When the Mohr–Coulomb criterion is satisfied, the maximum principal (compressive) strain It is assumed that shear damage evolution is related only to the maximum compressive principal strain Based on the above equations, it can be found that the damage variable Of course, the above-mentioned constitutive law can be used to simulate the failure process of rock under static loading when the stress rate effect on the strength as expressed by Eq. As described above, the rock specimen is composed of many square elements with the same size. These elements are also acting as the four-noded iso-parametric elements for finite element analysis. The equilibrium equations governing the linear dynamic response of a system of finite elements can be expressed in the following form: At initial condition, the elements are elastic, and their stresses can be calculated via step-by-step integration. At a time step, the principal stresses from the previous time step are subtracted from the current principal stresses and divided by the time step in order to calculate the stress rates of the elements. Similarly, when the current minor principal stress and corresponding stress rate are both negative, the increased strength of an element due to the increase of absolute value of this stress rate can also be obtained. When the effect of stress rate on the dynamic compressive strength is considered according to Eq. As discussed by many researchers The geometries and loading conditions for the bar specimen are shown in In For incident compressive stress wave I ( Two spallings occur for incident compressive stress wave II ( The geometries and loading conditions for disk specimens are shown in The rock disk is 150 For the static loading condition, displacement is imposed on the top loading paten step by step with the bottom platen fixed in the vertical direction, which simulates the compressive loading with displacement control. Similarly, for the dynamic loading conditions, the incident compressive stress is imposed at the top loading platen while the bottom platen is also fixed in the vertical direction. Initially, the rock specimen is elastic and the stress distribution on the vertical diameter is given in  The first element is damaged in tensile mode near the vertical diameter of the specimen (as shown at Step 23 of It should be mentioned that, for this specimen, fracture initiation does not mean collapse of the specimen. From In an attempt to more fully comprehend the response of the rock disk to the different amplitudes of incident compressive stress waves, the three incident compressive stress waves as shown in Firstly, the elastic stress field for the homogeneous specimen under the stress wave I is given, in order to illustrate the stress wave propagation in the homogeneous rock disk. The material parameters are specified for the material properties of this rock, i.e. the Young's modulus is 62.2 It takes The ‘photoelastic fringe’ of stress distribution obtained from the numerical simulation indicates that the stress distribution in a rock disk is not so regularly distributed as that under the static loading, but changes periodically with time. Before the equilibrium condition at It should also be mentioned that the rock disk under this dynamic loading conditions is quite different from that in the SHPB experiments because the rock specimen in the SHPB experiments remains in equilibrium until the time of failure. Hence, it can be seen that the numerical simulations of this work are most useful for studying the complex failure process and failure mechanisms of rock under a variety of dynamic loading conditions. Since no damage of elements occurs when stress wave I is applied, the failure process analysis is only concentrated on the other two incident compressive stress waves. The maximum shear stress distribution, as well as cracking sequence from beginning to final failure, for the rock disk under stress wave II is shown in Under the stress wave III, as shown in In With regard to the displacement at the top loading plate, under the stress wave II the displacement has attained a peak value and begun to decline, while under stress III, it has not attained its peak value. Depending on the stress distribution that varies with time due to the propagation of the stress wave, the failure mechanisms of rock under the above two incident compressive stress waves are different. When stress wave II is applied, as discussed above, the majority of the damaged elements are found after Compared to the numerical results of rock under static loading, the amount of cracking is significantly increased when rock is subjected to the dynamic loading. This is because much more damage is activated when the stress wave propagates in the rock. The cracks initiate, not only near the vertical diameter, but also in other parts of the rock disk. Under dynamic loading conditions, the rock specimen is much more fractured with the increase in magnitude of the stress waves. In contrast to the experimental results of the SHPB experiments, which were observed similar to a statically loaded specimen A numerical simulator, which considers the heterogeneity of material properties and the effect of strain rate on strength, was used to study the failure processes of a rock disk subjected to static and dynamic loading. The following conclusions are drawn from our numerical simulations: Under static loading, numerical simulation reproduces well the primary crack at the disk center propagating along the diameter of specimen and the secondary cracks near the loading platens. Under dynamic loading, different failure patterns and failure mechanisms are numerically captured when incident compressive stress waves with different amplitudes are applied to the rock specimen, which indicates that the failure pattern and failure mechanism of rock under dynamic loading is closely related to the propagation of stress waves. Compared to the static loading condition, more cracks are developed in rock under dynamic loading, and the numerical results of this study are advantageous in capturing the failure pattern and failure mechanisms resulting from the propagation of stress wave in the rock specimen. In the future, care should be exercised in such simulations to accurately model the failure specimen subject to a variety of input stress pulses and to compare the results with experimental results. Although the work reported here has calculated on rock disks, such RFPA simulations are possible for a wide variety of specimen geometries. The authors would like to thank the financial support from the Research Grants Council of the Hong Kong Special Administrative Region, China (Project No. PolyU 5044/99E) from 2001 to December 2002. They also thank the Natural Science Foundation of China (Grant Nos. 50504005 and 50204003) for their continuing support.