Introduction
                  Tarsal navicular fractures are rare and treatment of comminuted fractures is especially difficult. Since 2007, the authors have had access to 3D reconstruction from CT scan images and specific locking plates, and they decided to evaluate whether these elements improved management of these severe cases.
               
                  Materials and methods
                  Between 2007 and 2011, 10 comminuted tarsal navicular fractures were treated in a prospective study. All of the fractures were evaluated by 3D reconstruction from CT scan images, with suppression of the posterior tarsal bones. The surgical approach was chosen according to the type of lesion. Reduction was achieved with a mini-distractor when necessary, and stabilized by AO locking plate fixation (Synthes™). Patient follow-up included a clinical and radiological evaluation (Maryland Foot score, AOFAS score). Eight patients underwent postoperative CT scan.
               
                  Results
                  All patients were followed up after a mean 20.5months. Union was obtained in all patients and arthrodesis was not necessary in any of them. The mean Maryland Foot score was 92.8/100, and the AOFAS score 90.6/100. One patient with an associated comminuted calcaneal fracture had minimal sequella from a compartment syndrome of the foot.
               
                  Discussion
                  The authors did not find any series in the literature that reported evaluating tarsal navicular fractures by 3D reconstruction from CT scan images. The images obtained after suppression of the posterior tarsal bones systematically showed a lateral plantar fragment attached to the plantar calcaneonavicular ligament, which is essential for stability, and which helped determine the reduction technique. Locking plate fixation of these fractures has never been reported.
               
                  Conclusion
                  Comminuted fractures of the tarsal navicular were successfully treated with specific imaging techniques in particular 3D reconstructions of CT scan images to choose the surgical approach and the reduction technique. Locking plate fixation of the navicular seems to be a satisfactory solution for the treatment of these particularly difficult fractures.
               
                  Level of evidence
                  Level IV.Navicular bone fractures of the foot are rare Comminuted fractures are particularly difficult to treat and if internal fixation is impossible, certain authors recommend arthrodesis as the first or second line of treatment Between 2007 and 2011, we performed a prospective study of 10 comminuted tarsal navicular fractures treated by locking plate in 10 men, mean age 29 In one case with fracture-dislocation and significant plantar comminution, the most medial screws were directed towards the cuboid and screwed several millimeters into the bone to obtain sufficient stability. No additional talonavicular pinning was performed. A postoperative CT scan was obtained in 8/10 cases. All patients were immobilized in a splint then a plaster cast. Progressive weight-bearing was allowed after 6 The patients underwent a clinical (Maryland Foot score 3D reconstruction from CT scan images with suppression of the talus and the calcaneus ( Reduction was considered to be anatomic on standard X-rays in two patients who did not undergo a CT scan. In the eight patients who underwent CT scan, reduction was anatomic in four cases, and nearly anatomic (1–2 A dorsal fasciotomy was necessary in one patient with a compartment syndrome of the foot following a complex hindfoot trauma. All patients had a mean follow-up of 20.5 The patient with the most medial screws, that were inserted into the cuboid bone (case No. 5 in Analysis of 3D reconstructions from CT scan images was essential in treating this series of navicular fractures. The usual simple CT scan views on three planes already provide more information than standard X-rays, however, because of the concave joint facet and because of the displacement, it was difficult to obtain all the necessary elements on the same image. With 3D reconstruction and suppression of the talus and the calcaneus, we were able to clearly visualize the lateral plantar fragment ( Talonavicular pins, which are sometimes recommended in unstable lesions We therefore used one or two of the three different surgical approaches ( If the lateral plantar fragment was large, a dorsal approach could be used, centered on the area of comminution. If it was small, a medial approach was necessary to be able to use a dorsoplantar-pointed reduction forceps. If there was an associated dorsolateral fragment, a dorsolateral approach had to be associated for direct visual control of reduction. This study only includes a small number of cases, but navicular fractures are rare Before the study by Sangeorzan et al. The quality of articular reduction was considered optimal in six cases and acceptable in four. We feel that the quality of reduction is influenced by several factors: the quality of imaging making surgical planning possible; perioperative use of a mini-distractor is especially useful for direct visual control of reduction of the intermediate fragments. We used this in 2/3 cases. It is recommended by several authors the use of a pointed reduction forceps in the dorsoplantar position was the determining factor for obtaining final reduction in 2/3 cases. Although the use of a pointed reduction forceps has been mentioned in the literature It is possible to obtain good results in these rare and difficult fractures ( The main author (P. Cronier) is a prior member of the Foot and Ankle Expert Group of the AO-ASIF (Association pour l’étude de l’Ostéosynthèse - Association for the Study of Internal Fixation), which is a non-profit association, associated with the manufacturer Synthes™. He is regularly invited to speak at international AO courses. Other authors declare that they have no conflicts of interest concerning this article.