The coal and gas outburst has become a worldwide challenge and is still not fully understood. In this study, an experimental investigation was carried out for outburst evolution. Coal briquettes were fabricated based on less than 0.6 mm pulverized coal particles of Tunliu Coal Mine. CO2 was used to simulate outbursts by saturating coal briquettes in varying gas pressures (0.2, 0.4 and 0.6 MPa). The outbursts of coal briquettes were induced when rapid gas decompression was performed. The results indicate the outbursts depend on the gas pressure, water content and the rate of gas decompression. The differential pressure between the gas inside and outside the coal briquette is essential to outbursts and varies for different water contents while other parameters affect the initiation and intensity of outbursts as well. The higher gas pressure the more intense outburst occurs. It is worth noting that low rate of gas decompression cannot activate any outburst in the experiments even for a high gas pressure. The water content affects the outburst strongly. The critical minimum gas pressure in the coal briquettes with high water content becomes much higher than that in the coal briquettes with low water content. The major energy of the outbursts in the experiments is the expansion energy of the free state gas inside the coal briquettes. This study clearly demonstrates the progressive fragmentation of outbursts due to gas decompression.Coal and gas outbursts are well known as the sudden and violent energy release of coal and gas that results from a comprehensive function of gas pressure, in-situ stress, coal strength, etc. The first coal and gas outburst accident was reported in France in 1843 and led to two fatalities. Since then, over 30,000 coal and gas outbursts occurred in China, Russia, Poland, Turkey, etc. Coal is a porous material containing various pores and voids, thus these pores and voids can be filled with gases during their formation at depth, e.g. methane (CH The mechanism of outbursts has been studied since outburst occurred The present work concentrates on the experimental simulation of outbursts considering gas pressure, the rate of gas decompression, and water content. This study aims to study the evolution of outbursts and how the internal gas of coal acts on outbursts based on a comprehensive experimental investigation. The energy components that contribute to the outburst were analysed and compared. An experimental apparatus was designed to investigate the effects of high pressure gas on outburst phenomenon. It mainly consists of a compression test machine, a transparent acrylic cell, two end plates and a gas tank. The experimental apparatus is similar to that in Guan et al. In the experiments, CO Our experimental setup is designed based on the triaxial test setup in soil mechanics. The transparent cell has the pressure limitation of 1.0 MPa. The regulator of the CO The coal briquettes are made of pulverized coal particles and water under compaction. Excess water will be expelled due to compaction. The compaction of about 20 MPa is held for 1 h. Although excess water is expelled during the compaction, the fresh coal briquettes still have high water content. Fresh coal briquettes can become dry coal briquettes after 2-day air-drying. The uniaxial compressive strengths (UCS) of the two coal briquettes are notably different. The fresh coal briquette with high water content (14.82%) has a higher UCS than the dry coal briquette with low water content (1.09%), i.e. 0.36 MPa vs. 0.22 MPa. In terms of failure strain, the high water content coal briquette (2.26%) presents higher than the low water content coal briquette (1.97%). Therefore, the coal briquette with high water content indicates ductile failure while the coal briquette with low water content shows brittle failure. Slight larger Young’s modulus is found by comparing with the two stress-strain curves, i.e. 19.50 MPa vs. 13.38 MPa. Brazilian disc tests were also performed to determine the tensile strength of the coal briquettes based on the suggested methods of the ISRM Prior to injecting CO Thereafter, decompression of saturated gas is performed after a coal briquette completes CO Typical nine coal briquettes were performed to investigate the mechanism of outburst. Case 1 (Intact coal briquettes) means only degassing occurred and the adsorbed gas and free gas diffused towards the outside. The internal gas pressure is lower than the critical pressure such that no damage happened in the coal. Case 2 (The fractures of coal briquettes) results from the propagation of cracks and fissures due to the internal gas. However, the growth of fractures depends on the various parameters, e.g. gas pressure and the strength of coal briquettes. Fracture growth stops if the gas pressure and contents are insufficient. Finally, fractures but no fragmentation occur in coal briquettes. Compared with the coal briquettes with high water contents, low water content coal briquettes are liable to occur outburst (Case 3). The outburst fragments in In terms of the process of the outburst, the outburst only takes several microseconds, see As experimental results show, the intensity of outburst depends on gas pressure, gas decompression rate and water content of coal briquettes. To describe the intensity of coal and gas outburst, the degree of fragmentation is introduced. The degree of fragmentation is defined as the mass ratio of the residual fragment to total mass The main energy of outbursts comes from the release of gas. It is obviously known that outbursts must occur only when gas pressure reaches a threshold. The critical gas pressure is significant to evaluate the risk in underground mining engineering. The outbursts have been experimentally studied in terms of high pressure gas According to the results shown in In the experiments, two different coal briquettes showed different critical gas pressures accordingly. The coal briquettes with high water content and high strength (average water content of 14.08% and UCS of 0.36 MPa) were difficult to occur outbursts until the high gas pressure of 0.6 MPa was reached. In comparison, the critical gas pressure decreased to 0.2 MPa in terms of the coal briquettes with low water contents and low strength (average water content of 1.09% and UCS of 0.22 MPa), as shown in In our experiments, the rate of gas decompression is indicated as a key factor to induce outbursts. Since the limitation of the experimental apparatus, the rate of gas decompression is difficult to be controlled continuously. Only two different rates of gas decompression were conducted in the experiments, e.g. 0.60 and 6.23 MPa/s. Coal briquettes were employed in the outburst experiments. According to the results, the rate of gas decompression affects the outburst of coal briquettes, see The gas in the micropores of coal are divided into free state gas and adsorbed state gas Under the isothermal condition, the absorbed gas volume For intact coal samples, the sizes of pores can be assumed as uniform. Based on this assumption, a unipore model was developed In particular, for short time (<600 s) and the desorbed fraction is less than 0.5, the diffusion of gas in coal It is well known the statistical duration of outbursts usually in the range of 3–96 s The so-called outbursts in our experiments occurred within tens of microseconds, here we suppose the outburst duration is 40 ms. By assuming Adsorption in coal is classified as chemical adsorption and physical adsorption. In chemical adsorption, the adsorbate is bound to the solid surface by a direct chemical bond, and in physical adsorption, adsorption occurs mainly due to van der Waals and electrostatic forces between the adsorbate molecules and the atoms composing the adsorbent surface The gas behaviours (e.g. CH Thus, a criterion for the crack initiation in the coal is introduced as From Eq. The progress of the outburst can be further understood according to the analysis of energy release during an outburst. The energy components involved in outbursts are the energy generated by free gas For an adiabatic process, the total expansion energy of the free gas in coal Given that the adsorbed gas in coal, replace the volume of free gas with the volume of adsorbed gas volume from Eq. However, only a portion of the adsorbed gas is involved in the progress of outbursts since the duration of the present experimental outburst is tens of microseconds, In general, fragmentation occurs along with outbursts, the energy is from the gas because there is no other loading applied on the coal briquette. It is worth noting that the more energy dissipated in the fracturing process, the higher fragmentation degree occurs. We consider a simple model to evaluate the relationship between the energy dissipated for fracturing and the fragmentation degree. Then, assumptions are made that the energy acting on fracturing is proportional to the fracture area at a ratio of the specific surface energy and the all energies from free gas and desorbed gas can act on fracturing. The shape of fragments is taken as spherical particles with a mean diameter of Thus, the total energy dissipated by the fragmentation Based on the above analysis, the energy components involved in the experimental outbursts can be calculated and the results are shown in We have performed experiments to investigate the effects of internal gas in coal on outbursts. So-called outbursts were observed clearly in the experiments, which demonstrated the gas cause. Based on the experiments, the progress of outburst and the roles of water content, decompression rate as well as energy components during outbursts were examined. The main findings are concluded as follows: Coal briquettes of high quality and CO The water content of coal briquettes can significantly affect the initiation of outbursts. For coal briquettes have higher water content, more water can occupy the micropores of coal, which can reduce the gas content and coal brittleness, and increase the coal fracture roughness. The expansion energy releases from the gas may not be enough to cause the fragmentation of coal briquettes when they have higher water content. Therefore, only fractures appear in the coal briquettes with higher water content. However, violent outbursts can occur in the coal briquettes with lower water content at the same saturated gas pressure and rate of gas decompression. The rate of gas decompression is a second key factor to cause the outburst of coal briquettes. If the rate of gas decompression is lower than the critical minimum rate, the internal gas can flow and seep out as the coal briquette is an intrinsic porous material. The coal briquettes can only degas safely if the rate of gas decompression is below the threshold. The rate of gas decompression corresponds to the gas desorption and gas emission in the coal briquettes. The coal briquettes can occur fragmentation and outburst if the rate of gas decompression is above the threshold. The threshold value increases as the water content increases. Further studies will be conducted to figure the threshold function with the water content in the coal briquette, which will be presented in the future publications. The evolution of outbursts was identified and discussed. An outburst is the consequence of the coal fracture and fragmentation mainly caused by the internal gas. Energy components, i.e. energy release of free gas, desorbed gas, and energy dissipation of fragmentation, were quantitatively analysed for the experimental outbursts. Free gas possibly contributes mainly to the outbursts in the experiments, which can be useful to the actual outbursts in coal mining. This paper has been financially supported by the GRF grant from