The bacterial oxidation of galena (PbS) has been studied, largely due to its relevance to the bioleaching of sphalerite (ZnS) and other sulphide minerals. Ferric sulphate oxidation experiments were first conducted as an analog to the indirect bio-oxidation mechanism, and the process was found to be diffusion-controlled due to the presence of a product layer. The bacterial oxidation of galena by a mixed culture of iron- and sulphur-oxidising bacterium was found to proceed according to a diffusion-controlled indirect mechanism, in which the primary role of the bacteria is the re-generation of ferric iron. Using quantitative XRD analysis, it was demonstrated that the oxidation product layer consisted solely of lead sulphate and elemental sulphur, in a 1:1 ratio. It was proposed that elemental sulphur and lead ions were formed in a ferric oxidation reaction, while lead sulphate subsequently formed via precipitation of the lead ions, consuming sulphate ions from solution. The galena bio-oxidation experiments demonstrated considerable acid consumption, because of occlusion of the produced elemental sulphur by precipitated lead sulphate. This reveals a new mechanism through which galena oxidation may hinder the bioleaching of other sulphide minerals.There is currently great interest in the bioleaching of sulphide minerals, especially for the processing of copper, zinc and refractory gold ( In contrast to galena, a great degree of interest has been shown in the bioleaching of sphalerite. This interest has arisen due to the increasing need to process lower grade ores of mixed mineralogy, which are difficult to treat through traditional flotation and smelting circuits. One particular problem facing the processing of zinc bearing ores is the common association of sphalerite with galena, often at fine grain sizes, which can particularly complicate the differential flotation of the two minerals. Due to their common association, zinc and lead sulphides are often processed simultaneously, and new hydrometallurgical techniques are being developed to treat complex sulphides of this kind ( According to the frequent association of galena and sphalerite, zinc bioleaching often involves the co-oxidation of galena. This is especially important in the context of recent research that has shown that the oxidation of galena to lead sulphate passivates both the biological and ferric sulphate leaching of sphalerite ( In spite of the importance of the bacterial oxidation of galena, relatively little is known about the mechanism by which it proceeds. This study attempts to elucidate the oxidation mechanism through bacterial and ferric oxidation experiments. Prior to these experimental results, a review of the proposed mechanisms of bacterial and ferric oxidation is presented, by which to later interpret the experimental findings. Currently, three different mechanisms have been suggested for bacterial oxidation: the direct, indirect and indirect contact mechanisms ( While the mechanism for the bioleaching of most common metal sulphides has been fairly well determined, that of galena has not been. This is in spite of the fact that bacteria of the  The anodic dissolution of galena has been well studied, and is known to proceed according to Eq. The ferric leaching of galena in nitrate media is a system in which Pb A number of studies have also been performed on the ferric leaching of galena in chloride media, where Pb The best analog to indirect bio-oxidation is perhaps provided by ferric sulphate oxidation. However, the ferric oxidation of galena remains relatively poorly studied due to the difficulties associated with tracking lead sulphate formation. Studies on the oxidation of galena in sulphate media have shown that sulphuric acid is also capable of converting galena to lead sulphate ( From the above analysis, it can be concluded that the indirect oxidation of galena will proceed during bio-oxidation, though with possible diffusion limitation. However, it cannot be stated whether any of the other proposed bioleaching mechanisms will be of significance, such as has been suggested in the literature. Accordingly, the present study aims to determine a complete mechanism for the bacterial oxidation of galena. Leaching experiments were conducted on a natural galena specimen, with significant sphalerite inclusions (obtained from B.K. Minerals, Australia). The chemical analysis of the sample is given in Experiments in ferric sulphate media followed the procedure of The experimental procedure for bacterial oxidation experiments has been given elsewhere ( Solution aliquots were removed from the bioreactors at periodic intervals, and assayed for metal ion concentrations using inductively coupled plasma mass spectrometry (ICP). The solution pH and Eh were recorded, and the ferrous ion concentration determined by titration. If required, sulphuric acid was used to adjust the solution pH back to 2.0 or below. In addition to solution sampling, slurry samples were also removed (of approximately 50 mL) in order to determine the degree of mineral oxidation. The slurry samples were filtered, rinsed, and then dried, and the mineral residue was analysed for lead sulphate, galena, sphalerite and elemental sulphur through quantitative XRD, calibrated against chemical assays. To study the attachment of bacteria onto mineral particle surfaces, 0.5 g of mineral sample was placed in a 250-mL Erlenmeyer flask with 10 mL of inoculum and 140 mL of MKM. Flasks were then placed in an incubator at 35 °C. Bacterial counts were performed at regular time intervals using a haemocytometer and a Leica DM/LS optical microscope. Three ferric oxidation experiments were conducted on the galena mineral specimen, at particle sizes of −45, −75 +45 and −125 +75 μm, and the experimental results are shown in The observed diffusion limitation in the above experiments is believed to be the result of a deposited surface layer of lead sulphate. From the slope of the linear relationships in  Three bioleaching experiments were performed on galena mineral samples in the size fractions −45, −75 +45 and −125 +75 μm. During the experiments, XRD analysis was performed on solid samples periodically removed from the bioreactors, in order to identify and quantify the mineral phases present. The XRD analysis identified the mineral species galena, lead sulphate, sphalerite and elemental sulphur in the majority of samples. As mentioned, significant quantities of elemental sulphur were observed in the majority of sample residues. Numerous other studies on galena oxidation in sulphate media have also observed elemental sulphur formation, though it has been mechanistically ascribed to a number of varied sources. In As mentioned, the lead sulphate/elemental sulphur product observed in the ferric sulphate experiments provides ca. 100 times less diffusion resistance than the product layer formed from the ferric sulphate leaching of sphalerite. During the leaching of a sulphide mineral, the metal ion is removed, while sulphur undergoes a series of reaction steps to form elemental sulphur as S Due to the proposed mechanism of product layer formation, it would be expected that the elemental sulphur layer would be completely occluded by precipitated lead sulphate. This hypothesis is supported by the current experimental results, where nearly all of the expected elemental sulphur is detected in the leach residues. If the elemental sulphur was formed at the mineral particle surface, then it would be readily available for bacterial oxidation to sulphate ions. This does not appear to be occurring, thus supporting the postulated mechanism. Also, the elemental sulphur product layer formed from galena oxidation would be expected to be far more porous than that formed from the oxidation of minerals such as zinc, copper and iron sulphide, due to the much greater atomic weight of lead over these other metals. Again, this is in accordance with the observed results. If one studies the SEM images of During all three galena bio-oxidation experiments, the solution pH was observed to consistently rise. This decrease in acidity was compensated for by the periodic addition of sulphuric acid, adjusting the pH back to the desired value of 2.0. Once galena oxidation was complete, the pH of the solution began to level out at the desired value. The high levels of acid consumption witnessed in all three tests support the proposed mechanism, in which the produced elemental sulphur is occluded by precipitated lead sulphate. Eq. Using the XRD results obtained from the residue samples, the extent of galena oxidation can be calculated from both the initial galena content and the galena content at a particular time. Galena oxidation has been calculated for the three bacterial oxidation experiments conducted at different size fractions, and the results are shown in  As discussed earlier, there are believed to be three mechanisms by which bacterial oxidation may proceed: the direct, indirect and indirect contact mechanisms. For the direct and indirect contact mechanisms to be valid, bacteria must attach to the mineral particle surfaces. This process of attachment is believed to be controlled by EPS ( In The bacterial oxidation of galena has been found to proceed according to a diffusion-controlled indirect mechanism. During oxidation in the presence of a mixed culture of both iron- and sulphur-oxidising bacterium, a combined product layer of lead sulphate and elemental sulphur is formed, as confirmed by XRD and visual microscopy. A mechanism has been suggested for the formation of this product layer in which 1 mol each of elemental sulphur and lead sulphate are formed per mole of galena oxidised, with the corresponding precipitation of 1 mol of sulphate ions from solution. It was demonstrated that bacteria are unable to attach onto the product layer formed during galena oxidation, thus eliminating the possibility of any direct bacterial oxidation. The elemental sulphur produced during oxidation of galena was found to be occluded from bacterial attack by precipitated lead sulphate. Because the acid generated during bacterial oxidation of elemental sulphur traditionally balances out that consumed during ferrous iron oxidation, the biological oxidation of galena was observed to result in high levels of acid consumption. This revealed a new mechanism by which galena may hinder the leaching of other sulphide minerals. Oxidation experiments in ferric sulphate media demonstrated that the rate of galena oxidation is controlled by product layer diffusion and not chemical reaction. The diffusivity of ferric ions through the lead sulphate/elemental sulphur product layer was determined as 1.4×10 I would like to thank Puru Shresthra and Jodi Reynolds for conducting the mineralogical analyses, including XRD and visual microscopy. I would also like to thank Manuel Lastra and Julia Budden for their comments and suggestions.