Mining remains one of the most hazardous occupations worldwide and underground coal mines are especially notorious for their high accident rates. In this work, we provide an overview of the broad and multi-faceted topic of safety in the mining industry. After reviewing some statistics of mining accidents in the United States, we focus on one pervasive and deadly failure mode in mines, namely explosions. The repeated occurrence of mine explosions, often in similar manner, is the loud unfinished legacy of mining accidents and their occurrence in the 21st century is inexcusable and should constitute a strong call for action for all stakeholders in this industry to settle this problem. We analyze one such recent mine disaster in which deficiencies in various safety barriers failed to prevent the accident initiating event from occurring, then subsequent lines of defense failed to block this accident scenario from unfolding and to mitigate its consequences. We identify the technical, organizational, and regulatory deficiencies that failed to prevent the escalation of the mine hazards into an accident, and the accident into a “disaster”. This case study provides an opportunity to illustrate several concepts that help describe the phenomenology of accidents, such as initiating events, precursor or lead indicator, and accident pathogen. Next, we introduce the safety principle of defense-in-depth, which is the basis for regulations and risk-informed decisions by the US Nuclear Regulatory Commission, and we examine its relevance and applicability to the mining system in support of accident prevention and coordinating actions on all the safety levers, technical, organizational, and regulatory to improve mining safety. The mining system includes the physical confines and characteristics of the mine, the equipment in the mine, the individuals and the organization that operate the mine, as well as the processes and regulatory constraints under which the mine operates. We conclude this article with the proposition for the establishment of defense-in-depth as the guiding safety principle for the mining industry and we indicate possible benefits for adopting this structured hazard-centric system approach to mining safety.Mining remains one of the most hazardous occupations worldwide, and underground coal mines are especially notorious for their high accident rates. Recent media coverage of major fatal accidents in Ukraine, China, South Africa, and the United States highlight a growing public awareness of the dangers of mining. Unfortunately these reported events constitute only the tip of the “safety iceberg” in an industry that remains significantly important in many parts of the world and constitutes an essential economic activity for many communities. In mining as well as in other hazardous industries, various safety levers can be acted upon to modify the exposure to the inherent risks involved, to minimize their likelihood of occurrence, and to contain or mitigate the consequences of accidents should they unfold. Decision-makers can adopt different attitudes and choices with respect to the conditions in these industries. Consider the following episode in which the comments of the protagonists are particularly revealing of different “archetype” attitudes typically adopted in the face of hazardous conditions. In November 2007, a major explosion occurred in a mine in Ukraine killing 90 miners. The Prime Minister at the time, Viktor Yanukovych was reported as saying, “this accident has proven These two attitudes reflect typical perspectives on accident causation and system safety, and they are not unfamiliar to the academic safety community. For example, the Normal Accident Theory (NAT), developed by In essence, the distinctive feature between the two comments reported previously is with respect to attitudes and choices adopted in the face of hazardous conditions: (1) forfeiting action to improve safety, the resigned attitude to accept hazardous conditions as they are; and (2) devising approaches and acting on various safety levers to modify the exposure to these inherent risks, decrease their likelihood of occurrence, and contain or mitigate the consequences of accidents should they unfold. There is an economic and a moral argument in support of the statement that the most important resource that comes out of the mine every day is the miner. It is thus unacceptable to forfeit action to improve safety in the mining industry and be content with its current safety track record worldwide. But how to go about devising strategies and executing on them to improve safety in the mining industry? First, it is important for the stakeholders involved in this industry to have the proper tools, frameworks, and understanding of various hazards for dealing with system safety and accident causation. In this work, we introduce the safety principle of defense-in-depth to the mining community and propose it as a guiding principle for coordinating actions on various safety levers, technical, organizational/managerial, and regulatory to improve mining safety. Our purpose is to contribute one small step in supporting mining operators and regulators improve on the current safety conditions in this industry and sustainably reduce its casualty rate. The remainder of this paper is organized as follows. In Section This section provides an overview of the safety record of the mining industry. The focus is on the US mining industry for which extensive data is available from the Mining Safety and Health Administration (MSHA).   Fatality numbers tell one part of the safety record of an industry; another important dimension of this safety record is the number of injuries and illnesses associated with said industry. It is informative to look at broader historical trends in the evolution of fatalities and fatality rates in the mining industry. Fifty years later, between 1959 and 1968, the US coal mining fatalities, shown in This discussion invites a reconsideration of the statement by the Ukrainian Prime Minister quoted earlier, that “this accident has proven once again that a human is powerless before nature.” Since employment and fatalities data in the US coal mining exist dating back for over a century, fatality rates can be computed and their evolution over a long period of time displayed for (qualitative) visual assessment.      An extensive list of coal mining disasters worldwide can be found in Although beyond the scope of the present work, it is sobering to reflect, beyond the statistics displayed in The causes of mining accidents include explosions (methane, coal dust, or other), fires, rock and roof falls, landslides, blackdamp and toxic gases outbursts, and water inrush/sudden inundations (see It is common in the mining industry to separately identify health issues and safety issues. This separate classification does not necessarily reflect mutually independent hazards, but it helps recognize a difference in the time scales of effect of the hazard sources. For example an explosion or a mine collapse will result in immediate traumatic injuries or fatalities, whereas a prolonged exposure to coal or silica dust can result in debilitating and fatal consequences for miners over the years in the form of lung diseases (e.g., black lung or Coal Workers Pneumoconiosis, CWP). Although this work focuses solely on safety issues, health issues are of major importance to the mining industry. The scale of the health problem is considerable and can be crudely conveyed by the following two statistics. First, in the US for example, 10,406 miners died as a result of pneumoconiosis alone between 1995 and 2004 ( These two statistics, the high casualty toll from health hazards in coal mining and the significant costs of dealing with these issues after the fact, make a strong argument in favor of research into these adverse health consequences of mining and their prevention. This observation is relevant for the mining industry worldwide, and it is particularly important for mining in developing countries in the following manner: Mining accidents with high casualty tolls attract media attention worldwide and may prompt political and legislative action – Chinese coal mines for example are notoriously dangerous with official Chinese statistics showing a death toll in coal mines between 4746 and 6995 death per year However, beyond the media attention-grabbing large-scale accidents, health issues are the more prevalent but silent killers of miners, and as such, they should not be forgotten or disregarded by decision-makers. If for example the rough order of magnitude relationship noted previously between fatalities in the US coal mining resulting from safety issues and health issues holds worldwide, then Chinese coal mines may be significantly more dangerous than already acknowledged, and it is hoped that health issues in coal mines, not just safety issues, will also be recognized as a top priority by the government and regulatory agencies. To paraphrase a saying by Mark Twain, while thunder (safety) gets the attention, it is lightning (health) that does most of the (sinister) work. In this section, we analyze one recent mine disaster involving methane and coal dust explosions. Our purpose for this case study is twofold: (1) to provide some specifics on mining accidents beyond the statistical perspective presented in the previous section, and (2) to pave the way for the discussions that follow in the next sections on safety levers and defense-in-depth applied to the mining industry. Mine explosions, whether of methane or coal dust, are the most common causes of high fatalities in mining accidents. Their repeated occurrence, often in depressingly similar manner, both in the US and abroad, are a clear indication of the failure of the mining industry and the regulatory system to heed the lessons of the past and adopt a robust approach to eliminate these sinister accidents, or at least emaciate their deadly consequences. Explosions are the loud unfinished legacy of mining accidents and their repeated occurrence in the 21st century is inexcusable and should constitute a strong call for action for all stakeholders involved in this industry to settle this problem, once and for all. Although the triggering mechanism or ignition source varies between accidents, spontaneous combustion for example in the case of the Moura mine disaster ( Different safety levers exist to control or influence an accident trajectory: technical levers, organizational/managerial levers, and regulatory levers. The mining disaster at the JWR No. 5 mine is a poignant story in which all the safety levers were pulled in the wrong direction, and a host of decisions made that precipitated the accident sequence and aggravated its consequences, as we discuss next. The JWR No. 5 mine is located in Tuscaloosa County, Alabama. It is one of the deepest coal seams in the United States, and when mined, it liberates high quantities of methane and as a result is considered “very gassy.” On September 23 2001, a roof fall occurred followed by a methane explosion, and 55 min later another more powerful methane and coal dust explosion occurred claiming the lives of 13 miners (  The roof at the accident location had been deteriorating 2 In addition to these Furthermore, cracks were seen in the roof, and over the 2 One more indication that the “top was working” (roof movement) was that a close-by cement brattice was “taking weight” and cracking, and some ribs were sloughing and rolling, a condition that worsened roughly an hour prior to the roof fall.  On the afternoon of September 23, 2001, at 5:17   Coal dust is a recognized explosive hazard in the mining industry. Explosions in coal mines involving coal dust are among the most violent and destructive type of accidents. The primary way of neutralizing this hazard, in addition to cleaning up and avoiding accumulation of coal dust in the mine and especially on electric equipment, is through rock dusting, that is the application of rock dust, a neutral dust to increase the amount of incombustible content in overall mine dust. Going back to JWR disaster, rock dusting at the No. 5 mine was inadequate, and the hazard of dust explosion was probably not well appreciated at the mine, as evidenced by the 99 violations of coal dust accumulation and inadequate rock dusting issued in the 12-month prior to the accident ( Thus, the second accident pathogen at the JWR No. 5 mine consisted in the accumulation of coal dust and the longstanding inadequacy of rock dusting at the mine. Coal dust became a major fuel source for the second explosion, and both the severity and the extent of propagation of the second explosion were the result of coal dust involvement.   The discussion in this section described the accident trajectory or sequence of the JWR No. 5 mine disaster. Several concepts were introduced to help describe the phenomenology of accidents in general and this accident in particular, such as Defense-in-depth is a fundamental principle/strategy for achieving system safety. First conceptualized within the nuclear industry, defense-in-depth is the basis for risk-informed decisions by the US Nuclear Regulatory Commission ( Defense-in-depth, typically realized by successive and diverse safety barriers, technical, organizational, and procedural, is designed to: (1) prevent incidents or accident initiating events from occurring, (2) prevent these incidents or accidents initiators from escalating should the first barriers fail, and (3) mitigate or contain the consequences of accidents should they occur (because of the breach or absence of the previous “prevention” barriers) ( It is worth pointing out that an accident is defined by the Department of Energy ( In mining as well as in other hazardous industries, various safety levers exist and can be acted upon to modify the exposure to the inherent risks involved in said industries, and promote safety. The importance of the safety principle of defense-in-depth cannot be underestimated. How the safety levers are pulled and what “defenses” have been put in place along potential accident trajectories – that is ways in which hazards transform into accidents – are essential contributions for the understanding of accident causation and the support of system safety. For example, the regulatory lever, which historically has been an effective safety lever in the US mining industry, as discussed in Section By mandating pertinent (and up-to-date) technical standards and safety procedures, supported by proper research and epidemiological studies. By providing the inspection apparatus of the regulatory agency with the necessary resources – in terms of funding and skilled inspectors – to audit’s the industry’s compliance with the regulation. In the case of the mining industry, the passage of safety standards, for example with respect to mine ventilation, methane concentration monitoring, rock dusting, and safety training, is an important first step in pulling the regulatory safety lever. However, the effectiveness of such action is largely contingent on the ability to inspect the implementations of these safety standards in mines. By supporting the enforcement capability of the regulatory agency, with a proper legal framework, to enforce compliance with the safety standards, deter or redress safety violations, and if need be, prosecute repeated safety violations. These three types of actions on the regulatory safety lever, Mandate – Inspect – Enforce, can be complemented in a variety of ways, by incentivizing compliance for example, or by assisting the industry in building its skills and ability to comply with the mandated safety standards. The regulatory safety lever can encompass a wide range of actions and predispositions: one the one hand, detection and deterrence through the ability to escalate to threats and legal action against criminal or reckless non-compliant behavior; and on the other hand, incentives and assistance to comply with safety standards, especially for companies that have the intent but not necessarily the ability and required (organizational and technical) competence to comply ( It is useful to acknowledge, although beyond – or on the edge of – the scope of the present work, that safety regulations and their enforcement, and more broadly the regulatory process, are significantly shaped, among other things, by the political context. For example in the US,  He then proceeds to illustrate how partisan politics can affect the regulatory safety lever shown in Other ways political factors can shape the regulatory process in the US is through executive reviews and the issuance of Presidential Executive Orders (EO). The purpose of this discussion is not prescriptive, but to acknowledge the existence of multiple safety levers, and that each can be pulled or relaxed (weakened) in a variety of ways. Defense-in-depth, and the commitment to its implementation, forces the thinking about regulatory, design, and operational choices to address various hazards and potential accident scenarios. Traditional risk analysis, in its bare essence, addresses the following questions ( What can go wrong? How likely it is? What are the consequences? Defense-in-depth adds the most important complement to these questions, namely What are you doing about it (“it” being the answer to 1)? Or how are you defending against it? The answer to this question constitutes an explicit demonstration of how various hazards and identified accident scenarios are, or ought to be, handled. In the next section, we examine how defense-in-depth can be relevant to the mining industry. Several hazards affect the mining industry and render it one of the most dangerous worldwide. These include explosions (methane, coal dust, or other), fires, rock and roof falls, landslides, blackdamp and toxic gases outbursts, and water inrush/sudden inundations. Example of some of mining accidents in which these hazards turned into disasters are provided in These hazards however can be prevented from escalating into accidents – or if they do escalate, their consequences can be contained or mitigated – with appropriate defenses. In other words, between “hazards” and “accidents”, opportunities exist to prevent the transition of the former to the latter, and if this transition does occur, opportunities exist to prevent the transition of “accident” to “disaster” (consequence mitigation). The opportunities to control hazards and block accident trajectories can be captured by the safety principle of defense-in-depth and its implementation. In order to have an effective control of hazards and to establish a set of “defenses” for blocking accident trajectories, it is important to understand first the “ingredients” that support the transition of the hazards into accidents, second the dynamic nature of this transition or the speed of development of a hazard into an accident, and third the “signatures” that a situation is growing into an increasingly hazardous state – what was referred to previously as the precursors or lead indicators. Once this understanding is established for all identified hazards, technical defenses, organizational and managerial defenses, and regulatory defenses can be put in place in support of safety in the mining system. The role of the miner is central to this proposed defense-in-depth approach to mine safety. The previous paragraph noted that for proper hazard control, it is essential to understand the ingredients of hazard build-up and escalation, as well as the “signatures” of these hazardous states and transitions—the operational recognition and awareness that an accident sequence may be unfolding. What was not indicated previously is where or in whom this understanding should reside; it is essential that this understanding be shared by all miners, supervisors, and mine management (not just with safety inspectors for example or other individuals remotely connected to the mine). The reasons for this statement may be self-evident but they are worth making explicit herein. The miners are at the “sharp-end of safety” ( Miners are the principal agents in defense-in-depth. The shared knowledge of the ingredients for hazard build-up and escalation invites their participation in, or contribution towards, eliminating these ingredients and the prevention of accident pathogen build-up. In addition, it is the miners’ active intervention in some cases that can help de-escalate an unfolding accident sequence and bring a mine back from a hazardous state to nominal conditions, when possible. Miners are also crucial “sensors” in defense-in-depth: many hazardous conditions in the mines and “signatures” of an increasingly dangerous state are best monitored and identified by the miners. In other words, miners can fulfill the essential role of a (distributed) monitoring network of local hazardous conditions within a mine. In short, they monitor for hazardous states and provide the prerequisite information for the triggering of active safety interventions in lines of defenses. For these two roles to be properly fulfilled, mine management has to organize the necessary safety workshops for all miners to participate in, and during which the ingredients of various mine hazards are discussed, the dynamics of hazards escalation are laid out, and the “signatures” of various hazardous states are identified. These dedicated safety workshops can be organized on a regular basis to maintain an active awareness of mining hazards and a tested competence in identifying and dealing with them. These workshops can also help bring the collective wisdom (and experience) of miners to bear on finer details of local conditions, and other hazardous issues that the workshop organizers/facilitators may be unaware of or have overlooked. Finally, these workshops can have a strong positive side effect, namely the signaling by management the serious commitment of the company to safety (beyond the common lip service “safety first”). Management should promote safety vigilance and help build and sustain safety competence in all employees. Finally, safety-competent miners fulfill a crucial role, which can be termed decentralized decision-making in support of accident mitigation or containment, a final line of defense, especially during emergencies when centralized decision-making is absent, unavailable, or flawed (as was the case in the No. 5 mine case study, and many other mine disasters). During nominal operating conditions in the mine, a strong centralized planning and decision-making is needed for a number of reasons, including maintaining consistency in operational procedures and coordination of various work plans, permit-to-work, and handovers between day and night shifts. However, in critical situations, when communication with a centralized authority is not available for example or when local conditions, unbeknown to a supervisor, require immediate action to avert disaster, miners can fulfill this role of ultimate line of defense by deciding locally on the best safety course of action. For example, at the JWR No. 5 mine, had the miners received the proper safety training, they would have all concluded after the first explosion that the mine ventilation may be disrupted, and in a gassy mine, the likelihood of methane build-up leading to a second explosion is significantly high. As a result, all the miners would have decided that the best safety course of action is to evacuate the mine, regardless of whether the supervisor is reachable or what he orders. In extreme cases, this role of decentralized decision-making may justifiably lead to miners refusing to comply with orders that are clearly dangerous. Consider for example methane explosions. Methane enters an “explosive range” when its concentration in the mine atmosphere reaches between 5% and 15% ( Because of the criticality of proper ventilation in support of mine safety, several lines of defenses can be placed to sustain this safety barrier. Defenses in the form of management processes can be developed to carefully develop ventilation plans and monitor their implementation and performance on a regular basis. Additional defenses in the form of organizational processes can be put in place to trigger effectives responses and corrective actions should mine ventilation become less than adequate. Regulations can be developed and enforced to ensure that these ventilation-related defenses are in place. In short, several of the safety levers shown in The previous discussion was confined to methane explosion, but the general idea can be adapted to various mine hazards, some of which were noted earlier in this section. For all mining hazards, multiple defenses can be put in place around hazards and their “ingredients” to prevent their transition into accidents (e.g., from a gassy mine to a methane explosion) or to a “disaster”. For example, going back to the JWR No. 5 mine disaster, we find that multiple defenses were seriously flawed or compromised, and that several lines of defense along the accident trajectory (shown in The first barriers to fail were literal defense lines in the form of inadequate roof control and support. The second flawed line of defense was the inadequate training in understanding roof fall hazards, in dealing with this hazard, and interpreting its precursor signs. For example, proper training and procedures could have been put in place for aggressive response to deteriorating roof conditions, such as proper information sharing about the condition across the mine system (including management and mine engineer(s), as well as cordoning the area and de-energizing the area-at-risk. Proper training would have resulted in either the battery never being brought to the area-at-risk (of roof fall) in the first place or that it would have been covered or removed at the signs of impending roof fall (see discussion of lead indicators in Section Furthermore, several lines of defense failed and allowed a serious accident pathogen, coal dust, to accumulate in the mine, in particular the failure of procedures for and implementation of rock dusting. In addition, the fact that the block lights remained energized after the first explosion and that the mine was not evacuated reflect important deficiencies in management-driven safety defenses of proper training and supervision. Training for emergency situations is or should be taken as a significantly important safety defense. Finally, the regulatory safety lever, which creates several lines of defense, failed to enforce the implementation of proper technical safety barriers at the mine, as evidenced by the staggering 90+ safety violations of ventilation standards, and over 90 violations of coal dust accumulation and inadequate rock dusting in the year prior to the accident. In short, the regulatory safety defenses were inefficient and failed to prompt management to take safety seriously and implement the required technical and procedural defenses in support of mine safety. Why this occurred and safety inspections came to be considered as the “toothless tiger” (  Defense-in-depth will make it easy to organize safety trainings and get buy-in from miners and mine management for the various safety defenses that should be implemented. Safety workshops at mines will result in better information sharing and retention about particular hazards, their potential escalation, and the ways to defend against them, when the workshops are organized around the principle of defense-in-depth (for each particular hazard) than when the workshops consists of unstructured and increasingly larger lists of “DOs and DON’Ts”. Defense-in-depth will support a better appreciation of accident lead indicators by miners and mine management and the need to strengthen lines of defense and trigger effective hazard control responses. Defense-in-depth will support a system approach to mining safety in which multiple stakeholders better understand their contributions to accident prevention through their actions on various safety levers and lines of defenses; mine safety becomes a collective output of coordinated efforts on various safety defenses. MSHA, in collaboration with academia and select mining companies, should undertake a few pilot workshops at select mines to test these hypotheses and assess the appeal and usefulness (or lack thereof) of the establishment of defense-in-depth as the guiding safety principle for the mining industry. In this work, we provided an overview of the broad and multi-faceted topic of safety in the mining industry. After reviewing some statistics of mining accidents, we focused on one pervasive and most deadly failure mode in mines, namely mine explosion. We analyzed one recent mine disaster in which various safety barriers failed to prevent the accident initiating event from occurring, then subsequent lines of defense failed to block this accident scenario from unfolding and to mitigate its consequences. We then introduced the safety principle of defense-in-depth and examined how it can be relevant to and applicable in the mining industry in support of accident prevention and coordinating actions on various safety levers to improve mining safety. Several important topics for the mining industry were intentionally left outside the scope of the present work (primarily because the length of the current article, and because a curt treatment would not do them justice). Some of these topics will be addressed in future work, and they include (1) mining health hazards – the present work focused solely on safety issues; (2) emergency response and post-accident analysis, information dissemination, and recommendations; (3) continuous risk analysis and identification of new hazards as conditions in the mining industry change; and (4) safety culture in the mining industry. Finally, we believe more interactions and partnerships between academia, beyond the traditional mining engineering discipline, and the mining community (mining operators, researchers, and regulators), would be particularly helpful in promoting safety innovations and advancing the safety agenda of the mining industry. On the morning of January 2, 2006, an explosion occurred at the Sago underground coal mine in Upshur County, West Virginia killing 12 miners. The explosion originated in an abandoned section of the mine and blew out the seals, allowing the explosion to propagate into the working area of the mine. The accident report identified the most likely ignition source of the explosion as a lightning strike that traveled from the surface underground into the sealed area of the mine where an explosive gas mixture had accumulated. One man died in the initial explosion due to blunt force trauma. Of the two crews underground, one managed to escape the mine, the other crew determined that they could not safely exit the mine and retreated. Although the second crew attempted to barricade themselves into conserve oxygen and seal out carbon monoxide, they were unable to make an airtight seal. All but one man died of carbon monoxide poisoning before the rescue team was able to reach them ( A waste tip slide in Aberfan, South Wales occurred on Friday, October 21, 1966. The slide buried 20 houses, a farm, and a school killing 144 people. The failure was determined to be the fault of the National Coal Board for improper construction of the tips. The coal tips were placed on top of existing natural springs that could not withstand the load of the waste. Several official letters had complained of the danger posed by the coal tips before the accident occurred but no steps were taken to prevent a slide ( On February 26, 1972 a dam failure caused a coal waste slide that killed 118 people in the Buffalo Creek Valley, West Virginia. The slide was the result of failure of a mine-waste impoundment that released 17.6 million cubic feet of water and sludge, also breaking two other impoundments. The failure was caused by incorrect construction that collapsed after several days of heavy rain ( The Chasnala Mine disaster is the deadliest coal mine accident in Indian history. Three hundred and seventy-five workers were killed when water breached a wall separating an abandoned mine from the working areas of a close-by active mine. The abandoned mine had been flooded with water to prevent spontaneous combustion ( The Coalbrook North Mine in South Africa collapsed on January 21, 1960. All 435 workers underground at the time died. The disaster was a result of the collapse of several brick walls and a series of rockfalls. In the weeks preceding the accident several indications of overstressed pillars were evident, including a strata collapse a month before the disaster that injured one worker ( The Sunshine silver mine experienced a large mine fire on May 2, 1972. Ninety-one men died of smoke inhalation and carbon monoxide poisoning. The cause of the fire has not been conclusively determined, but it is known that previously applied polyurethane foam used to seal the ventilation escalated the degree of the fire and released a large amount of toxic fumes. The polyurethane foam was rated to be non-burning and self-extinguishing, but this was found to not be the case. An explosion broke through the barrier separating the flow intake and outtake at which point fans meant to force air out of the mine instead started re-circulating the carbon monoxide and smoke back into the mine ( The Crandall Canyon Mine disaster occurred on August 6, 2007 and was punctuated by a second fatal incident 10 In the early morning of November 20, 1968 an explosion at the Consol No. 9 Mine in Farmington, West Virginia killed 78 miners. Thirteen miners were able to escape on their own power and a further eight were rescued. Over the next several days a series of explosions, fires, and collapses hampered recovery and investigative efforts and eventually forced the closure of the mine. It was known that rock dust was prevalent in the mine and had been noted in the 10 previous federal inspections [United States Mine Rescue Association]. The exact cause of the explosion could not be determined. This disaster influenced the Federal Coal Mine Health and Safety Act of 1969 (