Nitrogen mineralization kinetics were compared in three different soils (pH values: 5.2, 7.1 and 8.6) when treated with bovine manure (BM) and sewage sludge (SS) composts. The soil–compost mixtures were kept at a controlled moisture content of 60% of their water holding capacity (WHC) and were incubated in the dark at 25°C for 2years. Five mathematical models were compared (simple exponential, double exponential, special model, hyperbolic and parabolic), using as experimental data the mineralized N accumulated during 360 and 720days of incubation. The results showed that the best fit for describing the mineralization of organic N from the compost after 1year of experimentation was obtained with the simple exponential model. However, the special model showed the best fit for data from 2years of incubation and thus better reflected organic N mineralization over a longer time-span. This suggested that the organic N in the two composts was made up of two organic pools of different degrees of stability.The use of mathematical models to predict the amounts of nitrogen mineralized over time would allow the evaluation of soil’s capacity to supply N to plants and would make possible an assessment of the availability of mineral N in soils under different management options or with different properties ( Two main factors are of concern in relation to the study of the transformation of organic nitrogenous compounds in the soil. The first is the “potentially mineralizable N”, or the maximum amount of inorganic N that can be formed. This depends upon mineralization and immobilization processes that are related to the ratio of carbon to nitrogen (C/N) in the organic matter, and also upon the type of organic material. The second factor of interest is the “rate of mineralization”, which depends on soil and environmental conditions and the quality of organic matter. The environmental conditions that affect the mineralization process in soil are the moisture content, temperature ( It is important to quantify these factors as mathematical relationships which can be incorporated into more complex mathematical models relating to the N cycle in soil. With mathematical models, it is easier to evaluate the fate of N when organic fertilizers are applied to soils and to plan the optimum conditions for the use of nitrogen by plants. Empirical models are mathematical equations that can be fitted to the experimental results. The use of these models aims to evaluate or predict observed phenomena or experimental data with the objective of developing adequate soil management practices. Models represent attempts at mathematical descriptions of a natural event. In respect of N mineralization, the main purpose of modelling is to obtain quantitative data to recommend the addition of N to the soil where appropriate ( However, modelling N dynamics in soils treated with organic wastes is difficult because of the transformation/turnover processes between the different pools of N in the soil (stable organic, degradable organic and inorganic N) and also because of the possible losses due to the high mobility of mineral N in the soil ( An evaluation of the availability of N in the soil can be carried out by means of short-term biological methods using incubation of samples in the laboratory. Under controlled conditions, this incubation provides the organisms linked to the conversion of organic N to ammonium with their optimum conditions for obtaining maximum mineralization rates. It also allows study of a soil’s N mineralization potential as a function of time (  A number of equations have been used to model, and thus to describe, N mineralization kinetics in soils, although the rate of decomposition of organic materials in soil has been more commonly described by first-order kinetics. Mineralization is the process of decomposition of organic matter, mediated by soil microbes. Therefore, since microbial activity in soil is determined by enzyme dynamics, which are often described by an exponential equation, mineralization should theoretically be described with an exponential equation ( The model initially used to explain N mineralization dynamics in soil consisted of one first-order exponential equation (simple exponential model), proposed by Moreover, models with more than one component have been utilized to achieve a better analysis of experimental cumulative mineralized N as a function of time. A model with two components or two first-order exponential equations (double exponential model) was proposed by  In the past few years, hyperbolic ( The experiment reported here involved research into the organic N mineralization in three different soils, selected to include a range of pH values (acid, neutral and alkaline) from recently utilized residues, as composts. The objective of this work was to assess and compare the modelling of mineralization of organic N in three compost-treated soils. The composts used came from bovine manure and urban sewage sludge. The five mathematical models compared were: simple exponential, double exponential, special model, hyperbolic and parabolic. Of these, the model that gave the best description of organic N mineralization data was chosen. The three soils used were taken from the top 15–20 Two types of compost were studied: bovine manure (BM) compost and urban sewage sludge (SS) compost. The first compost used was produced from bovine manure (faeces and straw bedding) in the composting plant belonging to a livestock farm sited near the city of León in northwest Spain. The composting system used was the turned bed or channel, beds being covered with a roof and force-aerated from below. After the thermophilic stage, lasting about 2 The second compost used was produced from municipal sewage sludge in the composting plant belonging to the Municipal Wastewater Treatment Plant in Jerez de la Frontera in the Province of Cádiz in southwest Spain. In this plant, an activated sludge process is used to treat sewage. The compost was produced in a turned-pile system, mixing the anaerobic sewage sludge with green wastes. After approximately 2 Both composts were air-dried at room temperature and sieved (<5 A sample of soil (275 The soil and compost were mixed thoroughly. The soil–compost mixture was transferred to a cylindrical plastic pot (5.15 The corresponding samples were taken out of the incubator at 0, 20, 40, 60, 80, 120, 180, 240, 300, 360, 540 and 720 The soil and compost samples were allowed to dry in the air and then ground and passed through a 2 Five mathematical models were compared in this work, using as experimental data the mineralized N accumulated during the period of incubation. They are summarized in Data for the mineralized N accumulated were fitted to mathematical equations by the non-linear least-square curve-fitting technique (Marquardt–Levenberg algorithm), using SPSS v.14.0 software. The confidence intervals (95%) for the parameter estimates were selected in order to assess the statistical significance of curve-fitting. Furthermore, so as to compare the fits of different kinetics and identify the best model, the coefficient of determination ( Net mineralized N from compost organic N in the three soils studied, expressed as percentage of the organic N applied with the compost, is shown in Experimental data for mineralized N in compost-treated soils were fitted to five non-linear models used to predict nitrogen mineralization (  After 360 This indicated that the consideration of more than one fraction of the organic N does not improve the fit. A higher value of  The fit to the N mineralization data after 720 For the remaining treatments, SnBM, SaSS, SnSS and SbSS, the model which presented the best fit to the N mineralization data after 720 This may indicate that as N mineralization proceeds, mineralizable N resistance becomes greater and thus the rate of mineralization decreases. This also confirms the existence of two fractions of organic N with different degrees of degradability. Therefore, one part of the organic N would mineralize quickly, while most organic N would mineralize slowly and with a kinetic that is linear over time. On the other hand, Comparisons of the model parameters for data relating to 360 and 720 On the other hand, fitting the double and special models to the mineralization data was sometimes impossible, or gave estimates for parameters that were meaningless values. Thus, the Furthermore, parameter estimates should not be considered exact quantitative values, since they depend on temperature and moisture conditions in the soil. However, they would be useful for detecting differences between soils and treatments in this experiment, since these were studied under identical conditions. In fact, models and their corresponding parameters are necessary for a mathematical description of soil or compost N mineralization kinetics. Many computer models simulating the N cycle in biological systems utilize such mathematical models and require the corresponding parameters. Estimated The organic N mineralization data after 1