The stabilization of raw porcelain gres suspensions with sodium naphthalene sulfonate formaldehyde condensates (SNSFC) was examined systematically in order to understand the basis mechanism of dispersion. Small additions of SNSF to the classical deflocculating mixture with sodium silicate were tested. The repulsion between the colloidal particles was correlated with the adsorption isotherm and zeta potential. The naphthalene sulfonate condensates were effective as dispersant for raw porcelain gres suspensions. The efficiency of these dispersant was attributed to electrostatic effect between the colloidal particles. The ability of the SNSFC to stabilise stabilize raw porcelain gres suspensions was not affected by the degree of condensation.Within the great range of products offered by the ceramic industry, developments in porcelain tile commonly referred to as porcelain gres, have been outstanding. During the past five years, the production has increased currently accounting for 40% of European's total product output. As the demand for porcelain gres continues to increase, leading edge techniques will be required to assist manufacturers in improving their products. Some processing techniques, for example slip casting or injection moulding, use ceramic suspensions with high solid volume and proper stability to improve its economics [ Dispersing agents based on polyelectrolytes, such as polyacrylates, polysaccharides and polystyrene sulfonates, have been used in the preparation of these concentrated suspensions [ Naphthalene sulfonate formaldehyde condensates are used in a number of consumer products and industrial processes that involve particles of a colloidal nature. Examples of such applications are as diverse as cement production, pigment and dyestuff formulation, elastomer manufacture, agrochemicals, haircare products, textiles and mineral processing [ The basic composition of the raw porcelain gres material was a synthetic mixture supplied by ECESA (Lugo, Spain) whose mineralogical composition was 45 wt.% feldspar, as fusion agent, 40 wt.% plastic clay, as plasticizing agent, and 15 wt.% kaolin, as whiting agent. The mean diameter of the raw porcelain gres particles, measured by laser diffraction (LD), was 2.5 µm and with about 100% of the material below 3–4 µm and the 50% of the ceramic particle was over than 1 µm. The specific surface area for this powder was 16.9 m All tested deflocculant mixtures contained 25 wt.% of commercial polymer with a solid content of 50 wt.% and a 75 wt.% of sodium silicate (SiO Ceramic dispersions were prepared by mixing 1 g of the raw material with 50 mL of polymeric solution, without the sodium silicate. A total of 24 different dispersions were prepared by adding the four different polymers at six different concentrations: 0, 2, 10, 20, 30 and 40 mg L The amount of polymer adsorbed on the particles was evaluated from the difference between the initial polymer concentration and the polymer concentration in the supernatant. The specific polymeric electrical charge was determined from the measurement of zeta potential. This measure was evaluated by electrophoresis. A diluted porcelain gres suspension was preparing prepared by dispersing 0.1 g of porcelain gres in 100 mL of solution. A total of 20 different polymer solutions were prepared by adding the four different polymers at five different concentrations: 0, 50, 100, 200 and 250 mg L The slurry was prepared by mixing the raw porcelain material, water and deflocculant mixture, followed by ultrasonication (Ultrasonic Bandelin Sonoplus, Germany) for 10 min in order to homogenize the suspension. Polymer adsorption takes several hours to reach equilibrium. Therefore, the obtained suspension was kept in a sealed flask for a day at 25 °C before testing. The final pH of the suspensions was around 8. All suspensions were prepared with 35% w/w of water. A total of three different suspensions were prepared by adding the different polyelectrolyte mixtures at 0.057% w/w, on the basis of dry material. This is a common composition used for the elaboration of ceramic concentrated suspensions. The rheological experiments were carried out in a rotational rheometer, HAAKE CV20 at 25 °C. The measuring device was the ME31 bob/cup sensor system (inner cylinder diameter 28.93 mm, beaker diameter 30.0 mm, length 24.0 mm and sample volume 1.80 cm The adsorption isotherm for each polymers at pH In all cases, the adsorbed amount increases as the polymer concentration increases, until a plateau was reached. The plateau observed in the isotherms indicated a monolayer adsorption of the polymers, independently of their composition ( At pH below the IEP of the raw porcelain gres the positive charge of the particles anchors negatively charged dispersants ( Results given in For these systems, the Langmuir model was a good predictor of polymer adsorption onto porcelain gres particles ( The constant The amounts of SNSFC adsorbed were smaller than the amount of SA adsorbed. Large values of At all concentrations of polymers the zeta potential was negative ( Addition of SA produced the highest negative zeta potential at the lowest dispersant addition ( To investigate the effect of the polymer charge, the experimental values of the zeta potential were adjusted by the following equation: In addition, we calculated the specific polymer charge, As it can seen from The increase of the amount of anionic polymer increased the zeta potential ( Adsorption and zeta potential were remarkably affected by the chemical composition of the polymer chain (  The upward and downward curves did not coincide, revealing low thixotropy ( To compare the rheological properties, we apply a simplified version of a rheological model presented elsewhere ( It is assumed that the time derivative of the viscosity, at a constant shear rate, follows a first-order kinetic process ( In this model, two thixotropic times were considered: that for the net breakdown process, We considered that the steady steady-state viscosity follows a power-law model: The linear increasing and decreasing of shear rate can be considered as multiple steps with sudden changes in the shear rate. Runs were divided into 1000 steps, and Eqs.   Experimental results show that there is a direct relation between the rheology of the suspensions, the adsorption density of the adsorbed polymer and the zeta potential ( Several investigators have shown that electrostatic repulsion is the predominating stabilising stabilizing effect for both polymers ( In explaining the lowest viscosity in the presence of SA, the smaller number of anionic groups (SO The stability of suspensions of raw material for porcelain gres deflocculated with four polymers (SA, SNSFC SNSFC was effective in reducing the viscosities of concentrate raw porcelain suspensions, although the deflocculant power was slightly lower than SA. The authors are thankful to Rohm and Hass Company for their collaboration and the supplied samples. This study received financial support from the project CICYT (CTQ2005-08346-C02-01).