Consolidation behavior of nanocrystalline Al–5 at.% Ti powders has been investigated by using ultra high-pressure hot pressing method. Nanocrystalline Al–5 at.% Ti compacts with full density were successfully processed by hot pressing for 250 s at 120°C under 4.8 GPa with a grain size less than 50 nm. It is considered that each grain in as-compacted materials maintained random orientation with respect to its neighboring grains. The consolidation temperature, 120°C, is about 300–400°C lower than conventional one. Abnormal grain growth was observed in specimens prepared at temperature over 300°C, which was over one half of the absolute melting temperature of Al. Some grains grew up over 500 nm in these specimens. Rockwell hardness and Vickers micro-hardness values of the specimen prepared by the proper conditions were 105.2HR
                     B and 243.7H
                     V, respectively. This hardness value was one of the highest one ever obtained in Al–5 at.% Ti alloys.There have been many efforts to improve the low ductility of Al–Ti alloys at room temperature by alloying additions, grain refinement and heat treatment Among many available techniques including the gas condensation method which was most widely used before and through 1990s, mechanical alloying (MA) attracts attention as a versatile method of producing nanocrystalline materials with a broad range of chemical composition and atomic structure Most synthesizing methods produce nanocrystalline materials as a powder form. Consolidation of powder is required by various techniques such as hot pressing, hot extrusion, hot isostactic pressing (HIP). However, grain growth occurs readily during high temperature consolidation of nanocrystalline materials Pressure application during sintering is known to achieve full densification of some nanocrystalline powders with minimal grain growth In this study, the results on the consolidation behavior and microstructures evolution of nanocrystalline Al–Ti alloy powder, which was prepared by reactive ball milled in H RBM of elemental powders of Al (−325 mesh, 99.5% pure) and Ti (−325 mesh, 99.9% pure) was performed to yield Al–5 at.% Ti composition in a large high energy ball mill (attritor) having a capacity of 7.8 l under flowing H As-milled powders sieved into −200 mesh were hot degassed for 20 min at 500°C in a vacuum furnace for the removal of hydrogen and formation of titanium trialuminide prior to consolidation. Since the reaction of hydrogen with titanium during RBM in H The degassed RBM powders were subsequently consolidated by vacuum (10 The early stage of nanocrystallization process of Al–10 wt.% Ti alloy during RBM in H As thermally metastable materials, nanocrystalline materials lose their unique characteristic by grain growth during heat treatment. For this process, diffusion or mass flow is required for grain boundary migration. Since the high-angle boundary of nanocrystalline material may undergo grain boundary migration or sliding, it is thought that the mentioned process can easily occur at lower driving force. Nanocrystalline Al–10 wt.% Ti alloy powder ball milled in H Crystalline materials densify during sintering by mass flow processes of grain boundary diffusion, volume diffusion and plastic flow. Densification occurs because the pores are annihilated at the interparticle boundaries, dislocations, phase boundaries or other microstructural grain boundaries In this study, eight specimens were prepared from various pressing conditions. The conditions and some properties of as-pressed specimens are presented in  Because of very fast consolidation at low temperature, specimen no. {6} maintained its grain size as 50 nm. The size is considered as one of the smallest one ever obtained in Al–Ti system by various consolidation methods. And thus, its hardness values were very high compared with nanocrystalline Al–Ti compacts by other methods such as hot extrusion and PAS process In this study, abnormal grain growths were observed in specimens with high-pressure application above 300°C. Thus, it is considered that a specific hydraulic force to induce high pressure is another important factor causing an abnormal grain growth during consolidation. An abnormal grain growth was not found in the hot extruded specimens although they had long time processes consisting of hot degassing and pre-heat treatment exposed at 500°C without applying pressure, but, under applying pressure of 1.5 GPa, its heating time is only 10 min during hot extrusion process   Nanocrystalline Al–5 at.% Ti alloy was successively synthesized by RBM in H Abnormal grain growth was observed in specimens prepared at temperature over 300°C, which was over one half of absolute melting temperature of Al. Some grains grew up over 500 nm in this specimens. Hardness and micro-hardness values of the specimen prepared by the proper conditions were 105.2 The authors acknowledge gratefully the financial support of the Korea Science and Engineering Foundation [98-0300-03-01-5]. This work was also supported by the Brain Korea 21 project.