Intermittently administered parathyroid hormone (PTH) is a potent bone anabolic agent. We aimed to determine the impact of long-term treatment with PTH on bone structure, dynamics, and mineralization. We ovariectomized (ovx) 1-year-old rats with the exception of a baseline and a sham-operated group. Twelve weeks later, a 36 week treatment with PTH analog SDZ PTS 893 (12.5, 25, 50, 100 μg/kg), human PTH(1-34) (25, 50, 100 μg/kg), or vehicle (ovx, sham) was initiated. Bone dynamics, structure, and mineralization were evaluated in the lumbar spine and in the femoral diaphysis. Cancellous bone turnover was elevated 12 weeks postovariectomy in estrogen-deficient, vehicle-treated animals, but returned to the level of the sham group by 48 weeks. The animals experienced substantial cancellous bone loss associated with a reduction of trabecular number and presented with a partly rod-like trabecular network. After 36 weeks of treatment with SDZ PTS 893 or human PTH(1-34), cancellous bone formation rates and turnover were raised in all treated groups compared with age-matched controls. The mineral apposition rate was increasing with dose. This amplified matrix synthesis led to trabecular thickening, but not to an increase in trabecular number, resulting in a crude, plate-like cancellous network with a high bone volume fraction. Fluorochrome label-based cortical bone dynamics demonstrated that a thick ring of new bone was formed at the endocortex by activation of modeling drifts during treatment. Treatment-induced cortical bone formation was increased with dose at the subperiosteal and endocortical envelopes, but substantially higher at the latter. Intracortical bone turnover was elevated near the endocortex. Bone mineralization was undisturbed in all compartments. The average degree of mineralization was lowered slightly, reflecting the increased portion of new bone formed during treatment. In summary, the main anabolic effect was mediated for both peptides by an increase in bone apposition with dose, persisting throughout treatment that lasted more than one third of the lifespan of the rats, and direct activation of bone-forming surfaces. As a result, a substantial amount of new bone, maintained at elevated turnover and adequate mineralization levels, formed predominantly at compartments exposed to bone marrow.In humans, the bone anabolic effect of intermittent administration of PTH and its fragments has been demonstrated in 0.6–3 year long-term monotherapy, In rodents, a substantial increase in bone mass has been demonstrated in several studies in intact, In our study, we evaluated the impact of a long-term treatment on the bone tissue of estrogen-depleted aged rats. We assessed the effects of a 36 week intermittent treatment with different doses of the novel PTH analog SDZ PTS 893 One hundred ten 11–12-month-old female Wistar rats (IFFA Credo, L’Arbresle Cedex, France), which had gone through five reproductive cycles, were used. Their last weaning had been 22 weeks prior to the beginning of the experiment. The animals were evenly distributed into groups of ten according to age, body weight, and whole-body bone mineral content, as measured by dual-energy X-ray absorptiometry (pixel size 1.5 mm × 1.5 mm, scan speed 40 mm/sec; Norland XR-36, Fort Atkinson, WI). The rats were housed in groups of five animals at 25°C with a 12:12 h light:dark cycle. They were fed a standard laboratory diet containing 0.8% phosphorus and 1.1% calcium (Nafag 890, Basel, Switzerland). Food and water were provided ad libitum. Human PTH(1-34) was made by solid-phase synthesis on an ABI 430A peptide synthesizer using a standard synthesis protocol consisting of repetitive cycles of N Bilateral ovariectomy (ovx) was carried out in all animals by a dorsolateral approach under inhalation anesthesia using isoflurane (Forene, WOB506, Lot 55370VA, Abbott AG, Switzerland) with the exception of a group killed at baseline (baseline) and a sham-operated group L-2, -5, and -6 and the femurs were placed in 40% ethanol for 24 h, followed by five 24 h cycles in 70% ethanol at 4°C Sets of 4 μm and 8 μm nonconsecutive (8 μm distance) microtome sections were cut (Microtome 2050 Supercut, Reichert-Jung, Nussloch, Germany) for evaluation of cellular parameters and of fluorochrome label-based dynamic parameters using modified Q The 4-μm-thick sections were stained with a modified Giemsa stain. Microscopic images of the specimens were digitized and evaluated semiautomatically using an Axiophot photomicroscope (Zeiss, Oberkochen, Germany) at a magnification of ×200 linked with a camera (CF 15/4 MC(C), Kappa, Gleichen, Germany) to the Q Fluorochrome labels were evaluated semiautomatically on the 8 μm sections at a magnification of ×200 using an Axiophot photomicroscope and a digitizing (Drawing Board III, CalComp, Scottsdale, AZ) interfaced with the Q Nonconsecutive 50 μm ground sections were cut (Saw Microtome 1600, Leitz, Wetzlar, Germany), ground, and polished (Planopol V, Struers, Copenhagen, Denmark). The mineralized bone at the section surface was silver-stained with a modified von Kossa stain. Images of the stained trabecular surface layer were grabbed at a magnification of ×20 (Stereoscopic Zoom Microscope SMZ-10, Nikon, Tokyo, Japan) and converted into binary images (threshold gray level: 180–200, 1 pixel = 8.3 μm) using adapted Q The macerated vertebrae from all groups were coated with carbon and the three-dimensional arrangement of cancellous bone and of resorption lacunae was examined using scanning electron microscopy (JSM-5800/5800LV, Jeol, Tokyo) (backscattered electron mode 15 kV, working distance 19 mm). Nonconsecutive 100 μm sections were cut exactly from the middiaphysis (as determined by measuring the length of bone with a caliper and marking the center with a scalpel blade) at an interval of 400 μm, ground to 50 μm, and polished. Fluorochrome labels were evaluated semiautomatically at a magnification of ×100 using the Axiophot photomicroscope and CalComp digitizing interfaced with the Q Microradiographs of the 100 μm sections were taken prior to grinding for evaluation of cortical bone structure (20 kV, 45 min; Faxitron, Hewlett-Packard). Bone was defined as those portions of the microradiographic image that had equivalent or greater optical density than the image of three layers (43 μm) of aluminum foil exposed on the same film. Non-bone tissue was defined as all other tissue within the periosteal envelope. Images of the microradiographs were grabbed at a magnification of ×25 (Model SMZ-10 Stereoscopic Zoom Microscope) and converted into binary images (1 pixel = 6.9 μm) using adapted Q Plane parallel block samples were cut. The surface was micromilled to create a topography-free specimen surface (Ultramiller, Reichert-Jung, Leica UK, Ltd., Welwyn Garden City, Herts, UK) and coated with carbon. Colloidal graphite (water suspension) conductive tracks were painted on the top of the sides of the blocks to reach the milled surface and connected to conductive carbon adhesive tape used to attach them to 80 mm Bone mineral density was evaluated by the calibrated standardized quantification of backscattered electron gray-level images from a scanning electron microscope (Zeiss DSM 962, Cambridge, UK) fitted with a four-segment annular solid-state backscattered electron detector and interfaced with image analysis software. The results are expressed as mean ± standard error (SEM). All statistical analyses were carried out using BMDP (Version 1990 for VAX/VMS, BMDP Statistical Software Inc., Cork, Ireland). The data were subjected to one-way analysis of variance (ANOVA). Equality of variances was tested using the Levene Percent osteoclast and osteoblast perimeter and number were highest in the 12 week ovx animals compared with the other control groups ( Osteoblast perimeter and number as markers of active bone formation were significantly elevated in all SDZ PTS 893 and hPTH(1-34)-treated groups compared with age-matched ovx controls Compositional backscattered electron imaging confirmed the presence of an increased amount of more recently mineralized bone in all treated animals (represented by darker gray levels) ( Fluorochrome labels administered at the end of the study were rather wide in the PTH-treated animals, probably indicating rapid active bone mineralization. Superficial woven bone formation and peritrabecular fibrosis were present in two animals treated with the 12.5 μg/kg dose, in one with 25 μg/kg and in one with 100 μg/kg of the PTH analog. In a further eight animals treated with the analog and in five treated with the natural fragment, faint signs of woven bone formation were detectable. Ovariectomy induced loss of cancellous bone ( The amount of cancellous bone was significantly increased in all treated groups compared with age-matched controls ( A large proportion of the subperiosteal surface of treated groups presented with the initial fluorochrome label. This label was administered before initiation of anabolic or vehicle treatment ( The width between the initial label and the last label given before necropsy clearly increased with dose both at the subperiosteal and at the endocortical envelope ( The extent of double-labeled bone surfaces was significantly higher in all treated groups at both envelopes when compared with the age-matched ovx group. This indicates that an increased proportion of cortical bone surfaces was still actively involved in bone formation in the treated groups after 9 months of treatment Histological observation demonstrates that the new bone was laid down as inner circumferential lamellae in the treatment groups The average degree of bone mineralization, as evaluated quantitatively on backscattered electron gray-level images, depends mainly on the age of the bone tissue and thus its formation history in normally mineralized bone. It was slightly higher in cortical than in cancellous bone The density profile represents the distribution of the different degrees of bone mineralization and normally shows a peak in the upper half of the density range (bins 8–16). The mineral fronts at the bone surfaces frequently showed a granulated appearance in animals from all treated groups Estrogen loss induced an elevated cancellous bone turnover in the vertebrae of old retired breeder rats that was detectable at 12 weeks postovariectomy when anabolic treatment was initiated. However, bone turnover returned to the level of aged estrogen-competent animals after 48 weeks. In accordance with previous findings, Estrogen-deficient animals treated for 36 weeks with either peptide had significantly increased cancellous bone formation rates compared with age-matched controls. Thus, the well-described bone-forming effect of PTH Both histomorphometric parameters as well as surface morphology examined by scanning electron microscopy indicated increased cancellous bone resorption compared with age-matched controls: the predominantly flat resorption lacunae were sometimes very extended in the treated animals. With the exception of the highest dose of SDZ PTS 893, this was not related to the dose administered. An increase of bone resorption with PTH treatment has not been observed previously in rats in shorter duration studies. In keeping with the increased extent of bone-forming surfaces and the elevation of matrix synthesis, trabecular thickness increased with dose with either peptide. In accordance with most previously published data, In the femoral diaphysis, some subperiosteal bone apposition had occurred during the 36 week experimental period in both estrogen-competent and -deprived control animals. Bone-forming activities were slightly higher in the ovariectomized animals than in the intact animals at the end of the experiment. At necropsy, the fluorochrome label administered at the onset of treatment was no longer present at the endocortex. The label may have been removed by resorption events resulting from estrogen deficiency and/or aging. Such a cortical drift has been described previously. Comparable quantities of initial fluorochrome label were preserved in all treated and control groups at the subperiosteal envelope. However, the amount of newly deposited bone increased with dose with both peptides. The mineralizing periosteal surface was still 2–4.5-fold higher in treated animals at the end of the experiment, but, as in the cancellous bone compartment, no further dose relationship could be detected. In contrast to vehicle-treated controls, in PTH-treated rats, a very large fraction of the initial fluorochrome label given at the initiation of treatment was present at the endocortical envelope 9 months after its administration. It has been demonstrated that the initial bone anabolic response to PTH does not require the recruitment of new bone-forming cells from osteoblast precursors, but that PTH can rapidly activate bone lining cells to initiate deposition of matrix in less than 24 h. The amount of matrix deposited during anabolic treatment on the original endocortical bone surface increased with dose, as observed at the subperiosteal envelope, but the amount of new bone formed at the former site far exceeded the subperiosteal bone formation. The predominance of endocortical bone apposition over subperiosteal bone apposition with PTH treatment was shown in two previous studies. The preservation of the initial fluorochrome label at the endocortical surfaces suggests that the bone formed under PTH treatment was deposited directly by activation of a modeling drift rather than a positive bone balance during remodeling. The amount of endocortical bone-forming surfaces was still 3.5–8-fold higher in the treated groups compared with controls after 36 weeks of treatment. In analogy to cancellous bone, signs of elevated intracortical remodeling were present near the endocortical surface in treated animals, suggesting that the newly formed bone was maintained in a state of increased bone turnover. However, this elevated bone turnover had no negative impact on biomechanical competence, because a dose-dependent increase in bone strength has been reported in bones taken from this study (L-4 and contralateral femur) for all rats treated with SDZ PTS 893. The average level of bone mineralization depends mainly on the age of the bone tissue and thus its formation history. Because bone reaches the greater part of its full mineralization rapidly in rats, SDZ PTS 893 and hPTH(1-34) showed comparable characteristics with respect to bone dynamics, turnover, structure, and mineralization. However, animals treated with the PTH analog exhibited higher bone formation rates and higher bone resorption than those treated with the natural fragment, as described earlier in a 4 week study. In the present study, an increase of bone apposition with dose and direct activation (endocortical) or enhancement of an existing bone modeling drift (periosteal) persisted over the entire treatment period, which covered a substantial part of the lifespan of the rats. The large portion of new bone formed was maintained at elevated turnover levels compared with age-matched controls. Bone mineralization was adequate, although slightly lower on average due to the large volume fraction of new, more recently mineralized tissue. The proximity of bone surfaces to bone marrow seemed to be a key factor for the magnitude of the long-term bone anabolic response to PTH. Finally, we conclude that the PTH analog SDZ PTS 893 and the natural fragment hPTH(1-34) had comparable bone effects, although the former seems to be somewhat more potent with respect to its effect on bone formation and turnover. The authors thank A. Montefusco and P. Ingold for their excellent technical assistance.