The characterisation of bauxite ores, in particular, the iron mineralogy, is critical when determining their processability. In this study, various Jamaican bauxite ores have been characterised by X-ray powder diffraction (XRD) utilising Rietveld quantitative phase analysis, and Mössbauer spectroscopy. The only forms of iron minerals found were crystalline hematite and crystalline alumino-goethite of relatively small crystallite size. The results obtained by XRD and Mössbauer spectroscopy were found to complement each other well, suggesting that for these samples, there is no indication of an appreciable amorphous iron phase present.Geologically, Jamaican bauxite is considered to be ‘young’ in that it is uncompacted and soil-like in nature, with deposits filling sinkholes or depressions in a karst limestone topography ( The major iron phase in catchment deposits is hematite and accounts for its red colour. Goethite present in these deposits shows a low substitution of aluminium within the goethite structure. Catchment deposits have far better internal drainage. The difference in internal drainage between the catchment and hillside deposits affects the weathering and the degree by which the bauxite deposits undergo secondary surficial alteration due to ground water and dissolved humic acids ( The dissolution and reprecipitation mechanism of surficial alteration causes apatite, the phosphate mineral of the primary (catchment) deposit, to transform to the secondary phosphate minerals crandallite, wavellite, and variscite. Additionally, hematite and goethite in red (catchment) bauxites are transformed into poorly crystalline, highly aluminous goethite. Gibbsite is remobilised during this process and hence contributes to lower grade bauxite ores, with the aluminium substituted primarily into the crandallite and the alumino-goethite. Therefore, alumino-goethite is the dominant iron phase found in hillside deposits and accounts for its yellow colour ( Substitution of aluminium into goethite in Jamaican bauxites has been recorded to be as high as 20 mol% ( The iron oxides are unchanged by the processing of bauxite within a low temperature (< A range of techniques have been used in the past to study bauxite ores. The technique employed in most studies is X-ray diffraction (XRD). The primary reason for this is that XRD has the ability to identify mineral phases. The versatility of the technique has enabled it to be expanded into quantifying the substitution of foreign metal atoms within a mineral structure, as with aluminium substitution within goethite ( XRD also lends itself to the full quantitative analysis of the mineral matrix which makes up a bauxite ore. Several approaches to this have been taken in the past, such as combining X-ray Fluorescence (XRF) and XRD Reference Intensity Ratioing (RIR) ( Mössbauer spectroscopy is a powerful tool for examining iron mineralogy within native and treated bauxite ores ( Iron oxides and oxyhydroxides exhibit magnetic ordering for example up to 77 K for lepidocrocite and as high as 955 K for hematite. Depending on the phase, in their magnetically ordered state, they can be antiferromagnetically or ferri/ferro-magnetically ordered, whereby the antiferromagnetic ordering temperature is called the Néel temperature ( The Mössbauer spectrum of magnetically ordered materials exhibits a sextet, and the parameters that can be derived to characterise the absorber include the isomer shift, quadrupole splitting, the magnetic hyperfine field, and the linewidths at half height. Above their respective ordering temperature, the iron oxides and oxyhydroxides are paramagnetic with Mössbauer spectra consisting of a doublet ( The presence of poor crystallinity due to lattice defects, driven primarily by small particle size, and the substitution of aluminium for iron, affects the Mössbauer behaviour in qualitatively the same manner by lowering the order–disorder temperature In this study, various Jamaican bauxite ores have been characterised by X-ray powder diffraction utilising Rietveld quantitative phase analysis, together with Three bauxite samples were examined from three different Blue Mountain plots, and are identified as BM03BX, BM06BX, and BM14BX. All bauxite samples were ground to less than 150 μm and further ground in a mortar and pestle before analysis by powder X-ray diffraction or Mössbauer spectroscopy. X-ray diffraction (XRD) was carried out on a Panalytical X'Pert MPD PRO instrument using a Cu radiation source with a single reflection flat graphite diffracted beam monochromator specific for the X'Celerator RTMS detector used. A 1° antiscatter slit was used with a Programmable Divergent Slit to give a fixed irradiated length of 12.0 mm. A 0.04 radian Soller slits was employed and diffractograms were collected between 5 and 75° 2 Rietveld based quantitative analysis was carried out using the MAUD (Material Analysis Using Diffraction) programme (Lutterotti, L., Department of Materials Engineering, University of Trento, Italy). Crystallographic data for mineral phases used in the refinement of the quantitative analysis included; anatase ( The Rietveld refinement procedure was as follows: The unit cell of each mineral phase was held fixed to the reference value, except for goethite, hematite, and boehmite, unless present in quantities of less than 1 wt.%, in which case they too were held fixed at the reference value. For goethite, hematite, and boehmite, their unit cells were allowed to refine, as it was considered that their unit cell would vary depending on the degree of isomorphous substitution. In all cases it was also found that the The MAUD programme varies from other more typical Rietveld programmes in that crystallite size and the microstrain is a fitting parameter and not combined within the fit of the Caglioti peak profile parameters for each phase. The Caglioti function still exists but it is applied to the entire pattern rather than to each individual component. Using this method as compared to conventional Rietveld refinement, it has been found that the crystallite size determination is very comparable, but better fits can be obtained, as evident by a reduced weighted profile residual ( For each sample, the analysis for Loss of Mass was carried out at 1000 °C. The calcined samples were subsequently fused with flux and cast into glass disks with quantitative analysis of minor and major elements carried out using a Philips XRF spectrometer PW 2400, where intensities of the specific secondary radiations were converted into concentrations by established calibration curves. The kaolinite (Al The SiO Mössbauer spectra were obtained at room temperature using a constant-acceleration spectrometer with a triangular reference signal. The data were recorded with a proportional counter and stored in a 512-channel analyser. A metallic iron foil at room temperature was used for velocity calibration and the velocity increment was 0.045 mm s  The Al However, to determine the unit cell volume, crystal structure refinement of the sample is required, which is complicated and laborious. Strong linear relationships have been found between individual unit cell dimensions and substitution. For example, in the case of aluminium-substituted goethite, the strongest linear relationship was found to hold for the For the hematite/corundum and the boehmite/lepidocrocite system, the same holds true for the However, in this study, Rietveld refinement has been used, and thus all the unit cell dimensions are determined for each mineral phase. Therefore, the degree of isomorphous substitution has been determined from the linear relationship of the change in the unit cell volume. The crystallographic reference data for goethite, hematite and boehmite is the same as that used for the Rietveld refinement, while diaspore is taken from For the Rietveld refinement, the reduced weighted profile residual ( There is no particular trend of reactive silica (kaolinite) within the bauxite samples. However, bauxite sample BM03BX is unique as it contains the highest kaolinite content and also has the gibbsite polymorph, nordstrandite, present in the sample. It is recognised within the literature that nordstrandite is typically associated with bauxites with relatively high reactive silica ( With increasing boehmite content, the degree of iron substitution within the lattice seems to stay relatively consistent. Conversely, the aluminium substitution within the goethite lattice appears to increase with the goethite content. For BM03BX where the iron oxide phase is almost entirely goethite, the degree of substitution is 15 mol%, which compares reasonably well with the value of 20 mol% found previously ( The bauxite sample with the highest goethite content (BM03BX) is visually a ‘yellow’ bauxite, while BM14BX is a ‘red’ bauxite. BM06BX is of intermediate colour. Generally, and as demonstrated by these bauxite samples, yellow bauxites have the highest phosphorus content (see An example of the Mössbauer spectra generated for the bauxite samples is given in Previous studies have shown, that as a function of particle size, the Mössbauer spectrum of goethite will collapse and exhibit superparamagnetism at particle sizes less than approximately 10 nm ( In this study, it was determined from XRD that the goethite had a mean crystallite dimension of approximately 20 nm, but also was in the range of 12 to 15 mol% aluminium substituted. Therefore it would be expected that the Mössbauer spectrum of the goethite would demonstrate paramagnetism at room temperature and hence exhibit the collapsed doublet as observed. The hematite in the bauxite as examined by XRD found no evidence of aluminium substitution. For Mössbauer spectroscopy of hematite, it has been found that the particle size where paramagnetism at room temperature is estimated to appear is at approximately 7 nm ( However, a closer examination of the Mössbauer spectrum, as depicted in A clear understanding of the iron mineralogy is a fundamentally key parameter when determining the processability of a particular bauxite ore. Generally for Jamaican bauxite ores, the higher the goethitic content, the more difficult the bauxite ore is to process, with exceptions to this general trend usually accounted for by the presence of very fine or amorphous phases ( The only crystalline iron phases identified by XRD were hematite and alumino-goethite. The same was true for Mössbauer spectroscopy. It would appear that the iron substitution within the boehmite, as determined from XRD, is below the detection limit of the Mössbauer spectrometer. Of great interest is the ratio of goethite to hematite as determined by XRD and Mössbauer for each bauxite sample. This is given in  Quantitative analysis by Rietveld powder X-ray diffraction and iron speciation by Mössbauer spectroscopy have been used to characterise a variety of Jamaican bauxite ores, allowing for a clear understanding of the iron mineralogy, which is hugely significant as it has a large bearing on the processability of the bauxite. Alumino-goethite and hematite were the only identified phases. The small crystallite size and high degree of alumino-substitution of the goethite, as measured by XRD, was reflected by the Mössbauer spectra, which demonstrated magnetic disordering and hence the characteristic superparamagnetic doublet. In contrast, the hematite, which was of larger crystallite size, and was not substituted with aluminium, exhibited magnetic ordering and therefore gave the characteristic sextet in the Mössbauer spectra. The goethite to hematite iron ratio as determined by XRD and Mössbauer corresponded very well, demonstrating that for these samples there is no indication of an appreciable amorphous iron phase present. The presence of very fine or amorphous phases has in the past been used to account for anomalous processing behaviour. Future research will look to characterise bauxite samples that are not so different mineralogically, but have very different processing behaviour, with the anticipation that Mössbauer spectroscopy will be able to highlight their differences. This research has been supported financially and through supply of samples by the West Indies Alumina Company (WINDALCO), Jamaica. This support is gratefully acknowledged.