Kaolin with a given size distribution was calcined at 1023 K for 2 h. The calcined samples were digested in hydrochloric acid solutions of known concentration at constant temperatures. The samples taken from the solution at various periods of time were analysed using a complexometric method and the amount of aluminium passed into solution was determined. Experimental data showed that the dissolution kinetics follow the unreacted core model for spherical particles of unchanging size. It was also found that the process is chemical reaction controlled at temperatures ranging from 318 to 369 K with the activation energy of 79 kJ/mol. The surface reaction rate constant, independent of solution concentration, was found to be expressed as
                        
                           k
                                 s
                              =exp(8.55−9500/T)m/s
                           
                        
                     where T is absolute temperature in K.Today metallic aluminium is largely produced by the Hall–Heroult process in which alumina (Al At the end of the leaching process, aluminium in solution can readily be precipitated as Al(OH) Although many researchers have studied the leaching of kaolin in acid solutions, there is no general agreement on the dissolution mechanism and reaction kinetics. The kinetics of sulphuric acid leaching of fine metakaolin was reported to be first order with respect to the unleached aluminium. However, the leaching of pelletised metakaolin, under the same conditions follows the shrinking core model with chemical reaction control In another study carried out by The objective of the research reported in this paper, therefore, was to make a detailed kinetic investigation of HCl acid leaching of kaolin and determine the effects of the particle size, concentration of the solutions, and the leaching temperature on the dissolution rate. Before the leaching, kaolinitic clay must be purified. Description of the purification of the kaolinitic clay is given elsewhere In the digestion process, 3.0 and 5.0 M HCl acid solutions, prepared from Merck product, were used. For the purpose of leaching, 100-mL solution at known concentration was placed in a flat-bottomed flask connected with a reflux condenser. Water was circulated between the jacket around the flask and a thermostat at constant temperature. After thermal equilibrium was established, approximately 1 g of calcined clay sample was transferred into the flask and the mixing by a magnet was commenced. A sample of 5.0 mL, taken from the flask at the predetermined time interval was analysed complexometrically to determine the amount aluminium that passed into the solution. Pure kaolin (Al As seen in When chemical reaction controls, in a heterogeneous reaction, the time for complete conversion of a particle is given by  The leaching kinetics of purified kaolin, calcined at 1023 K for 2 h, in acid solutions follow the unreacted core model for spherical particles of unchanging size with chemical reaction control. In the temperature range of 318–369 K, it was also shown that the surface reaction rate constant, independent of solution concentrations, can be given by the expression in