Kinetics of gold(III) chloride complex ions reduction with dimethylamine borane and precipitation of gold nanoparticles was investigated. The influence of concentrations of reductant, gold(III) chloride complex ions, neutral salt and chloride ions as well as temperature on the process was reported. Experimental results were used to determine parameters in the Arrhenius equation. A set of reactions occurring in the system was proposed. Rate equations were presented and verified. It was proposed that state of the catalytic surface of gold particles play a crucial role in the mechanism of the reaction and competition between AuCl4
                     − adsorption and AuCl4
                     − reduction on the metal particles exists in the system. Microscopic observations as well as analysis of the particles were also performed.KGHM Polska Miedź S.A. is one of the biggest producers of copper, silver and gold in Europe. In 2008, 924 There is a lack of information on the kinetics of reaction between noble metal ions and DMAB. Our previous study ( Solution of gold(III) chloride complex was prepared from metallic gold (99.99%, provided by Mennica Polska S.A.). Metal was dissolved in aqua regia, and then mixture was evaporated several times to remove nitric acid and excess of HCl to obtain pure solid tetrachloroauric acid. Next, the acid was dissolved in deionized water. Required concentrations of gold(III) chloride complexes (2.5 Changes of gold(III) chloride complex ions concentration during reaction with DMAB was measured spectrophotometrically. All experiments were carried out by means of spectrophotometer (Applied Photophysics SX-20) using stopped flow technique. Directly before spectrophotometric analysis two solutions (AuCl Droplets of gold colloid (sample was taken one minute after synthesis, [AuCl The effect of pH on the distribution of gold(III) complex ions at constant chloride ions concentration (0.05  DMAB does not exhibit any peaks for the wavelengths in the range from 200  It was also observed that the presence of metallic gold in the solution facilitated hydrogen evolution. It is one of the typical side products of DMAB oxidation. An exemplary kinetic curve registered during gold(0) precipitation is shown in For monochromatic light, Eq. Kinetic curves registered during turbidimetric measurements have characteristic sigmoidal shape, specific for autocatalytic process, where product of the reaction is a reaction catalyst (here: gold particles) ( Kinetic curves as a dependence of solution absorbance versus time were registered at the wavelengths of 314 It was assumed that increase in the absorbance (at 600 Data presented in Reaction (5) is both consecutive and parallel to the process (4). To determine consumption of AuCl Change of A concentration with time is described by a general equation: Value denoted with subscript “0” corresponds to the initial concentration of A in the solution. Eq. It was accepted that concentration of DMAB is at least one order higher than that of AuCl To confirm validity of the proposed model series of experiments were performed and the results are gathered in the next chapters. The influence of initial concentration of DMAB on the observed reaction rate constant It seems that heterogeneous reaction can occur in the absence of DMAB, since The influence of the initial concentration of gold(III) chloride complex ions on the reaction rate was investigated. Tests were performed at two temperatures and constant DMAB concentration. It was found that An attempt of the reaction order determination was made. As it was mentioned earlier, heterogeneous reaction dominates in the system. Therefore, the reaction rate was calculated upon the changes of AuCl It was found that in the AuCl Experiments were carried out at temperatures in the range from 288 To determine activation energy of the process It was found that activation energy increases only slightly with the increase in AuCl To determine the influence of chloride ions on the reaction kinetics, different initial concentrations of sodium chloride was added. The experimental results are given in It was observed that at constant temperature, For better understanding the process, the influence of chloride ions on the reaction rate at different temperatures was investigated. Obtained results and fitted linear dependences are shown in It was found that the increase in the initial concentration of chloride ions increases activation energy of the process from 42.22 To clarify the effect of Cl Equilibrium potential for Au/AuCl However, such approach does not correspond strictly to a specific shape of the curve It is known that addition of some amount of neutral salts to the investigated system may increase, decrease or have no influence on the reaction rate. This effect has been called “salt effect”. The effect of the salt addition is dependent on the charge of reacting species. Using following equation: Two dashed lines relates to the calculated results with the assumption that reducing agent has either negative (− Precipitation of gold particles was monitored by turbidimetry. Analysis of the experimental kinetic curves shows that Reaction (5) is mainly responsible for the formation of the solid phase. It is worth to note that at According to the proposed model, it was calculated that for Precipitation of gold particles was studied at various temperatures. Using the Arrhenius equation, activation energy of the solid phase precipitation was determined ( The slope of the straight line was used for calculation of the activation energy. It was 43.99 The influence of the initial concentration of the reductant on gold(0) precipitation rate was investigated. The experimental results are presented in It is seen that the initial concentration of DMAB has a significant influence on the rate constant of the solid phase precipitation. As it was observed earlier, The influence of the initial concentration of gold(III) ions on metal precipitation rate was also investigated. The results are shown in It was assumed that equation describing the initial reaction rate Microscopic analysis of gold particles was done using STEM microscope. Single particle was analyzed using EBSD method. EDS analysis confirmed qualitative composition of the investigated material. Spectra showed peaks characteristic for pure gold. The presence of copper as well as aluminum and oxygen was also detected, but the peaks originated from the substrate and handle of the sample, respectively. The obtained results show evidently that at ambient temperature reduction of gold(III) complex ions with DMAB takes place and mechanism of the process is rather sophisticated. One may suggest multifarious way of gold(III) chloride complex reduction. Process is initiated by homogenous reduction of AuCl These four reactions may take place simultaneously. Eqs. At large excess of the reducing agent and in the aqueous system one can assume that concentrations of these components are constant. Then, Specific sigmoidal shapes of the kinetic curves show that reaction has mainly autocatalytic character. It is worth to note that Reaction (4) accelerates Reaction (5) due to formation of new catalytic gold nuclei. However, we can assume that the rate of Reaction (4) is significantly lower in comparison to heterogeneous process (5). Additionally, despite that Process (19) is thermodynamically spontaneous, it may be omitted in the considerations due to high stability of hydrogen molecules at ambient temperatures and under low pressure ( However, we can assume that the rate of reaction (4) is significantly lower in comparison to heterogeneous process (Reaction (5)). Basing on the mass balance at any time of the process it may be written that: This solution is in good agreement with the rate laws fitted to registered kinetic data. Consequently, Eqs. The experimental work show that proposed mathematical models do not fit strictly to the actual course of the reaction. Both models are developed for first-order processes, whereas fractional reaction orders were found for AuCl Dimethylamine borane is an effective reducing agent for gold(III) chloride complex ions at ambient temperature and in acidic aqueous solution. The reduction may consist of two main paths, i.e.: reduction of gold(III) chloride complex ions by DMAB to metallic form in homogenous and heterogeneous (autocatalytic) reactions. It seems that gold(III) chloride ions are reduced in one step by direct electron transfer from DMAB to AuCl DMAB can be used to recovery of gold form acidic aqueous solutions. Its application leads to the metallic gold precipitation, initially in the colloidal form, but after about 24 hours it forms sediment easily to filtration. This work was supported by the The Authors thank Tomasz Tokarski, Ph.D., from Department of Structure and Mechanics of Solids at Faculty of Non-Ferrous Metals of AGH University of Science and Technology for his help during STEM analysis.