Microstructural evolution of nanocrystalline TiO2 powders during mechanical milling was evaluated via Rietveld refinement method. Fully anatase phase nanocrystalline TiO2 powders were mechanically milled using a high-energy planetary ball mill. Milling the powders, employing two types of balls with different sizes, and annealing at three different temperatures, led to the formation of equiaxed nanocrystalline TiO2 powders with the mean crystallite size in the range of 10–80nm, based on the Rietveld refinement results. According to the X-ray diffraction and scanning electron microscopy results, it was found that phase structure, composition, and crystallite size of the resulting particles were dependent on annealing temperature. The transformation kinetics is properly described by the standard first-order model of Avrami–Erofeev equation with activation energy of E
                     =28kJ/mol which implies at the random nucleation of rutile phase on the surface of anatase crystallites followed by an instantaneous growth of the nuclei.Owing to their wide range of applications in photocatalysis, pigments, cosmetics In the study of nanocrystalline materials, the crystallite size is usually the sole factor of interest. Effective introduction of nanocrystalline particles in different applications requires careful investigation on the crystallite size of these particles to make the most out of their exceptional properties. The reason behind the importance of the crystallite size lies in the fact that the performance of TiO The ease of data collection in the powder diffraction instruments and their availability and versatility make them indispensable tools to obtain compositional, structural, microstructural and many other types of information. The extensive peak broadening and possible overlapping inherent in the studies of the patterns acquired from nanocrystalline particles make the phase determination process a very demanding and time-consuming process. Misidentification of the multiple phase systems, co-existing in closely related phases, as being single phase ones, can lead to fallacious results The present work addresses the solid-state polymorphic phase transformation in the nanocrystalline TiO Nanocrystalline TiO Phase characterization of the obtained powder was conducted using a Philips Xpert pro X-ray diffractometer (XRD) with Co Kα radiation. The average crystallite size and relative weight percent of the anatase, brookite and rutile phases in the samples were calculated via Rietveld Refinement Method using Materials Analysis Using Diffraction (MAUD) program. The particle morphology was investigated using Philips XL30 scanning electron microscope (SEM). In order to determine the exact phase evolution in the TiO The experimental patterns ( The experimental XRD pattern (dots) of the initial TiO  In order to trace the evolution of TiO  In order to check the thermodynamic stability of the rutile phase, the milled powder was annealed at higher temperature (1050 The variation of the rutile crystallite size and root mean square (RMS) microstrain in rutile phase with increasing the annealing temperature is shown in On the other hand, it seems that the superimposition of brookite peaks with shoulders of rutile phase (see The change in the lattice parameters of rutile phase of the milled samples versus annealing temperature is shown in  Polymorphic phase transformation in TiO  By comparison the SEM micrographs shown in The mechanical activation of the polymorphic phase transformation of nanocrystalline anatase phase was investigated in the present work. It was found that the transformation of anatase phase to brookite and rutile can completely occur during mechanical milling and there is no need for further annealing. By annealing the powders, the brookite phase was completely transformed to the rutile phase at 750 Valuable scientific discussions with Dr. D. Haghshenas and Mr. S. Sheibani are gratefully acknowledged.