The interaction of high-pressure waterjets with fluids and solids is characterized by the possibility to apply determined stresses with a defined quantity of energy. Beside its classical application in the material and surface processing, the high-pressure waterjet technique found entry into the comminution technique, particularly in connection with new tasks in the environmental and recycling industry. In this contribution, fundamentals and mechanisms of high-pressure waterjets as well as their interactions with solids will be presented. Examples of the use of high-pressure waterjets for comminution are given.A substantial increase of research activities in the field of comminution can be observed in recent years. This development has been largely a response to new requirements in respect of materials to be comminuted-from contaminated soils to complex consumer products -and rising demands regarding the fineness of the comminution products. Corresponding to the specific requirements of these new comminution tasks, a multitude of new processes and process adaptions have been developed. Also, quite unorthodox principles of stressing like comminution by laser beams or by electrically generated underwater shock waves are used. In the framework of these developments also, high-pressure waterjets have to be taken into consideration as a stress tool for comminution. The technology of high-pressure waterjets is highly advanced because of their long-standing use in many different technical fields, for example in cutting as well as for the abrasive stressing of surfaces. So the preconditions for a problem orientated application as a comminution technique are given. Some applications have been proposed or already implemented. The paper deals with the fundamental mechanisms of stressing by high-pressure waterjets. Examples of different uses for comminution tasks are described and further application potential will be pointed out. Due to the possibility of high-pressure waterjets to apply determined stresses with a defined quantity of energy, they are specifically suitable for the decomposition of complex composite materials. With this paper, inspirations for further developments shall be given. The collision of high-pressure waterjets against solid surfaces causes large forces. These can cause the separation of solid constituents from the surface. This abrasive effect is used in many technical applications. Below the main objectives are specified: removal of superficially adhering pollution, roughening of surfaces, clearing away of thicker layers of the base material, clearing away of layers connected firmly with the surface of the base material, such as lacquer or rubber coatings, corrosion layers, oxide films or superficially contaminations. In the order of listing the necessary intensity of the stress increases. Pressures up to 600 MPa are used. High-pressure waterjets are generated by high-pressure pumps, usually by plunger pumps. The water is conveyed through a nozzle ( With an operating pressure The structure of the generated waterjet after the nozzle is schematically represented in In technical applications, the distance between the nozzle and the stressed solid material is usually located within the main area, where the most intensive interactions between waterjet and solid surface occur. The particularly high abrasion effect of the waterjet in the main area is caused in the droplet formation. A droplet collective possesses a substantially higher stress effect than a stationary continuous waterjet. As a result of the impact of droplets, dynamic stresses arise. The resulting forces are significantly higher than the forces caused by static stresses. With increasing distance from the nozzle, the size of the droplets as well as their velocity decreases due to impulse exchange with surrounding air. Thus, also the abrasion effect within the final area of the waterjet decreases. If the jet surrounding medium is not air but water, another jet structure results. Turbulence eddies are produced by impulse exchange with the surrounding medium, which take up a large part of the jet energy. In the underwater application of high-pressure waterjets with the objective of a surface abrasive stress, therefore, usually fine particles are added to the jet. It was proven that additionally to dynamic and static stresses further effects occur like erosion and cavitation. The effect of the jet results from the interactions of these mechanisms. Actually, it is not possible to quantify the contribution of the individual specified processes. Besides the velocity and structure of the jets, the possible interactions between high-pressure waterjets and solid surfaces depend also on surface geometry of the solids ( Basically, the interaction between high-pressure waterjets and solids can be described as follows: Due to the small waterjet diameter, solid surfaces are stressed almost punctually. Very large surface-specific power densities of up to approximately 200 kW/mm The pressure caused by static and dynamic stresses amounts up to approximately 1000 Pa. By cavitation, local pressures can occur up to 10 The stress leads to destruction of the material within the surface area with the consequence of a material separation. The separated constituents are substantially smaller than the source material. The grain size of the separated material depends on the structure of the stressed material. It amounts to some μm (homogeneous materials) up to some mm (heterogeneous materials). Also, larger fragments can be separated by a defined movement of the waterjet. The prerequisite for selective comminution processes ( Apart from its function as sources of energy, the water works at the same time also as transport medium and leads the produced fine products off. Thus parallel to the stressing process a sorting or a classifying process takes place. The primary effect of the waterjet consists in stress and removal of material. In the case of impulse exchange between waterjets and disperse materials, also kinetic energy will be transferred on particles. This can lead to stress of particles among themselves. The application of high-pressure waterjets for comminution covers a large spectrum. This concerns both the grain size and the material properties. An important technological field of application is the separation of superficially, loosely attached or with the base material connected contaminations. For the separation of surface contaminations, the selective liberation by high-pressure waterjets is particularly suitable. The pollutants are removed from the solid surfaces and are taken away in only one process step. Basically, this application can be already interpreted as comminution process, since here a breakage of solid bonds takes place.  Further applications concern the removement of superficial connected material of smaller units. A similar task concerns the separation of superficial attached impurities from plastics in the context of a recycling process (  Further tasks exist in the fields of recycling and environmental technology in isolating or cutting up larger units or material compounds for the purpose of a sort-pure liberation. For different tasks already computer-controlled disassembly systems were developed using high-pressure waterjets as cutting tools. Examples for this are the disassembly of washing machines ( A novel problem solution for a complex liberation process in the recycling industry is shown in A further example of selective comminution is the disassembling of nuclear fuel elements by means of high-pressure waterjets for the purpose of recycling ( A further application refers to the disposal of munition. The usual method of disposal is open burning or open detonation, which destroys valuable resources that can be reclaimed and converted into useful products. The task is to remove the explosive from the metallic cover ( In addition to selective comminution tasks in the field of recycling, also applications in connection with traditional comminution processes are known ( Further applications take place within the fine powder production. Outgoing from the principle of a jet mill chambers with different geometry were developed, through whose channels particle-loaded fluids with high velocities up to several 100 m/s flow ( The above mentioned examples represent only an incomplete single dump of the present uses of high-pressure waterjets for comminution. However, already from this, the very large spectrum of use of this stressing principle is evident, which covers the dismantling of very large units up to the production of nanoparticles. High-pressure waterjets cannot replace the existing comminution processes. However numerous applications regarding new tasks can be carried out. Particularly, in the area of material recycling, many comminution or liberation tasks can be solved, which are not to be overcome by conventional procedures.