The fourth meeting in the series organised by the Coal Research Forum on ‘Coal Research and its Applications’, was held at Imperial College of Science, Technology and Medicine, London, in September 2002. The series continues to gain in popularity with over 100 delegates, the largest number yet, attending the 3-day meeting. Naturally, the majority of the delegates were UK-based but a third came from overseas with representatives coming from as far afield as Japan, Australia, USA, China, Nigeria, South Africa and Chile. As regards participation from mainland Europe, Spain provided the largest number of delegates but it was encouraging to be able to welcome delegates from Poland, the Czech Republic, Estonia, Austria, Germany, Greece and Portugal. The aim of these meetings has been to bring together the university-based coal-research community and those in industry who also carry out coal research or have an interest in the applications of such research. On the basis of this theme, the meeting was organised into eight sessions on combustion and combustion-related emissions, coal carbonisation, coal preparation, beneficiation and handling, co-firing of coal with biomass, coal characterisation, other coal related processes, modelling and advanced monitoring techniques. The large number of presentations received, 90 in total, also necessitated a successful and enjoyable poster session which was held in the early evening of the first day. Not surprisingly, the session on combustion and combustion-related emissions was the largest single session, occupying all of the first day with 17 presentations in all. The two days were divided equally into the seven sessions covering the other topics. The poster session of nearly 40 contributions was equally diverse as regards the subject matter and the overall standard of the presentations was maintained at the high level of the previous meetings, provoking some lively discussions. The interaction of researchers with such a wide range of interests is especially fruitful and the format of the meeting certainly encourages a ready exchange of ideas. This Special Issue for the meeting contains 38 papers from the 52 oral and 38 poster presentations made at the meeting. They are representative of the wide subject matter covered by the meeting and they are indicative of the success of the meeting. The sponsorship of the meeting by BCURA, TXU Europe, Mitsui Babcock Energy Ltd, Powergen UK and Innogy is gratefully acknowledged and the organising committee, under the leadership of Dr Mike Cloke, can be well-satisfied with the result of their efforts. I am sure all those who attended are looking forward to the fifth meeting the organisation of which is now underway, the venue being Edinburgh in September 2004.