Bone Morphogenetic Proteins (BMPs) are members of the TGF-β superfamily of growth factors. Several BMPs exhibit osteoinductive bioactivities, and are critical for bone formation in both developing and mature skeletal systems. BMP-7 (OP-1) is currently used clinically in revision of posterolateral spine fusions and long bone non-unions. The current study characterizes BMP-7 induced gene expression during early osteoblastic differentiation of human mesenchymal stem cells (hMSC). Primary hMSC were treated with BMP-7 for 24 or 120 h and gene expression across the entire human genome was evaluated using Affymetrix HG-U133 Plus 2.0 Arrays. 955 probe sets representing 655 genes and 95 ESTs were identified as differentially expressed and were organized into three major expression profiles (Profiles A, B and C) by hierarchical clustering. Genes from each profile were classified according to biochemical pathway analyses. Profile A, representing genes upregulated by BMP-7, revealed strong enrichment for established osteogenic marker genes, as well as several genes with undefined roles in osteoblast function, including MFI2, HAS3, ADAMTS9, HEY1, DIO2 and FGFR3. A functional screen using siRNA suggested roles for MFI2, HEY1 and DIO2 in osteoblastic differentiation of hMSC. Profile B contained genes transiently downregulated by BMP-7, including numerous genes associated with cell cycle regulation. Follow-up studies confirmed that BMP-7 attenuates cell cycle progression and cell proliferation during early osteoblastic differentiation. Profile C, comprised of genes continuously downregulated by BMP-7, exhibited strong enrichment for genes associated with chemokine/cytokine activity. Inhibitory effects of BMP-7 on cytokine secretion were verified by analysis of enriched culture media. Potent downregulation of CHI3L1, a potential biomarker for numerous joint diseases, was also observed in Profile C. A focused evaluation of BMP, GDF and BMP inhibitor expression elucidated feedback loops modulating BMP-7 bioactivity. BMP-7 was found to induce BMP-2 and downregulate GDF5 expression. Transient knockdown of BMP-2 using siRNA demonstrated that osteoinductive properties associated with BMP-7 are independent of endogenous BMP-2 expression. Noggin was identified as the predominant inhibitor induced by BMP-7 treatment. Overall, this study provides new insight into key bioactivities characterizing early BMP-7 mediated osteoblastic differentiation.Mesenchymal stem cells (MSC) are capable of differentiating into a variety of cell types, including osteoblasts, chondrocytes and adipocytes. Differentiation of MSC into osteoblasts is requisite to embryonic skeletal formation, homeostatic skeletal remodeling and fracture repair. Osteoblastogenesis encompasses numerous morphological and molecular changes through which MSC acquire the ability to deposit the mineralized extracellular matrix (ECM) characteristic of bone tissue Bone Morphogenetic Proteins (BMPs) are members of the Transforming Growth Factor-β (TGF-β) superfamily of growth factors, and are well established physiological regulators of osteoblastic differentiation. Several BMPs display osteoinductive activity, and two of these, BMP-7 (osteogenic protein-1, OP-1) and BMP-2, are currently used clinically to induce new bone formation in spine fusions and long bone non-union fractures Primary hMSC represent an attractive model for studying BMP osteogenic bioactivity, as they are believed to be the primary cell type responsive to BMP signaling during bone formation Our laboratory recently described an Primary human bone-marrow derived mesenchymal stem cells (hMSC) and hMSC culture media, including Mesenchymal Stem Cell Growth Medium (MSCGM) and Osteogenic Differentiation Medium (ODM), were purchased from Lonza (Walkersville, MD). Cells were obtained from healthy donors between the ages of 18 and 45, and were tested by the manufacturer for multipotency down the osteogenic, chondrogenic and adipogenic lineages. In addition, cells were found to be positive by flow cytometry for expression of CD105, CD166, CD29, and CD44, and negative for CD14, CD34 and CD45. Cells were expanded BMP-7 was prepared by Stryker Biotech as previously described Primary hMSC were seeded in MSCGM in 96-well dishes at 5 Primary hMSC were seeded in MSCGM in 48-well dishes at 1.5 Primary hMSC were seeded in MSCGM at 1.5 Data analysis was performed by Genome Explorations, Inc. (Memphis, TN). Data were normalized using two different methods, the Affymetrix Statistical Algorithm MAS 5.0 (GCOS v1.4) and RMA RNA was isolated using the TurboCapture 96 mRNA Kit (Qiagen, Valencia, CA) according to the manufacturer's instructions. Reverse transcription was performed using 40 U of M-MLV Reverse Transcriptase (Promega, Madison, WI) in a buffer containing 20 mM Tris–HCl, 50 mM KCl, 5 mM MgCl Stealth RNAi (Invitrogen, Carlsbad CA) was used to target FGFR3, DIO2, HEY1, ADAMTS9, HAS3, MFI2, BMPR1A and ACVR1. A BMP-2 siRNA On-Targetplus SMART pool was purchased from Dharmacon (Lafayette, CO). Chemistry matched negative controls (non-targeted sequences) were utilized as controls to confirm the specificity of each targeted knockdown. Pools of BMPR1A and ACVR1, two receptors critical to signaling by BMP-7 Flow cytometry studies were performed at Southern Research Institute (Birmingham, AL). Primary hMSC were plated in MSCGM in 35-mm dishes at 1.5 Primary hMSC were plated in MSCGM in 48-well dishes at 1.5 Tissue culture supernatants from hMSC treated with ODM or ODM containing 50 or 500 ng/ml BMP-7 were assayed for 30 human cytokines using a Human Cytokine 30-Plex Panel from Invitrogen (Carlsbad, CA). Cytokine analysis was performed by NovaScreen (Hanover, MD). Briefly, beads conjugated to analyte-specific capture antibodies were incubated with cell supernatants or standard curve samples in 96-well plates. A biotinylated detector antibody was added to each well, followed by Streptavidin-RPE. Samples were analyzed in a Luminex 100 instrument. The concentration of each cytokine was determined from the standard curve, which was generated using a five parameter algorithm. Data from time series experiments were analyzed by ANCOVA. Data from flow cytometry, cell cycle gene expression, cell quantification and siRNA knockdown studies were analyzed by two-sample Affymetrix microarrays were used to evaluate BMP-7 mediated changes in global gene expression during early osteoblastic differentiation. The dose of BMP-7 used was established through preliminary work in which the response of primary hMSC in AP activity assays was assessed over a range of BMP-7 doses from 4 μg/ml to 16 ng/ml ( In order to focus our investigation on the principal downstream effects of BMP-7 treatment, and to avoid false positives, we imposed stringent criteria to generate lists of DEGs. Only probes significantly ( Hierarchical clustering of the 955 probe sets identified three major expression patterns, referred to as Profiles A, B and C ( Consistent with a model of BMP bioactivity, a strong upregulation of genes associated with TGF-beta signaling was revealed through KEGG analysis of Profile A ( Among the most highly upregulated genes in Profile A were several genes with unknown or poorly defined roles in BMP mediated osteoblastic differentiation. These include FGFR3, DIO2, HEY1, HAS3, ADAMTS9 and MFI2 ( We then evaluated the contribution of these genes to BMP-7 mediated osteoblastic differentiation. Using siRNA, expression of each target gene was inhibited, and the ability of MSC to differentiate into mineralizing osteoblasts following BMP-7 treatment was assessed. Potent and persistent downregulation of each target gene was documented at several time points through day 10 of BMP-7 treatment (12 days after nucleoporation) ( Enrichment for genes associated with cell cycle and DNA replication was identified in Profile B (transiently downregulated at 24 h, then upregulated at 120 h by BMP-7 treatment) by KEGG analysis ( Since the magnitude of the observed gene downregulation at 24 h was relatively minor, and an inhibitory role for BMPs on cell cycle progression is not widely recognized, the early effect of BMP-7 on cell cycle stage was evaluated using flow cytometry. BMP-7 induced a statistically significant increase of approximately 12% (from 62.1% to 69.2% of total cell population, The effect of BMP-7 on cell proliferation was further evaluated by quantifying the number of cells in BMP-7 treated wells over a period of 8 days ( The most prominent pathway identified by KEGG analysis of Profile C (genes continuously downregulated by BMP-7 treatment) was the cytokine–cytokine receptor interaction pathway ( Notable among the genes inhibited by BMP-7 treatment in Profile C ( In order to better understand the feedback loop mechanisms through which BMP-7 treated hMSC modulate BMP-7 bioactivity, we interrogated the Affymetrix data to identify all BMP-7 mediated effects on the expression of BMPs, GDFs and known BMP inhibitors ( Of all BMP and GDF genes, only BMP-2 and GDF5 analyses confirmed the trends suggested by the Affymetrix profiling. As shown in We next investigated whether the osteoinductive activities of BMP-7 are exerted independently or in synergy with endogenous BMP-2. BMP-7 mediated osteoblastic differentiation was evaluated in hMSC in which a potent and sustained downregulation of BMP-2 was achieved using siRNA ( We further interrogated the unfiltered RMA normalized dataset, as described above, to evaluate the expression of BMP inhibitors in BMP-7 treated hMSC ( In the current study, BMP-7 mediated gene expression during early osteoblastic differentiation of primary hMSC was evaluated by Affymetrix gene profiling. Regulation of several genes and pathways not previously associated with osteoblastic differentiation was identified. Striking upregulation of six genes with undefined roles in osteoblastic differentiation was observed by Affymetrix profiling and confirmed by QPCR. A functional screen using siRNA suggested that two of these genes, MFI2 and HEY1, were essential to mineralization in differentiating hMSC. MFI2 is an iron-binding cell-surface glycoprotein that shares sequence similarity with members of the transferrin superfamily. Proteins of this superfamily contribute to iron sequestration in osteoblast cells SiRNA mediated knockdown of DIO2 was found to accelerate mineralization in differentiating hMSC, in the presence or absence of BMP-7. DIO2 is a member of the iodothyronine deiodinase family, a group of enzymes whose members regulate thyroid hormone availability. DIO2 plays a critical role in the conversion of inactive pro-hormone T4 to its active form, T3 An early, transient, attenuation of the cell cycle was observed following BMP-7 treatment of hMSC. Osteoblastic differentiation is tightly linked to cell cycle regulation through Runx2/Cbfa-1 expression, which peaks during G BMP-7 was found to significantly inhibit cytokine production and secretion in hMSC. This activity may lead to modulation of osteoclast activity by BMP-7 during bone formation, as several cytokines downregulated in this study promote osteoclast precursor recruitment, osteoclastogenesis and osteoclastic bone resorption Modulation of CHI3L1 expression by BMPs has not previously been reported. Osteoblastic expression of CHI3L1 has been described in osteophytic bone To better understand how BMP-7 modulates responsiveness of target cells during early osteoblastic differentiation, expression of other BMP and GDF genes, and BMP inhibitors, was investigated by interrogation of the Affymetrix dataset. Confirmation studies demonstrated that several BMP inhibitors, including NOG, BAMBI, GREM1 and GREM2, were significantly upregulated by BMP-7. Induction of NOG in BMP-7 treated cells far exceeded that of all other inhibitors, suggesting that noggin may act as the principal negative regulator of BMP-7 function during human osteoblastic differentiation. This data is in agreement with that published by Gazzerro et al. where the authors describe a dose-dependent induction of noggin following BMP-2, BMP-4 or BMP-6 treatment of rat osteoblasts BMP-7 treatment of hMSC resulted in a downregulation of the chondrogenic growth factor GDF5 in differentiating hMSC. Inhibition of GDF5 by BMP-7 under osteogenic conditions may contribute to the shift from chondrogenesis to osteoblastogenesis that occurs during endochondral bone formation This paper describes the underlying mechanisms of BMP-7 bioactivity during early osteoblastic differentiation of primary hMSC. This information may serve as a point of comparison for bioactivity of other osteoinductive BMPs, to better understand the individual contributions of BMPs during human bone formation. Furthermore, these data should facilitate the informed use of BMP-7 as a therapeutic agent and tissue engineering tool.  Supplementary data associated with this article can be found, in the online version, at