Increasingly complex numerical models are nowadays often utilized for studying ground source heat pump. The differential equation systems representing these models are often both large and stiff and can be hard to solve with conventional implicit methods. In this work, an adaptive step size segmentation Haar wavelet method is developed for solving large stiff ODE systems representing ground heat exchanger models in order to compute the ground temperature distribution over time. Three models are studied in this work: the cylinder-source model, a standing column well model and a vertical closed–loop borehole model. The proposed method is compared with the numerical differentiation formulas method of order 1 to 5 in terms of backward differences. Results indicate that, for a similar accuracy, the proposed method is 3–17 times faster than state-of-the-art commercial solvers.system coefficients thermal capacity (J °C Haar coefficients (–) or volumetric heat capacity (MJm shank spacing (m) Haar matrix (–) Haar wavelet (–) Bessel function of the first kind (–) dilatation parameter (–) translation parameter (–) or thermal conductivity (Wm heat exchanger length (m) level of wavelet (–) number of equations (–) Haar integral matrix (–) Haar integral (–) or accuracy order (–) thermal resistance (°C W radius (m) old step size (s) new step size (s) temperature (m) time (s) flow rate (m Bessel function of the second kind (–) first Haar interval (–) second Haar interval (–) third Haar interval (–) absolute difference (°C) machine precision (–) relative tolerance (–) absolute tolerance (°C) maximum relative local truncation error (–) error level (–) maximum absolute local truncation error (°C) borehole fluid grout time step index node index neighboring node index pipe soil ground heat exchanger infinite cylindrical source ordinary differential equation partial differential equation standing column well thermal resistance and capacity model In recent years, numerical methods have been successfully used to emulate ground-coupled heat pump systems wherein a heat carrier fluid circulating through a ground heat exchanger (GHE) transfers heat with the surrounding ground Solving stiff ODE systems can be numerically challenging. Indeed, selection of the integration step size is critical since large steps can lose some fast changing properties of the solution while small steps greatly increase the computation time. A large array of numerical explicit and implicit methods is available for solving stiff problems Wavelet-based methods have received increasing interest from researchers in the last few years The main advantages of the approach over state-of-the-art explicit and implicit solvers are its simplicity, sparse matrix representation and possibility of implementation of fast and efficient algorithms This paper presents an adaptive segmentation Haar wavelet method for solving large linear first-order stiff systems representing ground heat exchangers modeled through the TRCM approach. It is shown, through three numerical experiments, that the proposed algorithm leads to computation times up to 17 times faster than the numerical differentiation formulas (NDF) method of order 1 to 5 in terms of backward differences implemented in Matlab code The Haar wavelet method consists of expressing each ODE by a Haar wavelet decomposition, and embedding the wavelets into a system of linear equations whose unknowns are the wavelet coefficients. The wavelet coefficients then allow a direct derivation of the ODEs solution, thereby greatly simplifying the solution procedure. In the following section, the conventional Haar wavelet method is first presented. Then, the algorithm proposed to modify the segment length is presented with sufficient details to allow the interested reader to implement the method. The orthonormal set of Haar wavelets Thus, Combining these row vectors gives the un-normalized Haar matrix of order Since all the Haar wavelets are orthogonal to each other, they form a very good transform basis. Therefore, any function To illustrate the approach, let Eq. When solving differential equations, integration is often required to obtain a solution to the problem. Consequently, it is convenient to work with the integral of a Haar wavelet. Based on the work of Use of matrix Pursuing the example started previously, Eq. Then, integration of So far, the simulation period was the normalized interval Now, consider a first-order ODE system of the following form: To exemplify the structure of the system, consider a tridiagonal ODE system with The size of matrix Instead of computing the solution of a given ODE system directly using the conventional Haar method or the segmentation method, an adaptive step size algorithm has been developed. The general idea behind the algorithm consists of obtaining a solution ( The use of linear multistep methods is well suited given the distance between the collocation points within a segment is constant. The approach is also convenient since The length of the segment is then adapted using the well-known adaptive step size algorithm of For clarity, The approach described previously consists of using two different integration algorithms. Although it would have been possible to compare the solution provided by the Haar wavelet method at the last collocation point with The algorithm developed in this work has been implemented in a compact Matlab In a general way, a GHE and its surrounding ground can be represented by a nodal network of interconnected thermal resistances ( Using the heat conservation principle, the temperature ( Ultimately, one must first determine the numerical values of Note that this approach treats the GHE and the surrounding ground as a whole and allows the calculation of the temperature at any node in the domain. To alleviate the computational burden, some authors used the so-called “two-layer” approach The proposed Haar wavelet method is used for solving the three linear TRCMs of GHEs illustrated in The accuracy of the method proposed in this work is evaluated by a mean absolute difference (MAD) over all solutions. For all scenarios, the computations were carried out on a standard desktop computer with a 3.6 GHz Intel i7-2600K processor. The heat transfer between the heat carrier fluid and the ground in a typical closed-loop borehole is a three-dimensional transient heat transfer problem, but it is often simplified into a 1D radial problem for simplicity. When doing so, it is assumed that a constant heat flux is imposed at the surface of a cylinder of radius The second case study is known as the standing column well (SCW) system recently developed by Ref. The 2D radial geometry makes this ODE system less sparse because each node has up to four neighbors. It is also physically more complex then the ICS as it involves both heat advection and diffusion, which makes the system more stiff. For the whole simulation duration, a constant Δ The third case is the vertical closed-loop borehole model represented in a quasi-3D geometry and developed by Refs. Unlike the ICS model, this model explicitly accounts for the heat carrier fluid, the U-loop and the grout. As shown in First, For the first case, For the SCW model with n = 2000, the temporal evolution of the inlet and outlet fluid temperature (i.e When the SCW model is discretized into a finer mesh (i.e n = 3000), the NDF method becomes considerably slower and requires up to 53.3 s to compute the solution. On the other hand, the Haar wavelet method remains notably fast with a relative gain of 10.7 for J = 0. With J = 1, the computation time increases to 11.0 s, which is still 4.8 times faster. This case study shows that the proposed Haar wavelet method remains surprisingly fast when dealing with increasingly large stiff ODE system. For the U-loop model, ( The use of increasingly complex models are nowadays often required for studying GHEs. In this work, a new method using Haar wavelets is developed for solving large linear stiff ODE systems obtained by the TRCM approach. In order to overcome the limitations of the conventional Haar wavelet method, a segmentation method coupled to an adaptive step size algorithm is proposed. Three case studies were investigated: the ICS model, the SCW model and the U-loop model. The examples shown in this paper demonstrate that the proposed Haar wavelet method can successfully compete with the efficient When used in conjunction with other methods such as the two-layer technique or the spectral approach, the Haar wavelet method can significantly improve the computational efficiency of difficult problems encountered in the field of ground-coupled heat pump systems or in any other field dealing with large stiff ODE systems. The authors would like to acknowledge the