The problems of nuclear waste treatment and decontamination have been paramount for a number of years and continue to adversely affect the acceptability and expanded uses of nuclear power. By and large, methodologies for waste treatment exist at varying efficiency and correspondingly high expense. With a view to nuclear waste remediation, a novel bio-inorganic ion exchanger was developed which utilises a microbial system to synthesise hydrogen uranyl phosphate which serves as an intercalative ion exchanger for the fission products 137Cs, 90Sr and the activation product 60Co. Hydrogen uranyl phosphate-coated Serratia sp. biofilm, immobilised onto polyurethane reticulated foam, was used in a flow through reactor, with complete substitution of H+ in the matrix by the intercalating target metal species. Experiments carried out in South Korea have confirmed these results using test nuclides (137Cs, 85Sr and 60Co), as well as water from a pool, where spent fuels are stored and cooled, sited in a post irradiation examination facility at the Korea Atomic Energy Research Institute. Over 97% and ∼85% removal of 137Cs and 60Co, respectively, from the pool water were reported, at a flow residence time of 7 days.H Fission of  Cylindrical glass columns (length 9.0 cm and internal diameter 1.5 cm) were used as reactors. Two packing systems were used for bioaccumulation of HUP onto biofilm immobilised onto polyurethane foam: quartered cubes (88 per reactor, 125 mm The reactors containing HUP supported on biofilm immobilised onto cubes of polyurethane foam were challenged with solutions of Co(NO The Co  Polyurethane foam cubes (ca. 15) from a packed-bed reactor, containing biofilm and HUP, were transferred to a Universal bottle (25 mL), deionised water was added, the foam cubes were squeezed and the HUP deposits were transferred to another bottle. The suspension was settled under gravity, washed three times with deionised water, at ambient temperature, then twice with acetone and dried. The HUP powder (a few mg) was laid onto Magic Tape and examined using a D5000 Siemens Diffractometer (School of Chemistry, The University of Birmingham) in transmission mode. The diffractometer is equipped with a Ge monochromator to produce Cu K This work was performed at the Korea Atomic Energy Research Institute (KAERI). Reactors containing HUP-coated A similar reactor packed with a rolled-up polyurethane foam containing HUP supported onto immobilised biofilm was used for the removal of  Usually HUP and UO Reactors containing HUP (ca. 107 mg U), supported on biofilm immobilised onto polyurethane foam cubes, exposed to Co  MRI of similar bioreactors in parallel to those tested at KAERI (using non-radioactive surrogates) showed that channelling occurs between the foam cubes and down the side of the reactor (the fluid has higher velocities), i.e. contact between the flow and the biofilm coated with HUP is reduced. Therefore, the foam cubes were substituted by a rectangular piece of foam containing HUP supported on biofilm, rolled-up in the reactor, to overcome fluid channelling. Preliminary tests showed the reactors to be effective in the removal of > We have shown that using HUP as a bioinorganic ion exchanger it was possible to remove 100% of cobalt, strontium and caesium from aqueous solutions until the reactor reached saturation. These results were confirmed using test nuclides ( This work was supported by BBSRC (grant no. 6/E1464), Hanil Nuclear Company (South Korea) and the Korea Atomic Energy Research Institute. The authors thank Recticel (Belgium) for the biofilm support.