Oxalic acid is now considered as a useful chemical in various hydrometallurgical processes. For its massive applications in hydrometallurgy, cost-effective production of the acid is necessary. In this direction, fermentative production of the acid from glucose appears attractive. Aspergillus niger, the main oxalic acid producing organism, in general oxidizes glucose rapidly to gluconic acid, and conversion of this sugar to oxalic and citric acid is always sufficiently less. In this article, we have shown that immobilized mycelia (bioparticles) of A. niger NCIM 548 strain secreted more oxalic acid from glucose than the amounts produced from either sucrose, lactose or glucose under submerged condition. Germination of immobilized spores in polyurethane foam yielded bioparticles which produced more (average: 3-fold on 7th day and 3.7-fold on 9th day) oxalic acid from glucose compared to free mycelium cells, mainly during the 2nd and 6th cycle. Recycled bioparticles maintained average activity of acid production up to six cycles.Oxalic acid, produced by many saprophytic and phytopathogenic fungi, causes leaching and transformation of insoluble inorganic metal compounds in nature through acidification and via its chelating property Oxalic acid can be produced both by chemical and fermentative processes, the first one being more common nowadays. The usual chemical methods use sodium formate (heating followed by H Among the variety of fungi producing oxalic acid  The medium contained the following components in (g/l): glucose (105.5) or sucrose (100) or lactose (102.6) plus glucose (2.51)—all with the same carbon content; NaNO Spores from 7-day stationary culture at 30 Immobilization was done using spore suspension of Fifty milliliter culture medium taken in a 250-ml Erlenmeyer flask was inoculated with spores of In order to determine the oxalic acid producing activity and stability of the bioparticles, several cycles of fermentation were carried out for either 7 or 9 days at 30 Broths after fermentation were filtered through a 0.2-μm membrane. Oxalate in the filtrate was estimated by titration with KMnO Sugars were estimated colorimetrically using orcinol Biomass of In the present study inoculum size was allowed to vary from 5 × 10 The results presented in C-sources were used at concentrations equivalent to 42 The amount of oxalic acid (in g) produced per 100 The adsorption technique of immobilization   The optimum inoculum size for this strain ( Lactose is not readily utilized by Medium pH strongly influences oxalic acid production by Although sucrose is the preferred substrate for fermentative production of oxalic acid, nearly equal yields of oxalic acid in lactose permeate and sucrose medium was reported earlier Immobilized cells of the We thank Prof. A.K. Guha of the Indian Association for the Cultivation of Science, Kolkata for his valuable suggestions. Authors thank Dr. B. Achari for revising the manuscript. S.K. Mandal received a Senior Research Fellowship from the Council of Scientific and Industrial Research, New Delhi, India.