Diabetes is a major frequent cause of atherosclerosis vascular disease. Arterial calcification in diabetic patients is responsible for peripheral vascular involvement. Molecular imaging using 18F-sodium fluoride (18F-NaF) positron emission tomography (PET)/computed tomography (CT) has been recently proposed as a marker to study the in vivo mineralization process in the atheroma plaque. A 69-year-old man with a history of type 2 diabetes and no clinical evidence of peripheral arterial disease underwent an 18F-NaF PET/CT scan. A linear, well-defined 18F-NaF uptake was detected along the femoral arteries. In addition, the CT component of the PET/CT identified an unsuspected “tram-track” calcification in his femoral arteries, suggestive of medial calcification (Mönckeberg's sclerosis). In other vascular territories, focal 18F-NaF uptake was also detected in carotid and aorta atheroma plaques. Molecular imaging with 18F-NaF PET/CT might provide new functional information about the in vivo vascular calcification process in diabetic patients.Diabetes represents a leading cause of morbidity and mortality in the Western world. In addition, vascular calcification in diabetes is associated with a major risk factor for cardiovascular disease. The appearance of vascular calcification may be focal in atheromatous plaque (in the intima) or diffuse in the media (Mönckeberg's sclerosis) of the vessel wall. Diagnosis of vascular calcification requires different structural imaging techniques, such as ultrasound, angiography, CT and MR that provide anatomical visualization of the arterial lumen and the arterial wall. The typical radiographic finding of Mönckeberg's sclerosis is the “tram-track” pattern, appearing as a linear contiguous parallel calcification which reflects the circumferential calcification of the medial arterial wall. Currently, the combined used of positron emission tomography (PET) and computed tomography (CT) provides a non-invasive imaging technique which allows complementary functional and anatomical information on the whole body. In this sense, molecular imaging with In this clinical case we report the We present a 69-year-old man with a history of type 2 diabetes, hypertension, smoking, hypercholesterolemia, prior myocardial infarction, and no clinical evidence of peripheral arterial disease. He was on treatment with aspirin (100 A non-contrast enhanced PET/CT (130 Mönckeberg's sclerosis, also called medial elastocalcinosis, is characterized by the calcification of the medial layer of the arterial wall. Medial arterial calcification is common in healthy elderly subjects and in patients with end-stage renal disease and type 2 diabetes. The process of arterial mineralization involves the differentiation of vascular smooth muscle cells towards osteoclasts-like cells in the vessel wall.  Derlin et al. reported the uptake of The patient included in this clinical case showed a linear Interestingly, in the case reported here, the peripheral In conclusion, functional molecular imaging using The authors declare no conflicts of interest