Ternary multisilicon copolymers are prepared from copolymerization of acrylic acid, sodium styrene sulfonate and γ-methacryloxypropyl trimethoxy silane, from which functional groups of –Si(OCH3)3, –COOH and –SO3Na are obtained respectively. The acidic –COOH groups may induce gel during copolymerization, and thus sufficient solvent needs to be used. The –Si(OCH3)3 groups can crosslink with polyvinyl alcohol (PVA) to yield cation exchange hybrid membranes.
                  The membranes have the ion exchange capacity of 1.01–2.26mmol/g, water uptake of 39.1–59.7%, swelling degrees of 108–339% in 65°C water after 192h, and swelling degrees of 254–344% in 65°C alkaline solution after 60h. Membrane with proper ratios of multi-functional groups can sorb 1.4mol/L NaOH in 1.0mol/L NaOH solution. The membranes are used in diffusion dialysis (DD) process for alkali recovery from NaOH/Na2WO4 solution. The dialysis coefficients of NaOH (U
                     OH) are in the range of 0.013–0.021m/h at room temperature, with the separation factors of 15–23. The high U
                     OH values indicate the superiority of multi-functional groups. The –OH, –COOH and –SO3Na groups from PVA and multisilicon copolymer chains may have coupling effects on the transport of both Na+ and OH− ions.Large amount of acid or alkali waste solution is produced from industrial processes, such as hydrometallurgy, electronic products processing, papermaking and production of biological products. The acid or alkali solution can be treated with diffusion dialysis (DD) membrane process due to its unique advantages, such as low energy assumption The DD researches are mainly focused on three aspects, as shown in The effects of membrane structures on DD performances are generally summarized as following ( Different functional groups can be combined through blending and sol–gel process between polyvinyl alcohol (PVA) and multisilicon copolymers. Multisilicon copolymer has a long main chain, and many branched chains with plenty of functional groups such as –Si(OCH In our following work, a ternary multisilicon copolymer, which contains both anhydride and –SO The present work is a further development of ternary multisilicon copolymer for preparing PVA-based hybrid membranes. The present ternary multisilicon copolymers are prepared from acrylic acid (AA), sodium styrene sulfonate (SSS) and γ-methacryloxypropyl trimethoxy silane (γ-MPS), which provide the copolymers with functional groups of –COOH, –SO Polyvinyl alcohol (PVA, polymerization degree of 1750 Copolymerization of AA, SSS and γ-MPS was carried out as following. SSS was dissolved in DMF for one day under stirring, and then added with AA, γ-MPS and azobisisobutyronitrile. The mixture was heated to 70 The total dosage was fixed at 0.1 The hybrid membranes were prepared through the sol–gel process of poly(AA-co-SSS-co-γ-MPS) in the presence of PVA (step 2 of The membranes were signed as M901, M811, M622, M433 and M244 according to the molar ratios among AA, SSS and γ-MPS. The first number refers to the dosage of AA, the middle number refers to the dosage of SSS, and the final number refers to the dosage of γ-MPS. For example, M811 means 80 The sol–gel solutions (casting solutions) were observed through digital camera (Canon, IXUS 60). The membrane morphologies were observed through both the digital camera and scanning electron microscopy (SU8020, Hitachi Company of Japan). Wide angle X-ray diffraction (WXRD) measurement was conducted at room temperature using Philips X’ PERT PRO X-ray diffractometer. Ion exchange capacity (IEC) was measured to investigate the content of –COOH and –SO Water uptake ( The swelling resistance was reflected from membrane swelling degree in hot water. Pre-weighed membrane sample was immersed in 65 Alkaline resistance was also reflected from membrane swelling degree after immersion in hot NaOH solution. The dry membrane sample was immersed in 65 The sorption isotherms were tentatively measured by only the weight alteration, with the accuracy of 10 The sorbed NaOH concentration was calculated as a ratio of molar mass of NaOH to sorbed volume of water, which is in the formula of ( The DD was running to investigate membrane potential applications in alkali recovery The separation factor ( Multisilicon copolymer tends to become gel during preparation and preservation if without careful manipulation, which is mainly attributed to the multi-Si(OCH The copolymerization of AA, SSS and γ-MPS is extremely difficult to prevent the gel formation. The solvent of DMF has to be used, for the SSS is dissolvable in DMF but indissolvable in toluene. Initially, various solvents such as DMF/toluene and monomer ratios have been attempted but without significant effects. Subsequently, more amount of solvent (160–240 The ternary multisilicon copolymers contain –COOH groups instead of previous –C(O)–O–(O)C– groups Comparisons between previous and present multisilicon copolymers are listed in The theoretical and practical IECs, together with The The Membrane swelling degrees in 65   The sorbed concentrations with respect to solution concentrations are shown in DD performances, including The The coupling effects among multi-functional groups may be similar to the “ion channels” reported in fuel cell applications As the dosage of –SO Finally, the highest The As the dosage of –SO Ternary multisilicon copolymers of poly(AA-co-SSS-co-γ-MPS) are prepared from copolymerization of acrylic acid (AA), sodium styrene sulfonate (SSS) and γ-methacryloxypropyl trimethoxy silane (γ-MPS), during which sufficient solvent (160–240 The membranes are homogenous and transparent. As the dosage of –SO This project was supported in part by the