Mineral models serve as a methodology not only for analyzing mineral demands and forecasting future mineral needs but also for explaining mineral industry structure, estimating the costs and benefits of investments, and assessing the implications of public policy alternatives. Because mineral models can integrate a large number of factors in a systematic way, they are particularly useful in the analysis of problems where: (i) a mineral commodity or a group of related commodities occupies a major position in the functioning of the economy, (ii) large quantities of the commodities are consumed or traded, and (iii) economic or political shocks could have severe impacts on the demand and consumption of minerals. To solve these and other kinds of mineral demand analysis and forecasting problems, this article presents underlying modeling considerations, the modeling procedure, choice of methodology, model applications, and conclusions. For further information see The term “demand” is sometimes used loosely as if it were equivalent to “consumption” or “requirements.” Here we use the economists’ definition of demand—i.e., the various quantities of a commodity that consumers would wish to purchase at different combinations of prices and incomes, i.e., the empirical price–quantity schedule. Below consumer demand is further distinguished from derived demand. Influences on demand, substitution, time frame, geographic frame, market structure, technological change, product dimensions, “top-down” versus “bottom-up,” and uncertainty are also important. Consumer demand theory seeks to explain how individuals satisfy wants by purchasing final goods. In contrast, the theory of derived demand based on production theory shows how producers decide what quantities of variable inputs and investment goods to purchase in order to meet the demand for their outputs. Consumer demand is very important in determining the demand for nonfuel minerals, e.g., houses, automobiles, refrigerators, and many other important classes of consumer goods contain large quantities of metallic and nonmetallic mineral materials. However, very few of these nonfuel minerals are used directly by the ultimate consumer. Whether the commodity is copper, iron, or sand and gravel, it is usually combined with other inputs to produce another intermediate or final product. For this reason, in modeling nonfuel mineral demand, consumer demand is often assumed to be determined outside the model and the emphasis is on derived demand. Modeling of demand behavior usually begins with an interpretation of basic demand responses to prices and income (i.e., the associated price and income elasticities). Price elasticities vary among different minerals and among their diverse uses. They tend to be lower for minerals without close substitutes than for those where such substitutes exist. In addition, these elasticities vary with time as well as with the actual excess demand or excess supply (see Demand measurement is also influenced considerably by mineral substitution patterns. The cross-price elasticity of a competitive or complementary commodity varies with minerals, markets, and time. Where minerals easily substitute for one another, as in the case of copper and aluminum in electrical conductor applications, cross-price elasticities are relatively high. These relations can also be measured by what is the price-relative effect between inputs, also known as the Hicks–Allen elasticity of substitution. Among the factors influencing substitution are economic, technical, and technological ones as well as institutional and consumer preferences. Today engineering or synthetic materials often substitute for natural resource minerals. Models are often designed to try to anticipate industrial behavior and economic impacts in the minerals industry, and to relate these impacts to mineral policy. A short-time frame of <2 years may not be sufficient for policy changes and economic impacts to be realized. Alternatively, for long-term forecasting of >10 years into the future, uncertainties are so prevalent that mineral demand models may not always offer any particular advantages over other simpler approaches. Thus models seem particularly appropriate for addressing mineral-related problems in the medium-term of 2–10 years. Mineral modeling today usually requires that the model dimension be international. There are several reasons for this. First, many nonfuel minerals, especially those largely converted into metallic form at or near the source move widely in international trade. It is, therefore, almost impossible to come up with a realistic price projection unless the global market is evaluated. Second, US dependence on imported raw materials is very high and has increased since the 1970s. This too suggests that a global view is necessary. There are, of course, certain important minerals such as sand and gravel that are both produced and consumed almost wholly domestically. In many cases the magnitude of demand in these markets exceeds that for the metals. For these commodities, models based on national or smaller geographic areas make sense. Sometimes special methodologies are employed such as spatial equilibrium and geographic information systems (GIS). Demand modeling also requires a consideration of market structure and the related adjustment mechanisms that move a market toward equilibrium. Price may not be the result of purely competitive adjustment. Consequently, market structures must be investigated to see if they reflect imperfectly competitive or oligopolistic conditions. Technological change, unlike substitution in its most limited sense, involves changes in the set of production possibilities available to industry. Such changes may mean that a larger output can be produced with the same inputs or may mean that one factor can be substituted for another in a new process. Often, technical or technological change that involves factor substitution is price induced, e.g., the historical trend in mining wages is positive and greater than the trend in the prices of other mining inputs, and mining has become less labor intensive as a consequence. However, the switch to more capital-intensive mining techniques not only was induced by changes in factor prices but also was necessitated by the need to mine lower-grade ores that require more intensive processing. Changes in technology can be extremely important in determining the demand for minor metals, whose prices typically constitute only a small fraction of the cost of final products. Changes in technology can also be both marginal and radical. Marginal changes involve the continual improvement in the efficiency with which products are produced and materials are used over the normal course of time. In contrast, radical change refers to a fundamentally new way of doing things. The market to be modeled may be narrowly or broadly defined. Demand may range from demand for a particular metal shape used in a particular type of fabrication to aggregate demand for the mineral material by the entire economy (see Related to the choice of product dimension and geographic frame is the problem of choosing an appropriate causal structure. A causal structure may take the form of either a top-down approach or a bottom-up approach. The most common top-down approach is to relate aggregate demand for a given mineral to some broad economic variable, such as GNP or industrial production and prices. The bottom-up approach involves analyzing mineral consumption in the end-uses of individual minerals, aggregating these to get national totals, and further aggregating national totals to get world totals. In using this approach, one must establish a relationship between each one of these subsectors and some more aggregate economic phenomena. These are then aggregated to reach a national total. Mineral markets are characterized by a high degree of uncertainty. There is uncertainty on the supply side of the market because mineral exploration is risky and the results of investment in exploratory activity are difficult to predict. In addition, strikes or producer country embargoes may cause unforeseen supply disruptions. Price behavior is an additional source of uncertainty. The prices of nonfuel mineral commodities are, on average, much more volatile than are the prices of other commodities. On the demand side of the market, if consumers are risk averse, they will be concerned with fluctuations as well as levels of prices, and, will prefer commodities whose prices fluctuate less. Uncertainty aggravates the problems encountered in making accurate demand projections, particularly if forecasts of production, consumption, or price at a specific future time are required. This usually requires understanding the variations in the endogenous and exogenous variables and providing probability distributions for the forecasts. The confidence bands of forecasts must thus be wide, and any projections must be interpreted with caution (see Most economic models of mineral demand are based to some degree on common elements: (i) data that are used in constructing the model, (ii) variables such as price and quantities of consumption that are determined by the model (endogenous variables), (iii) variables such as aggregate economic activity that are determined outside the model (exogenous variables), and (iv) theoretical, behavioral, and physical relationships that are used to combine the model variables in a systematic fashion. Econometric models, engineering models, and input–output (I–O) models all have something to contribute to mineral demand analysis. It is becoming increasingly difficult to find models that are purely econometric or purely engineering models. Such combined models can provide a comprehensive analysis of a particular problem, e.g., in accounting for interactions of the economy when projections postulate future changes in the mix of final goods produced and consumed. Such interactions of the economy might be computed through the application of coefficients in an existing I–O model. But if it is thought that demand for an item is affected strongly by its price, it will be necessary to examine price elasticities using an econometric approach. If it is thought that technological development will determine whether a commodity will be used for highly specialized purposes, an engineering model that captures its special properties and its uses is essential. Every research decision, of course, involves such trade-offs. It is not possible to construct an econometric model, for example, without a reasonable number of empirical observations. It is usually impractical to apply conventional I–O approaches to mineral demand modeling if someone else has not already constructed the relevant I–O tables. A process model cannot be constructed without having access to, and an understanding of, the requisite engineering data. By contrast, system dynamics modeling has been developed to permit the substitution of exogenous estimates in place of those that would be statistically estimated from data. It is erroneous to think of data as being either “available” or “unavailable.” The more important question for mineral demand modeling is what degrees of accuracy and detail are necessary and what does it cost to achieve them. The closest situation to unavailability is that of retrospective data, which were not contemporaneously collected, and approximate data that actually were collected but whose completeness, specifications, or deviations from specification are unknown. For more recent events or measurements, it will usually be possible to conduct a survey, but the cost of not having already-prepared data conveniently on hand suggests that the value of particular data sets in future modeling efforts should be a relevant consideration when new survey efforts are contemplated. The procedure normally followed in mineral demand modeling is to construct a model whose applications will meet the intended purposes. This procedure can be expected to vary slightly from model to model. After a model builder has determined a model’s purpose, it must be decided which modeling methodology is most suitable for achieving that purpose. Given a particular methodology, the model builder must then decide how to specify the model. This normally involves selecting a number of behavioral relationships within the industry of interest, according to some given theory. A number of important considerations must be taken into account in constructing the actual model, such as:  The primary, intermediate, or final levels of demand Temporal or spatial frame Linear or nonlinear behavior Simultaneous or recursive causality Short-, medium-, or long-time span Static or dynamic adjustments Single commodities or multicommodity orientation Competitiveness of the market structure The relationships between these factors portray the empirical reality of the demand behavior of interest when the parameters of the individual relationships are estimated. The parameters must be estimated by statistical techniques for econometric models or be derived from engineering data in the case of engineering or process models. To determine whether a given model has been specified and estimated correctly, the model must be validated. This is normally done by means of tests to determine how well the solution provided by a model approximates reality. If a model is temporal in structure, it should be validated for the period that encompasses its data base. Confirmation of the validity of such a model permits “what-if” studies to be carried out for the model’s historical base period. But even if a model describes the past well, there is no assurance that it will be equally accurate with respect to the future. A model’s potential ability to provide accurate forecasts must be determined by the model’s theoretical structure and data base, or to some extent, by an evaluation of its ability to “backcast.” The importance of the validation of models cannot be over-emphasized. Model application is the most important step in the modeling procedure; indeed it is the goal of mineral modeling. A demand model usually meets its purposes through one or more of the mentioned applications objectives, that is: (i) analyzing the structure of demand adjustments or their past history, (ii) evaluating problems or policies by determining the impact of a given policy on mineral demand in the past or in the future, and (iii) forecasting demand, price, or other important variables. All models of mineral demand simplify the handling of complexities of real-world mineral usage, but in certain circumstances may neglect some important engineering, economic, and institutional details in doing so. Each modeling technique emphasizes a different aspect of the way in which minerals are used. Considered below are econometric, engineering or programming, I–O, and hybrid models. Econometric models are strong for short- and medium-term forecasting. The basic institutional structures that they embody, both in relation to the macroeconomy and to industry, tend to remain relatively stable or to move in a predictable manner. For very long-term forecasting, such as a 15–25 year time frame, serious forecasting errors can result from major structural changes in the economy as well as in particular mineral or energy markets. When econometric models are employed for such purposes, they usually are supplemented by information from professional commodity modelers and other specialists in technological forecasting (see Econometric models tend to be strong in predicting generalized technical progress because such trends are typically well established over the historical period to which a model refers. By contrast, specific technological changes represent a break with past trends, and there is no way that an econometric technique can easily accommodate these, other than through the use of an engineering model adjunct to the econometric formulation. Because most econometric models are based on the assumption of perfect competition, they tend to be strong in analyzing marginal and reversible substitution of the classic economic kind. In contrast, radical substitution involving asymmetric or irreversible changes is much harder for a model to handle. Engineering and programming models are strongest for exploring the effects of changes in technology, policy, or economic variables on mineral and energy markets (see The ability to incorporate engineering detail also allows us to investigate the effects of changes in such variables on substitution. These models have been used to analyze the effects of changes in factors that influence the costs or properties of finished materials on their competitive position vis-à-vis substitutes. They also allow incorporation of future technological changes that we have good information about. Therefore, when forecasting the demand for copper, it can be specified that at a certain point in the future the use of fiber optics technology will reduce the demand for copper in the telecommunications industry by a specified proportion. Alternatively, it could be specified that an engineering production function for a new production technology, such as the liquid dynamic compaction process for producing rapidly solidified metal powders, to simulate future costs of production. Of course, if the past is a guide to the future, we can be assured that there will be numerous changes in technology, as well as in other variables, that cannot easily be anticipated. In short, one cannot be confident that any of the methodologies currently at our disposal can provide useful long-term forecasts. I–O models represent the only approach in which the aggregate of all minerals (among other materials and inputs into productive activity) or energy forms is accounted for (see The very comprehensiveness of the system is, at the same time, a severe drawback if the modeler cannot work exclusively with published I–O tables. If it is necessary to adjust available I–O matrices for desired evaluations of different assumptions, a great deal of work has to be done in order to achieve consistent alterations, either of the transactions matrix or of the technical coefficients. Worse still is the situation where an I–O table would have to be compiled from scratch. Even where reliable tables exist, considerable work may have to be done to expand such tables with newly acquired data, estimates, or borrowed coefficients in order to provide the detail necessary for adequate mineral or energy industry analysis. Many mineral market models are combinations of two or more techniques. Although models may cluster into broad groups that can be easily distinguished, a whole spectrum of modeling techniques exists and there is considerable overlap among the different methodologies. In particular, as the modeling process becomes more sophisticated, modeling techniques begin to merge and become more difficult to classify. The principal ways in which mergers occur are through hybridization and linkage, e.g., it is not uncommon for the demand side of a metal market model to be estimated econometrically. It might consist of regression equations that attempt to capture the determinants of consumption of a particular metal in each of several user sectors. Hybrid models are so common in practice that it is difficult to find an example of a model that is “pure” in the sense that it borrows nothing from other models. While hybridization involves constructing models that combine modeling methodologies, linkage involves hooking two or more models together in a systematic fashion. The constituent models that are linked can be constructed using the same or different techniques. One common practice is to link two or more mineral commodity models when the respective commodities are substitutes in consumption. This can be accomplished by estimating production (or cost) functions for each using sector. Substitution will then occur among commodities as relative commodity prices vary. Another form of linkage is to incorporate an I–O model into an econometric model. In this case, the principal economic relationships are estimated by statistical inference. To obtain forecasts of exogenous variables, mineral market models must be linked to macroeconomic models or to times series models of individual macroeconomic variables. The more detailed the mineral demand model is, the more elaborate will be the macroeconomic forecasting infrastructure that it requires. In fact, the nature of the available macroeconomic forecasting infrastructure may be a key factor influencing the specification of the mineral model that depends on it. More recently, the tendency has been to incorporate econometric equations into simultaneous or computable general equilibrium models. Mineral demand models are employed to analyze past market adjustments, to forecast future prices and quantities, and to evaluate major mineral policy issues and problems. Policy issues such as the security of mineral supply, barriers in international trade, environmental standards, energy regulation, interest rates and inflation, and price stabilization schemes are linked in several important ways to mineral demand relationships. Because mineral demand affects market outcomes, it influences actions taken on major mineral policy issues. The kinds of mineral problems that can be assessed through the use of models vary widely. For example, whereas a private company is usually interested in modeling market behavior primarily as a means of improving its development and marketing strategy, government agencies are interested in mineral demand and supply from a broader standpoint, i.e., how actions pertaining to mineral commodities will affect the national economy and public welfare. Mineral demand forecasting requires approaches that reflect a temporal structure. Models based on statistical inference from past experience tend to be quite good at fitting and projecting marginal changes in technology. Because this progress proceeds in a slow, steady fashion over time, it tends to be incorporated into the statistically estimated coefficients that link the variables in demand or supply functions. Forecasts carried out with such models therefore tend to project a continuation of technical progress into the future, though the precise form of this progress will not normally be specified by the model. Such an approach, however, may miss radical change, since this, by definition, represents a fundamental break with the past. Methods that are oriented more to engineering-based projections that are, in turn, based on explicit technological forecasts are more useful for projecting particular product needs. When it comes to shorter term demand forecasting, more fluctuations are present in a given mineral demand series. Such forecasts thus should incorporate techniques which utilize the probability distributions of the forecasts. Improving our assessment of the costs and benefits of environmental standards in mineral extraction and processing operations is a challenging task. Nevertheless, attempts to do so have proven worthwhile, because environmental regulations affect the minerals industry in several ways: (i) they add to the costs of mining, processing, and utilizing minerals; (ii) they affect the national or international location of mining and processing facilities; and (iii) they increase the demand for pollution control equipment, the manufacture of which in turn increases the demand for major minerals, alloys, and minor metals. Socially optimal environmental regulation depends on policy analysis that is capable of accurately predicting the entire array of costs and benefits; this is the task of economic welfare analysis which measures the composite consumer and producer surplus (see Instability in the minerals industry has been intensified by high rates of inflation and the increasingly cyclical character of some of the principal markets for goods that are made from mineral materials. Both inflation and the growth in cyclical behavior have had profound impacts on domestic and world commodity market prices and industry earnings. Price instability also impinges adversely on developing country export revenues. Any attempt to analyze the impact of these developments on the minerals industry requires detailed knowledge of the effects of the economic cycle on mineral demand and consumption, both domestically and internationally. Minerals demand modeling enables us to analyze market adjustments, to forecast prices and quantities, and to evaluate investment, environmental and other policy-related decisions. Scientific procedures are employed which involve econometric, engineering or programming models, and I–O models. More recently these methodologies have not only been hybridized but now include time series models, computable general equilibrium models and risk-adjustment techniques. The uncertainty of the future of mineral, energy and materials demands represents an on-going challenge for mineral economists. Mineral demand models should provide us with a basis for meeting this challenge.