A hierarchical nanoporous-TiO2 nanotube composite structure consisting of a nanoporous top layer with smooth underlying nanotubes was obtained by a single-step anodization technique. The growth of such composite structure has also been applied to Ti wire substrate for the first time. The photoelectrochemical performance was examined under AM 1.5 simulated solar irradiation in 1 M KOH electrolyte. In general, the hierarchical architecture demonstrated improved photoelectrochemical activity over plain TiO2 nanotubes. Furthermore, the composite structure on a wire substrate was also found to enhance photoelectrochemical activity over a foil substrate. Under optimized conditions, over a 40% increase in hydrogen generation for hierarchical nanotubes over plain nanotubes is observed and over 25% increase in hydrogen generation using a wire substrate over a foil substrate is observed.Increasing global energy demand requires the development of new energy storage and conversion systems, which are sustainable and environmentally friendly. The use of solar energy has the potential to play a major role in meeting many of our energy demands The use of highly ordered, one-dimensional nanostructures of TiO The electrochemical synthesis technique adopted for growing T-NT allows for a variety of tubular- and hierarchical-type structures by changing a few synthesis variables. For example, a small step change in temperature (d In this work, we report the synthesis of hierarchical nanolace-type T-NT in a single anodization step achieved through surface etching treatment prior to anodization ( Titania nanotubes were synthesized on titanium foils (1.5 × 1 cm, ESPI Metals, 99%) and wires (3 cm, The surface morphology of the T-NT and hierarchical T-NT was examined with the use of a field emission scanning electron micrograph (Hitachi, S-4800). The photoelectrochemical measurement experiments were carried out in a custom-built quartz window cell with the T-NT on foils or wires serving as the anode, Pt mesh as the cathode, and Ag/AgCl (3 M KCl) as the reference electrode. The potentials are reported against reversible hydrogen electrode (RHE) The electrolyte was 1 M KOH (pH = 13.8). A computer-controlled potentiostat (Princeton Applied Research, Parstat 4000) was used to control the potential and record the photocurrent generated. The photoanodes were illuminated by a 300 W solar simulator with an AM 1.5 filter to obtain an intensity of ∼87 mW/cm Hydrogen generation experiments were conducted in a two-electrode electrochemical photocell (  The synthesis of hierarchical T-NT is normally achieved through a two-step anodization process The PEC performance of hierarchical titania nanotubes formed on the foils and wires was examined under simulated AM 1.5 irradiation in 1 M KOH electrolyte. The foils and wires were prepared as described above and subsequently tested for PEC performance. Potentiodynamic plots under irradiation for foils and wires both exhibit behaviors for typical The efficiency for the conversion of light energy to chemical energy under an applied external potential was plotted versus applied potential under illumination, ( The PEC enhancement of the hierarchical nanotubes over plain nanotubes can be attributed to an increased surface area for light harvesting and electrolyte surface coverage as well as improved charge separation. Wang et. al. Samples exhibiting the best photoelectrochemical performances within this work (i.e., Foil-60 s and Wire-30 s) were used to carry out quantitative hydrogen generation experiments under simulated solar ( A new method for the preparation of hierarchical titania nanotubes is presented. The surface treatment prior to anodization results in smooth nanotubes with nanoporous tops and enhanced photoelectrochemical performance. Moreover, the growth of hierarchical titania nanotubes on a titanium wire substrate is successfully demonstrated. Under optimized conditions, PEC water splitting efficiency under simulated AM 1.5 irradiation of 0.34% and 0.15% at 1.23 V (RHE) is realized for hierarchical titania nanotubes grown on wires and foils, respectively. The conversion efficiency of the surface treatment prior to anodization presented here nearly matches that of a two-step anodization method for preparing hierarchical titania nanotubular arrays. Further improvements in PEC water splitting efficiency can be achieved through additional approaches such as doping or surface plasma treatments. The use of a wire substrate provides an avenue to engineer systems where a planer substrates may not be applicable. This work was supported by the