This paper presents a new control strategy for a class of non-Gaussian stochastic systems so that the output probability density function (PDF) of the system can be made to follow a desired PDF. The system considered is represented by an Nonlinear AutoRegressive and Moving Average with eXogenous (NARMAX) inputs with input channel time-delay and non-Gaussian noise. A multi-step-ahead nonlinear cumulative cost function is used to improve tracking performance. For this purpose, a relationship between the PDFs of all the inputs and the PDFs of multiple-step-ahead output is formulated by constructing an auxiliary multivariate mapping. By minimizing this performance function, a new explicit predictive controller design algorithm is established with less conservatism than some previous results. Furthermore, an improved approach is developed to guarantee the local stability of the closed-loop system by tuning the weighting parameters recursively. Simulations are given to demonstrate the effectiveness of the proposed control algorithm and desired results have been obtained.In the past years, the mean and variance of system outputs have been widely used as the control objectives for stochastic systems (see In the past few years, some effective control strategies have been developed to control the shape of the output PDFs ( develop new control design approaches that can be used for the control of the output PDFs for general non-Gaussian stochastic systems; establish analytical tools for the closed-loop stability and performance. As time-delays exist in many processes, in this paper a class of NARMAX models with time-delayed control inputs and non-Gaussian stochastic inputs will be considered. In order to provide an enhanced dynamic tracking performance, a cumulative performance index with respect to the multi-step-ahead output is studied rather than the instantaneous one used in Based upon the discussions in the previous section, let us consider a class of stochastic systems represented by At each sample time  The random variables   As a conditional output PDF, On the other hand, since an instantaneous cost function (see  When  Cost function To develop a feasible control design algorithm for the above system, it is necessary to formulate For every Different from the models discussed in    Firstly, the Jacobian of For known Thus, for the above-defined multivariate function From Denote   It can be seen that For each sample time  The above algorithm is obtained from a necessary condition for optimization. To guarantee its sufficiency, the following equality should be satisfied  The real-time suboptimal PDF control algorithm can be summarized as follows: (i) transform the NARMAX model to the general  Indeed, in comparison with the results in Generally, the stability analysis and synthesis for closed-loop system are difficult to conduct for nonlinear stochastic systems. This is true when the proposed optimal control law is applied to the system. In For this purpose, system For the flexibility in the controller design, term   At sample time Corresponding to To demonstrate the use of the proposed algorithm, we consider a typical fibre length distribution system in paper-making processes where the following NARMAX model with a time-delayed input can be used In the simulation, the initial conditions are set to be To compare the results obtained in In this note, an optimal output PDF control problem is studied for NARMAX stochastic systems with non-Gaussian random inputs and time-delayed control inputs. The control objective is to find the real-time controllers such that the stochastic dynamic output can be made to follow the desired stochastic distribution. To improve the closed-loop system performance, a multi-step-ahead predictive cumulative cost function is used, for which the output PDFs of the multi-step-ahead output are formulated by constructing an auxiliary multivariate function. The enhanced recursive optimal PDF control laws are proposed using the optimality condition. Furthermore, a stabilization control law is presented with the guaranteed local stability. Simulations have demonstrated that a satisfactory tracking performance of output PDFs with respect to their target PDF has been obtained using the proposed algorithms. Compared with the previous works ( With the recent developments made for the PDF control problem, our future work includes the further analysis on the stability, performance and robustness, and the simplification of the design algorithms. This work is supported by NSFC of China (60474050 and 60534010) and the 111 project (B08015) with Northeastern University of China where the second author is affiliated to. These are gratefully acknowledged.