Widely different hydrogen adsorption capacities have been reported for a variety of carbon materials which have attracted attention for hydrogen storage. This has led to doubts as to the validity of some of the claims and it has been suggested that one possible reason for the disparate hydrogen sorption capacities may lie in the inaccurate measurement of the hydrogen adsorbed. The aim of the work described in this paper was to make a contribution to this debate by developing a means and method of producing repeatable, accurate measurements of hydrogen sorption capacity in carbon materials. The apparatus developed is a volumetric differential pressure set-up operating at up to 10MPa and the method has a conservative limit of detection of 0.1wt% and an accuracy of ±0.05wt%, using 1.0–2.5g samples of the carbon materials studied. These included a carbon nanofiber sample and a series of activated carbons, the latter displaying a direct correlation between the BET effective surface area and the hydrogen sorption capacity of the materials. The amount of hydrogen adsorbed was less than 1wt% for all the carbons examined.Environmental concerns regarding the use of fossil fuels and their predicted exhaustion are globally important issues. Hydrogen is a promising substitute for fossil fuels in mobile applications, with the additional benefit of potentially allowing the production of zero emission vehicles. However, to facilitate the commercialisation of this technology suitable hydrogen storage systems need to be developed. To quantify this goal, the US Department of Energy has set the target of developing a hydrogen storage material capable of storing 6.5 In recent years, activated carbons, carbon nanofibers and carbon nanotubes have all attracted considerable attention as potential hydrogen storage materials Gravimetric methods are typically carried out with ca. 1–10 TPD, sometimes referred to as temperature desorption spectroscopy, determines the hydrogen sorption capacity of a material by observing the desorption profile of a hydrogen loaded material. Typical desorption experiments are carried out with ca. 1–10 The volumetric method determines the hydrogen storage capacity of a material by measuring the pressure drop resulting from adsorption after exposing the sample to hydrogen at constant volume. Most of the work reported has been carried out using direct pressure measurements in customer built apparatus based on the Sieverts type apparatus which is used to determine the hydrogen storage capacity of metal hydrides Recently, a second volumetric approach has been introduced using the measurement of differential pressure in an attempt to improve the accuracy and reliability of the method This technique is claimed to have several advantages over the traditional direct pressure measurement The present study highlights possible difficulties that can be encountered when using the volumetric differential pressure method if certain factors are not taken into consideration, leading to erroneously high results. The use of a helium baseline correction and larger sample sizes (1.0–2.5 Commercial activated carbons were selected on the basis of porosity to give a range of BET surface areas ( Ethylene (99.5%), hydrogen (99.9%) and argon (99.9%) were used for the preparation of CNF with no further purification. Helium (99.9%) and hydrogen (99.9%) were purified using a liquid nitrogen trap prior to hydrogen sorption experiments. The CNF sample was prepared by carbon vapor deposition from a copper–iron–nickel (5:85:10) catalyst using ethylene–hydrogen (1:4) as the reactive gas. The catalyst precursors were prepared by co-precipitation from stoichiometric aqueous solutions of copper nitrate trihydrate, iron nitrate non-ahydrate and nickel nitrate hexahydrate using sodium hydroxide solution as the base. Sodium hydroxide was selected over weaker bases used previously to give better definition on precipitation. The resulting suspension was then filtered and the precipitate dried at 107 Nitrogen BET surface area studies were carried out using a standard Micrometrics ASAP 2010 at −196 XRD analysis was carried out on a Philips-1050 attached to a Hilton Brooks generator. Prior to the analysis the samples were placed in a gravity mount ensuring no preferential orientation of the sample occurred before the measurements were recorded. The hydrogen adsorption measurements were conducted on the custom built volumetric differential pressure apparatus presented, The following protocol was used to operate the apparatus. Using S1 as the sample cell and S2 as the blank, the sample was loaded into S1 and sealed to the apparatus by a high pressure VCO o-ring fitting. The free space in S1 The ideal gas equation has been used here, but using experimentally determined compressibility factors for hydrogen gives a reduced adsorption value of ca. 0–5% when operating at 10 Initial sample masses prior to in situ degas procedures were in the range 1.0–2.5 The volumetric differential pressure hydrogen adsorption set-up has several advantages over the more traditional direct pressure procedures, such as the Sieverts apparatus. Differential pressure transducers have much higher accuracy (ca. 25 times) than direct pressure transducers and by applying the ideal gas equation of state equation the hydrogen adsorption capacity can be calculated solely using the differential pressure measurement. The differential pressure system also helps to minimise the errors resulting from minor temperature fluctuations (ca. ±0.1 The helium run prior to the hydrogen adsorption run acts as a leak detection test. After 3 To assess the accuracy of the apparatus, a metal hydride, lanthanide nickel was used as a standard. Metal hydrides tend to require much lower pressures to adsorb hydrogen, with most reaching equilibrium with hydrogen pressures below 1 The initial calibration was carried out at 1 The second calibration was carried out at 10 The activated carbons were selected primarily on the basis of providing a broad range of BET nitrogen effective surface areas this measurement being commonly used in publications as a general indication of adsorption capacity ( The hydrogen adsorption profiles of all the activated carbons were recorded at 10 The Fisher FDC and Speakman carbons displayed slightly different behaviour to the other activated carbon samples studied. Again, over 90% of the adsorption appeared to occur almost instantaneously, however the approximate final 10% of the adsorption occurs over a much longer timescale of ca. 100 The conservative ±0.05 To study the effect of varying the degas method and to try to determine by which mode the adsorption was occurring, a series of runs were carried out using AC3000 varying the degas procedure used ( The isotherm for AC3000 was recorded at 2 The relationship between microporosity and hydrogen adsorption for the seven activated carbons studied can be seen in The variables affecting CNF hydrogen sorption will be reported in later publications. The CNF sample used here to demonstrate the method has a BET effective surface area of 270 The hydrogen adsorption profile was recorded at 10 The volumetric differential pressure hydrogen adsorption apparatus developed has been shown to offer a reliable and accurate method for determining the hydrogen adsorption capacity of a material to a limit of 0.1 The CNF result reported here appears to be consistent with work carried out with CNF by several teams using various methods for hydrogen sorption detection including Yamanaka et al. We gratefully acknowledge the technical advice from Dr. G. Pez (Air Products and Chemicals, Inc.), Mr. F. Anderton and Mr. M. Fletcher. We would like to thank Dr. J. Parra (INCAR, Spain) for BET analysis and Mr. D. Clift for XRD analysis. The financial support of the EPSRC (Engineering and Physical Sciences Research Council) and Air Products and Chemicals, Inc. is also gratefully acknowledged. Supplementary data associated with this article can be found, in the online version, at 