Chemical vapour deposition (CVD) is widely used for preparation of pyrolytic carbons from various precursors. The prediction of deposition kinetics requires deep understanding of all transport phenomena involved. In this work, we perform the computational modelling of ethanol pyrolysis in a commercial CVD reactor (a tube furnace). The reactor is employed for growing carbon layers on alumina substrates. The inlet gas flow is produced by evaporating azeotrope ethanol/water mixture and mixing it with inert gas (argon). The modelling is performed in 3D and 2D statements using Marinov mechanism with 57 species participating in 383 reactions. The heat and species transport is taken into account with temperature dependent physical properties. It is shown that the inlet gas velocity in the 2D statement should be corrected for a meaningful comparison with the 3D case. A good agreement is found between species mole fractions at the substrate position for 3D and 2D statements at low volume flow rates, while at high flow rates some deviations are observed. The temperature at the substrate position is found to be lower than at the reactor wall due to inflow of a colder gas. The main pyrolysis products at moderate temperatures (around 900 °C) are water, ethylene, hydrogen, carbon monoxide, and methane. With increasing temperature, the mole fractions of hydrogen, acetylene, and carbon monoxide increase, while those of water and methane become smaller. With increasing ethanol/water volume flow rate, the mole fractions of ethanol and pyrolysis products saturate at some constant values due to incomplete thermal decomposition of ethanol in the reactor volume. The rise of argon flow rate leads to the decrease of pyrolysis products mole fractions due to decrease of residence time. The obtained results can be employed for simulating and analyzing pyrolysis processes in realistic CVD reactors with complex geometry as well as for the development of coupled gas phase and surface reaction model of carbon layer deposition on nanoporous substrates.radial coordinate (m) polar angle (rad) axial coordinate (m) density (kg/m dynamics viscosity (Pa s) thermal conductivity (W/m K) heat transfer coefficient (J/m specific heat capacity (J/kg K) diffusion coefficient (m velocity vector (m/s) velocity magnitude (m/s) inlet axial velocity (m/s) viscous stress tensor (Pa) unit tensor temperature (K) enthalpy (J) energy source due to chemical reactions (J/m heat flux (J/m pressure (Pa) operating pressure (bar) number of species molar mass (kg/mol) mass fraction mole fraction diffusive flux of species (kg/m rate of production of species volume flow rate (m mass flow rate (kg/s) residence time (s) volume (m inlet cross–section area (m tube radius (m) universal gas constant Stefan–Boltzmann constant (W/m emissivity factor gravity vector (m/s unit normal vector Reynolds number Prandtl number empirical constant initial wall inlet ambient substrate species index argon ethanol water ethanol and water reference thermoblocks heated section between thermoblocks Chemical vapor deposition (CVD) is a process of depositing a thin solid film on a substrate through chemical reactions of gaseous species In carbon materials technology, pyrolytic carbon production via CVD is one of the most important processes Typical precursors for pyrolytic carbon formation are hydrocarbons (methane, ethylene, acetylene, propane, etc.), which are pyrolysed at high temperature (900–1300 °C) and subsequently deposit on a substrate as result of surface chemical reactions. The critical parameters controlling the deposit are the precursor gas, temperature, pressure, residence time (volume of reactor isothermal section divided by the volumetric flow rate), and ratio of surface area to free reactor volume The prediction of deposition kinetics as well as final deposit structure requires deep understanding of all transport phenomena involved (gas phase and surface reactions, heat/mass transfer by diffusion and convection). The quantitative experimental analysis of species composition in the gas phase in CVD of carbon from the unsaturated light hydrocarbons (ethylene, acetylene, and propylene) was performed in Apart from hydrocarbons, ethanol can be considered as an attractive alternative precursor for pyrolytic carbon formation. The presence of hydroxyl group in ethanol weakens the C–H bond, which may result in an increased reactivity in comparison with C By using ethanol as the carbon source, a new simple catalytic CVD technique to synthesize high purity single–walled carbon nanotubes at low temperature was proposed in Note that the prediction and control of carbon deposition kinetics on the surface of nanopores and nanofibers require extensive experimental and modelling studies. The first step in this process is the understanding of gas flow, heat transfer, and detailed gas–phase kinetics in a CVD reactor with realistic geometry and boundary conditions. The optimization of flow and heat/mass transfer process in CVD reactors for improving their performance have been previously considered in a number of works In this paper, we perform 2D and 3D numerical modelling of ethanol pyrolysis in a commercial CVD reactor. The influence of temperature, pressure, ethanol, and inert gas (argon) flow rates on the gas–phase kinetics is analyzed taking into account heat and species transport in the reactor volume. This study will serve as the basis for the development of coupled gas phase and surface reaction model of carbon layer growth on nanoporous alumina substrates. The paper is organized as follows. In Section The chemical vapour deposition reactor consists of a cylindrical mullite tube with inlet and outlet sections made of stainless steel flanges ( The stationary model of flow and gas–phase kinetics in the CVD reactor is based on the conservation laws of momentum, energy, and mass for a mixture of The energy equation is written as The species transport equation is given by Eqs. For description of ethanol pyrolysis, we employ the chemical reaction mechanism proposed by Marinov The boundary conditions are presented in In this study, we also employ the chemical kinetics model at zero spatial dimension, i.e. assuming that the species mass fractions depend only on time. The species transport equation is written as For each considered case (see Our aim is to investigate the effect of reactor wall temperature In the vaporization system, the liquid mixture of ethanol and water with the volume flow rate The mole fractions are calculated as The volume flow rates at temperature We also introduce the Reynolds number of gas flow in the tube: The list of calculated cases is presented in Let us estimate the Reynolds number of flow at the tube inlet ( The preliminary calculations of ethanol pyrolysis in the working range of parameters showed that 14 species mainly contribute to the stationary mixture composition in the reactor: H The porous alumina thermoblocks and substrate have the following physical properties: bulk density 1561 kg/m Note that we have neglected the heat transfer by thermal radiation in the reactor volume, see energy Eq. On the basis of calculations, we will analyze the following parameters: temperature We have performed the modelling of CVD reactor in three–dimensional (3D) and two–dimensional (2D) statements. The solution of 3D problem requires high computational cost and is not suitable for parametric studies. Thus, a series of 3D calculations was performed in order to choose and justify a proper reduction of full 3D problem to 2D problem. The latter was further used for studying the system response to the variation of control parameters. The 3D modelling is performed using cylindrical coordinates As a result of 3D modelling, the corrected values of gas velocity, which should be imposed at the inlet of 2D problem, have been determined. The correction is required in order to obtain 2D velocity and temperature fields, which closely resemble their 3D counterparts taken at the vertical longitudinal cross–section of the tube. The inlet velocity for 2D problem is calculated as The simulations are performed in the software package ANSYS Fluent 17 using the finite–volume method on structured grids. The 2D grid is composed of 61300 cells, while the 3D grid consists of 822000 cells, see The equations of transient chemical kinetics model In this section, we provide an overview of ethanol thermal decomposition mechanisms and outline the main reaction paths. The description is based on the literature data The unimolecular decomposition of ethanol occurs via the following reactions Further decomposition of ethanol takes place via abstraction reactions leading the formation of isomeric radicals, namely C The hydrogen abstraction reactions with OH produce the same isomeric radicals and water The 2–hydroxyethyl radical decomposes to produce ethylene via reaction The other ethanol radicals are consumed to form acetaldehyde The decomposition of formaldehyde occurs via the reactions The formyl radical is consumed to form carbon monoxide The attack of methyl and hydrogen radicals on acetaldehyde produces the acetyl radical as well as methane and hydrogen, respectively: The further decomposition leads to carbon monoxide formation The decomposition of acetaldehyde also occurs via the following paths, where vinoxy radical is formed: This radical is further decomposed into ketene and hydrogen radical There attack of OH radical on acetaldehyde also leads to the formation of formic acid The carbon dioxide is mainly produced via the following reaction paths The ethylene obtained in reactions In addition, the ethyl radical is formed in the reaction The vinyl radical C Reactions The methyl radical recombination reaction and ethyl radical interaction with hydrogen radical produce ethane The propylene is formed via reactions of vynil and 1–hydroxyethyl radicals with the methyl radical The interaction of ethyl and methyl radicals leads to the formation of propane The contributions of the described reactions paths to the decomposition of ethanol essentially depend on temperature. We will discuss it in more details in Section Let us start the discussion of results with the comparison between 2D and 3D models. The velocity and temperature fields obtained from 3D calculations are presented in The velocity magnitude field The comparison of mole fraction fields for ethylene is shown in The mole fractions of 13 selected components averaged over the substrate surface, which is located at the central part of CVD reactor (see We conclude that the 2D model can be successfully used for calculation of ethanol pyrolysis in the CVD reactor instead of more realistic 3D model. However, it requires the correction of inlet velocity (see Section We have studied the ethanol pyrolysis at different temperatures in the range 500–1500 °C, see Cases 1–11 in The variation of species mole fractions with furnace wall temperature is shown in The mole fractions calculated at thermodynamic equilibrium are presented in  Let us now analyze how the flow rate of ethanol/water liquid mixture The dependence of species mole fractions on the ethanol/water mixture flow rate The profiles of temperature and species along the reactor are shown in In this study, we have varied the argon flow rate in the range 10–2000 ml/min, see Cases 20–30 in Finally, let us consider the impact of pressure on the ethanol decomposition. The considered range of pressures is 0.1–1 bar. The corresponding parameters are listed in In this work, we have performed computational modelling of ethanol pyrolysis in a commercial CVD reactor, which has the form of a cylindrical tube with the heated section. The inlet gas flow is produced by evaporating azeotrope ethanol/water mixture followed by mixing it with the inert gas (argon). Previously, this reactor was employed for growing carbon layers on alumina substrates (membranes). The modelling is performed with the help of ANSYS Fluent 17 software package in 3D and 2D statements using Marinov mechanism. The transport of heat and species by convection and diffusion as well as the presence of gravity are taken into account. The control parameters are varied in the following ranges: temperature 500–1500 °C, pressure 0.1–1 bar, argon flow rate 10–2000 ml/min, and ethanol/water liquid flow rate 0.05–5 ml/min. The obtained results can be summarized as follows: Consideration of a real reactor geometry with the heated section separated from the inlet and outlet sections by thermoblocks leads to large variations of temperature along the reactor and requires taking into account the temperature dependencies of viscosity, thermal conductivity, and species diffusion coefficients as well as radiative heat transfer on the boundaries. The meaningful comparison of results between a real 3D tubular reactor and a 2D plane channel requires the correction of inlet velocity, which should be an order of magnitude smaller in the 2D statement. A good agreement is found between species mole fractions at the substrate position for 3D and 2D calculations at low volume flow rates. For high flow rates, the main deviations are observed for ethanol, acetaldehyde, and formaldehyde. The temperature at the substrate in the reactor center is always lower than the wall temperature, and this deviation becomes larger with increasing ethanol/water and argon volume flow rates as well as pressure due to inflow of a colder gas from the inlet section. The residence time decreases with wall temperature and volume flow rate, but increases with pressure. In the considered range of flow rates, the ethanol decomposition starts at around 600 °C. At moderate temperatures around 900 °C, the main pyrolysis products are water, ethylene, hydrogen, carbon monoxide, and methane. The further temperature rise increases the mole fractions of hydrogen, acetylene, and carbon monoxide, while the water and methane mole fractions are decreased. With increasing ethanol/water volume flow rate, the mole fractions of pyrolysis products increase reaching almost constant values for flow rates higher than 1 ml/min. Under such conditions, the ethanol is not fully decomposed at the reactor volume, and its mole fraction reaches a constant value for flow rates higher then 3 ml/min. The rise of argon flow rate leads to the decrease of pyrolysis products mole fractions due decrease of residence time. The latter increases with pressure, which causes the rise of products molar concentrations. Comparison of reactor performance with thermodynamic equilibrium calculations shows significant differences, especially for low temperature regimes. The obtained results can be employed for simulating and analyzing pyrolysis processes in realistic CVD reactors with complex geometry. They also provide the basis for the development of coupled gas phase and surface reaction model of carbon layer growth on alumina substrates. The authors declared that there is no conflict of interest. This work is supported the Supplementary data associated with this article can be found, in the online version, at The following are the Supplementary data to this article: 