Traditional models of soil organic matter (SOM) decomposition are all based on first order kinetics in which the decomposition rate of a particular C pool is proportional to the size of the pool and a simple decomposition constant (dC/dt=kC). In fact, SOM decomposition is catalyzed by extracellular enzymes that are produced by microorganisms. We built a simple theoretical model to explore the behavior of the decomposition–microbial growth system when the fundamental kinetic assumption is changed from first order kinetics to exoenzymes catalyzed decomposition (dC/dt=KC×Enzymes). An analysis of the enzyme kinetics showed that there must be some mechanism to produce a non-linear response of decomposition rates to enzyme concentration—the most likely is competition for enzyme binding on solid substrates as predicted by Langmuir adsorption isotherm theory. This non-linearity also induces C limitation, regardless of the potential supply of C. The linked C and N version of the model showed that actual polymer breakdown and microbial use of the released monomers can be disconnected, and that it requires relatively little N to maintain the maximal rate of decomposition, regardless of the microbial biomass’ ability to use the breakdown products. In this model, adding a pulse of C to an N limited system increases respiration, while adding N actually decreases respiration (as C is redirected from waste respiration to microbial growth). For many years, researchers have argued that the lack of a respiratory response by soil microbes to added N indicates that they are not N limited. This model suggests that conclusion may be wrong. While total C flow may be limited by the functioning of the exoenzyme system, actual microbial growth may be N limited.It has long been dogma in microbiology that soil microbes are most commonly limited by carbon availability, even in organic soils where microbes live in the midst of potentially degradable C. Thus, there are two apparent contradictions that develop from previous studies: first, microbes appear to be C limited in the midst of plenty, and second, microbes can appear to be both C and N limited simultaneously. The normal argument to explain C limitation in organic-rich soils is that the low quality of soil substrates limits their availability to soil microbes, and thus, even if the organisms are not truly C limited, they are energy limited ( We believe that at least a partial resolution to both these apparent contradictions may lie in the nature of organic matter processing and our conceptual and mathematical models for describing it. Most models of soil organic matter (SOM) breakdown assume first order decomposition kinetics One can argue that if the microbes could increase their investment in exoenzymes, they could accelerate the breakdown of SOM and increase the flow of C back to the microbes, thus alleviating C limitation, regardless of the fundamental While the rate at which SOM is processed is strongly controlled by the quality of the material (the fundamental In this paper, we develop a simple theoretical model to explore the dynamics of the decomposition–microbial growth system when the fundamental kinetic assumption is changed from simple first order kinetics to decomposition that is catalyzed by an exoenzyme system. We built two versions of the model, one which assumes C limitation and a more complex version that integrates N and allows either C or N to limit microbial growth. We had two primary issues we wanted to examine: (1) how C limitation to soil microbes is induced by the behavior of the exoenzyme system, and (2) how C flow and microbial growth might behave under N limited conditions. The fundamental structure of the C-only model is shown in exoenzyme synthesis; cellular maintenance (respired as CO biomass production. The production of exoenzymes and cell biomass both require energy, and so some fraction of the available C pool is respired to provide that energy. The Model was created and run using Stella version 7.0.1 (High Performance Systems Inc., Hannover, N.H.). The model is constructed as a set of finite difference equations using daily time steps. The numbers of the equations match the processes shown in decomposition of polymeric material to produce available C microbial C uptake enzyme production enzyme loss and decay respiration to support enzyme synthesis respiration to support maintenance energy needs respiration to support growth of the microbial biomass ( polymeric soil organic carbon available dissolved organic C (derived from SOM breakdown) microbial biomass exoenzyme pool decay constant for a particular SOM pool fraction of decay constant for exoenzymes microbial maintenance rate (combines maintenance of living cells and biomass turnover substrate use efficiency (fraction of OM taken up that is converted into biomass or enzymes) Eq. Eqs. The challenge in relating this model quantitatively to SOM dynamics is that many of the parameters are unknown and are difficult to even estimate. For example, the size of the aggregate exoenzyme pool, its turnover time, and the actual kinetic terms for SOM breakdown are all unknown. We developed some parameters from the data on respiration and microbial biomass in We assumed that 5% of C flow is allocated to exoenzyme production ( As this is a theoretical exercise, the important questions are about the fundamental, qualitative behavior of the system. We tuned the model to match important output values to some published data to put the results into perspective, rather than to try to actually quantitatively predict the behavior of any particular ecosystem. We did sensitivity analyses on most parameters to determine the responsiveness of the model system to changes in those values. We made modifications to the specific form of some of the equations as we performed specific experiments with the model. These model experiments are discussed later. To link C and N required changing the control of several C flows, and it also required some changes in the structure of the C model ( The second major change was to include recycling of microbial biomass C and N. In the C-only version, there is a single term for microbial maintenance that combines the maintenance of living cells with microbial turnover that involves death and regrowth. While there is a growth respiration term, that is only used for respiration through overflow metabolism decomposition producing available dissolved organic N microbial N uptake use of N to produce exoenzymes C lost to unavailable forms due to microbial death N lost to unavailable forms due to microbial death C recycled back to the DOC pool due to microbial death N recycled back to the DON pool due to microbial death net mineralization immobilization of available inorganic N polymeric soil organic N available dissolved organic N microbial biomass N exoenzyme N proportion of microbial biomass that dies in each time interval proportion of dead microbial biomass (C or N) that is available for microbial use C-to-N ratio of the SOM C-to-N ratio of the microbial biomass. The core equation in the linked model is Eq. In this version of the model, Eqs. For the linked model, we started with the same core parameters as for the C-only model version. The new parameters that needed to be estimated were When the model is run with decomposition as a linear function of enzyme concentration, there is only a knife-edge equilibrium of stable system behavior ( Since fundamental chemical theory requires the catalyst concentration to be part of the rate expression, and our simple analysis shows that a stable system cannot be constructed when the kinetics are first order on enzymes, there must be a mechanism to produce non-linear kinetics. The specific mechanism in nature remains unclear, but one must exist. A likely mechanism is that as an organism produces more enzymes that must bind to solid substrates, they must diffuse further out from the cells, the substrates must diffuse further back, and enzymes may compete with each other for binding sites ( half saturation constant for enzymes on substrate;  When decomposition is made a non-linear function of enzyme concentration, the model becomes stable ( This experiment used an approach to producing non-linear dynamics in the functioning of the enzyme system that is documented in the literature and that follows from basic theory of enzyme action on solid substrates ( In a linear kinetics version of the C-only model version, the key determinant of C flow, and thus of microbial biomass, is the ratio of To demonstrate that the biomass is, in fact, C limited under equilibrium conditions, and to simulate the effect of adding labile C to the available C pool (DOC), we ran the non-linear enzyme kinetics version model until the system stabilized, added a single pulse of 10 The results of this model experiment are shown in To demonstrate that the response of the model to variable SOC values, we modified the model to make decomposition a first order function of SOM concentrations, so that the decomposition equation is Under the conditions of this model experiment, microbial biomass varied linearly with SOC concentration, and biomass remained a constant fraction of the SOC pool size (2.86%) over a range of SOC from 1 to 500 The core model assumes that exoenzyme production is the first priority in C flow, even before meeting cellular maintenance needs. We experimented with the model by changing that allocation priority. We changed Eq. When maintenance is the first C allocation priority, the model is highly unstable and the system always crashes, very quickly with the core parameters, more slowly when enzyme lifetime is extended ( The second major modeling exercise we carried out was to use the linked C and N model to consider how this system's behavior would change when N supplies are limited. If N availability is high, either from a low CN On the other hand, if N availability is low, from a high C-to-N ratio in SOM (CN The degree of N limitation and the CN Increasing the recycling of dead microbial biomass ( We used the linked C and N version of the model for this experiment with a CN Adding C and N in the model when microbial growth is N-limited produces somewhat counter-intuitive results. Adding DOC when the system is N limited increases overflow metabolism and thus increases total soil respiration ( Traditional logic predicts that respiration should increase only when the limiting element is added. Therefore traditional logic suggests that if N is limiting, adding N should increase respiration, while adding C should not. The model, however, predicts the exact opposite response: adding C increases respiration, while adding N reduces it. The changes in biomass with C and N additions, however, do follow intuitive logic as adding N increases biomass while adding C does not. The magnitude of biomass increase with added N, however, is limited by the flow of C (which is controlled by the exoenzyme system) and the rate of microbial turnover. The increase in biomass might be difficult to measure using techniques such as chloroform fumigation that are relatively insensitive to moderate changes in biomass. If the model of Using this model, we have examined how changing the underlying kinetic assumptions in a litter or SOM decomposition model can produce very different and perhaps counterintuitive results from those generated by traditional first order kinetic models. This alternative construct closely mimics several patterns that are commonly observed in real soils. First, studies have commonly suggested that soil microbes appear to be C limited, even in organic soils where C availability is potentially very large ( To resolve the apparent contradiction of C limitation in organic matter rich soils, discussion has usually focused on the idea of energy, rather than C limitation per se ( That biomass is a relatively constant fraction of total SOM across a wide range of conditions ( Perhaps even more interesting than the C behavior of the model is the behavior when N becomes limiting. In this case, adding C increases respiration, while adding the growth limiting element, N, actually decreases respiration. A decrease in respiration with added N has been observed in many experiments ( An interesting suggestion of these results is that adding labile C to a soil should increase respiration regardless of the element limiting microbial growth. If the soils are C limited, growth respiration should increase, while if the soils are N limited, waste respiration should increase through overflow metabolism. The only way to infer which element is limiting is to analyze changes in microbial biomass, but since these are still limited by C flow, it may be difficult to measure the limited increases that might be expected when the soil microbes are N limited. In light of the roughly linear increase in the waste/overflow C flow with substrate C-to-N ratio ( These model constructs add mechanism to the standard first order decomposition models, and through this, we believe, add insight into the nature of soil enzyme and microbial dynamics. However, since some ongoing allocation to exoenzyme production appears to be essential, one could argue that enzyme production could be integrated into a single overall maintenance cost. At equilibrium, the exoenzyme pool is stable and the model predicts it should be above There are a number of assumptions in the model that may not accurately represent reality. One such assumption is that enzymes are treated as an aggregate pool. In fact, there are at least three important classes of extracellular enzymes involved in decomposition: ligninases, cellulases, and proteinases. Microbes shift their allocation of C among these to balance the supply of resources returning to them—under N limited conditions proteinase production increases ( Most SOM decomposition models assume that SOM decay is first order on the SOM pool and ignore the role of the catalyst in the reaction, though fundamental theory argues that the catalyst must be part of the kinetic expression. These models also have not dealt with polymer breakdown and microbial use of the breakdown products as distinct processes, possibly under different controls. Despite this lack of mechanism, at the large scales of space and time that biogeochemical models operate, first order models appear to describe SOM turnover adequately, and our model supports the conclusion that under equilibrium conditions such models should reasonably describe decomposition dynamics and C flow in soil. While first order models are clearly useful under large-scale equilibrium conditions, however, they cannot fully explain the behavior of soil C flow and microbial dynamics. Such models may not adequately describe C cycling under variable conditions where the size of the biomass and enzyme pools may vary relative to each other over time ( Perhaps the greater power of our modeling approach comes in resolving contradictory evidence for microbial C and N limitation in soils. Exoenzyme-driven breakdown of SOM predicts a flow of small, dissolved organic molecules that are available for microbial use, but whose production is not under immediate microbial control. The separation of decomposition and microbial growth can explain why C flow and respiration have often not responded positively to increases in N availability, even in soils where the N dynamics suggest microbial N limitation. We demonstrated these concepts using a simple theoretical model with a number of arbitrary assumptions, perhaps the worst of which is to ignore inputs of simple available C (e.g. root exudates). However, we believe the core conclusions are robust. The role of exoenzymes in controlling the rate of decomposition has long been recognized. The role of exoenzymes in controlling microbial C and N availability and limitation, however, have not been well recognized. We believe that this model demonstrates the need to rethink many common conceptions and misconceptions about the nature of decomposition and C flow through the soil microbial system. We thank Roger Nisbet and Jill Schmidt for valuable discussions on the basic ideas presented here. We thank Patricia Holden for thoughtful comments on the model structure and the manuscript. Support for this research came from the US National Science Foundation Bonanza Creek Long Term Ecological Research, TECO, ATLAS and Microbial Observatories Programs, and from the Andrew W. Mellon Foundation.