The role of magnetic nanoparticles on the separation of chalcogenide fine particles from their mixture was investigated for the first time using the selective chelation property of ligands with metals. The need of the study lies in the fact that the finer sized ore particles do not respond to the conventional froth flotation technique of separation. The separation study has been carried out by synthesizing Fe3O4 magnetic nanoparticles and then using it in a model mineral mixture of ZnS and PbS added previously with a chelating ligand 8-hydroxyquinoline (HQ) in aqueous medium. The % of collected ZnS and PbS per mg of magnetically separated sample has been estimated as 95% and 0.28% respectively. Such kind of efficient separation has become feasible because of the fact that addition of 8-HQ induces simultaneous complexation with Zn2+ and Fe3+ ions but not with Pb2+ ions. This selective chelation has been studied by vibrational, fluorescence, XPS spectroscopic techniques and zeta potential measurements. Along with these results, controlled experiments were performed to confirm the selective chelation of 8-HQ ligands.In today’s world persuaded by industrial revolution, metals are the very foundation of modern society. Each and every object used in everyday’s life requires metal for fabrication for e.g. tools and machines, buildings, transportation systems etc. starting from a small watch to a big space craft. Mineral beneficiation is the first step of metallurgy involving both mineral processing and metal extraction processes. Whereas in the mineral processing part, froth flotation process is used in general for concentrating ore from impurities. However, the finer sized minerals prove to be a curse for flotation technology ( There are few reports on the use of ‘chelates’ as collector in the froth flotation process with technical representations ( 8-HQ is very much effective in complexation with Zn All experiments were performed with reagent grade NH ZnS nanoparticles were synthesized by a facile aqueous method ( Fe The average Pb and Zn in chalcogenide ore in India after mineral processing was reported to be Pb:Zn ∼ 1:5. The amount of Pb and Zn in the processed ore was found to be 2.01% and 10.04%, respectively ( The point of zero charge (P To carry out the magnetic separation process, initially ZnS and PbS were mixed in the ratio 1:19 (weight ratio) and the total volume of the mixture was made upto 31 mL. Then 4 mL of 8-hydroxyquinoline (8-HQ) solution (5 mM solution in ethanol) was added to it. Finally 3 mL of F 21 mL of ZnS solution of strength 0.02 mg/mL was mixed with 3 mL of Fe 21 mL of ZnS solution of strength 0.02 mg/mL was mixed with 10 mL of PbS solution of strength 0.5 mg/mL. Instantly white colloidal solution of ZnS became blackish in color and precipitated down. The solution became clear and when observed under UV chamber no fluorescence was seen at all. The precipitate was obtained by centrifuging at 6000 RPM for 10 min. The sample was air dried which became black in color. 10 mL of PbS solution was mixed with 10 mL of Fe 21 mL of ZnS solution of strength 0.02 mg/mL and 3 mL Fe 21 mL of ZnS solution of strength 0.02 mg/mL, 10 mL PbS solution and 3 mL Fe 21 mL of ZnS solution of strength 0.02 mg/mL, 10 mL PbS solution and 3 mL Fe Commercially purchased ZnS was grinded for few seconds. Then 10 mg of so grinded ZnS was mixed with 2 mg of PbS and the volume was made upto 100 mL and was sonicated to disperse the solution. This was followed by the addition of 19 mL of 8-HQ solution and 10 mL of Fe ZnS and Fe 8-HQ ligand was selected due to its highest binding affinity towards Zn From the comparative FTIR plots of ZnS and HQ added ZnS in To illustrate the selective chelation of HQ ligand with ZnS and Fe Fluorescence spectrum of ZnS consists of a single peak at 459 nm ( The above observations indicate that interaction between HQ and ZnS leads to plausible complexation whereas with PbS not at al. However, it is difficult to interpret the possibility of complexation in case of Fe In order to perform the magnetic separation study of ZnS and PbS from their mixture, a model mineral mixture was prepared first as described under the method section. Simultaneously, control experiments were performed with control samples as detailed under the same section. The samples collected after drying were characterized through FTIR, EDX and AAS spectroscopic techniques. FTIR spectra are presented in To study the role of 8-HQ ligand in the selective separation of ZnS and PbS, a comparative FTIR study of samples CH, CP, CPH and ZF were done and the results are shown in The compositional analysis of all the samples was carried out through EDX spectroscopy and the results are presented in A probable interaction mechanism of HQ with Fe The chemical composition of magnetically separated CPH sample was measured using XPS ( The magnetic property of the Fe The zeta potential study of all three species viz. ZnS, PbS and Fe Hence all three species show almost similar trend in the zeta potential plot at different pH ( Based on above all observations from XRD, HRTEM, FTIR, UV–visible, fluorescence, XPS spectroscopy and Zeta potential analysis, the HQ mediated interaction between ZnS, Fe From the zeta potential plot in The value of P From the results of magnetic separation shown in To see the applicability of our present technique for coarser sized particles, a control experiment has been done with commercially purchased ZnS of size ∼5 µm. The SEM image of which is presented in Once the selective combination of iron oxide nanoparticles with ZnS is established to separate it out from the mixture of ZnS and PbS, now it is required to detach the ZnS from the composite. For that two different procedures were employed. In the first procedure, the magnetically retrieved sample was subjected to prolonged sonication. It is observed that a blackish brown colored solution is obtained, but when subjected again to magnetic separation, clear supernatant is obtained. In the next procedure, 68.4 mg of CPH sample was roasted at 600 °C for 3 h. The recovered sample lost almost 23.2 mg in weight. The XRD analysis of the roasted sample was carried out and the result is shown in The use of Fe The magnetic separation study was performed at three different pH ranges. The best result obtained as separation % of ZnS and PbS to be 95% an 0.28% respectively at pH 6.33. Moreover, detachment study consists of roasting the sample to break down the organic molecule, 8-HQ and then again subjecting to magnetic separation. All these findings suggest that magnetic separation can be employed as an alternative method of separation of fine ZnS from other chalcogenides present in the ore by choosing suitable ligands to selectively surface functionalize with magnetic nanoparticles. Authors are thankful to Director, Supplementary data to this article can be found online at The following are the Supplementary data to this article: