This paper describes the horizontal deflection behaviour of the streams of particles in paramagnetic fluids under a high-gradient superconducting magnetic field, which is the continued work on the exploration of particle magneto-Archimedes levitation. Based on the previous work on the horizontal deflection of a single particle, a glass box and collector had been designed to observe the movement of particle group in paramagnetic fluids. To get the exact separation efficiency, the method of “sink–float” involved the high density fluid polytungstate (dense medium separation) and MLA (Mineral Liberation Analyser) was performed. It was found that the particles were deflected and settled at certain positions on the container floor due to the combined forces of gravity and magneto-Archimedes forces as well as a lateral buoyancy (displacement) force. Mineral particles with different densities and susceptibilities could be deflected to different positions, thus producing groups of similar types of particles. The work described here, although in its infancy, could form the basis of new approach of separating particles based on a combination of susceptibility and density.Magnetic separators exploit the difference in magnetic properties between the minerals and are used to separate valuable minerals from non-magnetic gangue, e.g. magnetite from quartz Since Beaugnon and Tournier succeeded in levitating water and some diamagnetic materials in 1991 AVCO Corporation and NASA (USA) pioneered the use of ferrohydrostatic separators (FHS) in 1973 by employing a kerosene-based ferrofluid to separate automobile scrap Over the past decade a considerable amount of research has been conducted at the University of Nottingham on the levitation of particles under high magnetic gradients The magneto-Archimedes solution used in this chapter is MnCl The mass susceptibility of the MnCl The susceptibilities of MnCl The corresponding volume magnetic susceptibility of 2 Ore mineral materials were prepared and investigated about the separation efficiencies in this paper. They were nickel ore located at Australia, copper ore A located at South Africa and copper ore B located at Atacama Desert, Northern Chile. These particles were crashed to the various size fractions needed in experiments by Retsch milling. MLA (Mineral Liberation Analyser) was used to quantify the mineralogical characteristics of each kind of ore minerals. The mineralogy compositions of the three kinds of ore samples obtained by MLA are listed in the following tables: The run-of-mine coal used in this paper is bituminous coal The experiments were performed using an Oxford Instruments Minimum Condensed Volume (MCV) superconducting magnet, which had a 5 As mentioned in our previous research work, the particles levitated in the magneto-Archimedes fluid were repulsed to the wall of a container in the superconducting magnet field centre area. In order to explore this interesting behaviour a rectangular glass box was made with dimensions, 145 After removing from the collector, the mixture of particles on every zone of the collector was separated by putting it into the solution of sodium polytungstate (SPT). The density of SPT solution was set to 3100 The size of particles and strength of the magnetic field are important factors to be investigated for the potential application of this technology. A series of experiments was carried out to study the effect of the magnetic field and particle size on the separation of pyrite and sand. During the experiments, the mixture of pyrite and sand (total 10 However, the intensity of magnetic field had a strong influence on the separation of particles as shown in In order to optimise the operating parameters to achieve better separation, several experiments were carried out to determine the effect of the feeding position on separation. In these experiments, the injector tube is inclined to form an angle with the top board surface of the magnet as shown in As the inclined injection tube was pointing to the magnet bore, the particles would drop to the zone of the collection system which was quite close to the magnet bore centre without the magnet field. The results of sand particle deflection were shown in The behaviours of particles from several ore samples were examined in the superconducting magnetic system. SPT was used to analyse the distribution of particles in sink and float products at this stage. To investigate the effect of size fraction of particles on the separation efficiency, MLA was also applied. Magnetic field intensity shows paramount influence on the deflection of particles as per previous work. Experiments had been carried out to investigate the effect of magnetic field intensity on 3 kinds of ore samples, the results of SPT (whose density was set as 3000 The results of nickel ore separation are shown in Particle size is an important factor when it comes to the processing of ore minerals. The different size fractions of the ore samples ranging from 0.106 It seemed that the size fraction of particles (investigated range + The results of copper ore A samples were shown in The fractions of ore mineral particles with size 0.25–0.5 The MLA images of the copper ore B particles with different size fractions (0.25–0.5 There is no particle at the 30–100 The combination of The MLA images of the nickel ore particles with different size fractions (0.25–0.5 The MLA images of the copper ore A particle separation results with different size fractions (0.25–0.5 From SPT analysis and MLA results demonstrated above indicate that particles with different densities and/or susceptibilities in real ore minerals could be settled at a certain position on the container floor due to the unbalanced horizontal driving force, thus could be explored to separate particles under certain conditions. From the above experimental results, it can be seen that the magnetic horizontal deflection has potential in the separation of sand and pyrite particle system, and some kinds of ore mineral particle system. Further exploration about the usage of magnetic horizontal deflection in the separation of run-of-mine coal particles was described in this section. The coal samples investigated in this paper were chosen to be the run-of-mine coal particles. The run-of-mine coal particles were treated to get rid of slurry first by washing with water. And then the size fraction of run-of-mine coal particles was chosen to be + The run-of-mine coal particles with size fraction + The particles which settled at the area of 0–60  The measurement results in There were no particles at all in the central area of the bottom of the narrow glass box from the above When streams of particles with different parameters such as sand and pyrite, ore samples and run-of-mine coal particles were put in the same magnetic system, similar results were obtained as that of a single particle. Particles with different densities and susceptibilities settled down at different positions on the container floor due to the combined forces of gravity and magneto-Archimedes as well as a lateral buoyancy (displacement) force. Good results had been obtained during the separation of model minerals (pyrite and sand), however, when it comes to the real ore samples, the separation efficiency would depend on the property and complexity of ores. It was found that nickel ore sample could not be well separated as per the experimental results, this was partly due to the entrainment of strong magnetic property particles (mainly amphibole, pyrrhotite, pentlandite) during its attraction to the collector bottom which blocked the deflection of diamagnetic particles. In order to solve this problem, pre-treating of materials (magnetic separation) to remove magnetic particles is necessary in the future work. Besides that, the compositions with different densities or ash contents in run-of-mine coal particles can be effectively separated. The higher density compositions in run-of-mine coal particles with higher ash contents prefer to stay at the area where it is quite near the magnet bore centre. The lower density particles with lower ash contents were repulsed to the further end of the narrow glass box. The method potentially could be further developed for the separation of particles as per susceptibility and/or density and recovery of metal and plastic from waste printed circuit board.  This work was funded as part of the UK Engineering and Physical Sciences Research Council Basic Technology Programme: Magnetic Levitation Technology for Mineral Separation, Nanomaterials, and Biosystems for Space Exploration (GR/S83005/01).