Egg white (EW) includes several proteins with high potential for fractionation processes (lysozyme, ovotransferrin). However, the high viscosity of EW that is caused by the fibrillar protein ovomucin is a limiting factor concerning processability. The common procedure to reduce this viscosity is the precipitation of ovomucin, which, however, results in undesirable dilution effects and loss of proteins. So, the objective of this work was to develop a method to decrease the viscosity of EW without the described disadvantages. Therefore, a high-pressure homogenization process was used. It was demonstrated that it is possible to destroy the EWs’ fibrillar network by homogenization treatment, and thereby, to decrease the viscosity significantly. Additionally, filtration was enabled, which allows the use of EW for e.g. chromatographic fractionation. Simultaneously, it was shown that lysozyme that was entrapped in the fibrillar network was released, and therefore, it is available for fractionation processes in higher amounts.Egg white (EW) has excellent interfacial properties, and therefore, it is extensively used as functional ingredient in food industry. For some processes, e.g. for fractionation, some of the physical EW properties are limiting factors. One of them is the inhomogeneous structure, which is caused by the different viscous layers in EW. Directly below the egg membrane and around the egg yolk are low-viscous layers, while there is a high-viscous layer in between, which provides nearly 60% of the total egg white ( The two proteins that are of interest regarding the previously named fractionation are the EWP ovotransferrin and lysozyme. Lysozyme is known as a hydrolytic enzyme that cuts β-1-4-glycosidic linkage between N-acetyl muramic acid (NAM) and N-acetyl glucosamine (NAG) contained in bacterial cell walls. It thus shows antibacterial activity especially against gram-positive bacteria ( For EWP fractionation, chromatographic methods are typically used, in lab scale as well as in industrial scale ( Therefore, the objective of this study was to develop a method that ensures the processability of EW, especially concerning the fractionation processes, by creating a homogenous structure with a decreased viscosity. Additionally, the filtration that is not possible using untreated EW should be enabled, because this is an indispensable requirement for subsequent chromatographic separations. Further, the entrapped and bound lysozyme should be released from the fibrillar network to be available for fractionation. This should be achieved without any loss of protein or dilution effects. In order to fulfill the given requirements, EW was treated by a high-pressure-homogenization process. The hypothesis behind was that the mechanical forces disintegrate the fibrils into smaller pieces, which increases the processability, without any loss of valuable EWP. The work of Freshly laid eggs from “Lohman Tradition” hens were collected from the University’s research farm (Thalhausen) and used within 24 EW was treated with the high-pressure-homogenizer APV 1000 (APV Products, Albertslund, Denmark). The operation was done in single stage modus with pressures of 0 (effect of pumping through the high-pressure-homogenizer), 1, 2, 5, 10, 25, 50, 75 and 100 Rheological measurements of protein solutions were carried out using an Advanced Rheometer AR 1000 (TA Instruments, New Castle, USA) and controlled by AR Instrument Control software (MathWorks, Natick, Massachusetts, USA). For the determination of the dynamic viscosity, a concentric cylinder geometry with a gap adjusted to 500 The particle size distribution was analyzed using the Malvern Mastersizer 2000 with a Malvern Mastersizer Hydro 2000S measurement unit (Malvern Instruments GmbH, Herrenberg). For all measurements a real diffraction index of 1.41 for protein and 1.33 for water was used. Samples were added up to an obscuration of 5–6%. All samples were measured in triplicate. The measured particle size distribution was depicted as sum distribution An often used pore size for pre-filtrations to avoid pore blocking in subsequent applications is 0.45 Using RP-HPLC, the concentration of the main EWP ovalbumin, ovotransferrin, lysozyme and ovomucoid was analyzed. Especially, the concentration of lysozyme was of interest, because this was used to determine the extent of the lysoyzme release from the network by high-pressure homogenization. With RP-HPLC, only free and unbound proteins can be detected. If a protein is entrapped, the characteristic retention time based on the polarity of the protein is changed. Following the protein release can be determined by the increase of the specific protein concentration. The samples were diluted in double-distilled water depending on their protein concentration to reach a protein concentration around 2.5 The effect of the homogenization pressure on the viscosity of EW was determined by rheological measurements. A further effect that can be seen in This viscosity decrease indicated that the fibrillar structure of OVN is diminished successfully by the forces in the high-pressure homogenizer. To confirm this, particle sizes of EW samples were measured. The size distributions after a pre-treatment of one run at 5–25 The third particle size range (c) shows a monomodal distribution of small particles resulting from high-pressure homogenization with one run at 50–100 The connection of the viscosity results shown in As stated in the introduction section, untreated EW cannot be filtrated. Hence, the effect of the high-pressure homogenization of EW on its filterability was determined. It can be assumed that the possibility to pass a filter with a defined pore size is related to the particle sizes of the sample. Comparing the filtration results ( As stated in the introduction part lysozyme is an interesting EW protein for fractionation processes. One problem regarding fractionation, as mentioned before, is that lysozyme is partly bound in ovomucin–lysozyme-complexes and needs to be released before. Hence, the lysozyme content after the high-pressure homogenization process is of interest and was determined by RP-HPLC measurements. As can be seen in the RP-HPLC chromatograms of the untreated EW compared to them treated at 25 In order to determine the amount of free lysozyme that is therefore available for subsequent fractionation processes the lysozyme content was calculated. In the untreated EW, part of the lysozyme is dispersed in water embeddings and bound to OVN fibrils by electrostatic interactions as can be seen schematically in The results confirm that high-pressure homogenization is a suitable pre-treatment method for increasing the processability of EW. The work presents the basis for further EW applications regarding e.g. fractionation processes or just an easier handling of this raw material. Hence, homogenizing with pressures of 25 Finally, it can be concluded that it is possible to avoid the precipitation of OVN fibrils with all mentioned disadvantages. Consequently, the application of high-pressure homogenization should be preferred over precipitation. The hypothesis that it is possible to diminish the OVN network by mechanical shear forces was confirmed. This novel way of EW pre-treatment can be used as a more efficient means to prepare EW for fractionation purposes with a repetitious accuracy. In further studies, the influence of this pre-treatment on protein nativity as well as on functionality will be investigated. This research project was supported by the German Ministry of Economics and Technology (via AiF) and the FEI (Forschungskreis der Ernährungsindustrie e.V., Bonn). Project AiF 17479N.