Introduction
                  Concomitant plate fixation as an adjunct to intramedullary nailing (IMN) of proximal third tibia fractures is a proven technique. Benefits include its role as a minimally invasive reduction aid, allowing for minimal soft tissue disruption. Expanding its indications as adjunct fixation to IMN throughout the tibia, we aimed to study outcomes in a multi-centre initiative.
               
                  Materials and methods
                  From May 1999 to March 2010, a total of 1302 operatively treated tibial fractures (including plateau and pilon fractures) with complete medical records were identified for review. Of these, 376 cases were treated via IMN, of which 30 cases were treated via combined IMN and plating, meeting inclusion criteria. Primary outcome was union rates, time to union, and complication rates. Secondary outcomes included mean alignment from the immediate postoperative period to the time of final follow-up.
               
                  Results
                  Twenty-seven out of 30 patients were available for follow-up. Twenty-five (93%) achieved bony union; the remaining two patients, sustained Type IIIA and B injuries respectively, went onto non-union secondary to deep infection and required multiple re-operations before achieving ultimate union. Mean time at final follow-up was 20±10 months, 96% were ambulatory at full weight bearing status with no malunions. No significant changes in alignment in either the coronal or sagittal planes were noted at time of final follow-up.
               
                  Conclusion
                  Combined IMN and plate fixation is a reliable tool not only in the treatment of fractures of the proximal tibia, but also for those fractures in the diaphysis and segmental fractures with proximal and/or distal metadiaphyseal extension with consistent ability to maintain high union rates and maintained alignment. However, longer-term follow-up and prospective trials will be necessary before coming to a definitive conclusion.Along with utilizing a lateral starting point, supra- or semi-extended positioning, or the use of Poller or blocking screws, a femoral distractor or an external fixator, provisional or permanent plating combined with intramedullary nail (IMN) has proved to be a reliable and efficacious tool in the treatment of the notoriously difficult to treat, proximal third tibial fractures Originally described for use in open, proximal third tibia fractures as a provisional reduction aid, the authors of this multi-centre study have expanded the indications for use in certain situations Ethical approval was obtained from all institutional review board committees prior to conducting this retrospective review. Between 3 level 1 trauma centres, from May 1999 to March 2010, a total of 1302 operatively treated tibial fractures (including plateau and pilon fractures) with complete medical records were identified for review. Of these, 376 cases were treated via IMN, of which 30 cases, contributions from the last 4 authors, were treated via combined IMN and plating ( Initial management consisted of closed reduction and splinting. All fractures were fixed definitively in the same surgical setting and within the first 24 Postoperative and follow-up data collection parameters included additional operations related to polytrauma cases, complications, and need for subsequent reoperations up to 1-year minimum follow-up. Follow-up time points were at 2 weeks, 6 weeks, 3 months, 6 months, 1 year and yearly, thereafter. Classification and tibial alignment measurements in both frontal (varus/valgus) and sagittal (anterior/posterior) planes were performed by fellowship-trained orthopaedic traumatologists in accordance with measurement technique described by Freedman and Johnson Statistical analysis was performed via SPSS 18.0 (IBM Corp., Somers, NY, USA). Mean values for alignment were calculated denoting valgus as a positive number and varus as a negative number, in the frontal plane, and procurvatum as a positive number and recurvatum as a negative number, in the sagittal plane. Continuous variable comparison was performed via unpaired Student's Thirty patients suffered high-energy, complex tibial fractures with subsequent combined IMN and plate fixation. Mean age of the patient cohort was 44 Three patients were lost to follow-up. Of the remaining 27 patients, 93% achieved union in a mean time of 20.3 Only 2 patients sustained complications. Both patients initially sustained open injuries, Gustilo and Anderson Type IIIA and IIIB, respectively. Both patients had a nonunion and deep infection. They eventually went onto union, but not before requiring several re-operations including antibiotic nail placement, and one patient requiring a latissimus flap for soft tissue coverage ( IMN and plate combination is an accepted, reliable option for the treatment of proximal third tibia fractures However, outside of its use in the proximal tibia, technique application to the more distal aspects of tibia has yet to be described in the literature. Benefits of IMN over plating for mid-shaft fractures have been well described and more recently, IMN for fractures of the distal tibia have reported favourable results Our study, however, does have its limitations. The retrospective nature of the series along with the small number of patients, short follow-up, and lack of functional outcome data does not offer the most definitive assessment of the technique. Furthermore, ideal alignment measurement would have been progressive surveillance of the mechanical axis to provide a true assessment of limb alignment. However, this alignment measurement method has been used previously, and to our knowledge, it is the first series to describe the technique's usage in such fractures with high degree of complexity, expanding its use to those fractures more distal to the tibial plateau. We have found unicortical plate fixation as a reliable adjunct prior to IMN to provide unicortical, relative stability, especially in the cases of high comminution and/or bone loss, segmental fractures with and without intraarticular extension (minimally displaced), and in the setting of poor bone stock (relieving hoop stresses). It is important to note that we do not advocate its usage as a standard for those diaphyseal or distal third tibial fractures, but rather offer it as an additional tool to help maintain reduction while minimizing soft tissue stripping, much like a reduction clamp can offer, but with more reliable reduction maintenance. In conclusion, in the setting of high comminution and/or bone loss, segmental fractures with and without intraarticular extension (minimally displaced), and in the setting of poor bone stock (relieving hoop stresses), IMN and plate combined fixation can offer a reliable and reproducible tool to achieve reliable union. Again, we hope to reiterate that utilization of the plate offers not a rigid construct, but an incompetent construct that offers relatively stability prior to IMN. Combined with IMN, providing overall relative stability should avoid high rates of non-union often seen with extremely rigid constructs seen in the distal femur and sacrum. Prospective trials, with a focus on functional outcome and progressive surveillance of overall mechanical alignment, may show that the IMN plate combination may prove better clinical outcomes than plating alone. The authors would like to state that no grants, funding, or any other additional benefits were directly received in the preparation or execution of this study.