Considerable studies on metal selective laser melting (SLM) have proved the necessity to refine microstructure parts fabricated by SLM in order to eliminate property anisotropy, hot-tearing and to increase the SLM-processability. In the present work, Ti nanoparticles, at the first time, were discovered to be an extremely effective inoculant for an SLMed 2024 aluminium alloy. 0.7 wt% addition of Ti nanoparticles was capable of substantially eliminating the hot-tearing cracks and columnar structure, and refining the grains in the SLMed 2024 alloy in a broad processing window. The substantial grain refinement in the Ti-inoculated 2024 alloy was attributed to the in-situ formation of Al3Ti nanoparticles with a L12 ordered structure, which formed a coherent interface with Al matrix and therefore significantly promoted the heterogeneous nucleation of the α-Al during solidification of melt pools in the SLM process. After a conventional T6 heat treatment, this SLMed alloy exhibited a superior balance of strength and ductility (tensile strength was up to 432 ± 20 MPa and elongation of 10 ± 0.8%), which was comparable to its wrought counterpart. This work can be considered as a breakthrough in research of fabricating high-strength aluminium alloys using SLM.As a typical additive manufacturing (AM), or 3D-printing, technology, selective laser melting (SLM) has been regarded as a powerful tool to rapidly fabricate geometrically complex components for various sectors, such as aerospace, automotive, biomedical and defence industries [ As the most common lightweight alloy, Al alloy has attracted increasing interests from researchers and engineers in the field of AM. But, most Al alloys are associated with low SLM processability. Majority of the currently “printable” Al alloys are still those near eutectic Al-Si based alloys (e.g. Al-7Si, AlSi10Mg and Al-12Si) due to their short freezing range [ The high hot-tearing susceptibility of the high strength Al alloys is closely related to the formation of large, textured columnar grains that are commonly observed in most SLMed alloys [ In conventional casting of Al alloys, a small inoculation with Ti (below 0.01 wt%), commonly in the form of Al-5Ti-B master alloy, is the widely used commercial method to refine the Al grains and suppress the columnar structure during solidification. Incorporation with Ti not only leads to the formation of Al In conventional casting, grain refinement is commonly achieved through introducing effective nucleants in metal melt to promote heterogeneous nucleation As mentioned above, previous studies on Al castings have proved that Al The A–B–K OR1 The A–B–K OR2 The K–H–S OR The Fan OR This signifies that the D0 In addition to the D0 Both Al and L1 It is noteworthy that in conventional casting of Al alloys with addition of Ti, only D0 A gas atomised 2024 alloy powder, with chemical composition of 3.70 wt% Cu, 1.21 wt% Mg, 0.40 wt% Mn, 0.09 wt% Si, 0.15 wt% Fe and Al (balance), was supplied by LPW Technology. High purity (99.9%) Ti nanoparticle with a size ranging from 40 to 60 nm, supplied by SS Nano Inc, was used as inoculant. The Ti-nanoparticle containing 2024 feedstock, which is termed as Ti-inoculated 2024 (TI-2024), was prepared by vibrative agitation mixing method, of which details were addressed previously Both 2024 and TI-2024 alloys were produced in a SLM125HL selective laser melting system (SLM Solutions Group AG). The machine is equipped with an ytterbium fibre laser with a wavelength of 1.06 μm, a laser beam size of 80 μm and a maximum power of 400 W. Following previous work In addition to use the optimized processing parameters as abovementioned, extra samples were built using altering the laser power (200, 300, 325 and 350 W) and the scanning speed (150 mm/s and 1200 mm/s) to evaluate the densification of the TI-2024 alloy under a broad SLM processing window. To further improve the properties, some as-built (AB) TI-2024 samples were heat treated to T6 condition in accordance with the conventional wrought 2024 alloy Microstructural features of the SLMed alloys were examined in a Reichert-Jung POLYVAR MET optical microscope and a JEOL 7800 field emission scanning electron microscope (FESEM). Samples were sectioned on both transverse (XY plane) and longitudinal (YZ plane) planes from the SLMed alloys, followed by mechanically grinding and polishing using standard metallographic methods down to 0.04 μm colloidal silica suspension, and then chemically etched with the Keller's reagent (2 ml HF, 5 ml HNO The phase analysis of the SLMed alloys were performed using X-ray diffraction (XRD) in a Bruker D8 Advanced powder X-ray diffractometer, operated at 40 kV and 40 mA. The scan rate of 1° /min and a step size of 0.02° were used at diffraction angle 2θ ranging from 20° to 90° All XRD scans were performed on the longitudinal planes of the SLMed alloys. Electron backscattered diffraction (EBSD), coupled in a JEOL 6610 SEM, was used to investigate the grain morphology and texture of each SLMed alloy. EBSD analysis were conducted along the longitudinal direction (on YZ or XZ plane) of each SLMed alloy. A step size of 0.2 μm was used to document the EBSD mapping and a critical misorientation angle of 2° was applied to identify grain boundaries. A Hitachi HF5000 transmission electron microscope (TEM), equipped with a probe aberration corrector and symmetrically opposed dual energy dispersive X-ray spectroscopy (EDS) detectors, and operated at an acceleration voltage of 200 kV, was used to further characterise the microstructure of the TI-2024 alloy in both TEM and scanning-TEM (STEM) modes. The selected area electron diffraction (SAED) was used to determine the OR between adjacent phases. At least ten diffraction patterns from different regions were taken to ensure the reproducibility of the determined OR. The elemental distribution in the TI-2024 alloy was examined using EDS under the STEM mode. Both high-resolution TEM (HRTEM) and atomic resolution high angle annular dark field STEM (HAADF-STEM) techniques were further applied for atomic and nano-scale characterization of the interfaces between adjacent phases. The HAADF-STEM images were taken under the Z-contrast mode, whose contrast depends on the composition of the specimen. The probe size under this mode was set to 0.078 nm with the collection angle ranging from 60 to 320 MRAD. The HRTEM and atomic resolution HAADF-STEM images presented herein were post-processed by inverse fast Fourier transforming (IFFT) using the Gatan DigitalMicrograph™ to reduce noise. TEM samples cut from the SLMed TI-2024 alloy were mechanically ground and polished from ~ 0.8 mm to 0.08 mm, followed by finally ion milling into thin foils in a Gatan Precision Ion Polishing System (PIPS). Tensile tests were performed along both transverse and longitudinal directions of each SLMed alloy. Samples with the gauge dimensions of 12.5 mm (length) × 3 mm (width) × 2 mm (thickness) were machined from SLMed parts using electro-discharge machining (EDM). The testing was performed in an Instron 5584 machine fitted with a video extensometer at a constant crosshead velocity of 1 mm/min at room temperature. Three samples were tested to ensure the reproducibility.    SEM micrographs on the YZ plane at a higher magnification ( To understand the grain refining mechanism in the SLMed TI-2024 alloy and experimentally verify the E2EM prediction, further microstructural characterization and crystallographic investigation were conducted in TEM.    This gives twelve equivalent variants of the S-precipitate. Thus, it is considered that the short-plates (i.e. labelled with B in A TEM micrograph at higher magnification ( The coexistence of S″, S (Type I) and S (Type II) signifies that the present TI-2024 alloy possesses a precipitation behaviour identical to the conventional wrought 2xxx series Al alloy.   The formation of the coarse columnar grains in the SLMed 2024 alloy ( However, as demonstrated in In addition to potent nucleants, solutes also contributed to grain refinement through generation of the CS zone at front of the solid-liquid interface to restrict grain growth if heterogeneous nucleation event occurred within the CS zone From previous studies [ In addition, the applicability of nanoparticles in metal AM can also be understood in terms of the free growth theory proposed by Greer et al.  The crack elimination in the TI-2024 alloy was closely related to the substantial refinement of Al grains ( The columnar structure and the formation of high fraction of intergranular hot-tearing cracks along the longitudinal direction result in poor and anisotropic mechanical properties of the SLMed 2024 alloy, as listed in In comparison, the TI-2024 alloy exhibited an isotropic mechanical performance with significantly improved strength and ductility, as listed in After a conventional T6 heat-treatment, the UTS of the TI-2024 alloy was further improved to ~432 MPa ( It should be noted that the T6 heat-treatment led to slight decreases in yield strength and in elongation of the TI-2024 alloy. This was primarily attributed to the significant coarsening of the Al grains, as shown in The present work verifies that inoculation treatment of the 2024 Al alloy with Ti nanoparticles dramatically increased the SLM-processability of this alloy, completely eliminated the hot-tearing cracks, and improved the mechanical properties through effectively converting the coarse columnar grains into fine equiaxed grains. Based on the results, following conclusions can be made: Metastable L1 Addition of Ti nanoparticles into 2024 Al alloy feedstock powder led to in-situ formation of the metastable L1 Compared with the coarse columnar microstructure in the SLMed 2024 alloy, the equiaxed, fine-grained microstructure in the Ti-inoculated TI-2024 alloy exhibited a much higher hot-tearing resistance during solidification. Thus, inoculation treatment with 0.7wt% Ti nanoparticles enabled to fabricate crack-free 2024 alloy in a broad SLM processing window. The formation of the equiaxed fine-grained microstructure also effectively eliminated the property anisotropy and simultaneously increased both strength and ductility of the SLMed TI-2024 alloy. A conventional T6 heat-treatment of the SLMed TI-2024 alloy further improved its balance of the strength and ductility due to the formation of homogeneously distributed Al None. The authors thank Australian Microscopy & Microanalysis Research Facility at the Centre for Microscopy and Microanalysis (CMM), The University of Queensland for the facilities and technical assistance. The authors are very grateful to Supplementary material associated with this article can be found, in the online version, at doi: 