Given increasing demand and importance of rare earth elements (REE), exploration is underway to find alternatives to ore-extracted product. With REE concentrations varying between 270 and 1480 ppm, coal ash has been deemed as one such potential source. A number of research groups are exploring technologies to separate REEs from coal ash and supercritical extraction has emerged as a high yield contender. Estimating the economic viability of this lab-scale process at the industrial scale is both important and challenging. In this study we estimate industrial scale cost and revenues of production of REEs from coal ash by combining prior laboratory results, scaling models, combinatorial scenarios and sensitivity analysis. The processing cost of extracting REEs from one ton of coal ash using supercritical CO2 and tributylphosphate (TBP) is found to vary between $380 and $1200 for 550 g of REE. The value of REE oxides that may be obtained per ton of ash is estimated to vary between $6 and $557, with a median of $250. Scandium is the most expensive REE and can account for up to 90% of the value of the yield. The results suggest that factors critical to the economic viability of the process include scandium content & yield, reagent use, and processing time.Rare earth elements (REEs) are a relatively abundant group of 17 elements consisting of scandium, yttrium, and the lanthanides. REEs have received special attention in recent years due to their critical role in electronics and energy technologies and the geographic concentration of production activities. Although REEs are relatively abundant in the Earth's crust, most mining activities occur in China. In 2015, China was responsible for 85% of global production. Some other countries that produce REEs include Australia, Russia, Malaysia and Thailand. In the USA, only one company was active in REE extraction in 2015, mining and processing Bastnäsite, a fluorocarbonate mineral, from a site in Mountain Pass, California. The United States continues to be an importer of rare earths, importing about 70% of rare earth compounds and metals used in 2015, at an estimated expense of $150 million ( Coal ash has been found to be a source of REEs ( Although coal ash has a lower total concentration of REEs compared to commercially processed ores, it has higher concentrations of some high value elements such as scandium and neodymium (see Biological leaching experiments have been conducted with acidophilic chemolithoautotrophic micro-organisms as well as acidophilic or neutrophilic heterotrophic bacteria. Acidophilic cultures comprised mesophilic, moderate-thermophilic and thermophilic Fe-/S-oxidizing strains. Bioleaching could achieve high extraction efficiency for aluminum (75%) and magnesium (79.2%) as well as some lanthanides like erbium (75.6%), thulium (77.9) and ytterbium (79.2%) ( Acid leaching is often used in the extraction of REEs from their ores. In China, extraction processes like the Bayan Obo process use a vessel or heap leaching and are often accomplished in situ ( Supercritical fluid extraction is also a leaching process where instead of large quantities of acid, supercritical fluid is used. Carbon dioxide (CO There are many applications of supercritical CO From an economics perspective, supercritical extraction may be expected to have two important advantages over other extraction techniques. Since supercritical CO Before describing the specifics of process modeling, we first review the economic and technical context of current disposition of coal ash in the U.S. In 2013, The U.S. generated around 53 million tons of ash out of which 23 million tons or 43% were re-used ( Re-use usually takes place in construction where fly ash is used as a direct substitute for Portland cement ( The price of fly ash varies depending on quality of ash, distance to market location and time of year, which impacts both demand and supply. Fly ash that meets concrete quality engineering standards is the most valuable and can sell for $20 to $45 a ton. Self-cementing fly ash used for soil stabilization sells for $10 to $20 a ton. Fly ash for flowable fill on the other hand can sell for as little as $1 a ton ( Having summarized current coal ash disposition in the U.S., we next describe how supercritical extraction would fit into this context. The process is not expected to redirect coal ash from its traditional uses, rather introduce an extra step in-between, i.e. after supercritical extraction of the rare earth elements, the coal ash can be disposed of via traditional means. Supercritical extraction is thus not expected to significantly affect the waste management of coal ash, rather to provide a new source of rare earth materials along the chain. The economic role of waste management on the supercritical process is treated by adding an expense or income associated with final disposal of coal ash. Following the above, the expense of disposing of coal ash is as high as $40/ton, the income as a co-product as high as $45/ton. The income/expense of final disposal depends on the as yet unknown quality of the coal ash post supercritical extraction. As will be seen ( Since supercritical extraction of REEs from coal ash has yet to be done on an industrial scale, techno-analysis is needed to explore economic feasibility. Techno-economic analysis (TEA), or sometimes techno-economic assessment, is a modeling framework used to estimate the economic performance of a technology not yet at industrial scale. Despite a long history of TEA case studies, e.g. ( TEA is done for a number of reasons. In the public sector, TEA is most often used to inform governmental decisions on research and development (R&D) investments. The U.S. Department of Energy (DOE), for example, frequently sponsors TEA studies of technologies as part of evaluating and adjusting its R&D portfolio, e.g. ( Techno-economic analysis combines process modeling, project economics and uncertainty analysis. Process modeling is done via some combination of empirical data, often from a laboratory scale process, mass-flow balance, and physico-chemical simulation, e.g. using tools such as Aspen ( Grappling with uncertainty is a primary challenge for techno-economic analysis. In this work we combine standard sensitivity analysis (in the form of tornado diagrams) with what we shall term combinatorial scenario analysis. A primary challenge in TEA is significant uncertainty in multiple process parameters. One thus needs to explore a multi-dimensional space of uncertain parameters in order to determine combinations of values that will lead to economic feasibility. Combinatorial scenario analysis supports this process as follows. Starting with N uncertain process parameters, each with a set of potential value scenarios, combinatorial scenario analysis involves estimating project economics for all possible combinations and separate combinations into economically feasible and infeasible sets. The results for economically feasible combinations of process and input quality parameters can then be used to inform R&D priorities. To scope the paper, we explore the economic viability of REE extraction from coal ash using supercritical extraction. We built a process model, assess its economics and explore its uncertainty with combinatorial scenario and sensitivity analyses. Critical process variables are found to be REE yield, REE content of input coal ash, reactor size, reagent requirement, and reagent cost. The contributions of this work are, we argue: To present the first economic feasibility analysis of extraction of REE from coal ash and to explore the utility of the combinatorial approach in techno-economic analysis. One of the early examples of extraction of rare earth elements using supercritical materials is by Kayo Sawada and collaborators. They used a complex of tributylphosphate (TBP), HNO It was found that UO  This result corroborated the findings of Samsonov's sample contained UO  All prior studies of supercritical extraction of REEs describe laboratory results and do not investigate economics. The above laboratory work informs our economic analysis. There is no prior work that estimates the economics of REE extraction from coal ash using any technology. We model the economics of supercritical extraction of REE from coal ash using a combination of material flow analysis, process economics, scale-up model, sensitivity analysis and combinatorial scenario approaches. Material flow analysis is used to quantify all inputs into, and outputs from the processes and ensures that the mass of inputs and outputs are balanced. The system boundary and mass flows have been elucidated in The system is designed to accept coal ash from power plants, remove rare earth metals and pass it on for traditional disposal or re-use. The process takes dry coal ash as an input. In the extraction process, TBP-HNO  There is currently no industrial scale application of supercritical technologies to extract REEs from any source. To estimate the material use, energy use, cost and revenue at an industrial scale, scaling up of laboratory and other similar industrial processes is conducted. To characterize materials flow in supercritical extraction, a literature review of prior laboratory studies was conducted, and industrial scale material and energy use was extrapolated using stoichiometric analysis. Assumptions were needed in the scale-up modeling, the process specific assumptions and literature that informed them are discussed in detail in the next three subsections. Once the material and energy use of an industrial scale process is estimated, economic analysis is required to comment on the profitability of the process.  A top-down analysis is used to estimate the cost of separating REEs, which are in the form of nitrates and obtaining individual REE oxides, which is the final saleable product. In this approach, the market price of a mixture of REE salts is compared to the net of their separated oxides. The difference in prices is assumed to be the cost of separation into individual oxides. Although this is a rough approximation, this is the best possible, given the availability of data. Uncertainty in the cost of enrichment is examined through scenarios.  Much of the prior method discussion addressed how to estimate the economics of a hypothetical industrial scale-up of the process. Such estimations have large uncertainties, which we analyze using combinatorial scenario analysis and sensitivity analysis. Combinatorial scenario analysis starts from the observation that the economic performance of a process depends on multiple variables whose values could change under development and scale-up. Sensitivity analysis is effective at identifying dependencies of outcomes on input variables, starting from a baseline set of values. Sensitivity analysis does not however explore the larger space of future values of multiple process parameters. In combinatorial scenarios analysis, process parameters that may change with development are selected, such as reactor size, product yield and reagent consumption. For each parameter, a discrete set of possible values, or scenarios is selected, e.g. possible reactor sizes might be 1000 L or 3000 L. Outcomes are then calculated for all combination of value scenarios. By examining which combinations meet some criterion such as economic viability, combinations of process development targets emerge. The idea of combinatorial scenarios is illustrated in The fundamental challenge here and in other techno-economic estimates is reasonable estimation of material and energy flows of scaled up processes. Our approach to estimating reagent consumption utilizes a combination of two laboratory studies ( To recount the laboratory studies,  To follow with stoichiometric analysis, an example reaction of uranium oxide and nitric acid is illustrated in the following equation: The stoichiometric molar ratio of REO:HNO While the consumption of HNO The amount of reactant complex per ton of coal ash was calculated by multiplying the REE content per ton of coal ash with the amount of reagent required per unit of REE in the experiments. This study maintains solvent mass to feed ratio (S/F) as constant, a method often used to study the scale up of bench technologies ( The extraction efficiency was considered to be the same as that provided in literature for REEs that were present in the solutions experimented with. These include Uranium, Plutonium, Americium, Europium, Yttrium, Lanthanum, Cerium and Terbium. REEs not studied in the experiment, e.g. Erbium, Gadolinium, Holmium, Terbium, Scandium etc. were assumed to have an extraction efficiency of 90%. As will be seen in Section CO The energy consumption of supercritical extraction processes has been discussed by several authors. The size of commercial extractors covered in the literature ranged between 400 and 1300 L ( It is assumed that processing will take place near coal power plants to reduce transportation. The fuel price in Wyoming, home of the Powder River Basin coal deposits, is chosen for this example. The process is assumed to be run 20 hours a day for 365 days a year. The equipment would be manned by two individuals. The wage rate is assumed to be $25 per hour, the median salary of a chemical plant operator in the USA in 2016. ( The capital cost and energy consumption of supercritical extractors was obtained through literature review of papers estimating the same for extraction of essential oils from herbs ( The cost of extractors of different sizes were obtained and the relation between capacity of extractor and cost for the same was estimated ( The usual scaling model for capital costs of industrial processes was used ( Based on the above modeling, a supercritical extraction process with 1390 L capacity is found to have a capital cost of $4.2 million. The relationship established above however can be used to estimate the cost of larger plants. Insurance, maintenance and property tax are assumed to be 1%, 2% and 4% of capital cost ( Based on these assumptions, the annualized capital + maintenance + tax + finance cost of a 1,390L supercritical CO The output obtained from the supercritical process is a mixture of REE nitrates. The next steps are separation into individual REE oxides, which is the final saleable product considered in this study. Metallothermic reduction processes can be used to enrich the product further and extract the rare earth elements in their metallic form, using inert gas at high temperatures (>1000 °C), under vacuum conditions ( The idea is to compare the price of a mixture of REEs with the net value of REEs post separation and identify the difference with the cost of separation and processing. Enriched mixtures made from bastnasite and monezite ores, 68% REE salts, are market products for which price data is available for 2008–2012 ( Finally, the separation costs per ton of coal ash are backed out from the above costs to process the enriched mixture as follows. We calculated the quantity of REE nitrates generated from a ton of coal ash. As an example, for the case of coal ash with global maximum REE concentration (934 ppm), approximately 1 kg of REE nitrate will be produced per ton of ash. This therefore gives us the same range of $18-$97 per ton of coal ash, for separation and processing cost. Further details of how these calculations are used in scenario development is shown in The potential income from REE extracted from coal ash depends on the combination of concentration, extraction yields and efficiency. For concentration, we use a substantial body of prior analytical work characterizing composition of coal ash from a variety of power plants around the world (Całus From the elemental concentration, the value of each coal ash for each of the 155 global samples was calculated based on the five-year average price ( Globally, the total value of REE oxides that may be obtained per ton fly ash varies between $6 and $557 with a median of $250 when using five-year average of prices from 2010 to 2014. Literature reports concentration of REE metal in coal ash, which exist as REE salts (sulfates, phosphates and nitrates). At the same time, price of metallic REEs is not available in a consistent manner from any data source. Therefore in order to determine the revenue from this process we needed to determine the value of REE oxide obtained from this process. We used the stoichiometric ratio between REE metal and REE oxide to adjust the prices, so that, when multiplied by the concentration numbers, which are reported in terms of metallic REE, it would reflect the total value of the respective REE oxides that may be obtained. Material flows for supercritical extraction of rare earth metals from coal ash at an industrial scale were developed using data available in literature. Shown in  In The extraction efficiency of different REEs varies between 7% and 99% (  The income from this process is determined by the price of coal ash, the REE content of coal ash and the percentage yield from the extractions. As explained earlier, we considered two yield scenarios, one with high and the other with low reagent use. The two scenarios have similar but slightly different yield results. We used the price of REEs in  Revenue scenarios combine two alternatives of REE concentration in ash (maximum by value, or median by value) and two alternatives of Scandium yield (50% and 90%). A lack of literature exploring the yield of scandium through supercritical extraction necessitated the yield scenarios. Cost scenarios have two alternatives of reagent use (high and low). The reagent use also differs between maximum and median value ash because it has a stoichiometric dependence on the mass of REE. We do not have two alternatives for the reagent use, in the revenue scenarios, since the value of the yield is practically the same for both high and low reagent use. Cost of separation of oxides, referred to as “separation and processing” are two more alternatives and they have either the low value of $18 or the high value of $97. Given the two alternatives for the four parameters, eight scenarios of cost and four scenarios of revenue has been developed. The maximum profit can be obtained when using coal ash with a maximum concentration of REEs, 90% yield of scandium, low use of reagent and low cost of separation and processing. Under such conditions, the process stands to make a revenue of $487 while incurring a cost of $395, thereby making a profit of $92 per ton of coal ash processed. If separation cost is high on the other, assuming all other conditions remain same, the profit will reduce to $13 per ton ash processed. All other cost and revenue combinations seem economically unviable. Recycling of reagents is possible using methods similar to those used in recycling reagents used in the PUREX process ( The annual cost and revenue of the four basic scenarios, assuming a scandium yield of 90%, have been summarized in Cost incurred from disposal of coal ash or income from selling the coal ash would change profits from each scenario by ±$40. This has not been incorporated in Since the high reagent use scenario is unlikely to be economically viable, sensitivity analysis was conducted with low reagent use on coal ash with maximum and median concentration of REEs. Analysis reveals that scandium is a key driver of overall process profitability. Changes in its yield, price, or concentration are major determinants of profitability for both types of ash. Reagent use is linked to REE concentration since it is stoichiometrically linked to the quantity of REEs. Reagent use and price is more important for ash with higher concentrations of REEs as can be seen in the case of ash with the global max REE. Reactor size, capital cost and hours of operation, factors that affect batch size are relatively more important for ashes with lower concentrations of REE. Hours of operation conflates two impacts, reducing annual output and at the same time increasing energy costs. The cost of energy, which includes natural gas and electricity amount to $81 per ton of coal ash processed. Incidentally, Wyoming has one of the lowest energy prices in the U.S. Our model uses 2014 prices of energy, the price of natural gas was $5.89/1000 cubic ft and that of electricity was $77.6 per MWh. Connecticut has one of the highest energy prices in continental U.S. The price of natural gas in the same year was $8.07/1000 cubic ft and that of electricity was $1701/MWh. If the process were to be conducted in Connecticut, the energy bill per ton would more than double to $173 per ton. Considering U.S. average prices ($5.62/1000 cubic ft natural gas and 104.4/MWh electricity) however, the energy cost per ton of coal ash processed would amount to $101, 25% higher than in Wyoming. Having said that however, this process is mostly likely going to be conducted in states with significant coal based generation, which also tend to have low energy prices. In practice therefore, the cost of energy may be expected to be closer to the lower bound of $81 per ton of ash processed. It should also be noted that the prices of natural gas have been decreasing and is expected to go down even further in the future. The energy cost therefore may decrease. Economies of scale become more important with lower concentrations of REEs. Capital cost could also increase if the coal ash requires head room in the extractor. The increase in capital cost in such a case would be directly proportional to the headroom required. CO There may be challenges in altering the parameters ranked in The low reagent scenario is already considering the lower bound of reagent use. Reducing reagent use further might also prove to be a challenge. Other factors like price of REEs, capital, and reagents cost are exogenous to the process and the processing plant is unlikely to be able to influence these factors. In recent years there have been studies to establish the technical feasibility of coal ash as a source of REEs ( The ash will have to have a high concentration of high value REE. The value of the REE content has to be close to maximum of what is found in coal ash globally. Scandium and neodymium are the two most expensive REEs and they heavily impact the value of the content. In the literature review we found that the ash sample with the highest value of REE came from a plant in Poland. There was however no way to ascertain the origin of the coal used to produce the ash. A preliminary analysis should therefore be done to ascertain of value of the REE content before engaging in this process. Currently, U.S. coal ash has far lower REE content and is therefore unlikely to be suitable for the process. The molar ratio of REE oxides to TBP reagent should be close to 1:20. TBP is expensive and increase in TBP use can quickly diminish profitability. The TBP-HNO Profitability is heavily dependent on scandium recovery, currently the most expensive REE. Processes must therefore have high scandium yield. Neodymium is the second most expensive REE, at about half the value. As prices change in the future, this will impact economic feasibility. REE ores do not contain some of the more valuable REEs such as scandium, which are currently obtained from other sources like red mud ( In addition to being a case-study, this work also contributes to TEA methodology. As is typical with TEA, data availability was a challenge due to lack of prior industrial development of the process of interest, in this case, supercritical extraction on mineral processing. Also, much of the data in the mining industry is proprietary and not easily accessed. In this work we used available data from similar industries and results from laboratory experiments, leveraging both to create scenarios for plausible industrial scale-up. The exercise here, as in all TEA, is beset with uncertainty. While there is no way to dispense the uncertainty, the combinatorial scenarios proposed here is a useful approach to clarify how outcomes depend on combinations of uncertain parameters. This research was supported by the 