A novel approach for nonlinear ultrasonics is presented which uses the demodulated response of a nonlinear vibro-acoustic signal. The demodulation process is similar to the quadrature demodulation process used in telecommunications. It is shown that the demodulation method provides an alternative approach for the analysis of nonlinear behavior compared to the analysis of frequency spectra or other techniques. The proposed method suggests that a representative reconstruction of the time-domain nonlinearity behavior of the system can be obtained. The paper provides a theoretical background to the technique as well as experimental validation. The proposed method is demonstrated for the analysis of four different types of contact acoustic nonlinear interfaces. It is shown that the demodulated waveforms are consistent with the expected mechanical behavior of the different interfaces. The results suggest that this method can provide more insight into the nonlinear behavior of a system compared to conventional spectral amplitude analysis techniques.Quality assurance and through-life support is an important aspect of ensuring the continued safety of engineering structures. The development of reliable and accurate non-destructive testing (NDT) methods is a key requirement for guaranteed safety and integrity. Many techniques can be used for non-destructive evaluation (NDE) and structural health monitoring (SHM) of engineering structures. Ultrasonic NDT methods are some of the most common techniques used today and can be used to detect damage, verify welds, determine material properties and measure the health of critical components. Conventional (linear) ultrasonic NDT methods have reached their limits of detectability for damage such as closed fatigue cracks and weak-bonds. Research into nonlinear ultrasonic NDT methods has demonstrated promise for detecting damage where linear methods have proven inadequate [ It has been demonstrated that nonlinear methods can detect fatigue cracks in structural alloys, delaminations in composite laminates and weak or kissing-bonds. For these defects, the nonlinear response can generally be attributed to contact acoustic nonlinearity (CAN) [ Two primary techniques have been developed based on the exploitation of nonlinear responses, higher harmonic [ For small nonlinearities this is often the simplest approach, however when the system nonlinearity is large, or when there are multiple sources of distortion the sideband spectra becomes increasingly complex and hence difficult to analyze. Advanced processing techniques have been developed for these types of signals. These methods include frequency-wavenumber and angle-domain wavenumber analysis [ In this research another method is proposed for the evaluation of the nonlinear response. This new technique consists of an additional processing step that can be applied to any modulated waveform. The method is based on mixing the response signal with a copy of the probing wave excitation and then low pass filtering. This is similar to the quadrature demodulation technique used in modern telecommunications. This new method will be compared to traditional spectra (sideband) amplitude analysis. The aim of this new method is to provide a more meaningful insight of nonlinear phenomena compared to conventional techniques. The remainder of this paper is structured as follows. First, an introduction to nonlinear vibro-acoustic methods is provided, with emphasis on how nonlinear modulation effects the waveform in both time and frequency domains. Next, a generalized theory of wave-distortion is given using an expanded power series. In Section The demodulation method is then experimentally verified in Section The vibro-acoustic modulation method used for nonlinear NDT purposes relies on the excitation of two distinct frequencies, namely a low frequency pumping wave in the acoustic range, and a high frequency probing wave in the ultrasonic range. The role of the high amplitude pumping wave is to induce mechanical nonlinear phenomena in the damaged areas [ A common example of VAM is the ‘breathing crack’ defect [ In VAM methods, the sidebands occur in a relatively small bandwidth either side of the probing wave frequency. This means that sidebands can be easily measured with a single transducer. VAM methods allow the measurement (probing wave) excitation to be distinct from the driving excitation (pumping wave). Importantly, as will be shown in Section In practice, it is observed that for most material damages many pairs of sidebands are generated and additional effects such as sideband asymmetry are common. The mechanisms that cause these effects are not yet understood, it is suspected that asymmetry is caused by phase dependent behavior such as viscoelasticity. However, as phase information from spectral analysis can be difficult to interpret this behaviour is poorly researched. It is understood that higher order sidebands contain information about the nonlinear behavior of the system. Despite this, it is typical in existing research to only consider the first pair of sidebands. This is partly due to the complexity in analyzing such a complex spectra of sidebands as well as measurement system limitations [ To illustrate the challenges with VAM methods, first consider a 50 Hz sinusoidal signal that undergoes some nonlinearity and becomes distorted. The resultant time and frequency domain response is given in In this case, a second harmonic and a DC offset in the frequency domain are observed. In the time domain it can be seen that the top of the waveform has undergone compression. Mechanically, this type of nonlinearity can manifest when the tensile stress cannot increase linearly with sample strain and as a consequence, the pumping wave becomes distorted. A common example of this is the breathing crack type defect as seen previously in Next, consider the same system under dual frequency (vibro-acoustic) excitation. This is shown in For this case, instead of observing the harmonics of the single input frequency we observe the sidebands around the probing frequency as would be done in a practical VAM system. Most notably, compared to the first single frequency case, the time domain signal no longer appears to provide direct insight of then nonlinear behavior of the system. As a result, for typical VAM methods the ratio of carrier amplitude to one or more sideband amplitudes in the frequency domain is instead used as a metric for quantitative measurement of nonlinearity. However, it would be optimal if a representation of the Damage induced material nonlinearity can be characterized by a nonlinear stress/strain relationship, this can be expressed by a nonlinear Hooke's Law, Next, consider that this system is excited by two distinct harmonic signals As is typical in a vibro-acoustic application we assume that This expression can be re-factored as Recalling that This can be expressed in singular powers of cos as Analyzing Eq. Thus, it was shown how for a given nonlinear system described by Eq. An expression of the response for the nonlinear VAM was obtained in the previous section. In practice, only the high frequency carrier and its sidebands are measured due to the limited bandwidth of the ultrasonic receiver. Therefore, the actual modulated response that is recorded is given by Demodulation is then performed by multiplying the signal again by a copy of the probing wave cos( Using the identity The final step is to apply an additional low-pass filter to remove the terms with frequencies substantially higher than the pumping frequency In essence, the demodulation has transformed the original sideband spectrum into a low frequency harmonic spectrum. This transformation is illustrated in The coefficients of harmonic terms This result indicates that the demodulated response as derived from the sideband data is not equivalent to the low frequency response waveform as would be generated by the vibro-acoustic modulation process. However, it will be shown in Section In summary, it is hypothesized that this novel demodulation process not only provides a meaningful representation of the nonlinear behaviour of the system, but that the near DC nature of the demodulated waveform allows investigation of vibro-acoustic nonlinearity in the time domain. This will be experimentally explored and verified further in Section The experimental apparatuses consist of two Panametrics-NDT X1020 100 kHz transducers stacked upon one another. A small loudspeaker is bonded to the top of the transducer stack with a backing mass attached to the speaker's cone. The backing mass is a glass marble 25 mm in diameter and weighing approximately 65g. The loudspeaker is the source of the LF excitation. A Rigol DG1023z signal generator is used to generate the excitation signals. The ultrasonic transducer is directly driven from its output. The loudspeaker is driven from a Topping TP20 audio amplifier which unity buffers the signal. The contact surface between the transducers is modified by introduction of different couplants and interface layers [ Four different configurations were tested similarly to a previous study [ It is expected that minimal nonlinearity will be observed for the baseline case, as the contact between transducers will be as ideal as possible. A high degree of nonlinearity is expected for the dry interface due to the expected intermittent contact of the two transducer surfaces from the LF vibration. Based on previous research a moderate degree of nonlinear is expected from the interface with entrapped air. A similar magnitude of nonlinearity is expected for the rubber disk configuration, effects due to the viscoelastic properties of the rubber are also expected to be observed. The excitation parameters were kept constant between each configuration, the low frequency (pumping) excitation was a constant 200 Hz 2 V pk-pk sine and the high frequency (probing) excitation was a 100 kHz 5 V pk-pk sine excitation. It is important to note, that due to the difference in excitation frequencies between pumping and probing waves the system is still dominated by the low frequency pumping excitation. This is because excitation amplitude is inversely proportional to the square of frequency. Assuming the system can be described by simple harmonic motion and the energy applied by both excitations is of similar order of magnitude, it would be expected that the HF excitation amplitude be 10 For each configuration time and frequency domain plots for both the raw VAM measurement and the demodulated waveform are provided. Demodulation was preformed as described in Section    The last configuration was the porous grease layer ( The experimental results presented in It appears that the demodulation technique is capable of producing results that are consistent with the excepted mechanical behavior of various tested nonlinear interfaces. Based on previous research [ In this paper a novel processing technique has been demonstrated for nonlinear vibro-acoustic analysis. The new method is based on the demodulation of a modulated probing wave. Demodulation is achieved by multiplying the raw modulated signal with a copy of the pristine probing wave and low pass filtering the result. A theoretical basis for this demodulation technique and a general model of nonlinearity was provided. Next, an experimental application was undertaken using a vibro-acoustic configuration. Four different contact acoustic nonlinearity configurations were investigated and the demodulated waveform was compared to conventional spectral analysis. It was found that the demodulated waveform was consistent with the expected mechanical behavior of the nonlinear interfaces. It was demonstrated how the new method can provide a more meaningful representation of the modulated signal spectrum and how it retains information such as phase shifting phenomena which are lost under conventional spectral amplitude analysis. Future experimental and theoretical work is currently being undertaken to further investigate this promising novel method for different types of contact nonlinearity. All persons who meet authorship criteria are listed as authors, and all authors certify that they have participated sufficiently in the work to take public responsibility for the content, including participation in the concept, design, analysis, writing, or revision of the manuscript. Furthermore, each author certifies that this material or similar material has not been and will not be submitted to or published in any other publication before its appearance in the  None. This study was supported in part by an The following is the Supplementary data to this article: Supplementary data to this article can be found online at