This paper introduced dextran sulfate sodium, a medical intermediate rich in sulfate group, as a potential depressant for calcite and fluorite in scheelite flotation. The flotation behaviors of scheelite, calcite and fluorite under different pulp pH with dextran sulfate sodium acting as depressant and sodium oleate acting as collector were studied through micro-flotation tests. The results showed that when sodium oleate was used alone, the three minerals floated well and were difficult to separate. Dextran sulfate sodium exhibited a selective depressant effect on calcite and fluorite flotation when it was added before sodium oleate. Using dextran sulfate sodium as depressant could achieve the preferential flotation separation of scheelite from calcite and fluorite by control of pulp pH at 7.0. The selective depressant effect of dextran sulfate sodium on calcite and fluorite was explored through surface analyses including zeta potential measurements, contact angle measurements and FTIR studies on mineral samples treated with dextran sulfate sodium and/or sodium oleate. On the basis of the surface analyses, a selective adsorption model of dextran sulfate sodium on calcite and fluorite was proposed.Scheelite (CaWO The depressant effect of the flotation modifiers (commonly termed depressants) on the calcium-bearing gangue minerals is usually realized through the interactions between the calcium ions on mineral surface and the functional groups in their molecules. Common functional groups in depressants are Dextran sulfate sodium (DSS) is a medical intermediate widely used in clinical experiment ( In this research, DSS was introduced as a flotation modifier to separate scheelite from calcite and fluorite. Sodium oleate (NaOl), a kind of carboxylic acid, was used as collector. Micro-flotation tests on single minerals were conducted to show its depressant effect on calcite and fluorite. The depressant effect was analyzed by zeta potential measurements, contact angle measurements and FTIR studies. Based on the surface analyses, a possible adsorption model of DSS on calcite and fluorite was proposed. The samples of scheelite, calcite and fluorite were all obtained from Xintianling mine, Hunan, China. Large, pure mineral crystals with fresh cleavage surface were carefully selected for contact angle measurement. Powder samples for flotation tests (+ DSS used in this study was purchased from Shanghai Macklin Biochemical Co., Ltd., Shanghai, China. It is water-soluble powder with a molecular formula (C Micro-flotation tests were conducted on a XFG flotation machine at 1800 Mineral pulp for zeta potential measurement was prepared by adding 0.03 In this paper, contact angle was used to characterize the hydrophobicity of mineral surface. The contact angle of mineral surface sample before and after flotation reagent treatment under different pH was measured with goniometry technique with a JY-82C video based contact angle measuring device. The flat surface of mineral crystals for contact angle measurement was prepared by grinding the crystals with a diamond disk subsequent by 0.05 Mineral sample for FTIR study was prepared by conditioning 0.5 The flotation behaviors of scheelite, calcite and fluorite in the absence and presence of DSS were studied using NaOl as collector. The effects of reagent dosage and pulp pH on the flotation recovery of the three minerals are shown in   The effect of DSS dosage on the flotation performance of scheelite, calcite and fluorite at pH The effect of pH on the flotation performance of scheelite, calcite and fluorite under different addition order of NaOl and DSS is shown in To study the depressant effect of DSS on calcite and fluorite flotation, zeta potential measurements on minerals with and without pre-treatment of DSS, were carried out under different NaOl concentration at fixed pH Remarkable drops in zeta potential are observed for all calcium minerals in Contact angle represents the surface hydrophobicity and is directed related to the floatability of mineral samples under certain flotation conditions. The contact angle measurement results of the three calcium minerals under different pulp pH and reagent schemes are presented in For bare scheelite, calcite and fluorite, their contact angles witnessed slight drop as pH increased from 7 to 12, as shown in In addition, it should be noted that the changes in surface hydrophobicity of calcite and fluorite as a function of pH may have provided the key information about defining the functional constituents in DSS solutions since the species distribution of DSS is also pH dependent. DSS is polyanionic salt of strong alkali weak acid and can hydrolyze in water solution. The sulfate group ( When pulp pH is controlled at the vicinity of 7.0, DSS mainly exists as the molecular polymer other than ionic polymer. Based on the results of flotation tests and contact angle measurements, it is easy to conclude that the adsorption of molecular polymer is stronger than ionic polymer on the calcite and fluorite. The adsorption of ionic polymer DSS on the calcium minerals may derive from the electrostatic attraction between Ca However, the adsorption of molecular polymer DSS on calcite and fluorite is different since there also exists the hydrogen bonds between H (in sulfonic acid group) and the anions exposed on particle surface except for the interactions between Ca In order to demonstrate the selective adsorption of DSS on calcite and fluorite, the FTIR spectra of reagents and minerals treated with NaOl and DSS The results in Dextran sulfate sodium has a depressant effect on flotation of calcite and fluorite when sodium oleate is used as a collector. The preferential flotation separation of scheelite from calcite and fluorite can be realized when dextran sulfate sodium is added before sodium oleate by control of pulp pH at 7.0. Zeta potential results show that pre-treatment of dextran sulfate sodium can selectively hinder the adsorption of sodium oleate on calcite and fluorite. Contact angle results indicate that pH This work was supported by the