During pumping fresh concrete pipes, aggregate migration is occurred under the action of various forces. In order to study the migration characteristic of aggregates during concrete flowing in pipes, in this paper, we built the test system based on particle tracking technology. Transparent concrete was prepared. The particle capture function of high-speed camera was used to track particle motion. Results showed that the radial displacement of particles depended on the initial location and aggregate size. Small aggregates near pipe wall or center axis had fewer motion. For the particles with larger diameter, the migration direction almost pointed to the axis of pipe. The migration displacement of nature aggregates was smaller than that of ground grinding ball. The migration displacement firstly increased and then decreased with increasing the diameter of particle. Moreover, the effect of particle shape on migration was explored. Finally, the wall effect, gravity induced particle migration and shear induced particle migration were compared based on the phenomenon of flow induced particle migration, results showed that the phenomenon of shear induced particle migration played the main role in the formation of lubrication layer. This study was of great significance to reveal the transport law of dense particle flow in the pipeline.Pumping concrete in the pipeline is an important part during the process of cast concrete or wet-mix shotcrete, which has been widely used in the world In the last decades, a significant efforts have been done to develop the non-invasive techniques for exploring concrete flow. These technologies, such as Particle Tracking Velocimetry (PTV) In addition, in order to better observe the flow of concrete, transparent concentrated suspension is also used. Blanc et al. High speed camera technology makes it possible to capture particle migration. The particle tracking technology mainly depends on the trace capture function of the high-speed camera. The half open pipe ( In brief, the existing technologies, including open half-pipe flow and transparent concentrated suspension, make it possible to study the particle migration when concrete flows in pipes. However, lots of current efforts were made to study the steady flow where the velocity profile was fully developed and the lubrication layer was formed (as shown in The cement in concrete was replaced by transparent polyacrylamide ( A small amount of the particles (equivalent diameter D: 4 mm, 8 mm, 12 mm, 15 mm) from the same batch were tagged with different dye and served for particle tracking technology. In addition, we selected some rounded grinding ball (diameter D: 4 mm, 8 mm, 12 mm, 15 mm) as the substitution for original aggregates to explore the effect of aggregate shape on particle migration. The automobile paint material was employed to dye particles, as shown in The test system consists of a camera, a half open pipe and an adjustable support, as shown in In order to verify that the particle migration captured was in the entrance flow rather than steady flow, the so-called hydrodynamic entrance length was calculated as follow The radial displacement was obtained by the initial location  In order to explore the effect of particle shape on migration, the comparison between rounded grinding ball and nature aggregate with different size was conducted. The results are shown in The abscissa represents the initial position of the particles before migration. The ordinate indicates the distance of particle migration. The average migrating displacement of nature aggregates was smaller than that of ground grinding ball, especially for those particles with larger diameter. The particles near the center axis of pipe had less migration displacement. In term of larger particles (Diameter 15 mm and 12 mm), with increasing the initial location of particle, the migration difference between larger and small particles became farther. Considering the smaller particles (Diameter 8 mm and 4 mm), the migration displacement difference between two went up and then down with increasing the initial location. It could be found that the rounded grinding ball was easy to migrate in the concrete flow, while nature aggregates with angular moved less. Those small particles near pipe wall or center axis had fewer migration than that at the middle location. According to analysis, particle shape was related to the viscosity of fresh concrete. Choi et al. To study the effect of particle diameter on migration, the average migration displacement of particles with same diameter was calculated and results is plotted in During pumping concrete, fresh concrete material is pushed alternately by two plugs of pump, as shown in In order to explore the effect of the alternate thrust on particle migration, we adopted the action, beating the open channel with a wood stick at the top, to simulate the push generated by the double-plug pump. When concrete flowed through the pipe, we used the wood stick to beat the pipe with 0 time, 1 time and 2 times, respectively. In each experiment, selecting 2–3 particles with same diameter was treated as the research subjects to calculate the average migration displacement.  During concrete flow in pipes, particles was affected by various forces that lead to particle migration. Spangenberg et al. According to It could be seen in the experiment that when transparent concrete fell in the half pipe, the paste rapidly clung to the inner pipe wall. Especially under the situation of beat behavior, the paste near the pipe wall or on the free surface would become thicker. In order to explain this phenomenon, we put the transparent concrete into the glass breaker. As shown in From this phenomenon, it indicated that the transparent paste layer always forms on the breaker periphery despite of the angle of the observation; then particles with small diameter lays the second layer; few coarse aggregates with corner angle may break the paste layer, appear in our sight. We called this phenomenon “wall-attachment effect of paste”, that was to say, the paste in fresh concrete would voluntarily form a lubrication layer near the wall or on the free surface. Particles would present a kind of “inner larger particle–outer small particle” distribution in fresh concrete system. The similar phenomenon was ever reported in In short, under the wall-attachment effect of paste ( Gravity: As we all know, gravity could induce the particle migration. The difference in density between particle and suspending phase was the main gravity source. The viscous drag of suspending fluid was the reacting force that prevented the particle migration. Gravity induced particle migration would reach equilibrium because of the increase in viscosity of the zones, where the local particle volume fraction reached the so-called random loose packing. Shear: During the pumping process, particles was migrated from the highly shear or highly concentrated zone to lowly shear or lowly concentrated zone because of particle collisions In order to explore the effect of shear, gravity and pipe wall on particle migration, the maximum induced local particle volume fraction caused by each particle migration phenomenon and the corresponding characteristic time of migration were estimated. According to the computational formulas (Eqs. The variation in particle volume fraction caused by wall effect was of the order: The variation in particle volume fraction due to gravity induced particle migration was of the order, The corresponding characteristic time of gravity induced particle migration was, The variation in particle volume fraction due to shear induced particle migration was same as the one due to gravity induced particle migration, The corresponding characteristic time of shear induced particle migration was, According to When pumping concrete, the lubrication layer at the interface between pipe and concrete plug was produced by the particle migration. In this paper, the migration law of particles in the pipe was investigated by particle tracing technology. In addition, the phenomenon of flow induced particle migration was discussed based on the behavior of shear, gravity and wall effect. The radial migration displacement of particles within pipe depended on the initial location and aggregate size. The particle near the center axis of pipe, no matter larger diameter or small diameter, had relative small migration displacement. Those particles that were far away from axis had larger migration displacement. For particles with larger diameter, the migration direction almost pointed to the axis of pipe; for small particles, the migration direction had no apparent law. The migration displacement of nature aggregates was smaller than that of ground grinding ball. In term of larger particles, with increasing the initial location of particle, the migration displacement difference between two became farther. Considering the smaller particles, the migration displacement difference between two went up and then down with increasing the initial location. Those small particles near pipe wall or center axis had fewer migration than that at middle location. The change trend of both rounded grinding ball and nature aggegate was same, the migration displacement firstly increased and then declined with increasing the diameter of particle. The migration displacement of rounded grinding ball was larger than that of nature aggregate under the condition of same diameter. Particle shape was related to the viscosity of fresh concrete that affect the particle migration. Alternate pump thrust was simulated by the beat behavior to study the effect of double-plug pump on migration. The initial beat behavior had the larger influence on migration than later beat behaviors. It was deduced that the alternate thrust generated from double-plug pump was beneficial for the redistribution of particle. In addition, the phenomenon of wall effect, shear and gravity contribute the flow induced particle migration, therein, the effect of shear on particle migration was the largest. It should be noted that the research in this paper was only based on laboratory research that included some assumptions, which would provide ideas and reference for particle migration research. However, further research is needed to study the real flow of concrete in pipes.  This study was funded by projects such as National Key Research and Development Plan of the 13th Five-Year Period of China [grant number 2017YFC0805203]; National Natural Science Foundation of China [grant number 51604163, 51974177]; Shandong Key Research and Development Program [grant number 2018GSF116001]; Natural Science Foundation of Shandong [grant numbers ZR2019QEE007, ZR201801280006, ZR2019MEE115]; a Project of Shandong Province Higher Educational Science and Technology Program [grant number J15LH03]; Elite program of Shandong University of science and technology (0104060540120). The authors declare that they have no conflict of interest. The authors declare that the data in this paper is available.