A methodology applicable at any phase of a surface mining project for evaluating its current technical and economic feasibility is presented.
                  It requires the typically available quantitative data on the ore-body, with its three-dimensional block model developed upon accurate interpolations. Thus it allows estimations of exploitable reserves in function of various cut-off grades, such as the average grade of mineable ore, the tonnages of ore and waste rock, stripping ratios and profit estimates for different production levels.
                  If cost evaluations of essential mine operations are available (such as ore mining, waste removal, ore concentration, transportation, indirect project costs and expected concentrate selling prices), the methodology will provide clear indications on the economic feasibility of mining, including the best available options at any moment. Simple expressions are developed on the basis of a profit mathematical function and an application example is presented with data available from an existing iron ore deposit.Mining is essentially governed by the knowledge obtained from three scientific disciplines: geology, mining engineering and economics. Only through an intensive program of research and field studies can a successful mining project be implemented. This program must be carefully coordinated through a succession of pre-designed stages. Since the ultimate goal to achieve is obtaining an economic benefit upon the invested capital, that benefit is justified due to the uncertainty and risk that are involved in all those stages. Initial studies are geological in nature, based on pre-existing information (publications, technical reports, satellite images, etc.) and usually complemented with data from exploration activities on the ground, involving studies of geology, geophysics and geochemistry. Representative sample acquisition follows from field investigation including open-pits, shallow trenches, as well as drilling campaigns. These samples are then sent to specialized laboratories for the physico-chemical characterization of minerals, allowing the creation of a database that, after appropriate computational processing, may describe the main characteristics of the deposit. Analyses of technical and economic feasibility of the project are thus required, initially with reduced available data and subsequently with the greater volumes of information in order to provide reliable evaluations of project feasibility. Questions on the possibility of ensuring future revenues from the sale of the final product to the market, which should be higher than the investments required in all steps of the previous study, must be answered. Moreover, it is expected that these revenues will cover the necessary capital for the mining project with yields that should be higher than those of alternative financial applications. In essence, there is always a strong interaction between the four variables represented in It is obviously necessary to involve components of engineering and economics to answer these questions.  Determine the geometric shape of the mineralization, by defining the spatial orientation of the ore to extract (including the distribution of its contents along the mineralized volume) as well as the barren rocky material that must be removed. Design the mining method appropriate for extracting the deposit, including the mechanical equipment to be used in operations of excavation, loading and transportation of both ore and waste. The techniques of washing/processing that will be recommended for the product concentration, in conditions of supplying the consumer market. The general costs necessary to implement the project, from investments in exploration and recognition of the deposit, to feasibility studies and engineering design of the mine, not to mention the corresponding indirect costs of production (offices, business administration, social services, etc.) The funds to be spent as payments of taxes, miscellaneous fees and compliance with environmental protection rules will apply. There are several criteria to quantify all the variables listed above, being more used that proposed by It consists in defining the hourly profit function  The profit function can also be formulated in unit values (per ton or cubic meter of ore), by assigning a unit profit function In all these variables, there are two geological characteristics, which have great importance: the stripping ratio Thus, the In the same way, In practice, the operating conditions of any mine should be set away from those where profit can either be zero or negative, so that It is worth noting the instant relationships that must exist between the quantities of ore, waste rock and the actual cut-off grade. Another relevant concept is the Therefore, the economic control of mining should be conducted in a continuous way and it must be based on the assessment of the levels of the ore grade The ability to formulate three-dimensional block models for any mineral deposit can be used to evaluate the conditions of its exploitability. For this purpose, it is important to correlate mathematically the relevant variables in the profit function and its dependence on the cut-off grade Substituting these variables in the profit function formula, a direct relationship between profit and cut-off grade is obtained in order to allow a continuous monitoring of the mining operation economics. One can thus determine relevant characteristics of the project, such as the optimal cut-off grade (defined as one that maximizes profit), the adequate stripping ratio and the maximum overall profit. The above can be illustrated with simple mathematical functions, of the following type: It is then possible to establish equations linking operational profit with the cut-off grade and then find the cut-off grade value that leads to that maximum profit. In this way, the To determine the maximum of this function, it can be derived with respect to This important expression is of great interest, for it involves the four main variables included in  In addition, a set of economic parameters were determined upon feasibility studies on the project, which are shown in From these values it follows that the unit profit function is given by the relation: As indicated in Other parameters of interest can be calculated in order to seek more profitable opportunities. In effect, on the basis of data presented in It must be emphasized that Substituting the numerical data of The method opens the possibility of performing sensitivity analyses on different project variables, for example, by varying the iron ore concentrate selling price, which is the most important exogenous variable. Assuming values of ±25% on the price shown in It may be observed that the changes in terms of optimal cut-off grade and the maximum total profit fluctuations are not proportional to the selling price variations, showing in particular a great variability for the maximum total profit. The situation is particularly difficult for the lowest selling price, which requires a much greater optimum cut-off grade, thus decreasing the volume of exploitable reserves and leading to higher production costs due to the need for larger quantities of waste removal. It was sought to describe the usefulness of an expedite approach to permanently control surface mining projects, with the aim of determining the optimum values of the main variables that influence project profitability. Given a multitude of situations that might be encountered during the life of any mine operation, its managers must possess essential tools for rapid decision-making criteria and adjustment to reality. Such methods do not invalidate the applicability of more complex methodologies, such as integrated computational models, although these will lead to many difficulties in providing precise input data that sometimes are not available in mining companies.