The technical viability of the BRISA process for copper concentrates consisting of mixtures of either chalcopyrite and secondary copper sulphides (chalcocite and covellite) or chalcopyrite and sphalerite was studied. The ferric leaching of six concentrates (different in origin, granulometric, chemical and mineralogical composition) was tested in this work. In order to speed up the process, ferric leaching was carried out in two stages. In the first one, metallic sulphides associated with chalcopyrite were leached and, in the second one, the unattacked chalcopyrite was leached with Ag+ as a catalyst. Applying this sequence of leaching stages, copper extractions higher than 96% were achieved within 20 h for all the studied concentrates.Currently, copper ores consisting of either chalcopyrite and chalcocite and covellite (known as secondary copper sulphides) or chalcopyrite and sphalerite (with Zn <3%) are processed via pyrometallurgy. The mining industry produces concentrates from the raw material whose net value are determined by the treatment and refining charges, and by the applicable penalties if the concentrate grade does not fit within the range desired by the smelter. This paper is one of a series where the application of an hydrometallurgical process, the BRISA process The BRISA process (Biolixiviación Rápida Indirecta con Separación de Acciones: Fast Indirect Bioleaching with Actions Separation) is based on the indirect bioleaching mechanism This procedure allows the separate optimisation of the stages: the biological one by the use of suitable packed-bed bioreactors, and the chemical one by the use of stirred tank reactors favouring the copper and zinc extractions by thermal activation and use of catalysts. In the last decade, biooxidation reactors have been notably developed. Several designs can be found in the literature As the ferrous iron in leaching liquors can be effectively biooxidized by flooded packed bed reactors, the aim of this work is the study of the chemical stage of the BRISA process. In order to do this, sets of ferric leaching experiments with six different concentrates are performed. There has been much effort in trying to improve the chalcopyrite leaching rate and several catalysts have been proposed. It is well known that low concentrations of silver ion greatly accelerate the chalcopyrite leaching Silver ion is not a selective catalyst for the leaching of chalcopyrite and also increases or in some cases decreases the leaching rates of other metal sulphides. Silver ion has a negative influence on the kinetics of secondary copper sulphides leaching and, especially, on the kinetics of sphalerite leaching In order to avoid the negative catalytic effect and the consumption of silver by other sulphides that do not need it, two stages of ferric leaching are proposed Primary leaching: dissolution of the secondary copper sulphides and sphalerite. This is a relatively fast reaction at moderate temperature (70–90 °C). Catalytic leaching. Addition of silver ion as a catalyst in order to accelerate the chalcopyrite leaching. Following this procedure, the catalyst is used almost exclusively for chalcopyrite leaching. Finally, data obtained from the application of a reported method for silver recovery in chloride medium Six concentrates consisting of chalcopyrite with chalcocite and covellite (concentrates A, D, E and F) or chalcopyrite with sphalerite (concentrates B and C) have been studied. Samples of each material were mounted in polished sections for mineralogical study using optical microscopy and scanning electron microscopy (SEM) equipped with an energy dispersive X-ray analyser (EDX). Quantitative mineralogical composition was determined by image analysis from optical microscopy images. Metallic ion concentrations in leaching liquors were determined by atomic absorption spectroscopy (AAS), except ferrous iron concentration that was determined by standard potassium dichromate solution in an automatic titrator. Solids were analysed by wet chemical method, followed by AAS for metals and gravimetric analysis with barium chloride for sulphur. In all tests, the leaching liquor was an acidified aqueous solution of ferric sulphate with a ferric iron concentration of 12 g/L at pH 1.25. If another condition is not indicated, the reactor was a 250-mL Erlenmeyer flask shaken at 280 min Larger-scale tests were carried out in a 7-L thermostatted, baffled tank; 4 L of solution stirred at 800 min In two-stage leaching tests, once the primary leaching concluded, solid was decanted and separated from the liquid medium, and a fresh leaching liquor containing 500 ppm silver as silver sulphate was added. The water losses due to evaporation were determined by weight and were taken into account during Cu and Zn recovery calculations. The method used for the silver recovery consisted of elemental sulphur removal from the solid residue and silver recovery ( The dried sulphur-bearing residue was treated in a Soxhlet extractor with 200 mL of CS The effect of the pulp density was studied on concentrates A and B. The decreases in Cu and Zn extractions observed at high pulp densities are due to the depletion of ferric iron under those conditions. This effect only occurs in batch systems, since in a continuous operation a portion of the leach liquor is recycled after ferrous iron biooxidation It is interesting to notice that when ferric iron was the limiting reagent, ferrous iron concentration in final leaching liquor was higher than 7 g/L. Therefore, the greatest difference of ferric iron concentration between inlet and outlet streams in bioreactor must be 7 g/L. The effect of temperature on Cu and Zn extractions was studied for all concentrates. For concentrates A and B, leaching test were performed in 7-L stirred tanks; leaching time was 8 h for concentrate A and 10 h for concentrate B; pulp densities were 2% and 1% for concentrates A and B, respectively. The leaching results are shown in  The results indicate a marked effect of temperature on Cu and Zn extractions, which increases as temperature increases ( At 70 °C, a copper extraction of 92% was achieved for concentrate A (which contains a small proportion of chalcopyrite, Two-stage leaching tests (primary and catalytic) were carried out with different amounts of silver, for concentrates A and B. Operating time in each stages was the same: 12 h for concentrate A and 6 h for concentrate B. Pulp density was 3% and 1% for concentrates A and B, respectively. Results from these tests are shown in For both concentrates, Cu extraction increases as the amount of silver increases up to 2 mg per gram of concentrate; a further increase in the amount of catalyst has no effect on Cu extraction. A set of tests were performed in 7-L stirred tanks for concentrates A and B in order to study the effect of temperature in catalytic leaching. Operating time in both stages was the same: 4 h for concentrate A and 10 h for concentrate B. Pulp density was 2% for concentrate A and 1% for concentrate B. Amount of catalyst added was 1 mg per gram of concentrate for concentrate A, and 2 mg per gram of concentrate for concentrate B. For concentrate A, temperature in both stages was the same. For concentrate B, primary leaching was always carried out at 70 °C. For concentrate A, the effect of temperature on Cu extraction was similar to that obtained in primary leaching For concentrate B, increasing the temperature over the range 60–80 °C had no effect on Cu extraction. When the temperature was increased from 80 to 90 °C, Cu extraction decreased from 97% to 87%. Kinetic curves obtained from these tests   Material balances were calculated for these tests, accounting for the Ag concentration in concentrates and final residues, solid weight losses in leaching, S° removal and Ag extraction stages. The results show that the Ag extracted was greater than the amount added in catalytic leaching. This indicates that some of the silver in the concentrates was extracted, too. For these samples, the application of BRISA process would imply a consumption of catalyst theoretically null. The BRISA process is an alternative to the treatment of copper concentrates that contain chalcopyrite and non-ferrous sulphides. Cu extractions of >96% were achieved in two separate leaching stages: a primary ferric leaching and a secondary silver-catalysed ferric leaching. Thermal activation is necessary in order to obtain these recoveries, with temperatures of 70–80 °C being optimal. Recovery of silver added in catalytic leaching stage is possible by a procedure that consists of the removal of elemental sulphur present in the solid residue and the subsequent leaching of silver in a chloride medium. The authors express their appreciation to Empresa Minera Mantos Blancos, Empresa Almagrera and Compañı́a Minera Disputadas las Condes for making available the samples used in this study.