Recovery of cobalt and lithium from spent Li-ion batteries (LIBs) has been studied using ultrasound-assisted leaching. The primary purpose of this work is to investigate the effects of ultrasound on leaching efficiency of cobalt and lithium. The results were compared to conventional leaching. In this study sulfuric acid was used as leaching agent in the presence of hydrogen peroxide. The cathode active materials from spent battery were characterized by X-ray diffraction (XRD) and scanning electron microscopy (SEM) before and after leaching. Effects of leaching time, leaching temperature, H2SO4 concentration, H2O2 concentration, solid/liquid ratio, and ultrasonic power have been studied. Optimal leaching efficiency of 94.63% for cobalt, and 98.62% for lithium, respectively, was achieved by using 2 M H2SO4 with 5% (v/v) H2O2 at a solid/liquid ratio of 100 g/L, and an ultrasonic power of 360 W, and the leaching time being 30 min under 30 °C. Compared with conventional leaching, the ultrasound-assisted leaching gave a higher leaching rate and improved leaching efficiency under the same experimental conditionals. The kinetic analysis of ultrasound-assisted leaching showed that the activation energy of cobalt and lithium were 3.848 KJ/mol and 11.6348 KJ/mol, respectively, indicating that ultrasound-assisted leaching of cobalt and lithium from spent LIBs was controlled by diffusion.Lithium-ion batteries (LIBs) have been widely used as electrochemical power sources in mobile phones, laptops, video-cameras and other portable electronics, and recently for electric vehicles (EVs), due to several advantages including high capacity, high energy density, light weight, and good performance Several physical and chemical processes have been reported for the recovery of valuable metals, including crushing, dismantling, sieving, acid leaching, solvent extraction, chemical precipitation, and electrochemical treatments. These are shown in Over the past decades, the application of ultrasound in leaching process of hydrometallurgy has become more and more popular This work focused on the leaching process for recycling valuable metals from spent LIBs. The purpose was to investigate an ultrasonically assisted approach for recovery of cobalt and lithium from spent LIBs. In this study, ultrasound was applied in the leaching of cobalt, and lithium from spent LIBs to increase leaching efficiency and reduce the leaching time. The results of ultrasound-assisted leaching and conventional magnetic stirring were compared. The effects of different parameters such as the leaching time, the leaching temperature, the concentration of sulfuric acid, the concentration of hydrogen peroxide, solid/liquid ratio and ultrasonic power on leaching efficiency of cobalt and lithium were studied. The leaching kinetics was also studied. The spent LIBs used in this work were kindly donated to us by Tianjin Lishen Battery Joint-Stock Co. Ltd. N-Methyl-2-pyrrolidone (NMP, supplied by Damao Chemical Reagent Factory, China) was used to separate the cathode materials from the aluminum foil. Sulfuric acid (H According to Li et al. A certain weight of waste lithium cobalt oxide and a certain amount of mixture of sulfuric acid and hydrogen peroxide were put into the glass beaker of 250 mL volume. The glass beaker was placed into a digital heat gathering stirrer magnetic stirrer water bath thermostat (DF-101S, Gongyi Yuhua Instrument Co., Ltd., Gongyi, China), with an accuracy of ±1°. The temperature of the reaction was controlled by this thermostat. Air was pumped into the solution during the reaction. The ultrasonic probe was placed in the solution during the ultrasound-assisted leaching experiments. The ultrasonic waves were generated by the ultrasonic generator (XC98-IIDN, Nanjing NingKai Instrument Co. Ltd., Nanjing, China) with a frequency of 20 KHz at varying power in the range from 100 W to 1000 W. The agitator was used to stir the solution in conventional leaching experiments. The schematic diagram of the experiment is shown in The conditions of reaction, such as the leaching time, the leaching temperature, the concentration of sulfuric acid, and hydrogen peroxide, were controlled during the reaction. The solution was filtered and washed with distilled water after leaching. The leaching residue was dried and the amount of cobalt and lithium in the sample before and after leaching were measured by atomic absorption spectrometry (AAS, Thermo Scientific iCE 3000, USA) to calculate the leaching efficiency. The leaching efficiency is calculated by the following equation The reactions of reductive leaching of cobalt and lithium from waste lithium cobalt oxide in sulfuric acid using hydrogen peroxide as reductant are represented as follows As described by Lee et al. The effect of leaching time on the leaching efficiencies of cobalt and lithium was studied using 2 M H  The leaching efficiencies of cobalt and lithium increased to 88.22% and 89.5% after 20 min of ultrasound-assisted leaching, respectively, and then increased to 91.65% and 92.70% at the leaching time of 30 min, respectively. A slight change in leaching efficiencies of cobalt and lithium to 98.21% and 99.15%, respectively, was observed when leaching time was increased to 60 min. Therefore, the leaching time of 30 min was selected as the preferred operating condition for ultrasonic-assisted leaching of cobalt and lithium from waste lithium cobalt oxide. The effect of leaching temperature on the leaching efficiencies of cobalt and lithium was studied using 2 M H From From Eq. From The presence of H In To study the effect of solid/liquid ratio on the leaching efficiency using ultrasound-assisted leaching, the experiments were conducted at a solid/liquid ratio of 50 g/L, 100 g/L, and 200 g/L, respectively, using 2 M H It can be found from The effect of ultrasonic power on leaching efficiency of cobalt and lithium was studied by changing the ultrasonic power from 0 to 480 W, using 2 M H From The process of leaching cobalt and lithium from spent LIBs was a solid-fluid heterogeneous reaction The experimental data of ultrasound-assisted leaching at different temperatures and leaching times were fitted to the diffusion-controlled model presented in Eq. The logarithms of slopes versus 1000/T was plotted, as shown in The XRD patterns of the raw materials and the leaching residues for conventional leaching and ultrasound-assisted leaching under the optimum conditions, respectively, were presented in  The leaching of cobalt and lithium from spent LIBs was conducted using ultrasonic irradiation. The optimal conditions were found to be, a leaching time of 30 min, a leaching temperature of 30 °C, 2 M H We gratefully acknowledge the support of the