In this study, to increase the Cr(VI) adsorption capacity of bauxite, heat treatment method was tested and the effects of pH, adsorbent dosage, contact time, initial Cr(VI) concentration and temperature on the adsorption of Cr(VI) were investigated. Although heating provides an enhanced adsorption, the heat-activated bauxite was found to be a weak adsorbent for Cr(VI). The maximum adsorption yield (64.9%) was obtained at the conditions of pH 2, activated bauxite dosage of 20 gl−1, contact time of 180 min, for the initial Cr(VI) concentration of 10 mgl−1 and temperature of 20 °C by using the bauxite sample heated at 600 °C. The adsorption data fit a first-order rate expression and Langmuir isotherm. Enthalpy, free energy and entropy changes were calculated from the isotherm data. The adsorption of Cr(VI) onto heat-activated bauxite was found to be exothermic.Chromium and its compounds have many industrial uses, such as alloying, electroplating, leather-tanning, corrosion prevention etc. As a result of unregulated applications and inappropriate waste-disposal practices, chromium contamination of surface and ground water has become a significant environmental problem. Chromium has two oxidation states in the water system, Cr(VI) and Cr(III), which their mobility and toxicity are different. Cr(VI) species, having mobile and strongly oxidant characters, are known as mutagen and potential carcinogen ( In order to remove chromium from aqueous solutions, many different processes have been investigated. Principally, there are two main treatment methods for Cr(VI) removal. The first type of methods aim to remove Cr(VI) anions directly while the second type is based on the reduction of Cr(VI) to Cr(III). The precipitation of insoluble chromium hydroxide is a final step in the second type removal processes. The reduction–precipitation technique is widely practised for the treatment of wastewaters containing chromium. In the last few decades, alternative methods such as adsorption, ion exchange and membrane techniques have received more concern for metal removal from waste streams. Since adsorption methods seem to be promising, attention has been focused on chromate adsorbents, which leads to remove hexavalent chromium in one step. Finding the cost effective adsorbents requires further investigation in the field of natural sorbents, industrial and agricultural wastes or by products. In recent studies, our efforts have been focused on Cr(VI) removal by using low-cost materials ( Bauxite, one of the abundant minerals, mainly consists of aluminium and iron oxide and is widely processed for alumina production. It has been shown that the bauxite has a good affinity for the adsorption of various type of phosphates from water ( The present work is focused on the determination of removal performance of hexavalent chromium by using heat-activated bauxite and the interpretation of the sorption mechanism using standard procedures, including pH optimization, sorption isotherms and kinetics. Bauxite used in the study was provided from Seydisehir Aluminium Plant, Konya (Turkey). Preparation and characterization of bauxite sample were explained in our recent studies ( A 1000 mg-Cr(VI) Other reagents used in this study were of analytical grade. The initial pH of suspensions was adjusted to the required value by using NaOH or HCl solutions. The labwares used in the experiments were soaked in diluted HCl solution for 12 h, and then rinsed with distilled water. For heat activation, the procedure in our previous study was followed ( To determine the influence of heat activation, bauxite samples obtained by heating at different temperatures were subjected to standardized Cr(VI) adsorption tests. The experiments were carried out by shaking (300 cycle Since the result of standardized Cr(VI) adsorption tests showed that the most effective bauxite was the one obtained by heating at 600 °C, this sample was selected and used in the remaining study. Some physical and physicochemical properties determined for raw bauxite (RB) and activated bauxite obtained by heating at 600 °C (HAB) in our previous phosphate adsorption study ( In order to determine the influence of initial pH on adsorption, 1 g of HAB sample was contacted with the 50 cm In the experiments where the effect of adsorbent dosage was explored, the HAB dosages of 5–40 g The analysis of Cr(VI) was carried out colorimetrically with the 1,5 diphenyl carbazide method ( The solution pH was measured using a Mettler Delta 350 pH meter. All experiments were conducted in duplicate and average values were considered. Results from preliminary study where raw bauxite (RB) and activated bauxite obtained by heating at the temperature of 200–800 °C and subjected to standardized adsorption tests at two different initial pH of 2 and 3 (±0.05) were given in In the phosphate adsorption study ( Since pH is an important parameter, the effect of initial pH of solution on the Cr(VI) adsorption onto heat-activated bauxite (HAB) was studied at the conditions of contact time, 60 min; adsorbent dosage, 20 g In the case of outer-sphere complexes: In the case of inner-sphere complexes: On the other hand, the species of chromate anion present is dependent on the pH of aqueous solution. It is well known that the dominant species of Cr(VI) at the pH range of 2–5 is HCrO The pH change stemming from hydrolysis and adsorption must be very small at low pH, since the solutions are well buffered by the acids used in this pH range. However, significant changes found in this study may be caused by neutralizing reactions of metal oxide hydrates or carbonates, which can simultaneously occur with adsorption reactions (Eqs. In highly acidic media of pH 2, it can be stated that the adsorbent surfaces might be highly protonated and favour the uptake of Cr(VI) in the anionic form, HCrO   The effect of initial Cr(VI) concentration in the range of 2.5–50 mg Kinetic analyses were made on the basis of effect of temperature on the Cr(VI) removal depending on contact time ( As discussed in earlier sections, the adsorption of Cr(VI) onto HAB was found to be concentration and temperature dependent. The experimental data obtained under the various concentrations and temperatures were plotted in a linearised form of Langmuir and Freundlich adsorption isotherms (Eqs. Langmuir and Freundlich plots for the adsorption of Cr(VI) on HAB are shown in Some thermodynamic evaluations can be made from the results of isotherm studies. Standard Gibbs free energy (Δ Calculated values of thermodynamic parameters Δ The following conclusions can be drawn from this study in which heat-activated bauxite (HAB) was used as an adsorbent for Cr(VI) adsorption from aqueous solution. Cr(VI) adsorption capacity of bauxite increases with heating up to 600 °C. Adsorption of Cr(VI) on HAB is highly pH and temperature dependent. For the solution of 10 mg-Cr(VI) The kinetic studies indicated that equilibrium in the adsorption of Cr(VI) on HAB was reached in the contact time of 60 min. The first-order rate constant for Cr(VI) adsorption on HAB has been found to be 0.072 min That the adsorption capacity decreases with an increase in temperature shows that the adsorption process is exothermic. Although the heat activation of bauxite provides an increased adsorption for Cr(VI), the adsorption capacity is still rather limited. Since the further experiments showed that acid-washing of heated-bauxite exhibited more enhanced Cr(VI) adsorption efficiency, our future research will be focused on acid activation of bauxite for chromate removal. Bauxite is one of the abundant minerals and widely used as a raw material for alumina production by the Bayer Process. In spite of the fact that it has low Cr(VI) adsorption capacity, the use of the activated bauxite for adsorption of Cr(VI) from wastewater streams having low Cr(VI) concentration seems to be feasible. Bauxite ground for alumina production, can be utilized in Cr(VI) adsorption before the production and Cr(VI) adsorbed-bauxite can be recycled to the Bayer Process. Therefore, it can be concluded that the bauxite may be used as a low-cost adsorbent for Cr(VI) removal especially in districts of bauxite mining or alumina production.