Carbon sequestration in soil is influenced by chemical and physical soil properties. Physical soil properties such as soil structure, wettability, or soil moisture content are strongly scale-dependent. Therefore, we examined the influence of physical and chemical parameters on carbon sequestration in the laboratory on a scale termed here as “mesoscale”. Carbon mineralization was measured in undisturbed and homogenized soil cores originating from three loess sites similar in texture but different in important physical and chemical properties due to the actual land-use (i.e., arable land, grassland, and forest). We related physical factors like wettability (measured in terms of contact angle), wetting history, apparent oxygen diffusion coefficient, as well as chemical factors like pH and C/N ratio, to the evolution of CO2 from disturbed and undisturbed core samples equilibrated at different matric potentials. The influence of the wetting history could be shown by drying and rewetting the samples. To simulate natural conditions, some samples were treated with a dissolved organic matter (DOM) solution instead of water to evaluate the carbon sequestrating effect when a liquid with lower surface tension than water containing additional carbon is used for rewetting.
                  Results show that carbon sequestration is moisture-dependent. Carbon mineralization decreases with decreasing pH and increasing C/N ratio with the same significance. A close correlation between soil water repellency, measured on air-dried samples as potential contact angle (CA), and chemical parameters like pH and C/N ratio could be found, indicating that these basic chemical parameters are also closely correlated with wettability. Water repellency of natural soil is known to diminish with time when the material is wetted and re-establishes as the soil dries. Consequently, after rewetting the dried samples, a physical impact of water repellency on the CO2 release rate could be measured that was not observed during drying conditions. This could also be observed for the samples wetted with a DOM solution with easily accessible carbon and a lower liquid surface tension than pure water, simulating natural conditions. Chemical parameters seem to describe sufficiently the relation between chemical quality of the soil organic matter (SOM) and its bio-availability under drying conditions, whereas the impact of wettability on carbon mineralization rate is apparently smaller than the impact of chemical parameters.
                  Soil structure had a significant influence on the samples' respiration rate. Whereas aggregated samples at pF 1.8 showed a higher respiration rate compared to the homogenized samples, the opposite was found for aggregated samples at pF 2.5 and no difference could be found at pF 3.2. Therefore, a carbon sequestrating effect of aggregation could only be observed at pF 2.5. We conclude that not only chemical soil properties but also physical soil properties, like aggregation and wettability as well as the wetting dynamics, are important to understand specific differences in the dynamics of carbon mineralization in soils.Stabilization of soil organic matter (SOM) is the result of several mechanisms ( Up to now, SOM sequestration due to spatial inaccessibility has been investigated on the micro-scale from about µm to mm (e. g., In the present paper, the effect of soil structure, wettability, and wetting history on carbon sequestration is studied on a scale between the profile- and the single aggregate-scale, conceptually considered as meso- or soil core scale. Core samples used in this study were more than 50 times larger than the samples used, for example, by The objectives of the present study were to evaluate the simultaneous effect of physical and chemical soil parameters on the stabilization of SOM in undisturbed soil samples. To date, no study has been performed to evaluate the simultaneous impact of aggregation, wettability, and wetting history on SOM sequestration in a naturally structured soil system under typical land-use systems like forest, grassland, and arable land. This experimental approach is based on the following hierarchical working hypotheses: The carbon mineralization rate of the soil can be explained in general by well known key factors like pH (chemical milieu) or C/N (biological degradability). SOM/DOM is protected additionally by physical factors like aggregation and water repellency. The stabilizing effect of water repellency not only depends on moisture content and related properties like gas diffusivity, but also on the wetting history as a third dynamic class of impact factors beside static chemical and physical material properties. The soil used in this study is a loess derived (Endo) stagnic Cutanic Luvisol ( The DOM solution originated from litter material (Norway spruce, The basic experiment is a respiration study with soil of similar texture but different structure and wettability. Eight cylindrical steel soil cores (6 cm height, 338 cm Additionally, the apparent diffusion coefficient ( The wettability of soil material was characterized by the contact angle (CA) that forms at the three phase boundary water-soil-air with the Wilhelmy plate method (WPM) using homogenized, air-dried soil material ( For evaluation of the contact angle Additionally to the CA measurements the water drop penetration times test (WDPT) as described by At each water content the respiration rate was measured in plexiglass chambers with a volume of 10 L ( To minimize evaporation losses, each chamber was supplied with a water reservoir (5 mL). To prevent inhibition effects due to CO The apparent oxygen diffusion coefficient ( The pH (CaCl In this study the carbon stabilizing effect is indicated by decreased CO In The measured pHs are, as expected, lowest in the forest soil with the highest C/N ratios and highest in the wheat soil ( At high pH, we observe a large range of C140 values. This general bi-sectioned behaviour is observed at different pF-steps and for pH, C/N, and CA as independent variables, but cannot be found for the diffusion coefficient Statistically, a strong correlation between chemical and physical parameters exists between pH and CA ( The soils used in this study displayed CA ranging from 0–116° in the air-dried state. The grassland and wheat soil showed very small CA, whereas the mean CA measured in the forest soil was 87.7° with a high variability ( Surprisingly, at pF 1.8 a strong positive correlation can be found between CA and water content ( In the following, the impact of the matric potential and the wetting history is examined for the forest samples, because these samples, in comparison to the wheat and grassland samples, display high CA with a high variability ( As mentioned above, the cumulative mineralization of the samples depends amongst other parameters on the water content but, due to the correlation between chemical and physical parameters the cause of the measured carbon sequestration effect cannot be distinguished. A dependency of the cumulative mineralization (C3 and C140, pF 2.5 desorption) on CA can be seen (both Due to the low number of measurements with replicates at pF 2.5 (sorption), water and DOM samples have been evaluated as one to get statistically more reliable results. As can be seen in the following, no significant difference could be found between samples treated with water and DOM, respectively. As shown in As mentioned before, it can be seen that the samples ‘after water uptake (sorption)' show a higher impact of the CA on the mineralization of SOM (values more negative) in comparison to the samples at desorption. Additionally, a time dependency of the mineralization rate of the samples at sorption can be observed ( The first respiration measurement was conducted 16 days after rewetting the samples. It can be assumed that the impact of CA on the mineralization rate was even more pronounced at the beginning of the wetting phase as demonstrated in At pF 3.2 (desorption) the forest samples ( In  The DOM solution used in this study has a significantly lower surface tension (50.1 mN m It should be noted that the DOM solution used in this study has a much higher C content and a lower surface tension (see The effects of physical factors like wettability, wetting history, and soil structure, and chemical factors, like pH and C/N, on carbon mineralization in soil have been studied at the soil core scale. It was found that the soil's CA is a parameter that integrates chemical and physical factors influencing carbon mineralization in soil. Therefore, it is difficult to differentiate between chemical and physical effects on carbon mineralization. It can be assumed that during desorption of the samples the measured influence of CA is mainly of chemical origin (i. e., the influence of C/N ratio and pH) because, unlike the persistence of water repellency, its influence stays constant over a great range of time. The rewetted samples (sorption samples) showed a strong influence of CA on the mineralization of SOM. Additionally, the sorption samples showed a pronounced time-dependent influence of CA on SOM mineralization. The influence of CA is strongest after rewetting and decreases with time until an influence similar to that measured at desorption is reached. We assume that this decreasing proportion of the influence on the mineralization rate is the effect of wettability on carbon sequestration. The time-stable influence of CA on the mineralization rate can be explained as the chemical/biological part of the carbon sequestration in soil. The effect of CA can not be explained with different water content that equilibrate in the samples with different CA. Thus, it is assumed that the physical stabilization mechanism is due to a different distribution of water within the sample, i. e., a discontinuous water phase in the sample. The effect of CA could also be observed with a DOM solution, which wets the soil particles more easily due to a lower surface tension. The results show that not only the potential CA, i. e., the CA measured on air-dried samples, but also the wetting history of the soil is important for SOM sequestration in potentially water repellent soil. The stabilizing effect due to soil structure (aggregation) depends on the matric potential and hence on the water content. This result may explain inconsistent findings reported in the literature where a carbon sequestrating effect due to aggregation is either stated or not measurable. At pF 1.8 homogenized samples mineralized on average 25% less carbon compared to aggregated samples, which can be explained by a lower amount of air-filled pores and, therefore, lower aeration of the samples. At pF 2.5 the homogenized samples mineralized on average 14% more carbon compared to the corresponding aggregated samples. These differences between homogenized and aggregated samples can be attributed to the spatial inaccessibility of the occluded SOM in the aggregate's interior. After one drying/wetting cycle, no significant differences between aggregated and homogenized samples could be measured. This was probably caused by the formation of aggregates in the homogenized samples after drying and slight shrinkage. Consequently, also no differences between the mineralization of DOM in aggregated and homogenized samples could be observed. The mineralization characteristics of the samples were similar, no matter if water or DOM solution was added to the dry matrix. From this result we conclude that our findings with water should also be representative for the soil system in the field. In summary, we conclude that on the meso-scale stabilization of SOM depends on water content, soil structure, and the initial wettability and its persistence. These effects might be even more pronounced in the field on the profile scale, where the spatial–temporal heterogeneity with preferential flow pathways leads to inhomogeneous wetting patterns. We suppose also that dry domains in soil are more persistent when in contact with wetting fronts under capillary pressure instead of added free water to the soil as was done in this study. However, up to now it is not possible to quantify the persistence of subcritical water repellency (i. e., for CA Financial support provided by the “Deutsche Forschungsgemeinschaft — DFG” (Priority program “Soils as a source and sink for CO