Methane gas drainage is an effective method to ensure mining-process safety and deliver greater environmental benefits through reducing greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions. As most coal seams actually coexist with one or several other coal seams, i.e. the multi-layer coal seam group. A better understanding of the interaction between the adjacent coal seams could provide better guidance for the gas drainage engineering design to enhance its performance. Extensive studies on the multi-seam interaction have focused on the effect of mining the underlying coal seam on the overlying seam from perspectives of rock deformation, stress change and permeability variation. Meanwhile, as there is few coupled permeability models taking the coal-damage effect into account, previous permeability-variation analysis seldom commonly considered the mining-induced coal damage, coal mechanics changes and gas adsorption, which results in the permeability underestimation. Therefore, in this paper, a mathematical model which incorporates the coal permeability with coal damage, coal mechanical property and the gas adsorption was developed. Then this model was implemented into a finite-element numerical simulation, which was used to investigate the impact of the overlying coal seam mining on the underlying relieved seam from the perspective of damage-based permeability variation. Meanwhile, the effect of damage on gas-emission performance from the underlying seam was analyzed. Results show that there are four permeability areas under the mine-out panel, permeability increases greatly in areas I to III (the highest as over 650 times) while it increases slightly in the area IV. These permeability results are largely consistent with the stress-analysis conclusions obtained by other researchers. By taking the damage into account, the evaluation on gas-emission condition could become more reasonable. Above research outcomes could help to determine the favorable gas-drainage areas under the longwall mining panel and guide the drainage borehole design in the relieved coal seam, to deliver better drainage outcomes for the mining safety and GHG-emission reduction.During underground mining, gas-related incidents frequently occur in high-stress gassy coal seams and have great danger generally, e.g. the coal and gas outburst, gas explosion ( In nature, one coal seam generally coexists with some other coal seams, forming a multi-layer coal seam group. To enhance the gas drainage performance, the multi-seam interaction which can increase the permeability of relieved coal should be taken into account when designing drainage boreholes. This interaction can be illustrated using a typical coal seam group in Meanwhile, it can be seen that there are two types of interactions: (1) the relieved coal seam is above the first-mined seam; (2) the relieved coal seam is under the first-mined seam. Large number of previous studies have focused on the interaction type 1. Because the roof strata changes induced by longwall mining has been extensively analyzed, outcomes of which could be applied to explain this interaction type: Furthermore, above literature review shows that, previous studies on effect of mining one coal seam on another one were mainly from perspectives of the rock deformation, stress redistribution and permeability variation, among which, the permeability is a significant parameter as it largely determines the gas drainage efficiency. Investigations on permeability model have been extensively conducted by many scholars ( It could be concluded that the effects of coal stress change and gas adsorption/desorption are frequently taken into account in previous coupled permeability models, e.g. Palmer and Mansoori model, Shi and Durucan model, Cui and Bustin model and Liu et al. model. However, coal damage and coal anisotropy have seldom been considered when establishing those models. Pan and Connell also obtained this point based on reviewing lots of analytical permeability models and testing data ( In fact, the longwall panel dimensions are always very large (e.g. the panel width of 442 Therefore, in this paper, a new permeability model will be established. In this model, the permeability is commonly controlled by coal damage, gas adsorption/desorption and coal mechanical properties. Based on data of a coal mine, a numerical simulation model will be established by integrating the finite element method with the newly developed permeability model, to study the effect of mining the overlying coal seam on the underlying relieved seam, including the stress redistribution and the damage-based permeability redistribution under the mining panel, as well as the gas-emission performance from the relieved seam to the mining area. Finally, the potential application of above results to the gas drainage engineering design in the relieved coal seam will be discussed for enhancing the drainage performance. The sign conventions of stress in this study should be noted: the negative stress is assumed in compression and positive stress in tension. Meanwhile, positive strain means model-size increase while negative strain represents dimension decrease. Despite above sign conventions is contrary to those adopted in the geotechnical engineering, they are generally used in geomechanical simulation software. Therefore, the new mathematical models based on above conventions could be applied in the numerical simulation without any sign conversion. Coal is typically composed of matrix and cleats, and the cleat networks mainly determine the coal permeability compared with the matrix ( Furthermore, based on the elastic damage theory, Zhu and Wei put forward a damage-based permeability model which was used to investigate the mechanism of groundwater inrushes caused by mining activities ( Eq. Therefore, taking the permeability in three directions into account, Eq. At the same time, the total equivalent strain change Δ And the Δ For the coal, the sorption-induced volumetric strain Therefore, the Δ Substituting Eqs. This damage-based permeability model will be implemented into the FEM numerical simulation to investigate the permeability variation under the first-mined longwall panel and to govern the gas emission from the relieved seam to the mining area. To analyze the effect of the first-mined overlying coal seam on the underlying relieved seam, a numerical simulation model has been developed ( After the mining of overlying seam, its floor strata experiences intense changes: the rocks buckle upwards, some areas close to the mining panel become failure. The crustal stress relieves, more fractures generate and propagate, this to a certain extent results in the increase in permeability. Permeability indicates the fluid flow ability in coal and determines the gas drainability. Meanwhile, it could partly reflects the coal-deformation degree and the coal mechanical-property changes. Therefore, in this section, the permeability variation under the longwall mining panel is investigated. Furthermore, to highlight the effect of damage on permeability, the permeability variation is analyzed from two aspects: without considering the coal damage and considering the coal damage. The effect of damage on the gas emission from the relieved seam into the upper mining area is also discussed. Permeability variation under the mining panel without taking the coal damage into account is focused on in this section. Liu et al. developed the permeability model (Eq. The three belts theory could be used to explain the permeability results. In the last section, the mining-induced permeability variation without considering the coal damage have been analyzed. However, as discussed in the Introduction section, coal damage could result in significant permeability increase, thus to realize the accurate and realistic permeability prediction, the effect of damage on permeability should be taken into account. In As discussed in the previous section, due to the mining of the overlying seam, permeability increases under the mining area. Meanwhile, there is a pressure difference between the relieved seam and the mining area. Therefore, gas in the relieved seam would inevitably emit into the mining area ( During gas emission, gas pressure in the relieved seam decreases gradually. The pressure change is used to reflect the gas emission performance in this section. A profile located in the middle of the mining area is set for pressure evaluation ( According to above analysis, it is more reasonable to make the characterization description of changes under the mined overlying seam from the angle of damaged-based permeability. Therefore, improving the characterization description from the perspective of stress results by Yang et al. and Jiang et al., four permeability areas under the mining panel based on above damaged-based permeability results will be proposed, then its potential application in the coal mine, particularly to the gas drainage borehole design for enhancing gas drainage performance, will be discussed. As shown in During and after the mining of the overlying coal seam, gas drainage in the relieved underlying seam should be conducted, of which, there are mainly two purposes: (1) preventing the released gas of the relieved seam from emitting into the upper mining area; (2) reducing the gas content of the relieved seam. Finally, the gas drainage helps to eliminate potential gas-related incidents in both the overlying and underlying seams. At the same time, the amount of gas emitting into the ventilation air and then atmosphere decreases, which relieves the global warming effect. As coal permeability largely determines the gas drainage performance ( Taking the No. 8 coal mine of this study for instance, above simulation results could provide guidance on the gas drainage design in the relieved Ji Understanding of the interaction between adjacent coal seams is of significance to guide the gas drainage borehole design for the drainage-performance enhancement. In this paper, the effect of mining the overlying first-mined coal seam on the underlying relieved seam from the perspective of damage-based permeability variation is numerically investigated by implementing a mathematical model correlating the permeability with coal damage, coal mechanical property and the gas adsorption/desorption. Applications of those results on the gas drainage engineering design for mining safety and environmental benefits are discussed. Conclusions are as follows: The effect of coal damage on permeability has seldom been taken into account in most previous coupled permeability models. Thus a damaged-based permeability model is developed through adopting an exponential term to reveal the coal damage impact. The tensile failure and shear failure are judged by the first strength theory and Mohr–Coulomb criterion, respectively. Under the first-mined mining panel, there are four permeability areas. Permeability increases significantly in areas I to III while it increases slightly in the area IV. Particularly in the area I, the permeability increase ratio could be as high as over 650 times largely due to the coal damage in this area. Above permeability results to a large extent match the stress-change outcomes documented by other researchers. Research outcomes in this study could help to determine the favorable gas drainage areas under the longwall mining panel and guide the drainage borehole design in the underlying relieved coal seam, to prevent gas emission into the mining area: the drainage boreholes should be drilled in permeability areas I to III. Moreover, in the permeability areas I and II, borehole direction has slight impact on the drainage performance. In contrast, in the permeability area III, vertical boreholes have higher drainage efficiency than the horizontal boreholes and thus should be preferred. Meanwhile, the borehole sealing should be taken seriously in the damaged coal area under the mining panel (around 12 This study is financially sponsored by the