We investigated the separation of Mn with reduced extraction behavior of Co by PC88A/Versatic 10 acid from a leaching solution of spent lithium-ion batteries containing 11.4g/L Co, 11.7g/L Mn, 12.2g/L Ni, and 5.3g/L Li. The distribution coefficient and separation factor of Mn and Co were determined at different pHs. The slope analysis method was used to determine the extraction mechanism in the PC88A/Versatic 10 acid system. A McCabe–Thiele diagram and countercurrent simulation batch extraction were also investigated to determine at what stage Mn is extracted. The results show a decrease in distribution coefficient of Co and Mn, however, the separation factor of Mn over Co increased. This is an example of the antagonistic effect of Versatic 10 acid addition to PC88A. Using this effect, Mn can be recovered with an organic/aqueous ratio of 1 in the fourth stage in a PC88A/Versatic 10 acid system.Lithium-ion batteries (LIBs) are used extensively in portable electronic equipment such as cellular phones, personal computers, video cameras, personal digital assistants, and other appliances because of their high-energy density, high-power density, long life, and environmental friendliness. Recent demand for LIBs has increased significantly. For example, worldwide LIB production increased from 250 million in 1998 (10% in Korea) to 2044 million in 2007. The amount of spent LIBs will also increase with increasing demand for LIBs. LIBs contain 15% organic chemicals, electrolytes, and valuable metals such as 20% Co, 5%–10% Ni, and 5%–7% Li ( Earlier studies have reported on the recovery of Co and Li from spent LIBs of LiCoO However, Co in LIB has been replaced with Ni and Mn because of an increase in Co price and safe operation of LIBs at high temperature ( Information is needed on the recovery of valuable metals such as Co, Li, Ni, and Mn from LiCo The aim of this study is the effective and economic recovery of valuable metal by solvent extraction from spent LIB ternary cathode materials. Mn recovery was investigated to refine Co without its loss from leach solution with a high concentration of Co, Ni, and Li. In this study, we deal with causes for the decrease in Co extraction and its opposition to the synergistic effect. Organic solvents such as PC88A (molecular weight: 306.4 Leaching tests were conducted using 2 To determine the valuable metals extracted, pH isotherm tests were carried out at different mixture extractant concentrations of 0, 5, 10, 15, 20, and 25 To obtain a Mn solution from the loaded organic, stripping was carried out at different sulfuric acid concentrations and at an O/A In the countercurrent extraction and stripping experiment, a shakeout test was carried out using a separation funnel and the raffinate and stripping aqueous samples were analyzed. All analyses were performed by atomic absorption spectrometer (Perkin Elmer Model 400). A mixture of 20 In  According to the results in The extraction behavior of Ni is shown in The pH Generally, the separation factor (β The separation factor of Mn over Ni (β An O/A ratio isotherm was constructed to determine the required number of extraction stages for Mn. The O/A ratios were 8, 5, 3, 2, 1, 0.5, and 0.33, with a 20 The concentration of extracted Mn at each stage can be predicted from the McCabe–Thiele diagram. At each stage in the aqueous sample it is predicted to be 1000 To confirm the results predicted from the McCabe–Thiele diagram, a countercurrent simulation extraction test was carried out with 20 To remove co-extracted impurities such as Co, Ni, and Li from the loaded organic sample, a scrubbing test was carried out from 0.05 The stripping test was carried out from loaded organic that contained only Mn, using 0.5 Slope analysis was used to determine the extraction mechanism between a mixture of extractants and valuable metals. According to the cationic extractants, the reaction of divalent metal extraction can be represented by However, extractants such as phosphoric, phosphonic, phosphinic, and carboxylic acid are polymerized or self-associated in organic diluents ( By taking logarithms of Eqs. To extract Mn, Co, and Ni required a 4 mole equivalent concentration of PC88A at pH For Versatic 10 acid ( To change the concentration of PC88A from 0.28 From For a Versatic 10 acid concentration change from 0.65 Based on the results of The addition of Versatic 10 acid to PC88A resulted in a decrease in distribution coefficient of Co and Mn at a pH lower than 5. A slope analysis showed that Versatic 10 acid did not participate in and interrupted the extraction mechanism between PC88A with Co and Mn. This result is an example of the antagonistic effect. The Versatic 10 acid/PC88A system decreased significantly in terms of Co rather than Mn extraction. Although the distribution coefficient of Co and Mn decreased, the separation factor values of Mn over Co increased and reached 23.67 with increasing Versatic 10 acid concentration. To recover Mn from Co, Ni, and Li, optimal conditions for the separation factor value were found to be 25 This subject is supported by