In this research, an analysis of the effect of ethylenediaminetetraacetic acid (EDTA), thiosulfate and cupric ions on the silver leaching kinetics was performed. For that purpose leaching experiments with pure metallic silver were carried out at different concentrations of these reagents at room temperature. The results of this study showed that small amounts of EDTA accelerate the leaching of silver more efficiently than higher concentrations due to an increase in the oxidation potential of the leaching solution. These results were in accord with Pourbaix diagrams and redox potential measurements. A synergistic effect was found in the silver leaching kinetics when the thiosulfate and EDTA concentrations were both decreased. On the other hand, the silver leaching kinetics was reduced at low Cu(II) concentrations due to the decrease in the oxidizing ability of the leaching solution.
                  Characterization by SEM and EDXS of the silver in the first minutes of leaching revealed that the silver particles were coated by a layer of copper sulfides and copper oxides. Furthermore, characterization of the solid residue during the precipitation of silver in the leaching experiment was performed by the same analytical techniques, showing the presence of silver sulfide on the unreacted silver surface. The mechanism by which the silver sulfide is precipitated was found to be related to the copper sulfide formation. It was also observed that an increase in the concentration of EDTA promotes the silver dissolution avoiding the formation of copper sulfides or oxides; in these cases the process is controlled by the chemical reaction. These observations were also supported with Pourbaix and species distribution diagrams.Cyanide leaching is effective for gold and silver extraction from minerals in aqueous solutions. The precious metals are generally recovered with cyanide as complexing agent and oxygen as oxidant ( The need of processing difficult-to-treat ores as well as the environmental risks associated to cyanide use has encouraged the research and development of new leaching systems for precious metals. The thiosulfate–copper–ammonia system is considered a promising alternative to cyanide ( In this process cupric ions oxidize the precious metals while thiosulfate forms complexes with them. Ammonia is also added to stabilize the cupric ions in the alkaline solution, avoiding their precipitation as copper hydroxide ( The chemistry of this alternative leaching system is very complicated due to the occurrence of several chemical and electrochemical reactions during the precious metal leaching. In addition to the silver or gold oxidation reaction, some thiosulfate oxidative degradation occurs ( It has been reported that the leaching kinetics of silver can be favored by an increase in the thiosulfate concentration ( Consequently, scientists and engineers have focused the research on increasing the oxidizing capability of this leaching system and, at the same time, trying to avoid the oxidative loss of thiosulfate. Several investigations have been carried out to find an additional reagent for complexing cupric ions with the aim of increasing the silver and gold leaching kinetics but avoiding the thiosulfate oxidation ( Several studies have shown that EDTA (ethylenediaminetetraacetic acid) is an effective complexing agent for increasing the extraction kinetics of heavy metals such as Pb, Cu, Zn and Cd ( In the precious metals leaching with the thiosulfate system it has been demonstrated that the presence of EDTA decreases the thiosulfate oxidation rate by the formation of complexes of EDTA with the Cu(II) ions; the oxidizing potential of the leaching solution decreases ( The objective of this study is to elucidate the phenomena involved in the kinetics of silver dissolution with the thiosulfate–copper–ammonia–EDTA system, in an attempt to increase the silver recovery and to minimize the reagent consumption. For the leaching tests the composition of the solution was changed in order to study the effect of thiosulfate, EDTA and copper on the silver leaching. Pourbaix and species predominance diagrams were constructed for the system, and the kinetic model of shrinking core was applied to the results obtained. All the silver leaching experiments were performed in an agitated batch reactor (250 In order to elucidate the predominant species in each leaching system, Pourbaix and species distribution diagrams were constructed using the Medusa© Software. These diagrams are also useful for determining the oxidizing ability of the leaching systems, as well as the possible redox reactions that could take place. The diagrams were constructed considering the equilibrium data contained in the Hydra database of the Medusa© suite software ( The results of this study are discussed in four parts; in the first part appears the effect of the thiosulfate and EDTA concentrations on the silver leaching; the second section analyzes the kinetic data with the shrinking core model; the third section presents the thermodynamic analysis of the studied systems, and the fourth, the effect of the Cu(II) concentration on the silver leaching.  Besides these reactions, other simultaneous reactions may occur such as the oxidative decomposition of thiosulfate involving the formation of additional sulfur compounds such as tetrathionate, as well as the precipitation of copper sulfides species such as CuS or Cu Once the copper sulfide species are formed, the silver contained in the thiosulfate complex (Ag(S This reaction would explain the decrease on silver concentration in the leaching curves of In spite of the instability of the leaching systems presented in The EDTA concentration affects the silver dissolution. It was observed in From these results three important characteristics for the thiosulfate–EDTA leaching system can be highlighted: a) a decrease in the thiosulfate and EDTA concentrations favors the silver leaching; b) the leaching solution with 0.1 Redox potential measurements were performed for the leaching solutions in the tests of A thermodynamic analysis with the aid of Pourbaix diagrams was carried out in order to understand better the low leaching efficiency obtained at high EDTA concentrations (0.05 In order to understand the phenomena that control the silver leaching kinetics, some silver leaching experiments were analyzed with the shrinking core model. It was found that in some cases the process was controlled by the chemical reaction. Eq. On the other hand, Eq. The silver leaching results shown in On the other hand, the data of the silver leaching with 0.2 It was observed that the silver extraction curves showed some oscillations (precipitation–redissolution of silver). In addition to this, the precipitation of copper oxides and sulfides affects the silver leaching process with a 0.2  On the other hand, All the silver leaching experiments with 1.25  Two solid samples corresponding to the leaching experiment at 0.2  Contrary to the 0.025 In the previous sections it was observed that a decrease of the thiosulfate and EDTA concentrations enhances the silver leaching kinetics. This section deals with the effect of decreasing the cupric ion concentration from 0.05 Some oscillations also appear in these silver extraction curves, related to the silver precipitation as silver sulfide, as mentioned in the last section. The experimental data for the silver leaching with solutions 0.1 On the basis of the results obtained for the metallic silver leaching with the system thiosulfate–EDTA–Cu(II)–ammonia, the following could be concluded: In the range of thiosulfate and EDTA concentrations studied (0.1 The precipitation of copper oxides occurs for the leaching systems with 1.25 In the leaching systems with EDTA concentrations lower than 0.025 Finally, the slowest silver leaching kinetics was found when the cupric ion concentration was decreased from 0.05 The authors are grateful to CONACYT (Mexico) for the postgraduate scholarship awarded to Damaris M. Puente-Siller. The authors also wish to thank Dr. Alejandro Uribe-Salas, Dr. Roberto Pérez-Garibay and M.Sc. Juan Antonio González-Anaya for their continued support regarding the laboratory materials.