A KCl-MgCl2-AlF3 ternary system containing La2O3 was investigated for the preparation of Mg-Al-La master alloy by electrodeposition technique. The cyclic voltammetry and chronopotentiometry indicated that the co-reduction of Mg, Al and La occurs at cathode-current densities more negative than −0.29A·cm−2. Lanthanum under-potential deposited on pre-reduced Al and it formed Al-La alloy. Inductively coupled plasma-optical emission spectroscopy (ICP-OES) and X-ray diffraction (XRD) analyses were used to consider the contents of components in the alloy, the supernatant composition of molten salt after dissolution of La2O3 and the composition of the alloy, respectively. The galvanostatic electrolysis results showed that the optimum electrolysis conditions were the electrolytic temperature of 800℃, the cathode-current density of 6.92A·cm−2, and the electrolysis time of 60min. The XRD and SEM analysis results showed that the main phases of the obtained alloy sample were α-Mg, α-Mg+β-Al12Mg17 and α-Mg+Al11La3. The content of magnesium in the Mg-Al-La alloy reach with the increase of the cathode-current density.
                  Inductively coupled plasma-optical emission spectroscopy (ICP-OES) analyses of Mg-Al-La alloy samples showed that aluminum and Lanthanum contents of Mg-Al-La alloys could be controlled under the several cathode-current density.Mg-Al family alloys have a low density and high strength-to-weight, good corrosion resistance as well as are convenient for manufacturing, therefore they are widely used building so on several field According to the different matrix, the master alloy can be classified into an aluminum-based, a copper-based, an iron-based, a magnesium-based, and a nickel-based master alloy. Rare earth metal is one kind of important substances to improve the properties of Mg-Al binary alloys In the previous works, the reduction of Mg, Li and other ions in LiCl-KCl molten salts was investigated (e.g., and Mg-Li-Zn Harata Zhang Han In this work, the Mg-Al-La master alloy was prepared by fused salt electrolysis in KCl-MgCl AlF Chloride mixture (KCl:MgCl The schematic diagram of experimental apparatus is shown in All potentials were referred to the Ag/AgCl couple. The working electrode was molybdenum (99.99% purity) wire with a diameter of 1 Autolab electrochemical workstation (Metrohm Co., Ltd.) was used for all electrochemical measurements. ICP-OES (Optima 8300 DV; Perkin Elmer Corp., Waltham, MA) was used for the quantitative analysis of the components contents in the alloy. X-ray diffraction (XRD; PW3040/60; PANalytical Corp., Almelo, the Netherlands) analysis was used for the qualitative analysis of the Mg-Al-La alloy composition and the supernatant composition of molten salt after dissolution of La SEM and EDS (JSM-6610A; JEOL Co., Ltd.) analysis was used for the microstructure analysis of Mg-Al-La master alloy. When the content of KCl is 50 The interaction between the molten salts compositions at 700–850 From the above equations, the formed LaCl The anodic reaction is 2Cl The cathodic reactions are as follows. To study the mechanism of electrodeposition, cyclic voltammetry measurement was performed as shown in All potentials were referred to the Ag/AgCl couple. As shown in After adding of AlF As known from curve 3, after adding 1 The peak D that was detected at −1.55 The square wave voltammogram (SWV) is another analytical technique to determine the electron transfer number (n) in an electrode process. The width of the half-peak, Using the half peak ( The relationship between the half peak of Gaussian wave and the number of exchanged electrons is the same as the Eq.  By measuring  In curve 1 (  The average number of electrons transferred was calculated as Chronopotentiometry was employed to further investigate the electrochemical formation of Mg-Al-La alloys via co-reduction of Mg, Al and La. Under the applied current 30 When the applied current is 60 At the cathode current higher than 90 According to Sand’ s law, the Eq. where Cyclic voltammetry curves and chronopotentiograms show that electrochemical co-reduction occurred when the potentials are negative than −1.8 The current efficiency is able to calculate according to following equation. According to Faraday’s Law, Where: ICP-OES analyses of samples obtained by galvanostatic electrolysis are listed in   As compared with XRD analysis, the EDS results ( Electrochemical techniques showed that the co-reduction occurred when the current densities are more negative than −0.29 Under the conditions having the maximum current efficiency, Mg-Al-La alloys with α–Mg, β-Al The authors declare no conflicts of interest. The authors would like to thank the support from the Department of Metallurgical Engineering, Kim Chaek University of Technology. The authors acknowledge the great help on the offering of scientific data for the alloy preparation by scientific research organization workers and famous professors, Kim Chaek University of Technology.