This article presents a performance study of using different working fluids (gases) to power on Concentrated Solar Gas Engine (CSGE-Stirling and/or Brayton). Different working gases such as Monatomic (five types), Diatomic (three types) and Polyatomic (four types) are used in this investigation. The survey purported to increase the solar gas engine efficiency hence; decreasing the price of the output power. The effect of using different working gases is noticed on the engine volume, dish area, total plant area, efficiency, compression and pressure ratios thence; the Total Plant Cost (TPC, $). The results reveal that the top cycle temperature effect is reflected on the cycle by increasing the total plant efficiency (2–10%) for Brayton operational case and 5–25% for Stirling operational case. Moreover; Brayton engine resulted higher design limits against the Stirling related to total plant area, m2 and TPC, $ while generating 1–100MWe asan economic case study plant. C2H2 achieved remarkable results however, CO2 is considered for both cycles operation putting in consideration the gas flammability and safety issues.cross-sectional area, m dish area, m piston area, m specific heat capacity, kJ/kg specific heat capacity, kJ/kg concentrated solar Brayton engine concentrated solar Stirling engine compression ratio, concentration ratio for the dish diameter, m focal length, m dish parabola height, m solar intensity, W/m mean effective pressure, bar mass flow rate, kg/s number of dishes number of cylinders pressure, bar Brayton engine power, kW Stirling engine power, kW total power, kW specific gas constant, kJ/kg rim angle, ° rim angle ratio speed, rev/min pressure ratio temperature, °C total plant costs, $ volume, cm specific volume, m work, kW actual atmospheric Brayton engine compressor electric generator gas high inlet low optical out piston stirling engine turbine, tube efficiency isentropic index correction factor for Brayton efficiency The harmony between environmental protection and economic growth has become a worldwide concern, there is an urgent need to effectively reuse solar energy. Such a source of clean energy is one of the most attractive renewable energy that can be used as for heat engines Such systems have medium concentration ratio (500–1000). The systems are modular, each system is a self-contained power generator, they can be assembled into plants ranging in size from a kilo-watts to 100 CSSE is simple in design and construction and continuous tracking with the sun. The main working fluids of these engines are the gases. Hydrogen, Air, Helium, and Nitrogen are usually applied to get the required power from Stirling engines. High temperature and pressure Stirling engines such as KocKums, STM, and SOLO-161 are the real examples for the use of Hydrogen and Helium New working gases are compared related to the terms of compression ratio, pressure ratio, efficiency and design limits (dish area, receiver area, focal distance, power, and so on). Monatomic gases (He, Ar, Ne, Kr, Xe), Diatomic gases (Air, H The working gas election is performed according to best compression and pressure ratios results. Stirling and Brayton engines are compared related Total Plant Cost (TPC, $) and design limits of the plant. Wide scope of operating conditions (400–900 REDS-SDS The proposed system is modeled by the aid of REDS-SDS software which is developed by Sharaf et al. The developed model is built based on For solar radiation and due to the low thermal inertia, a dish Stirling System reacts very quickly on changes in solar thermal input. Thus, steady state operation is achieved within a few minutes after system start. A typical daily pattern of net electric energy production over a Maximum power output is normally reached at 1000 The solar powered gas engine system uses a large parabolic a mirror to focus the sun rays on the hot side of a gas engine. The reflective mirrors are mounted on a parabolic-shaped structure using stamped sheet metal. Other structure accessories are constructed of steel. The good solar dish reflectors must have the following properties; reasonable weight; hardness against deflection and wind load, durability against moisture and temperature changes; parts must be flexible; low cost, effective reflecting materials; and long lifetime The actual Stirling engine efficiency is calculated from the following equation The Stirling engine volume ratio (compression ratio) based on the efficiency is obtained as follows The pressure ratio is then calculated: The total plant efficiency is obtained by the assigning generator efficiency and optical and receiver efficiencies: Dish mirror area, m The dish parabola height, m The calculations of the dish concentration ratio Then the receiver area, m The total plant surface area, m The mean effective pressure is calculated as follows Therefore; the Stirling engine piston dimensions is calculated And the piston volume, cm  In a dish/Brayton system, solar heat is used to replace (or supplement) the fuel. The resulting hot gas expands rapidly and is used to produce power. In the gas turbine, the burning is continuous and the expanding gas is used to turn a turbine and alternator. As in the Stirling engine, recuperation of waste heat is a key to achieving high efficiency. Dish equations (areas, concentration ratio, focal length, etc.) from the previous subsection is not repeated here. The Brayton cycle ideal efficiency is performed as follows The actual Brayton efficiency is calculated as following The Brayton engine volume ratio (compression ratio- The Brayton pressure ratio is then calculated: The compressor power, kW: The turbine power, kW: Outlet turbine temperature, °C: Brayton cycle mass flow rate, kg/s: Outlet compressor temperature, °C:  The proposed cycle is mathematically modeled where the design and performance calculations are performed using the developed program with the aid of MatLab/SimuLink toolbox The hot gas Stirling and/or Brayton engines are considered as The proposed working gases in this study are classified into main three categories according to their chemical structure: Monatomic gases (Helium-He, Argon-Ar, Neon-Ne, Krypton-Kr, Xenon-Xe). Diatomic gases (Air, Hydrogen-H Polyatomic gases (Carbon dioxide-CO The only chemical elements which are stable single Diatomic molecules Polyatomic refers to the molecules or ions having two or more atoms. They are the molecules with two or more atoms. They do not have a positive or negative charge. In other words, these molecules are electrically neutral. (H It was clear from literatures that Air, and/or Helium were widely used for solar dish Stirling engines. However; in this study, a spot light is focused on the effect of using different gases with different heat capacities for different engines. Different heat capacities have a great influence on the compression and presser ratios hence the efficiency. In this work, the selection of the working gas is performed based on some important criteria such as: The working fluid should be that of low viscosity to reduce compression losses. Using higher pressure or lower viscosity, or combinations thereof, could reduce the high mass flow required For the Stirling engine, specific heat capacity at constant volume is considered the key factor to judge the efficiency results due to Eqs. Changing the specific heat would change the compression and pressure ratios of both engines thence; the design aspects would change. High results of compression and pressure ratios would decrease the design aspects such as Piston volume in the case of CSSE and mass flow rate in the case of CSBE. Maximum engine efficiency, maximum compression and pressure ratios. Minimum dish area and maximum dish concentration ratio. Minimum cost issues related to the engine and the dish area. Availability of the gases for industrial issues. Flammability, explosion, and environmental impact. In this part, data are run out for both engines (Stirling & Brayton) by the aid of REDS-CSGE model. All runs are executed at steady state conditions, and under the same operating conditions. The operational power range for both engines is fixed between 5 Compression and pressure ratios. Dish concentration ratio and focal length. Piston volume. Stirling and total plant efficiencies. Total plant area and costs.  The generated power from the engine is considered a vital parameter for the reduction of the design limits. The Brayton engine efficiency is considered much lower while comparing against the Stirling engine.     Generally; CSSE gives remarkable results against the CSBE cycle due to the effect of thermal efficiency of the Stirling engine while comparing at the same temperature level. Based on Engine selection: CSSE (Concentrated Solar Stirling Engine).  4–11. Working gas: CO Increasing the efficiency of the concentrated solar gas engine (CSGE) is considered a very important issue till today. Increasing engine performance means reducing the design limits thence; reducing the total weight and costs. The problem was how to increase the gained power from the solar dish engines. Solar dish engines have massive advantages concluded into: Tracking with the sun means working hours’ stability. High receiver efficiency. High mirror efficiency. However; there is a massive defect in the engine itself which drops the total efficiency down to unacceptable limits (from 95% receiving efficiency to 22% total efficiency). The aim of this work is focused on the engine, how can we increase the engine efficiency. Therefore; in this work, examining the effect of different working gases on the efficiency of two types of gas engines is performed. The Effect was to discover of twelve gases on several parameters such as size, efficiency, engine size, temperature, compression and pressure ratios, etc. The gases are divided into main three categories based on their behavior and atomic number which are: Monatomic gases (Helium-He, Argon-Ar, Neon-Ne, Krypton-Kr, Xenon-Xe). Diatomic gases (Air, Hydrogen-H Polyatomic gases (Carbon dioxide-CO The proposed gases are used for both cycles (Stirling and Brayton) for solar dish operation. Among these gases, C   The ideal cycle efficiency is obtained as;