Rationale and Objectives
                  In this article, we review the core principles of bone physiology alongside imaging examples that demonstrate such principles.
               
                  Materials and Methods
                  The core principles of bone physiology are reviewed and further solidified with a corresponding abnormal pathophysiologic example. The key principles of bone physiology to be reviewed include the following: (1) formation and growth, (2) maintenance and repair, (3) metabolism and regulation, and (4) neoplastic disease. Lastly, a collection of secondary bone diseases is presented to demonstrate the skeletal manifestations of numerous systemic diseases. With this integrative method, we hope to emphasize the value of using radiology to teach physiology within a clinical context. This is especially relevant now, as many US medical schools undergo curricular reform with more emphasis on integrative interdisciplinary learning. Ultimately, we intend to provide a paradigm for incorporating radiology into the pre-clinical medical curriculum through a review of basic science physiology that underlies key radiographic findings of the skeletal system.
               
                  Results
                  Radiology is known for its role in helping make diagnoses and clinical decisions. However, radiology is also well suited to enhance medical education by offering the ability to visualize physiology in action. This is especially true in skeletal radiology, where radiographic osseous changes represent a wide range of physiological processes. Therefore, skeletal radiology can be a useful tool for illustrating concepts of physiology that underlie the normal and abnormal radiologic appearances of bone.
               
                  Conclusion
                  Radiology is an important but underutilized tool for demonstrating concepts in bone physiology.One of the greatest underappreciated opportunities in medical education is the use of radiologic images to teach the basic medical sciences. Too often, medical students learn such subjects as anatomy, physiology, and pathology from text, diagrams, cadavers, and animal models rather than from living human subjects. Radiology makes it possible to visualize living human structure, function, disease, and injury in ways that can help learners gain a much deeper understanding of the material, creating indelible images that they carry with them into practice for many years. Nonetheless, radiology is underutilized in this regard. Despite the explosion of diagnostic imaging utilization in clinical practice, estimated to be nearly twice the rate of laboratory and pharmaceutical usage Although radiology has been used in a piecemeal fashion throughout the preclinical curricula for decades with subjects like anatomy As an extremely dynamic tissue, the radiologic appearance of normal and abnormal bone acts as a biological signature, representing underlying physiological processes in action. By contrasting key imaging components of normal physiologic and abnormal pathophysiologic appearances of bone, we will review and illustrate the core physiology principles of this system including (1) bone growth and development, (2) maintenance and repair, (3) metabolism and regulation via the endocrine system, and (4) bone neoplasia. Radiologic manifestations of secondary bone disorder, such as metastatic disease, also help learners understand how bone reacts to systemic diseases. Overall, we hope this integrated approach of teaching basic science and radiology together will improve clinical acumen and solidify an understanding of physiology. Bone development and growth requires understanding of two different processes: intramembranous ossification, as seen in flat bones such as the skull, and endochondral ossification, as occurs in long bones. The former begins when groups of mesenchymal stem cells cluster into a nidus (the primary ossification centers) within fibrous connective tissue. These clustered immature mesenchymal cells differentiate into osteoblasts that secrete unmineralized bone matrix (osteoid), which mineralizes as it becomes infused with calcium and phosphorous. Radiographs of the infant and adolescent skull provide an opportunity to visualize progressive intramembranous ossification as the radiolucent sutures, representing the unmineralized fibrous connective tissue, progressively decrease in width with progressive ossification of the skull bones ( Endochondral ossification is the mechanism of bone development for long bones and utilizes a hyaline cartilage template. Primary ossification begins within the central diaphysis where the cartilaginous model is resorbed and replaced by bone due to a complex cascade of osteoblast and osteoclast stimulation and maturation. Later, secondary centers of ossification develop within the epiphyseal cartilage. As ossification proceeds at these sites, a band of physeal cartilage remains trapped between these mineralizing ossification centers,otherwise known as the growth plate, which determines the rate of bone growth and final adult height. The steps of endochondral ossification can be clearly demonstrated with magnetic resonance (MR) imaging of skeletally immature bones in children, giving learners the opportunity to see this dynamic process in action ( Diseases associated with abnormal endochondral ossification often produce characteristic radiologic features that reflect their pathophysiology. An enchondroma, for example, is a benign cartilaginous bone tumor formed by a segment of physeal cartilage that fails to ossify normally ( Ossification can also occur in abnormal locations, such as soft tissues following injury due to metaplasia of the reparative cells. This is referred to as heterotopic ossification and occurs when native fibroblasts or endothelial cells are erroneously transformed into osteogenic cells similar to osteoblasts Skeletal maintenance and repair rely on a dynamic balance between bone formation and resorption. The ongoing process of remodeling involves osteoclasts that dissolve old or damaged bone, osteoblasts that secrete unmineralized osteoid, and the process of osteoid mineralization to form new bones. Even though there is minimal net change in bone mass, these opposing forces of bone formation and resorption are simultaneously active during physiological remodeling This balance, however, is disrupted under certain physiologic or pathologic conditions that uncouple the remodeling process. When this occurs, a surplus of bone formation or resorption may occur, ultimately producing a net change in bone mass. This is easily understood from radiographic images. In osteoporosis, bone mass and density are decreased to a pathologic degree, which is highlighted radiographically by the overall radiolucency of osteoporotic bones or by consequent fractures of the weakened bone ( Besides mechanical and hormonal influences, abnormal remodeling can also occur with diseases of the bone cells themselves. If the activity of one cell type is pathologically altered (increased or decreased), the radiologic appearance can reflect the compensatory activity of the other bone cells. For example, there is excessive bone formation in osteopetrosis (“marble bone disease”) due to a genetic defect that impairs carbonic anhydrase, the enzyme required by osteoclasts to acidify and dissolve bone matrix More run-of-the-mill examples further illustrate the dynamic balance between bone production and bone resorption. Every fracture, if observed radiographically over time, provides a superb opportunity to visualize this physiologic concept. Immediately after a fracture, the inflammatory stage of healing begins. In the reparative phase, a soft fibrocartilaginous callus is formed from mesenchymal cells of the periosteum to bridge the bone fragments, seen as indistinctness of the fracture margins and, at times, widening of the fracture gap. Next, the soft callus hardens as fibrocartilage is replaced with mineralized osteoid by a process resembling endochondral ossification Unfortunately, not all fracture repairs are adequate or complete. A number of local factors, if present, can undermine the repair response, which leaves a persistent fracture line. These include instability (insufficient immobilization or improper fixation method), poor vascularization, or infection Metabolism is another important topic in bone physiology. In this context, metabolism refers to the balance of anabolic and catabolic remodeling in relation to systemic mineral requirements and regulation by the endocrine system. The vital role of the skeletal system in calcium and phosphorous homeostasis can be conceptualized when physiology students learn that bone is mostly composed of extracellular mineralized matrix (65%), which stores 99% of the body's calcium and 85% of its phosphorous Two endocrine hormones primarily regulate bone metabolism: parathyroid hormone (PTH) and vitamin D. These hormones influence systemic calcium and phosphorous levels through many pathways, including regulation of osteoblast and osteoclast activity. Other notable, albeit less prominent, endocrine regulators of bone metabolism include calcitonin, estrogen, growth hormone, thyroid hormone, and glucocorticoids A common example is hyperparathyroidism (HPTH), a condition of excess PTH secretion, originating from a parathyroid adenoma in its primary form or from hyperstimulation by persistent hypocalcemia in the secondary form Another important regulatory hormone that raises calcium and phosphate levels is the active form of vitamin D (D3). In bone, D3 promotes osteoid mineralization. Osteomalacia is a skeletal disease characterized by soft bones that are poorly mineralized when D3 is inadequate due to poor nutrition or a genetic mutation. Osteomalacia in children is referred to as rickets and is often more severe than the adult form because of the delayed growth and abnormal mineralization that occur in skeletally immature children ( Despite their rarity, primary bone neoplasms provide a particularly memorable opportunity to watch bone pathophysiology in action. For example, enchondromas and chondrosarcomas demonstrate what it looks like when cartilage formation goes awry ( Numerous secondary disorders of bone show how bone reacts to external insults. In osteomyelitis, for example, there is inflammation of cortex and marrow from an infection. The bone may be infiltrated by infectious and inflammatory cells, resulting in replacement of the normal marrow fat ( Alternatively, bone metastases from nonskeletal cancers display a wide range of radiographic phenotypes that demonstrate different behaviors of various cancers through the bony reactions they incite. A well-known example is the lytic appearance of renal and breast carcinomas that metastasize to bone ( Arthritides are also highly illustrative. Osteoarthritis (OA) provides a marvelous illustration of the role of normal cartilage in joints and of how bone responds to its destruction. In OA, degradation of the articular cartilage exposes the underlying bony surfaces. The pathologic sequelae can be seen radiographically as asymmetric joint space narrowing, osteophytosis, eburnation, and sclerosis of affected bones ( Radiology is an underappreciated and underutilized tool in medical education. Despite its growth in clinical practice, its use in medical curricula has not advanced apace, even amidst widespread curricular reform. This is a shame, given its ability to portray anatomy, physiology, and pathology, especially in the skeletal system. Perhaps this explains, at least in part, why many nonradiology residency program directors consider interpretation of bone and joint radiographs to be an “essential” skill for medical graduates