This paper revisits the problem of computational modelling of a fluid-driven fracture propagating in a permeable porous medium using zero-thickness flow cohesive interface elements. Both cases of continuous and discontinuous pressure field across the fractures are implemented in a unified formulation. The paper provides computational aspects of hydraulic fracture modelling such as mesh generation, execution time, convergence and numerical integration issues. We show that Newton-Cotes quadrature must be used for quadratic flow cohesive interface elements at least for the presented problems. Our simulations exhibit the so-called intermittent crack tip advancement as recently confirmed in the literature. This paper is addressed to researchers who would like to have a quick working implementation of the zero-thickness flow cohesive interface elements for simulating hydraulic fracturing processes with finite elements.Natural gas production from hydrocarbon-rich shale formations, known as shale gas, is one of the most rapidly expanding trends in onshore domestic oil and gas exploration and production today. Hydraulic fracturing (HF) or fracking is a common technique for enhancing hydrocarbon production since the late 1940s because of the low permeability of these formations and the low conductivity of the natural fracture networks ( During the early period of hydraulic fracturing two dimensional (2D) models with simplified geometries (e.g. KGD and PKN models) were proposed ( There are a plethora of numerical methods developed to model hydraulic fractures ranging from classical methods such as finite element methods (FEMs), boundary element methods (BEMs), meshfree methods ( Usually in hydraulic fracture simulators the rock formation is assumed to be homogeneous isotropic linear elastic ( In this paper we revisit the cohesive interface elements which were presented in The remainder of the paper is organised as follows. The governing equations of the problem of fluid-driven fractures in porous media are given in Hydraulic fracturing or more general fluid-driven fractures in porous media is a complex phenomenon which couple different physical processes. They include (i) flow of the fracturing fluid in the fractures, (ii) flow of the pore fluid in the porous medium, and (iii) deformation of the porous medium (including fracture initiation and propagation). In this paper, for simplicity, we confine to (1) fully saturated media, (2) isothermal condition, (3) small deformation, (4) no fluid-lag, and (5) two dimensions. We refer to The fully saturated porous medium is modelled as a two-phase system, where the pores of the solid skeleton are fully filled with a single phase fluid, refer to In low-frequency ranges, the relative acceleration of the fluid phase with respect to the solid phase is negligible when compared with the acceleration of the solid phase. In this case, conservation of the linear momentum of the porous media domain Ω is described by the following equation The effective stress tensor, Under the assumption of small strains, the strain tensor is defined as The mechanical behaviour of the solid is dependent on the effective stress, and not dependent on the pore pressure, by the following general constitutive relation The continuity equation for the flow of the pore fluid through the permeable porous medium surrounding the fracture is written as Darcy's law, a phenomenologically derived constitutive equation that describes the flow of a fluid through a porous medium, is used. The Darcy's law reads Flow along geomechanical discontinuities is generally idealised as a laminar flow between smooth parallel plates separated by a certain hydraulic aperture. The mass conservation equation is given by And similar to the Darcy's law that relates the flux to the pore pressure, here the cubic law ( For the normal flow i.e., from the fracturing fluid to the surrounding porous medium, the following equations are used ( Substitution of the longitudinal flow equation, Eq. ( The aforementioned equations are complete with the following initial and boundary conditions. Essential boundary conditions are Natural boundary conditions read On the crack faces, the following boundary condition is applied ( Boundary conditions for the flow of the fracturing fluid Finally the initial conditions read The weak form of the momentum equation is obtained by multiplying Eq. ( Substituting of Eq. ( In a similar manner, the weak form of the mass conservation (Eq. ( The weak form of Eq. ( The computational domain is discretised with solid (or bulk) elements and zero-thickness triple-noded interface elements as shown in The finite element approximations of the solid displacement field and the pore pressure field are given by The gradients of the displacement field, which define the strain field, and of the pressure are thus given by The weak form of the momentum equation (cf. Eq. ( Introducing the FE approximations in Eq. ( The force vectors are given by Next, we turn our attention to Eq. ( And the flow external force vector is defined as For simplicity, the discussion is confined to linear interface elements but the method is equally applicable to quadratic elements. The pressure field of the fracturing fluid is approximated using the pressures at the mid-side nodes 5 and 6 ( The displacement jump across the crack which can be written as for the specific case of linear interface elements: The discrete equations of the interface elements consist of a mechanical part (from the cohesive tractions) and a flow part (from the fracturing fluid). The discrete equation of the mechanical part of the interface elements is derived by considering the virtual power on the crack Γ Upon the substitution of the finite element approximations for the virtual displacement jump and the pressure We now move to the flow part of the discrete equations. The fluxes at the fracture walls are given by Substitution of the FE approximations into Eq. ( For HF processes the acceleration term can be neglected, the final system of equations is, therefore, given by After assembly from both solid elements and interface elements one obtains the following system of equations Eq. ( The Jacobian is thus given by In the open literature computer implementation aspects of a HF code have not been provided. In order to close this gap, this section presents various practical details such as (i) how to generate interface elements with fracturing fluid nodes, (ii) how the interfacial integrals are evaluated, and (iii) how to enforce the continuity of the pressure field (if needed). The flow cohesive interface elements are implemented based on our standard cohesive interface elements which are usually used for modelling composite delamination ( The proposed FE formulation was implemented in the open source C++ code Jive In order to avoid the complex remeshing step during the analysis, interface elements are inserted, where needed and automatically, into the mesh prior to the simulation. In Another example where interface elements are inserted along all internal element edges is given in The bulk integrals Special care must be given to There is currently no consensus in whether the pressure across the fractures is continuous or discontinuous ( As the interface elements are inserted into the mesh prior to the simulation one needs to ensure that they do not open before crack initiation. There are different approaches to this issue. In the so-called In this section, three problems with increasing complexities are provided: (i) one dimensional consolidation, (ii) consolidation of a soil layer with a joint and (iii) the KGD plane strain hydraulic fracture problem. The first example is to verify the implementation of the poroelasticity part i.e., without fractures. The second example that concerns a stationary fracture is an easy test to verify the implementation of the fracture part. The third example concerns a propagating hydraulic fracture in an impermeable medium – the KGD problem. The first example is a uniaxial compaction test under drained conditions, also known as Terzaghi's problem as shown in Before presenting the numerical solutions the analytical solution ( The analytical solution for the pressure is given by ( For the numerical solution we use a mesh of 20 four-noded quadrilateral elements (Q4) (one element in the horizontal direction and 20 elements in the vertical direction) and a time step Δ In order to test the implementation of the flow cohesive interface elements, we consider the consolidation problem again but now with a vertical joint in the middle of the sample ( The result for case I, which is identical to the Terzaghi's solution, is not presented here. The problem is completely one dimensional as shown in The KGD problem concerns the propagation of a single fracture, due to the injection of an incompressible fluid under constant rate, in a impermeable, infinite, brittle elastic solid under uniform pressure as shown in The analytical solutions for the fracture length, the wellbore fracture aperture and the wellbore pressure are given by ( In order to render the numerical solutions comparable with the analytical ones, the model dimensions and material properties are selected such that the restrictive conditions for which the analytical solutions apply are adequately recreated. Specifically, the dimensions of the domain of analysis are much bigger than the fracture aperture and length, the permeability is small to minimise the influence of the poroelastic effects ahead of the fracture tip, and cohesive properties are selected to ensure a small cohesive zone relative to the size of the fracture (so that LEFM holds) ( The (plane strain) cohesive zone length, according to Rice, is given by ( Comparison between the analytical solutions and the numerical ones is given in Performance of the Newton-Raphson solver is shown in Next, performance of the quadratic flow cohesive interface elements is studied. We find that using Gauss quadrature to integrate the interface elements resulted in divergence due to crack penetration as shown in This paper is addressed to students or researchers who have been looking for a complete source of details to implement a finite element model for hydraulic fracture simulations (and also for nonlinear poromechanics problems). Therefore, a full framework of the method including pre-processing (how to insert porous interface elements into an existing finite element mesh), processing (how to compute all the matrices/vectors and solve the discrete equations), and benchmark problems with given analytical solutions was provided. Our implementation can handle both continuous and discontinuous pressure field, and both linear and quadratic elements are supported. We showed that Newton-Cotes quadrature must be used for quadratic flow cohesive interface elements at least for the KGD problem. Finally our simulations exhibit the so-called intermittent crack tip advancement as recently confirmed in The results presented in this work can be extended to inelastic porous media, partially saturated porous solids, fluid-lag and multiple fractures. The numerical examples addressed here are intentionally chosen to be simple so that they can be reproduced. Work are in progress to tackle problems with complex hydraulic fracture patterns. Funding support from the