The present research aimed to fabricate Fe–TiC–Al2O3 coatings on the surface of 1045 steel by gas tungsten arc cladding process. 3TiO2–4Al–(3+x)C–yFe (x=1.5 and 3, y
                     =0 and 1.71) mixtures were used as cladding precursors. The mixtures and the substrate were then melted using a gas tungsten arc cladding process. Results showed that a composite containing 20vol.% reinforcing phases was fabricated using 3TiO2–4Al–4.5C–1.71Fe precursor. The composite coatings formed by a four-step mechanism including, the formation of TiC into the Fe particles in front of the molten pool, the entrance of the Fe particles to the weld pool, the dissolution of TiC into the melt and finally, re-precipitation of TiC during solidification separately or on Al2O3 particles. Also, incomplete dissolution of some TiC formed TiC–Al2O3 colonies in the structure of the coatings. The hardness of the coatings increased up to the maximum of 830 HV which improved the abrasive wear resistance of the substrate.Ceramic-reinforced metal matrix composites (MMCs) have attracted considerable attention because of their high specific strength, stiffness, toughness, and wear resistance, as well as their good high-temperature stability, low fabrication costs, and good isotropic properties Nowadays, in order to fabricate new composite coatings with improved properties, two or more reinforcing phases are used instead of single reinforcing phase The first reaction in this system is the reduction of TiO Researchers have previously fabricated MMMC coatings on the surface of steel using various reactive mixture precursors and different cladding processes. A TiC–Al In almost all aforementioned studies, an Al–TiO The raw materials used in the present study as reactants were TiO Before cladding, the oxide layer was removed from the substrate surface using a milling machine and the plate was subsequently cleaned with ethanol solution. To produce a homogenous mixture of the raw materials, they were blended in planetary ball mill at 250 In the second series, 50 and 100 The cladding process was conducted using a welding rectifier (Gaam Electric Co.) on a moving table; the torch was fixed above the table, and the sample was moved at a constant speed. The self-propagating high-temperature synthesis (SHS) velocity depends on various parameters such as the reactant particle size, the green mixture's density, the presence of a diluent agent, and the initial temperature of the reactants. By preheating the 3TiO The XRD pattern of the coatings produced by the 3TiO The addition of 20 The basal projection of liquidus surfaces in the Fe–Ti–C ternary phase diagram at the Fe-rich corner is presented in  The SEM micrograph of the coating produced by the 3TiO It was indicated that the addition of Fe to the 3TiO According to the Fe–Ti–C phase diagram As indicated by white arrow in  The variations of Vickers' hardness taken from a vertical section of the coatings through the specimen in different samples are indicated in To assess the wear behavior of the coatings, dry pin on disk abrasive wear test was performed using 5  The aim of the present research was to assess the microstructure and wear resistance of the Fe–TiC–Al