Ninety-two patients with displaced Colles’ fractures were followed prospectively after manipulation under regional anaesthesia. Radiographs were taken before and after manipulation and after 3 months when a functional assessment was also made. A correlation was sought between outcome and radiological measurements. Final radial shortening of 3mm or more was associated with a significantly worse functional outcome after 3 months (P<0.001). Where the initial radial shortening was 3mm or more, the probability of malunion was 65% whereas with less than 3mm, the probability of malunion was 28% (P<0.001). With 5mm or more of radial shortening at presentation, the probability of malunion was 73% (P<0.01). The decision to manipulate remains a matter of judgement but a high failure rate renders simple manipulation and plaster cast fixation a poor treatment option in fractures with 5mm or more of radial shortening at presentation.Displaced Colles’ fractures are routinely treated in the Accident and Emergency department by manipulation under regional anaesthesia and plaster cast fixation. Many of these fractures re-displace. The aim of this study was to identify which radiological variables at presentation predict fractures likely to progress to malunion and unlikely to benefit from closed manipulation. Data were collected prospectively on 142 consecutive patients with displaced Colles’ fractures presenting to two Accident and Emergency departments in the South West of England. All had dorsal angulation of 15° or more, radial shortening in excess of 3 Gartland and Werley’s original demerit system for assessing outcome after distal radius fractures was modified in 1975 by Sarmiento with the addition of grip strength and loss of pronation. We have used a further modification by Altissimi which ignored the maximum points allocation to each category within the score as it is otherwise impossible to achieve a poor result ( Postero-anterior and lateral radiographs were taken at presentation, post manipulation and at 3 months. Measurements were made from these of dorsal and radial angulation, radial shift Univariate analysis, performed by SPSS statistical analysis software was used to determine the significance of any correlation between radiographic measurements and functional outcome. Patients were grouped according to initial radial shortening. The probability of malunion was calculated and the The modified Gartland and Werley score at 3 months was associated with final radial shortening ( The mean GWS was 7.1 (Good) in patients with a final radial shortening of less than 3 The mean GWS was 8.0 (Good) in patients with a final dorsal angulation of less than 15° and 11.2 (Fair) when it was 15° or more ( The greater the initial radial shortening the higher was the incidence of malunion ( In 86% of patients (79/92) manipulation improved radial shortening to less than 3 At 3 months, 18% of patients had an excellent outcome, 34% good, 45% fair and 3% poor, according to the modified Gartland and Werley score. Forty-one percent of patients achieved a satisfactory functional outcome at 3 months, similar to some series (Stewart et al., Variations in outcome may in part reflect a lack of reproducibility of the scoring system. Gartland and Werley’s original points allocation to groups of questions within their scoring system, made it impossible to achieve a poor result and the score has been used variably by different authors. We are not aware of any formal validation of this score which we use for reasons of precedent. In 38% of fractures radial shortening was reduced to less than 3 Final radial shortening of 3 Where there is 3 The decision to manipulate is a matter of judgement but we feel that a 73% risk of failure renders simple manipulation and plaster cast fixation a poor treatment option in fractures with 5