Although specialized metabolite distributions in different tea (Camellia sinensis) tissues has been studied extensively, little is known about their within-tissue distribution owing to the lack of nondestructive methodology. In this study, desorption electrospray ionization imaging mass spectrometry was used to investigate the within-tissue spatial distributions of specialized metabolites in tea. To overcome the negative effects of the large amount of wax on tea leaves, several sample preparation methods were compared, with a Teflon-imprint method established for tea leaves. Polyphenols are characteristic metabolites in tea leaves. Epicatechin gallate/catechin gallate, epigallocatechin gallate/gallocatechin gallate, and gallic acid were evenly distributed on both sides of the leaves, while epicatechin/catechin, epigallocatechin/gallocatechin, and assamicain A were distributed near the leaf vein. L-Theanine was mainly accumulated in tea roots. L-Theanine and valinol were distributed around the outer root cross-section. The results will advance our understanding of the precise localizations and in-vivo biosyntheses of specialized metabolites in tea.Tea ( Mass spectroscopy imaging (MSI) has seen rapid development as a technique to aid understanding of the locus of molecular entities inside biochemical and biological organisms ( To date, MSI has not been used to elucidate the spatial distributions of secondary metabolites in tea, which contain multiple and abundant characteristic metabolites. The major challenge when applying MSI technology to tea leaves is sample pretreatment, owing to tea leaf surfaces having a thick wax layer ( In the present study, DESI-MSI was used to investigate the within-tissue spatial distributions of metabolites in tea. To overcome the negative effects of the large amounts of wax on tea leaves, several sample preparation methods were compared and a porous Teflon (PTF)-imprint method was established for tea leaves. Furthermore, a direct sectioning method was used to prepare tea root samples. Using these optimized methods, the within-tissue spatial distributions of polyphenols and fatty acids in tea leaves, and Methanol was purchased from Thermo Fisher Scientific, Inc., Pittsburgh, PA, USA. Formic acid was purchased from Sigma-Aldrich Co., Ltd., St. Louis, MO, USA. Chloroform was purchased from Shanghai Aladdin Biochemical Technology Co., Ltd., Shanghai, China. PTF (a thickness of 1.6 mm, 36% porosity with 7 μm pore size) was purchased from Berghof group, Eningen, Germany. The experimental materials including tea ( Four sample preparation methods, including direct analysis without pretreatment ( From these experiments, PTF imprint pretreatment was found to be the most suitable for tea leaves. Therefore, the front and back side of the same tea leaves were imprinted on PTF sheets and applied to DESI-SYNAPT/MS analysis (Waters, Milford MA, USA). The root of one-year-old tea seedling was used in this study because this root tissue was tender and was easily cutted using a sharp scalpel. The thickness of cross-sectional slices was approximately 1 mm. Afterwards, it was glued onto a glass slides with double-sided tape and then was subjected to DESI-QTOF/MS analysis (Waters, Milford MA, USA). The direct cutting method was suitable for one-year-old tea root sample pretreatment, which effect was similar with that using a frozen slicer. The following parameters are usually optimized in the DESI system: ionization mode, solvent, flow rate, geometry (collection angle, incident spray angle, sprayer-to-inlet distance, and sprayer-to-surface distance), and pixel size. For tea leaf analysis, the appropriate DESI parameters were as follows: ionization mode, negative; mass range, 50–1000; solvent, acetonitrile with 0.1% formic acid; flow rate, 2 µL/min; collection angle, 10°; incident spray angle, 50°; sprayer-to-inlet distance, 4 mm; sprayer-to-surface distance, 1 mm; pixel resolution, 150 × 150 µm. The mass spectra collected as raw data were processed with Masslynx software V4.1, and images were viewed using HDImaging v1.4. To identify the metabolites, each interested peak was scanned for the details of MS For the tea root sample, the appropriate DESI parameters were as follows: ionization mode, positive; mass range, 50–1000; solvent, acetonitrile with 0.1% formic acid; flow rate, 1 µL/min; collection angle, 10°; incident spray angle, 45°; sprayer-to-inlet distance, 4 mm; sprayer-to-surface distance, 1 mm; pixel resolution, 20 × 20 µm. The mass spectra collected as raw data were processed with Masslynx software V4.1, and images were viewed using HDImaging v1.4. To identify the metabolites, each interested peak was scanned for the details of MS In the normal DESI-MS workflow ( Among all MSI technologies, MALDI and DESI have been widely applied in recent years. The ionization principle of MALDI-MS requires a sample embedded in a typical matrix that can absorb the laser energy and help transfer analytes into the gas phase and, finally, the ionic phase. The high laser precision guarantees high spatial resolution, which can reach 1 µm/pixel ( After optimization, the PTF imprint method was used for DESI-MSI analysis of metabolites in tea leaves. Using this approach, we detected only some fatty acids and polyphenols from tea leaves. This was attributed to two factors. First, PTF imprint methods can effectively transfer the abundant nonvolatile molecules. Second, the sensitivity of DESI technology can be improved to detect more low-content metabolites. To obtain the spatial distribution of molecules on the upper and lower surfaces of leaves, a more meticulous research method could be used to directly detect the leaf cross-section ( Theanine and valinol were distributed around the cross-section of tea root ( In the present study, tea leaf pretreatment methods were optimized for DESI-MSI analysis and the within-tea leaf or within-tea root distributions of metabolites were investigated. A PTF imprint method was suitable for tea leaf metabolite analysis using DESI-MSI. The catechin distributions on both sides of the tea leaves were not significantly different, but different catechins showed different distributions within the tea leaf. ECG/CG, EGCG/GCG, and gallic acid were almost evenly distributed on both sides of the tea leaves, while EC/C, EGC/GC, and assamicain A were distributed near the leaf vein. This study was supported by the financial support from the The authors declare no competing financial interests.