Flotation is controlled by the bubble–particle attachment mechanism which depends on the particle surface properties i.e., the particle composition, the surface liberation of valuable minerals and collector adsorption. This paper focuses on using the bubble–particle attachment method to understand the factors affecting attachment time. The attachment time measurements were performed with sized concentrates obtained by flotation of a copper sulphide ore (Northparkes Mine, Australia) in a mechanically agitated batch flotation cell. Quantitative mineral liberation analysis was used to determine the mineralogy of flotation concentrates. The results showed that the higher the amount of highly and moderately liberated copper minerals in flotation concentrates, the lower the attachment time. By using attachment time and collector dosage, we defined a non-linear empirical correlation to estimate Cu grade. The proposed empirical correlation has shown a satisfactory agreement between the calculated and the experimental Cu grade. These results showed that attachment time measurements are related to the Cu grade. This relationship may be used in the future to develop a practical method (without assays) to monitor changing grade for a specified system (flotation plant). It also may be possible to infer potential grade if mineralogy samples are available, but not enough samples are available for conventional flotation tests. However this requires a significant amount of further work.The key mechanism for successful flotation is bubble–particle attachment which is mainly investigated by contact angle measurements ( The measurement and the prediction of bubble–particle attachment time are very important since the information could potentially be used in the future optimisation, modelling and simulation of flotation circuits. However, the prediction of bubble–particle attachment time of real ore particles is very difficult since the surface chemistry of bubbles and real composite particles cannot be described from first principles and hence, the real value lies in ascertaining whether it is possible to establish an empirical model that links bubble–particle attachment time with flotation data. However, the literature does not provide an empirical model describing the relationship between bubble–particle attachment time and flotation data. For that reason, the main objective in this work is to investigate possible relationships between the bubble–particle attachment time and the degree of liberation of a copper-sulphide ore as well as to develop an empirical model which can successfully predict bubble–particle attachment time for an industrial system. Numerous researchers have used a device developed by Although the Glembotsky device has been typically used to determine attachment time, other techniques might be also used such as the wetting film stability measurements ( Various researchers have used mainly pure minerals such as quartz ( Apart from determining attachment time of pure minerals, attachment time has been also measured in the case of real composite particles ( Regarding the prediction of attachment time of real ore particles from the flotation data, The low grade copper–gold sulphide ore (1% Cu) was obtained from Northparkes mine (New South Wales, Australia). Major valuable minerals, found in this ore, are chalcopyrite (1.1%) and bornite (1.6%), while non-valuable minerals are mainly different type of silicates such as plagioclase (31.8%), quartz (14.7%), orthoclase (12.0%) and muscovite (11.4%). It should be noted that non-valuable sulphide mineral is pyrite (0.2%). The feed ore was prepared to a P The impeller speed was set at 800 The bubble–particle attachment measurements were conducted with the Induction timer from the University of Alberta, Canada ( Mineral liberation analysis of the sized samples of (53–106 The typical results of the flotation experiments are shown in In order to describe the relationship between recovery of the liberation class and flotation time (see The bubble–particle attachment time measurements were performed on the sized fraction (53–106  The copper mineral grade of particles in flotation products (Con-1, Con-2 and Con-3) collected when flotation pulp was conditioned at different SIBX dosages is given in  The mineral liberation measurements also provided liberation data for the Cu minerals.  Regarding the effect of collector dosage on the attachment time, it was found that the increase of collector dosage resulted in significant decrease in attachment time and a slight increase in the flotation rate constant. The reason for this is because the increase of SIBX dosage enhanced the surface coverage of SIBX molecules on Cu minerals, and thus surface hydrophobicity of these minerals was improved. However, quantitative determination of the surface coverage was beyond the scope of this work. The results of attachment time measured on concentrates were correlated with their Cu grade and collector dosage added during conditioning of flotation pulp. As seen in  By applying regression analysis to the experimental data, shown in A satisfactory agreement between the experimental and the calculated Cu grade was 13.3%, as seen in It is important to note that the effect of flotation time is indirectly incorporated into the attachment time i.e., the longer the flotation time the more poorly liberated particles would report to the concentrates, resulting in longer attachment time. The empirical correlation described by Eq. In this study, the bubble–particle attachment and mineral liberation measurements were used to relate the degree of liberation of Cu minerals with attachment time. The results demonstrated that the presence of highly and moderately liberated Cu minerals resulted in a decreased attachment time. This work showed that a non-linear correlation between the attachment time and Cu grade exists which may be used to predict the concentrate Cu grade. This work should contribute to a better understanding of bubble–particle attachment mechanism occurring during flotation of copper-sulphide ores. This relationship may be used in the future to develop a practical method (without assays) to monitor changing grade for a specified system (flotation plant). It also may be possible to develop a method to infer potential grade if mineralogy samples are available, but not enough samples are available for conventional flotation tests. This requires a significant amount of further work. Financial support from the