Boric acid has multiple uses in several industries, the pharmaceutical, glass and ceramic industries being some of them. Its obtaining involves the addition of sulfuric acid to slurry of calcium–sodium borate at 70°C and, after the removal of insoluble undesired material, the crystallization of boric acid by cooling the clear solution to 15–25°C. The residual mother liquor contains mainly sodium sulfate, sodium chloride and boric acid in concentrations depending on the composition of the borate ore and the temperature at which the boric acid is recovered. The addition of methanol or ethanol to these liquors is proposed to recover selectively most of the sodium sulfate by salting-out. This separation of the main component of the solution would not only produce a more easily disposable liquid waste but it would also reduce its over-all volume as it could be recycled into the main process. 98% of the sodium sulfate can be recovered with a 7:3 volume to volume ratio of alcohol to mother liquor. The recovery is improved when the concentration of boric acid is reduced before the salting-out. Ethanol proved to be 35% more efficient for the selective precipitation process than methanol. Sodium chloride and boric acid do not co-precipitate with the sodium sulfate.Boron minerals are used to obtain refined products such as boric acid and borax. These compounds have different applications in the pharmaceutical, ceramic and glass industries, among many others ( In Argentina, boric acid is obtained by the reaction of low grade ulexite (sodium and calcium borate) with sulfuric acid at 70 By-product calcium sulfate together with clay is separated as waste and, by cooling the mother liquors to a temperature of less than 25 In order to minimize water pollution, treatment and disposal of the liquors have been deeply investigated. Crystallization by cooling a brine obtained by evaporation is the most common process to separate salts from any aqueous system. Salting-out or drowning-out is another method to precipitate salts by adding a third component to the solution to change the solubility of a given solute.   Moreover, when an electrolyte is added, the salting-out procedure causes the decrease of the solubility of a non-electrolyte in water. As an example, the solubility of ethyl ether in water at 25 To our experience, the salting-out of sodium sulfate from boric acid liquor has not been studied. In this paper the use of ethanol and methanol as salting-out agents is proposed. The influence of boric acid in the recovery of sodium sulfate is also analyzed. Recovering by-product sodium sulfate allows the recycling of the mother liquor, saturated in boric acid, to the beginning of the process thus minimizing the liquid discharge. Sodium sulfate is also valuable as it is used, for example, in dyeing and stamping of fabrics (textile industry), and eliminating calcium from brines in order to obtain lithium carbonate. Mother liquors from two factories in Salta Province (Argentina) were the matter of study. The liquors were tagged as liquor A and liquor B. The chemical composition of the liquors is shown in The difference between the Cl The difference in the B Sulfate concentration in the liquors depends on the excess of H 96% ethanol and 98.9% methanol were used as salting-out agents. For the experiments, solutions containing different volume ratios of alcohol and liquor were prepared, specifically: 1:9, 3:7, 4:6, 5:5 and 7:3. They were stirred at a stirring speed of 100 Chloride was analyzed by volumetry using the Mohr method with a RSD of 4%. B Another test was made to study the influence of boric acid on the Na  With methanol, boric acid forms highly volatile boric acid methyl ester B(OCH Boric acid concentration in liquors A and B before adding alcohol is well below its corresponding solubility in water because of the crystallization process performed at temperatures lower than 25    In the original mother liquor sulfate concentration is below its solubility in pure water (see  The XRD spectra of some of the crystals, obtained at Institute of Geology and Mining of the National University of Jujuy laboratory, are shown in  Practically identical values of sodium sulfate recovery were obtained for both industrial liquors. While at low ratios of alcohol: recoveries are much higher for ethanol, at alcohol–liquor volume ratio of 5:5 and higher sodium sulfate recovery proves to be independent of the salting-out agent used. For alcohol–liquor ratio 7:3 over the 98% of sulfate is recovered. To study the influence of boric acid concentration on the sodium sulfate recovery both mother liquors (A and B) were cooled at 8  When boric acid liquors are treated with methanol or ethanol as salting-out agents, a selective crystallization of sodium sulfate is obtained. This crystallization is instantaneous and starts for alcohol–liquor volume ratios higher than 3:7. For the alcohol–liquor volume ratios used in the experiments NaCl remains in solution due to its low concentration in the original mother liquors, while boric acid does not crystallize because its solubility in alcohols is greater than in aqueous solutions. For mother liquors of both companies the sodium sulfate recovery is over 98% when the alcohol–liquor volume ratio is 7:3. When the H For alcohol–liquor volume ratios equal to 4:6 sodium sulfate recoveries using ethanol are 35% higher than those obtained using methanol. Considering that the recovery of sodium sulfate could be increased by performing the treatment in two or more stages, and that ethanol is less toxic than methanol, ethanol would be a better salting out agent for this process. The proposed treatment does not need expensive equipments or reagents and has two advantages: obtaining an important industrial sub-product and reduction of the volume of water used in the overall process of boric acid manufacture. On the other hand recovery and recycling of the alcohols should reduce the cost of these salting-out agents.