The non-dispersive solvent extraction (NDSX) of copper from aqueous ammoniacal/ammonium carbonate medium with LIX 973N using a microporous hydrophobic polypropylene hollow fiber contactor is reported. The influence of aqueous pH, ammonium carbonate concentration, copper concentration, extractant concentration, organic phase volume on relative concentration decrease of copper was investigated as a function of time. These experimental variables barely influenced the decrease in the relative concentration, whereas the module configuration (counter or co-current) influences copper extraction. The relative concentration can be well described as an exponential function of time. Copper stripping is accomplished using sulphuric acid solution.Various liquid membrane (LM) technologies have been developed for the treatment of heavy metals-bearing liquid effluents. These liquid membrane technologies included emulsion liquid membranes (ELMs) and supported liquid membranes (SLMs) in different configurations Non-dispersive solvent extraction (NDSX) processing is emerging as a competitive technique to conventional solvent extraction for the extraction of metals contained in liquid effluents LIX 973N is a new member of the oxime derivatives family and its performance has been proved on copper solvent extraction and flat-sheet supported liquid membrane technologies from ammoniacal/ammonium carbonate medium The characteristics of LIX 973N and Iberfluid (diluent) have been given in a previous paper The hollow fiber device used for the NDSX experiments was the commercially available unit 5PCS-1002 Liqui-Cel Laboratory Equipment, whereas a X30-240(G259) contactor was used for extraction or stripping runs. Both unit and contactor were obtained from Celgard (former Hoechst Celanese); the characteristics of the contactor are given in In the experimental device, the organic phase wet the microporous wall of the fiber because of its hydrophobic nature. The interface was immobilized at the pore by applying a higher pressure to the aqueous stream than to the organic stream Copper was analyzed by AAS (Perkin Elmer 1100B Spectrophotometer). The content of ammonia was estimated by an Automatic Steam Distilling Unit model UDR 130A (VELP Scientific). The equilibrium which governs the liquid–liquid extraction of copper from ammoniacal/ammonium carbonate solutions by LIX 973N is described by The loading capacity of LIX 973N has been determined contacting an organic phase (300 mL) of 5% v/v LIX 973N and an aqueous phase (1200 mL) containing 3 g/L Cu, 10 g/L ammonium carbonate at pH 9.5±0.1 during 3 h; after that, the aqueous phase was substituted by a fresh solution of the same composition as above and the contact was repeated. Experimental results showed that the loaded organic solution contained 3.3 g/L Cu, this value being consistent with results obtained by conventional solvent extraction and with that obtained with other LIX reagents. The influence of pH on copper NDSX has been determined using an aqueous solution (3 L) of 0.1 g/L Cu and 10 g/L ammonium carbonate and an organic phase (300 mL) of 5% v/v LIX 973N in Iberfluid. The aqueous pH was adjusted to values between 8.5 and 10.5. The results obtained showed that there is near quantitative extraction of copper (percentage values exceeding 99.0 after 3 h) within the pH range studied. The influence of the presence of ammonium carbonate in the aqueous phase on copper extraction has been studied by varying its concentration between 10 and 100 g/L. In all these experiments, the equilibrium pH was 9.5±0.1. The organic (300 mL) and the aqueous (3 L) phases were of 5% v/v LIX 973N in Iberfluid and 0.1 g/L copper, respectively. The results show that the presence of ammonium carbonate in the aqueous phase has a negligible effect on copper extraction; after 3 h, the percentage of extraction exceeded 99.0. Different variables were studied to investigate their influence on Cu(II) extraction by LIX 973N using NDSX technique. According to the literature From the results obtained with the present investigation, the following can be concluded. (i) Increasing the flow rate of the organic phase does not enhance the overall extraction rate; thus, it is possible to consider that the transfer to the bulk of the organic phase (step iii)) is not rate-controlling. This may be due to the strong affinity of Cu (ii) The change of organic phase volume does not have a noticeable effect on the extraction of copper. This can be also related to the high affinity of Cu (iii) The total concentration of copper does not control the extraction rate; this is also attributable to the continuous removal of copper from the aqueous phase at the aqueous-fiber interface by the organic phase flow which reduces the concentration of copper at this interface. This results in a high gradient of concentration between the aqueous feed and the fiber (organic phase) interface. The change in the metal concentration with time indicates that copper extraction follows kinetics of apparent first order in metal concentration: The influence of the module configuration on copper extraction was studied using an organic phase (300 mL) of 2.5% v/v LIX 973N in Iberfluid and an aqueous phase (3 L) of 0.1 g/L Cu, 10 g/L ammonium carbonate at pH 9.5±0.1. Though oxime extractants pick up ammonia The stripping of copper was studied using an acidic solution (180 g/L sulphuric acid) representative of a typical spent electrolyte from an electrowinning operation. Results obtained are summarized in From experimental data obtained from the present investigation and data obtained from the literature (some results given in (i) Either of the three technologies can be used to recover copper(II) from ammoniacal/ammonium carbonate solutions. (ii) Solvent extraction seems to be more suitable for the recovery of copper from more concentrated solutions, whereas non-dispersive solvent extraction and flat-sheet supported liquid membrane techniques are best suited for the treatment of dilute copper-bearing solutions. (iii) Different variables (i.e. aqueous pH, extractant concentration, etc.) equally influenced the recovery of copper using solvent extraction or non-dispersive solvent extraction technologies. The flat-sheet supported liquid membrane technique does not show its potential in this field (data on the scaling-up of the technology (i.e. in a hollow fiber module) are not available); in any case, LIX 973N performs equally well either in SX, NDSX or FSSLM. (iv) Using the three technologies, copper can be easily stripped from the loaded LIX 973N organic phases by acidic solutions (i.e. 180 g/L H Non-dispersive solvent extraction processing using LIX 973N in Iberfluid as copper extractant phase offers a technological alternative for metal removal from dilute copper ammoniacal/ammonium carbonate medium. In the present experimental conditions, neither aqueous equilibrium pH nor ammonium carbonate concentration influenced copper extraction. For a typical aqueous solution (0.1 g/L copper, 10 g/L ammonium carbonate at pH 9.5), the process is feasible with: (i) near complete extraction possible at A/O ratio of 10 if the initial extractant concentration in the organic solution is regulated with the corresponding amount of copper in the feed aqueous phase, (ii) negligible picking up of ammonia under complete organic phase copper loading, and (iii) near complete copper stripping possible using short reaction times and higher organic flow rates (i.e. test 6 vs. 4 in We thank CSIC for the support and Mr. Bascones and Mr. López for the technical assistance.