Interactions between copper ions and selected sulfide mineral concentrates were investigated in flask and column tests under conditions relevant to heap leaching in order to understand why copper recovery from a copper–nickel complex sulfide ore was significantly less than nickel recovery. Both pyrrhotite and pyrite were found to play roles in copper deposition from sulfate solutions in the range pH 1–5. The non-oxidative dissolution of pyrrhotite, previously reported to occur under acidic conditions of low oxygen availability, was also found to occur in a well-aerated system. Soluble copper reacted with the generated hydrogen sulfide to form copper sulfide, mainly covellite at pH >2.3 and its re-dissolution required acid, oxygen and a strong oxidant such as ferric ion. While significant copper also precipitated from copper sulfate solutions pH >3 in the presence of pyrite, the brochantite which was formed was readily re-dissolved at pH <3. The poor recovery of copper experienced in a test heap of copper–nickel sulfide ore was attributed to the presence of pyrrhotite and the rise in pH as the leachate percolated through the heap bed. The copper would only be recovered if acidic, oxidising conditions were restored in the heap.Heap leaching and bioleaching are low-cost technologies which contribute about 20% of annual world copper production and are practised world wide. It is not surprising, therefore, that recent high nickel prices have stimulated interest in applying heap leaching to nickel laterites and heap bioleaching to low-grade and difficult-to-process nickel sulfide ores. In the latter case, the results of bench-scale tests have been sufficiently encouraging to prompt the construction and operation of test sulfide heaps in Australia, Finland and China ( In two cases, the poor recovery of copper, compared with nickel, from complex copper–nickel ores was noted. At Talvivaara, Finland, a 17,000 tonne demonstration heap was constructed using a complex ore which contained pyrrhotite, pyrite, sphalerite, pentlandite, violarite and graphite and averaged 0.56% Zn, 0.27% Ni, 0.14% Cu and 0.02% Co ( Similarly, in about one year of operation, copper extraction from a test heap of copper–nickel sulfide ore from the Mt. Sholl deposit near Karratha, Western Australia lagged behind that of nickel by about 5–6 months, only achieving an extraction of about 50% of the contained metal in the heap, compared with about 90% for nickel ( In the present study, the interactions of soluble copper with the ore minerals pyrrhotite, chalcopyrite and pentlandite were investigated in flask tests under conditions relevant to heap leaching. In addition, because it is a commonly found mineral in complex sulfide ores, the interaction of copper with pyrite was also investigated. The conditions under which the copper that was deposited on pyrite or pyrrhotite surfaces could be recovered were investigated in column tests using concentrates supported on an inert host rock. Treated residues were examined using X-ray diffraction, Raman spectroscopy and SEM-based analytical techniques to identify copper-rich insoluble species and thus assist in describing the reaction chemistry of the different systems. A representative sample of a copper–nickel sulfide ore from the Mt. Sholl deposit near Karratha, Western Australia was pulverised to 100% passing a 125 μm screen. Mineralogical analysis using the Rietveld refinement of X-ray diffraction (XRD) data ( The chalcopyrite (CuFeS The pentlandite ((NiFe) The pyrite (FeS A pyrrhotite (Fe Quartz was crushed and screened to provide the inert ‘host rock’ that supported the concentrates for column leaching tests. Copper sulfate solution (150 mL; 1 g/L Cu and selected pH) was accurately weighed into a clean, dry, sterile 250 mL conical flask. The total mass of each flask and solution was recorded, and a sample of solution (~ Loss of solution by evaporation was compensated periodically by removing the flasks from the shaker and making up their previous mass by the addition of sterile deionised water. After the addition of water the flasks were shaken thoroughly and allowed to sit for 5 min so that the solid material would settle on the bottom of the flask. A sample of solution (~ After sampling, the pH of each experimental solution was adjusted to the required set point using sulfuric acid. The total mass of the flask and contents after pH adjustment was recorded before returning the flask to the shaker. At the conclusion of leaching the solid residue was collected using a 0.45 μm membrane filter, and rinsed with sulfuric acid diluted to the experimental pH using deionised water. The solids were dried at ambient temperature (20–25 °C) to minimise oxidation of the resultant products. The pH range tested in these experiments was pH 1 to 4, except for pyrrhotite, for which the range was pH 1 to 5. Ferric ion oxidation of covellite was examined at 45 °C using the procedure outlined above. In each flask, an accurately weighed sample of covellite (~ A known mass of quartz of particle size range − At the conclusion of the experiment, the columns were drained and the coated quartz particles collected. The sulfides were removed from the support rock by rinsing with deionised water and filtration of the resulting slurry, and then dried at ambient temperature. Solutions were analysed for Ni, Cu and Fe using a Varian Liberty 220 ICP–AES. The plasma was located in the axial position, with a total sample uptake time of 18 s and a washout time of 15 s. Solid samples were digested in aqua regia before ICP analysis. Solutions were analysed for ferrous ion content colorimetrically using a procedure adapted from X-ray powder diffraction patterns were collected from pulverised solid samples using a Philips X'Pert Automated Powder Diffractometer fitted with a Cobalt Long Line Focus X-ray tube. Patterns were collected between 2θ angles of 5–90° (at 40 keV, 30 mA), and interpreted using X-plot for Windows (Version 1.34). Phases were identified using the PCPDFWIN database (Version 2.02). Samples examined by SEM/EDS were mounted on carbon tape placed on a SEM stub and coated with two coats of carbon. The samples were analysed with a JEOL 5800LV scanning electron microscope at a working distance of 13 mm. EDS analysis was performed using an Oxford Instruments Link Isis system. Raman spectra were collected from granular solids using a Dilor LabRam 1B micro Raman spectrometer fitted with a 633 nm (HeNe) laser. A diffraction grating of 1800 grooves mm Flask tests, initiated with similar masses of soluble copper and solid substrate were monitored for about 70 h. Soluble copper concentrations increased to between 1900 mg/L (pH 1.5) and 1300 mg/L (pH 4) when chalcopyrite concentrate was treated with a copper sulfate solution (initially 1 g/L Cu), but in other tests with different substrates copper remained stable (± Direct reactions between cupric ions and chalcopyrite to form secondary copper sulfides are known, but occur very slowly (Eq. Tests using pentlandite concentrate displayed a small initial increase in copper content as a portion of the small amount of copper present in the concentrate was leached ( Pentlandite is oxidised readily by both molecular oxygen and ferric ions (Eqs. Pulverised ore, 100% passing a 125 μm screen, was treated with copper sulfate solution (1 g/L Cu) in the same way as the concentrates ( Copper losses in tests using pyrrhotite and pyrite were more substantial ( All tests containing pyrrhotite experienced an initial loss of copper from solution. The decrease at pH < Copper loss from solution appeared to be directly related to the presence of pyrrhotite, suggesting that this mineral was at least partly responsible for the delay in copper extraction in the test heap (compared with nickel recovery). No distinct trend between the amount of precipitated copper and solution pH was observed in the tests maintained at pH < Examination of residues revealed precipitates on the pyrrhotite surfaces ( Examination of the surfaces of the untreated and the treated (pH 4) pyrrhotite using Raman spectroscopy revealed the presence of elemental sulfur and goethite, due to surface oxidation ( The residues from higher pH columns yielded very similar X-ray diffractograms. In addition to elemental sulfur and unreacted quartz, peaks associated with unreacted pyrrhotite and the iron oxyhydroxides lepidocrocite (γ-FeO(OH)) and goethite (α-FeO(OH)) were detected. Unfortunately, the expected peaks for covellite would have been obscured by some of the stronger peaks associated with goethite, lepidocrocite or sulfur, and were not distinguishable from the background noise in other parts of the diffractogram. However, by refreshing the copper solution repeatedly, quantities of reaction products were increased and, together with significant amounts of unreacted pyrrhotite, lepidocrocite and elemental sulfur, covellite and possibly trace chalcopyrite were detected in the diffractograms. The observed results were consistent with covellite being precipitated on the pyrrhotite surface by reaction with hydrogen sulfide liberated during the non-oxidative leaching of pyrrhotite (Eq. In respect of the trace chalcopyrite detected with the treated pyrrhotite, Copper behaviour in the presence of pyrrhotite was examined under conditions of aeration and limited aeration in combination with varied pH in three series of columns in which the concentrates were supported on inert quartz chips of the size typically found in a heap leach operation. The conditions were: (i) aeration and synthetic leach solution ( Spraying or tumbling of a high solid density sulfide slurry onto or with an acid-stable support rock results in the formation of a thin layer of sulfide (approximately 1 mm thick) on the surface of the rock, which is stable under typical heap leach conditions ( Four columns were aerated and the synthetic leach solutions maintained at their set points between pH 1, 1.8, 2.5 and 3 throughout the experiment. These columns were intended to probe the impact of feed solution pH on copper precipitation onto pyrrhotite surfaces under well-oxygenated conditions. This experiment was similar to the operation of an aerated column loaded with ore, but effects should be magnified because the only reactive mineral present was pyrrhotite. The copper concentrations in the four reservoirs decreased at similar rates for the first five days ( For these columns, the pH of the discharge solutions was slightly higher than that of the feed solutions ( Comparison of copper curves for columns with feed solution pH 1 but different conditions of aeration ( In those columns where aeration was only applied after the feed solutions had been acidified to their selected pH set points ( For the unaerated columns and the columns for which aeration was applied after copper deposition, copper deposition on pyrrhotite was promoted by using an initial feed solution at pH 4. When the feed solution pH was adjusted to one of the selected pH set points, a very strong odour of hydrogen sulfide (H The results of the experiments strongly suggested that the deposition of copper in the presence of pyrrhotite was primarily governed by the leach solution pH but that the re-dissolution of the copper required the presence of an oxidising agent. The conditions required to generate ferric ions were not met in the unaerated columns, although total iron concentrations rose considerably in the low pH column ( In ancillary flask tests it was found that covellite oxidation (Eqs. Therefore, in order to minimise the precipitation of copper in a heap containing large amounts of pyrrhotite, it is necessary to ensure that a sufficient ferric ion concentration is maintained within a heap to oxidise any precipitated copper sulfide. It is at this point that the consideration of aeration within the heap becomes important. Although column tests performed in this study using both pulverised copper–nickel ore and pyrrhotite concentrate showed that relatively high aeration rates had little effect on the prevention of precipitation in a full-scale bioleach heap, its role is significant as a driver for copper recovery. Dissolved oxygen is required to ensure that bacterial ferrous ion oxidation occurs throughout a heap. The role of dissolved oxygen becomes even more important should a heap be inoculated primarily with sulfur oxidising bacteria, as ferric ion concentrations can only be maintained by the slower, oxygen-mediated oxidation of ferrous ions in the leach liquors. Although the copper–nickel ore contained very little pyrite, it is a common component of many copper sulfide ores, for example the Talvivaara ore ( Well formed, tabular crystals, indicative of slow crystal growth, were formed on the pyrite surfaces in the pH 4 test ( Brochantite was not detected when pyrrhotite surfaces were exposed to copper sulfate solutions and did not precipitate in ‘control’ tests conducted over the same pH range without pyrite addition. Thus it is hypothesised that the pyrite surface played a role in brochantite formation. The interaction of copper ions with pyrite has been examined previously. The results obtained in the present study indicated that the reaction of copper with pyrite in pyrite-containing ores could occur at lower pH than previously reported (pH ≥ About 70% of the copper in synthetic leach solution (pH 4) was deposited rapidly onto pyrite concentrate in columns irrigated for 16 days ( After the column feed solutions had been acidified, rapid re-dissolution of copper occurred in all columns, but with clear pH dependence ( Iron oxy-hydroxy species such as goethite (FeOOH) have been shown to form on pyrite surfaces exposed to atmospheric oxygen and water ( Ferric ions, which constituted about 50% of the total soluble iron, were negligible at pH ≥ Thus, pyrite caused the greatest loss of copper in the high pH tests ( Poor copper recoveries during the heap (bio)leaching of pyrrhotite-rich, complex copper–nickel ores are attributed to copper ion interactions with pyrrhotite surfaces. The H Copper sulfide re-dissolution requires low pH, oxygen and an oxidant such as ferric ion. In the absence of aeration, re-dissolution of copper precipitates from pyrrhotite surfaces cannot be achieved using leach solutions as low as pH ~ Although the selected copper–nickel ore did not contain significant pyrite content, pyrite often occurs in chalcopyrite and complex copper sulfide ores that may be amenable to heap bioleaching. Significant copper loss from solution was observed when a pyrite concentrate was mixed with a copper sulfate solution in tests pH > Loss of copper within an acid-consuming heap leach due to brochantite formation on pyrite surfaces would only be temporary. Dissolution of copper hydroxysulfates would occur readily once the pyrite surfaces were exposed to pH < Dr. A. Elliot is thanked for conducting ancillary experiments to confirm the presence of copper sulfides on pyrrhotite surfaces. M. Maley is appreciative of financial support from the Curtin University of Technology through a Curtin University Postgraduate Scholarship and for part funding from Titan Resources NL. Thanks are extended to Dr. Colin Hunter and Titan Resources NL for a description of the problem and for supplying the ore used in this study. The support of the Australian Government through the AJ Parker Cooperative Research Centre for Integrated Hydrometallurgy Solutions is gratefully acknowledged.