Previous research shows that the mechanical properties of sandstone are strongly influenced by porosity and grain area ratio (GAR). This study explores how these microscopic factors affect the elasto-plastic deformation of sandstone, and adopts a modified bonded-particle model to study the deformation behavior of sandstone under biaxial loading. Compared with the natural sandstone, the analysis model can effectively capture the elasto-plastic behavior of sandstone including non-linear elasticity and the variations of plastic flow. Furthermore, the simulated results of biaxial compressive tests show that the mechanical behavior of sandstone with different porosities and GARs possesses the following characteristics: The cohesion is significantly influenced by both GAR and porosity. Greater GAR and porosity values lead to a lesser cohesion. However, the influence of GAR on the friction angle is insignificant, and a lower porosity leads to a higher friction angle. For elastic deformation, the elastic shear and bulk modulus increase with decreasing porosity and increasing GAR. For plastic deformation, the influence of porosity and GAR on the variations of plastic angle β under different shear stress ratios seems insignificant. On the other hand, the plastic strain trajectory ξ increases with increasing porosity, but the influence of GAR is insignificant.Due to the complicated constituents of intact rock, understanding how the intrinsic microscopic properties of rock, including mineralogical and textural composition, influence macroscopic mechanical behaviors, such as strength and deformation, is an interesting topic in geotechnical research. Petrographic analysis provides a useful method to investigate the relationship between macro-scale behavior and micro-scale parameters. For example, many studies show that the microscopic characteristics known to affect the uniaxial compressive strength ( Jeng et al. Note that the porosity Young's modulus Eq. Given such deformational behavior of sandstone, it is interesting to see if porosity The numerical analysis in this study uses the discrete element concept to gain greater insight into the relationship between the microscopic properties of rock and its macroscopic behavior By combining the discrete element simulation and petrographic analysis, Hsieh et al. The modified bonded-particle model proposed by Hsieh et al. Since the proposed model contains three types of particles ( Furthermore, the sizes of the particles were determined based on the size distribution of natural sandstone, as shown in The specimen construction in this study followed the material-genesis procedure of Potyondy and Cundall According to the bonded-particle model, there is a total eight microscopic parameters to be determined. The parameters include the normal stiffness of particle This study adopts biaxial compression tests to explore the influence of confining pressure on the mechanical behavior of sandstone. To simulate biaxial compressive tests, the upper and lower boundaries were set as frictionless rigid platens, and lateral boundaries were flexible membranes composed of a series of tiny and uniformly sized particles with high bond strength and low stiffness. The membrane-particles were strong enough not to be torn apart, but could be stretched enough to deform freely. Hence, the membrane-particles behaved like the rubber membrane used in biaxial tests. Meanwhile, this study ignores the effects of gravity because the specimen is small, and the gravity-induced stress gradient has a negligible effect on the macroscopic behavior. The test simulation was divided into two stages: isotropic compression and shearing. Isotropic compression was simulated by applying a load, ranging from 5 to 40  Taking case G1_1 ( The deformation obtained from biaxial testing is further decomposed into elastic and plastic components, which are deduced from the unloading–reloading curve. The total strain tensor can thus be expressed in terms of these two components: For the elastic deformation, the elastic shear modulus  Remarkably, plastic deformation occurs before the failure of the simulated specimens. This section analyzes pre-peak plastic deformation. Considering both the volumetric and the shear strain increments, the plastic flow can be presented as vectors. The plastic flow angle When Additionally, for the magnitude of plastic strain increment, the plastic strain trajectory    Furthermore, Macroscopic elastic deformation is reversible, and mainly originates from the response of the stiffness of particles and parallel bonds during the loading process. Otherwise, the plastic deformation is irreversible, and is primarily induced by the volumetric change of pores due to particle movement and rotation after the breakage of parallel bonds. Especially when the shear band develops, high local porosity due to great particle rotation occurs inside the band, generating a significant plastic deformation. Previous experimental studies have reported similar phenomena The mechanical properties of rock are strongly influenced by porosity The cohesion is significantly influenced by both The elastic shear and bulk modulus increase with decreasing porosity and increasing For the plastic deformation, the influence of porosity and The results above not only reveal the micro-deformation mechanism of sandstone, but also provide a database for further micro-mechanic analysis of other factors, such as grain shape, grain breakage, and packing types.