Precambrian banded iron formations (BIFs) in the Quadrilátero Ferrífero host a special kind of Au–Pd mineralization known as Jacutinga. The main orebodies are hosted within the Cauê Syncline, a SW-verging fold that involves Paleoproterozoic metasedimentary rocks in the Itabira District, a regional synclinorium with BIFs in the core of synclinal folds in the northeastern part of Quadrilatéro Ferrífero, Minas Gerais. Structural analysis reveals two important features of the district: the polydeformed character of the rocks and the importance of brittle structures in the control of the orebodies. Two deformational events are recognized in this area. The first event developed the main foliation, S1, that is the enveloping surface of the Cauê Syncline. The second event is better defined in the northern boundary of the structure where it is represented by a right-lateral wrench fault zone that has developed a foliation, S2, that truncates S1. This wrench fault was also responsible for the development of a system of fractures (Frm) that host the Au–Pd mineralization. The auriferous bodies of Cauê Syncline (Y, X, Área Central, Aba Norte, Noroeste and Aba Leste/Aba Leste Inferior) were generated during this second event. Shear fractures (R, R′ and P) and tension fractures (T) developed in response to the wrench fault system under brittle conditions. The best-developed, and most commonly mineralized fractures are R and T in all auriferous bodies. Elsewhere, the best mineralization occurs in the contacts of hematite bodies (soft/hard) and intrusive rocks with fractured itabirites. Other mineralization (Aba Norte, Área Central and X) is hosted on the contacts of other units.
                  A system of fractures, as well as their intersections, thus represents the structural control on Jacutinga bodies and is responsible for the geometry of the orebodies. Of importance, there is no control by mineral/stretching lineations, fold axes and other ductile structure on the geometry and plunge of the orebodies.Ancient miners referred to a shiny black-feathered bird as Jacutinga, and also used the expression Jacutinga to refer to gold-bearing bodies. The Jacutinga is an auriferous orebody, of hydrothermal origin hosted by Superior-type banded iron formations (BIFs) and apparently restricted to the Quadrilátero Ferrífero (Iron Quadrangle) in Minas Gerais, Brasil. Since the beginning of the 18th Century, Jacutinga orebodies have been mined by mining companies and prospectors. From a geological point of view, this unusual type of gold mineralization has been the object of more recent, detailed studies but many questions regarding the nature of the mineralization processes remain unclear. From the standpoint of structural controls, this paper is the first to describe the geometry and relationships between the orebodies and the host rocks. Several authors have dealt with the Jacutinga question. The most important mined areas in the 19th Century were Gongo Soco, Bananal, Cata Preta, Maquiné and Itabira ( This paper addresses the Jacutinga deposits of the Cauê Syncline in the Itabira District on the northeastern boundary of the Quadrilátero Ferrífero ( The main focus of this study is on the question of the geometry and control of the Jacutinga bodies of the Cauê Mine within the Cauê Syncline. Previous data in the literature ( Presently-known Jacutinga deposits are hosted exclusively in Lake-Superior type Banded Iron Formations (BIFs) of the Minas Supergroup, a Paleoproterozoic platform sedimentary sequence ( The Quadrilátero Ferrífero is a 7000 km The Minas Supergroup is a metasedimentary sequence that unconformably overlies the Archean basement. Metamorphism reaches greenschist facies and locally amphibolite grade ( The structure of the Minas Supergroup rocks is strongly controlled by successive tectonic episodes that affected the area. NE and NW-verging structures are related to the Paleoproterozoic Eburnian (ca. 2.0 to 2.1 Ga) orogeny that involved NW contraction ( The Itabira District is sited over a regional synclinorium. The synforms are defined by the outcrop traces of the BIF ( Field mapping and detailed structural analysis of the Cauê syncline area supports a polyphase evolutionary model for the Itabira Synclinorium. The structural features can be grouped into two deformational events. Event 1 (D1) generated the Itabira Synclinorium ( Event 2 (D2) is responsible for the development of an E–W right-lateral wrench shear zone that truncates the regional cleavage, S1, along the northern boundary of the Cauê Syncline ( The 200 m-wide shear zone generated a system of fractures through which mineralized fluids ascended. Geometric and kinematic analysis of the sets of fractures is consistent with an E–W oriented contractional stress field. The set of structures described in the Itabira District can be correlated with the phases and events previously described in the Quadrilátero Ferrífero by several authors ( Six gold-bearing bodies occur in the Cauê Mine, within the limits of the Cauê Syncline: Y, X, Aba Norte (AN), Aba Leste (AL), Área Central (AC) and Noroeste (NW). The bodies occur in different spatial positions ( The Y Body was known in the past as the body of Mine Seven ( Host rocks to the Y Body are friable itabirites composed of bands of quartz and hematite, with concentrations of magnetite that have been transformed into kenomagnetite (weathered magnetite, Goethite bands are composed of goethite in association with hematite and magnetite. Kaolinite may occur in variable proportions. In places, hematite and gold are also associated with the goethite. Quartz bands comprise mainly coarse quartz grains and nodules of quartz cemented with goethite and some specularite, with zones of cryptocrystalline quartz and rare amethyst. Hematite bands with weathered magnetite also contain goethite, quartz and kaolinite. In kaolinite bands, white kaolinite occurs everywhere in thin films and is commonly associated with goethite and hematite, and some magnetite. Magnetite bands contain magnetite transformed into martite or to kenomagnetite. Magnetite concentrations occur as elongated and compact nodules with hematite in places. Talc and specularite concentrations normally occur in all bands described above. Bands with higher gold grades include the following associations: goethite–kaolinite–magnetite–hematite, goethite–hematite, hematite–magnetite–goethite, magnetite–hematite–kaolinite and hematite–magnetite. In Y Body, level 802, the thickest bands in an ore sample were separated and analyzed. Ore grades in goethite, hematite and quartz bands, respectively, are 390.57, 271.27 and 15.34 g/t, respectively. Magnetite crystals are abundant in the concentrate from all auriferous bodies, and there is a positive correlation between gold grade and magnetite concentration, both in concentrates and in bulk ore from the processing plant. The thicknesses of the ore zones are variable, from millimeters to over 50 cm, the most common being 1 to 20 cm ( Gold-bearing host rocks of the bodies X, Área Central and Aba Norte are itabirites and bodies of soft and hard hematite. Magnetite concentrations can occur in the itabirites of the Área Central and Aba Norte bodies and, more rarely, in the X Body. Hematite bodies are predominantly soft, except in the Aba Norte Body and in portions of the Área Central Body where they can be compact. In these auriferous bodies, the mineralization occurs predominantly at the contact between the lithologies described above. However, there are also many mineralized fractures that truncate the itabirites. The mineralization occurs in goethite, hematite and magnetite bands. Specularite, quartz and kaolinite are associated minerals, and rutile, tourmaline and pyrolusite are accessory minerals. The contact-hosted orebodies are everywhere thicker than those hosted in fractures in the itabirites. The average thickness is 0.2 m, but can reach up to 1.5 m in the Aba Norte Body. The principal characteristic of the X Body is an equivalent amount of manganese in the host rocks. The mineralization occurs at the contact between fractured itabirites and foliated soft hematite with manganese. Free gold is associated with hematite and goethite. Quartz, talc and specularite occur in variable proportions and kaolinite bands are common in the orebody, which has an average thickness of about 0.2 m. The Área Central Body has the same characteristics as the X Body, except for low manganese content. The mineralization is at the contact between fractured itabirites and bodies of soft or hard hematite, or in fractures that truncate the itabirites ( Similar to the Y Body, the Aba Norte Body was mined in the past as part of the Santana Mine ( The ore is composed of goethite and hematite bands with specularite, quartz and kaolinite, and accessory talc, rutile and magnetite. The thickness of the mineralized zone is about 0.3 m, locally reaching 1.5 m in tension fractures. Platinum group minerals are associated with Jacutinga in all auriferous bodies from the Itabira District. The minerals identified are: isomertieite ( Recent researchers with a focus on structural geology have characterized these bodies as having strong ductile structural controls with the control being attributed to stretching and mineral lineations ( In this study, detailed structural mapping of Y Body ( The first selectively mined level was level 893 m, with a median ore grade of 45 g/t. Median ore grades of about 25 g/t were then reached down to level 844 m. There, a decrease in the ore grades progressed to the current grade of 3.0 g/t in level 823. In the 49 m from level 893 to level 844, the body maintained a single structural control within two main fractures ( Despite the complex and widespread fracture arrays, two main sets of fractures can be defined. The first is the pattern between levels 893 and 844 where there are two main fractures with high and constant ore grades. Vertical fractures (N70E/90°) and inclined fractures (N30E/40°SE), that intercept each other characterize this system ( The second is the pattern of fractures located below the 823 level. From this level, the fractures have several orientations, forming a complex pattern with varied, but lower, grades than the upper fracture zone. Amid this complex pattern, two groups of almost parallel fractures with more constant grades can be defined. They have been called “Y Body 66” and “Y Body 67” ( Detailed mapping of key areas of the Y Body 66, on levels 811–808–805, shows that there are several interconnected fractures rather than a single planar fracture ( Detailed mapping of the Aba Norte Body at level 915 m shows that the highest ore grades are at Aba Norte 1, in bodies related to the wrench shear zone that truncates the northern limb of the Cauê Syncline ( As discussed below, the fracture array described above was generated during the D The shear zone truncates BIFs (itabirites) and also schists of the Nova Lima Group. The fault zone is not exposed in basement rocks of the Cauê Mine, due to extensive soil cover on both sides of the structure. However, some other wrench faults with the same trend truncate basement rocks close to the Cauê Mine. The main wrench shear zone is named ZTDFI (the Portuguese form for Wrench shear zone of the Itabira Ferriferous District; The right–lateral wrench shear zone is interpreted to have generated shear fractures (R, R′ and P) and tension fractures (T) with R and R′ developed in conjugate pairs in accordance with the Riedel pattern. In all the auriferous bodies, R and P fractures are better developed and better mineralized. T fractures are more abundant close to the wrench shear zone ( From a kinematic point of view, all fractures that trend northeast, N30–70E, are right-lateral synthetic structures. These fractures, in places, have an accentuated normal component ( The mineralized fractures more commonly occur in the packages of itabirites and in bodies of powdery hematite, but can also occur in compact hematite bodies, where the mineralization is more common at the contact with fractured itabirites. E–NE and W–SW trending fractures and shear zones commonly truncate the schists of the Nova Lima Group and gneisses of the basement. There is complete infilling with goethitic material in some fractures, whereas similar fractures are mineralized in BIFs. This shows that the basement rocks and the Rio das Velhas Supergroup were both involved in the fracture system that controls gold mineralization, even if fractures in these rocks are not well mineralized. In terms of the stress field at the Cauê Mine at the time of the mineralization, the existing structural elements, such as tension gashes, fold vergences and the spatial distribution of the system of fractures suggest two compressional directions: E–SE/W–NW and E–W. The fractures study suggests an E–W compression direction, with R and P fractures trending NE and R′ fractures trending NW. The field data show that synthetic fractures trend NE, antithetic ones NW, and the tension fractures E–W. Three types of plunge are defined: the plunge of the ore zones in the plane of the fractures, the plunge at the contact between hematite bodies and fractured itabirites and the plunge of the intersection of mineralized fractures. In terms of the plunge in the plane of the fractures, longitudinal section A–A′-located in Y Body, between levels 893 and 844, is a good example ( Longitudinal section B–B′, is located in Y Body 66, between levels 844 and 799, with an attitude of N60E/70°SE ( Gold mineralization also parallels the contact between soft/hard hematite bodies and fractured itabirites. Therefore, the plunge varies because the hematite bodies have different spatial positions. For example, AC and X bodies are in the central part of the mine whereas the AN Body is located inside the E–W trending wrench shear-zone ( An evaluation of the longitudinal sections indicates that there is a concentration of grades in the central part of the mineralized zones (BB′ and CC′) and that ore grades decrease laterally. The plunge of the mineralization in the Y and AN bodies is N20° E/28° to N60°E/35° within planes of fractures striking N60°–70°E and dipping 30 to 70°. Orientations of the foliation and mineral/stretching lineation ( Another plunge direction results from the intersection of mineralized fractures. Structural data suggest that the intersections of some fractures are coincident with auriferous concentrations. An example is Y Body, where the system of fractures is better developed and the mineralization is confined within it. The mineralized fractures trend 150/38° (P), 153/68° (R), 6/74° (T) and 8/32° (R′) ( The maps show that the intersection 72/20° is close to the attitude of the plunge of mineralization between levels 893 and 844. Additionally, sampling maps indicate that several enriched auriferous bodies occur in groups with attitudes of 72/20°, parallel to the 70/28° trend of the intersection of the R and P fractures along longitudinal section AA′ described above ( Some intersections between fractures have plunges close to those of the mineral/stretching lineations and folds axes, but field data clearly indicate that the fracture array is the predominant control. The Jacutinga is an auriferous ore type, of hydrothermal origin, hosted in fractures that truncate the BIFs (itabirites) and at the contact between those rocks and soft/hard hematite bodies and intrusive rocks. The Jacutinga has free gold, PGM and a lack of sulfides, with an at least partly secondary mineralogy of goethite, specularite, talc, kaolinite, manganese oxide, quartz, hematite and magnetite. The more common accessory minerals are tourmaline, monazite, zircon, apatite, ilmenite, epidote and rutile. Gold grade is extremely variable, including extremely rich ore zones. Two deformational events affected the Cauê Mine area in the Itabira District. The first event, D1, is the most prominent and responsible for the generation of the ductile cleavage, S1. The second event D2-phase 1 is represented by a wrench shear zone along the northern flank of the Cauê Syncline, with the generation of a S2 foliation, overprinting the pre-existing fabric. A mineralized system of fractures was then developed. The final D2-phase 2 generated crenulations and fractures. The structural analysis presented above demonstrates an important structural control on mineralization in the Jacutinga ores at the Cauê Mine. The auriferous bodies occur in brittle fractures that truncate itabirites and, more rarely, the hematite bodies, and at the contacts between fractured itabirites and bodies of soft/hard hematite. The fracture systems are related to the development of a wrench shear zone developed in the northern part of the Cauê Syncline. Such systems include conjugate pairs, R/R′, in all the studied bodies, and associated P and T fractures. Mineralization is hosted largely in the R, P and T fractures, more commonly in R and T. The auriferous bodies of the Cauê Mine are controlled by the intersection of fractures that truncate the regional foliation. The plunge of the mineralization is controlled by the intersection of brittle fractures, and is not parallel to the mineral/stretching lineations or fold axis or any other ductile structures as previously suggested in the literature. Development of this new concept on the geometry and dominantly brittle control of the orebodies has been responsible for more efficient exploration and mining, with significant impact on gold production at the Cauê Mine. The authors thank the Companhia Vale do Rio Doce, CVRD, for supporting the field and laboratory works. We also thank Prof. David Groves for improving the manuscript. Greg Arehart and F.R. Pires are also thanked for their reviews of the paper.