In recent years, developments in the field of lightweight armour have been of primary importance to the defence industry. This necessity has led to many organisations adopting composite armours comprising both traditional heavy armours and new lighter weight ceramic armours. The numerical modelling of metal based armour systems has been well documented over the years; and more recently advanced numerical methods have been utilised for the computational modelling of ceramic armour systems. It is the goal of this paper to demonstrate how a commercial finite and discrete element code, such as ELFEN, can be used in the further understanding of the response of combined ceramic/metal armour systems when subjected to large-scale dynamic loads through the combined techniques of adaptive remeshing, material erosion and particulate methods.
                  It is well established that penetration processes can be modelled using standard material erosion techniques. However for many brittle materials, including ceramics, the material regions close to the impact interface undergo comminution, which can effectively be numerically modelled as a continuum that will typically exhibit flow like behaviour. Furthermore, use of the commonly employed erosive techniques allows unavoidable material relaxation through element removal leaving voids at the impact interface, which for ceramic type materials introduces an invalid increased rate of damage accrual and hence an incorrect material response. One of the primary objectives of this paper is to present a new computational method which automatically transforms deformed finite elements into undeformable meshless particles. In addition, to overcome severe element conditioning associated with large deformation problems; it will be shown that this technique can be successfully coupled with adaptive remeshing techniques, which are themselves coupled to standard material erosion processes. An example presenting the potential benefits of this form of domain update method, in contrast to the traditionally used material erosion techniques, will be demonstrated for the computational modelling of brittle materials used in multiple component armour systems, which are frequently encountered within today's defence industry.Johnson–Holmquist normalised intact strength coefficient; Johnson–Cook yield strength Johnson–Holmquist normalised fractured strength coefficient; Johnson–Cook hardening coefficient elastic bulk wave velocity Johnson–Holmquist strain rate constant; Johnson–Cook strain rate constant specific heat capacity Johnson–Holmquist damage constant Johnson–Holmquist damage constant elastic modulus adaptive error assessment frequency; adiabatic heating conversion factor elastic shear modulus Johnson–Holmquist Hugoniot elastic limit elastic bulk modulus; Johnson–Holmquist pressure constant Johnson–Holmquist pressure constant Johnson–Cook softening exponent Johnson–Holmquist fractured strength exponent Johnson–Cook strain hardening exponent Johnson–Holmquist intact strength exponent Johnson–Holmquist pressure slope in Johnson–Holmquist maximum fractured strength Johnson–Holmquist maximum intact strength Johnson–Holmquist maximum tensile hydrostatic pressure; Johnson–Cook temperature Johnson–Cook melting temperature, Johnson–Cook reference temperature element volume Johnson–Holmquist bulking parameter total incremental strain rate equivalent inelastic strain Johnson–Holmquist inelastic fracture strain Mie–Grüneisen equation of state coefficient adaptivity element distortion error material density equivalent stress, equivalent stress at the Hugoniot elastic limit Johnson–Holmquist fully fractured material strength Johnson–Holmquist intact material strength The use of ceramic material is becoming more important in the design of lightweight vehicle armour. Combined ceramic and metal armour have the potential to be used in highly weight efficient armour systems not only for today's projectile velocities (1500–1800 The purpose of this study is to demonstrate that techniques based on, not only erosive techniques, of adaptive remeshing and meshless particle methods can obtain well-defined and time-resolved results for long-rod penetration in ceramics. These methods are pursued in order to provide additional tools for the numerical modeller to enhance the understanding of penetration processes that occur at various impact velocities, such as those of radial flow of the projectile (interface defeat) and of intermittent and asymmetrical penetration. The influence of the impact velocity of tungsten long-rod projectiles and target confinement on penetration velocity has been formerly investigated through materials erosion simulations The brittle failure model proposed by Johnson–Holmquist The numerical simulations demonstrated are based on experimental work presented by Lundberg et al. Previous works have demonstrated that Lagrangian based erosive or adaptive methods can be successfully applied to the penetration processes associated with high velocity impact situations in ceramic or metallic armour systems Numerical material erosion techniques. Mass conserving adaptive remeshing techniques. Finite element conversion to meshless particles. As previously stated the boron carbide ceramic target will be modelled in a similar fashion to that of Westerling et al. In addition, the metallic elements of the tungsten alloy penetrator and the steel confinement are numerically modelled using the Johnson–Cook viscoplastic constitutive model For the present simulations where material erosion is the chosen failure mechanism, the deactivation of elements in the finite element system is governed through the accumulated inelastic strain measure. This form of measure will be similarly applied for all system constituents whether they are metallic or ceramic. The threshold values for each constituent in the simulation are taken as those presented by Westerling et al. For the case of material erosion employed as the principal means of material removal, the domain is initially discretised with a fine distribution of four-node quadrilateral elements. For the simulations there is initially a higher concentration of elements, with mesh density 0.30 For the erosive simulation presented the penetrator undergoes steady penetration through the steel confinement and into the boron carbide ceramic. The penetration of the tungsten penetrator into the confined boron carbide target, obtained from the erosive simulations, is summarised by the plots presented in The use of adaptive remeshing of a domain requires the careful monitoring of all elements within the domain to allow the appropriate timings of mesh regeneration through use of remeshing criteria. In addition, it ensures that any subsequent generations of meshes allow appropriate prediction of element densities. Mesh adaptation is triggered by control criteria, which monitor threshold values of specific problem parameters. Typical quantities such as the element distortion and nodal quantities such as velocity gradients are often employed If the mesh control threshold distortion value is violated then the error map generated is used as an initial prediction of the optimum mesh density for the updated mesh. The prediction of the final optimum mesh density for the newly generated mesh is often based upon the effective inelastic strain measure Although, when using adaptivity, it is generally not required to use material erosion, in the simulations presented it is necessary to provide a minimal amount of element deactivation in order to primarily permit the perforation of the steel confinement, thereby allowing the tungsten sintered alloy penetrator to penetrate into, and in some cases perforate, the boron carbide ceramic cylinder. Since mass integrity of the domain is a feature of adaptive remeshing, mass erosion will be minimised and mass loss will be predominantly due to the removal of elements to allow the perforation of the steel confinement. Again the controlling mechanism for the deactivation of elements in the adaptive finite element system is governed through the accumulated inelastic strain measure. This type of measure will be similarly applied for all system constituents whether they are metallic or ceramic. Only the erosion threshold values for each constituent will differ, the associated values are given in For the adaptive simulation, the passage of the penetrator is very similar to that predicted using the material erosion technique. The penetration of the tungsten penetrator into the confined boron carbide target, obtained from the adaptive simulations, is summarised by the plots presented in For the adaptive case there are petals flowing from the penetrator tip back towards the initial impact surface. It is clearly apparent that the petals constitute the material that would typically be eroded in the standard erosive simulation. In addition, the adaptive remeshing leads to a much smoother contact interface between the individual material surfaces, resulting in what appears to be a much smoother final solution. Since the finite element mesh is continually being updated and triggered using a mesh distortion error indicator, the numerical resolution should be superior to the erosion case as the number of ill-conditioned elements will be minimal due to adaptive remeshing. It is also noted that the petals of the penetrator lead to a slightly wider crater present in the ceramic when compared to the crater created by the material erosion simulation. Ultimately, sharp corners created by the perforation of the steel confinement by the tungsten penetrator in the erosive simulation, have been smoothed through the use of adaptive remeshing. Experience has shown that the smoothing of the sharp corners can be attributed to two things. Firstly, the element sizes predicted from the inelastic mesh prediction criteria are potentially too large, but a trade off with between computational efficiency must be attained. Secondly, the implemented mesh transfer operators Penetration The conversion of deformed finite elements has been previously investigated with regard to discrete fracture models whereby discrete element fragments are converted into undeformable meshless particles Consider a deformed finite element mesh, as shown in In In addition, the present conversion process differ from the formulations proposed by Johnson et al. As shown in As It should be noted that all three constituents experience adaptive remeshing in order to maintain element conditioning. Element deactivation will occur additionally, if the corresponding element critical time step is deemed to violate a user defined minimum of 1.00E–009 In For the simulation presented the penetrator undergoes a steady penetration through the steel confinement and into the boron carbide ceramic. The passage of the penetrator is very similar to that predicted using the material erosion technique and adaptive techniques previously presented In accordance with previous researchers It can be seen, from The use of individual material erosion or adaptive techniques within finite and discrete element formulations have been established in the numerical modelling of metallic/metallic armour systems It is intuitively thought that at the impact interface, ceramic materials often undergo comminution whereby material behaviour is apparently dominated by a fluid like flow behaviour. It is clear that the description of the final damaged state of the material is critical in this type of numerical work, due to the physical system being largely dominated by fully fractured material during penetration. Hence the fractured strength curve is critical to the complete and accurate description of the flow like properties of the material. However caution must be taken when using methodology traditionally applied to ductile materials and applying it to brittle type materials. A similar result when using material erosion and adaptive methods have often been obtained for metallic systems, but it has not been investigated in depth for ceramic type materials as encountered here. Subject to this caveat, the advantage of providing a combined adaptive and erosive technique is that the modelling will provide superior mass conservation than using a purely erosive methodology. Indeed were perforation of a target component not required, e.g. the case of a single unconfined target, then adaptive remeshing could be employed alone and idealised mass conservation could be attained. Further, reiterating the remark of Johnson et al. This work was sponsored in part by the Engineering and Physical Sciences Research Council (EPSRC) under the support of the Defence Science and Technology Laboratories (DSTL), Chertsey, UK. The governing equations used in the Johnson–Holmquist original formulation The standard definition for the evaluation of the volumetric strain takes the original given form given in However, for the case of adaptive remeshing the function that evaluates the volumetric strain becomes invalid since the mesh is frequently changing. Hence to overcome this, the volumetric strain is evaluated from the summated incremental total strains over the element and when an automatic remeshing is required the total volumetric strain is mapped For the transition stage, when the material is neither intact nor fully fractured the damaged material equivalent strength is formed as a combination of these two material strengths as The damage term The term As stated previously the distortion of a given finite element can adversely affect the ability to obtain a numerical result that is of the desired resolution. To this end Dyduch However due to the simplistic nature of this indicator, there are key issues that render the above formulation problematic for many mesh discretisations. One of the fundamental difficulties, lies with the fact that when an element undergoes a distortion that is purely shear based, zero volume change will be realised, hence the element can potentially be highly distorted yet the indicator suggests that there is zero deformation occurring. In order to combat this shortcoming, it has been proposed that supplementary checks be made if the initial indicator This form of distortion estimation lends itself as an ideal tool for triggering automated adaptive remeshing due to the fact that the computation is relative based. It must be recognised that the distortion indicator is primarily required as a means of providing a level of automation for initiating the remeshing process. The role of the distortion indicator is to initiate remeshing with the new element size distribution being based upon an appropriate error estimation procedure. In the current work, the error indicator based on the plastic dissipation and plastic work rate of the finite element system, originally proposed by Perić et al. Comparing the relative global error Through use of the current element size and the value of error predicted by the error estimator, it is possible to evaluate the predicted element size of the new mesh using the relationship, The terms As an alternative to employing the error estimator as a means of predicting mesh densities Yu Schemes that prevent large changes in mesh density between adjacent elements can further enhance quality of the predicted finite element mesh. Mesh smoothing functions ensure that the percentage change in the mesh density between a set of locally adjacent elements cannot exceed a user specified tolerance. The utilised mesh smoothing function used takes the form, If mesh smoothing is not used, it is possible that, due to the non-smooth nature of the mesh, problems could be encountered later with further mesh regeneration due to the possibility of ill conditioned elements. If the inelastic strain (or strain rate) is used as a criterion for density prediction of the finite element mesh in addition to using the mesh smoothing function to minimise high gradients in changing mesh density it is necessary to perform these two operations sequentially yet still ensuring that each operation must satisfy the element densities specified in the user defined global bounds. The procedure that must be adopted to ensure compliance of mesh prediction and smoothing for predicted mesh densities is given in