In this investigation the flow curves of a duplex stainless steel were drawn by performing hot compression tests over a wide temperature range of 950–1200 °C and strain rates of 0.001–100 s−1. The flow curves of ferrite and austenite phases in the duplex structure were depicted by conducting similar hot compression tests on two steels that were cast and prepared with the same chemical compositions. The flow curves of the austenitic steel were found typical of dynamic recrystallization. They were successfully modeled by using the experimental exponential equation proposed by Cingara and McQueen. The flow curves of the ferritic steel were typical of dynamic recovery. They were modeled by the dislocation density evolution function proposed by Estrin and Meckning. Comparing the flow curves of three studied steels, it was found that the flow curves of the duplex steel were very similar and close to those of the ferrite steel. It was understood that in a duplex structure of ferrite and austenite the flow behavior is mostly controlled by the softer phase, i.e. ferrite. The law of mixture was modified to consider the strain partitioning between ferrite and austenite. The distribution coefficients of ferrite and austenite were described and determined at different deformation conditions. The results of modeling satisfactorily predicted the experimental curves. It was shown that the influence of austenite on the flow behavior of the duplex structure is almost low. However, it increases as strain rate or temperature rises.The need for both high corrosion resistance and desired strength characteristics has introduced duplex stainless steels (DSS) as deserving alternatives to single phase austenitic and ferritic grades Modeling of strain partitioning has been attempted by several researchers Chemical composition of the DSS 1.4462 used in the present study is shown in The chemical composition of ferrite and austenite phases of 1.4462 (2205) DSS over the studied hot working temperature was calculated using the Thermocalc software. In order to model the hot deformation behavior of each phase two alloys were cast and prepared according to the calculated compositions. The calculated composition of ferrite and austenite using Thermocalc as well as the composition of cast billets are summarized in The true stress–strain curves were calculated from load-stroke data and then were corrected for the effects of friction and deformation heating by the methods proposed by Ebrahimi and Najafizadeh The austenitic stainless steel produced with the chemical composition corresponding to the austenite phase in the studied 1.4462 DSS was subjected to hot compression tests as mentioned previously. Some representative flow curves of this material for constant deformation temperature and strain rate are shown in The first step in the modeling of the flow curves is to determine the dependence of peak strain and stress on the deformation variables. Thus, the value of the apparent activation energy for hot deformation should be determined using the constitutive analysis. The value of Different phenomenological or experimental models can be used to predict the flow curves of the austenitic steel. However, considering the aspects of the flow curves, the experimental method proposed by Cingara and McQueen seems to be more applicable The representative flow curves of the ferritic stainless steel are indicated in The differentiation of which gives: Substituting 1 − ( The plots of Indeed As discussed in the previous chapters, the flow behaviors of ferrite and austenite as separated phases can be successfully modeled using experimental or phenomenological methods. However, in case of the coexistence of these phases the contribution of each phase should be considered carefully. The contribution of the ferrite and austenite in the total strength of the DSS depends on the amount of strain that is partitioned in each phase. The strain partitioning is elicited from the remarkable difference between the strength levels of these phases apparent when comparing the same deformation conditions in In order to model the flow curves of the studied DSS the law of mixture is applicable because it is capable of considering the strain partitioning and different strengths of the constituents. The law of mixture is developed via the following equations: Eq. Therefore, by considering contribution coefficient for ferrite as As mentioned, at high strains the contribution of ferrite decreases gradually and austenite comes to accommodate the greater part of plastic strain. At iso-strain condition (Eq. This means that both austenite and ferrite bear the same strain as applied on the DSS. The stress terms in Eq. The values of flow stress of ferrite, austenite and DSS can be substituted respectively from The original form of the law of mixture in a DSS can be written as a combination of Eqs. This equation takes the advantage of the iso-strain condition at any strain by considering a distribution coefficient for each phase. The distribution coefficient for each phase is defined as the multiplication of volume fraction by the corresponding contribution coefficient. Therefore, Eq. By using the values of The major outcomes of this investigation are listed as below: The flow curves of the austenite phase in the duplex stainless steel were typical of dynamic recrystallization. They were modeled by using the experimental exponential equation proposed by Cingara and McQueen. The flow curves of the ferrite phase in the duplex stainless steel were typical of dynamic recovery. They were modeled by the dislocation density evolution function proposed by Estrin and Meckning. The flow curves of the duplex steel were very similar and close to those of the ferrite phase. It was understood that in a duplex structure of ferrite and austenite the flow behavior is mostly controlled by the softer phase, i.e. ferrite. The law of mixture was modified to consider the strain partitioning between ferrite and austenite. The distribution coefficients of ferrite and austenite were described and determined at different deformation conditions. The results of modeling satisfactorily described the experimental curves. It was shown that the influence of austenite on the flow behavior of the duplex structure is rather low. However, it increases as strain rate or temperature rises.