This paper assesses the physical, chemical and mineralogical characteristics of fine recycled aggregates obtained from crushed concrete waste, comparing them with two types of natural fine aggregates from different origins.
                  A commercial concrete was jaw crushed, and the effect of different aperture sizes on the particle size distribution of the resulting aggregates was evaluated. The density and water absorption of the recycled aggregates was determined and a model for predicting water absorption over time is proposed. Both natural and recycled aggregates were characterized regarding bulk density and fines content. Recycled aggregates were additionally characterized by XRD, SEM/EDS and DTA/TG of individual size fractions.
                  The results show that natural and recycled fine aggregates have very different characteristics. This should be considered in potential applications, both in terms of the limits for replacing amounts and of the rules and design criteria of the manufactured products.Concrete is the most used construction material, with estimated annual production of 10 Another concern of the construction industry is the significant waste generation, with an estimate of 850 to 880 Recycled aggregates are composite materials formed from cement, aggregates, water and eventually admixtures or partial cement replacement materials. The resulting properties are substantially different from those of natural aggregates and strongly dependent on processing and treatment Resulting from the presence of adhered mortar, FRA have lower density values than FNA It was also established that FRA particles are more angular, irregular and porous than FNA A route to improve FRA characteristics is to submit them to comminution processes similar to those applied to FNA Regarding chemical and mineralogical analysis, XRD or XRF have shown diversity inherent to the nature of recycled materials. Solyman Heinz and Schubert Shui et al. Overall, FRA can be used either as FNA replacement in concrete or mortar production The introduction of higher amounts of FRA in the production of concrete represents an opportunity for the construction industry. However full understanding and confinement of the properties of the aggregates and of their effect upon concrete are mandatory. In this context this work aims at systematically studying the physical, chemical and mineralogical properties of fine recycled aggregates made from concrete waste. Based on these results, researchers and concrete manufacturers will be able to employ an extensive range of properties on mixes design that can boost the use of FRA, disputing the common preconception that these materials are not suitable for concrete production. The FRA used in this work were obtained from a C25/30.X0. S3.D FRA density and water absorption ability were evaluated according to the procedure proposed by Rodrigues et al. The setting evolution of FRA was accompanied using a Vicat needle, according to NP EN 196-3:2005 Mineralogical analysis by XRD was carried out with a Panalytical X’pert Pro diffractometer using CuKα Microstructural features of both FNA and individual size fractions of FRA were studied by field emission gun scanning electron microscopy (FEG-SEM) (Jeol JSM-7001F) coupled to energy dispersive spectroscopy (EDS) (Oxford Instruments Inca PentaFETx3). The phases present, particle shape and regularity, cracking and porosity were assessed. Before observation particles were oven dried at 60 Thermal analysis (Netzsch STA 409 PC) was carried out on individual size fractions, in order to evaluate physical and chemical events involving the phases present. All samples were crushed to powder and submitted to simultaneous differential thermal analysis and thermogravimetry (DTA/TG). Metered amounts of powder were heated up to 1100 The results on FRA features were compared with those of two natural sands, a washed fine silica sand containing feldspars (FNA1, The FNA used for comparison purposes were further characterized by SEM and XRD. Although FNA1 is river sand, it has irregular, angular morphology ( The FRA content at the jaw crusher’s exit was determined for the three defined apertures, rendering 43.7%, 25.8% and 17.2% for the minimum, medium and maximum apertures, respectively ( The size distribution of FRA passing the 125 The standard test for density and water absorption evaluation presents issues when applied to FRA, resulting from the cohesive and binding ability introduced by the presence of partially hydrated cement The Vicat needle test results up to 24 The process proposed by Rodrigues et al. The evolution of water absorption with time for the FRA under analysis is shown in FRA present bulk density values respectively 9.8% and 14.5% smaller than the fine (FNA1) and coarse (FNA2) sands ( FRA bulk density was also analysed for each of the individual size fractions ( The sand equivalent (SE) test method was carried out to rapidly assess the fraction of fines below 63 SE results for individual FRA fraction are shown in Diffractograms for the FRA fractions in study are shown in The number of counts in the most intense diffraction peaks of each crystalline phase present in the diffractograms was further used for additional qualitative analysis of FRA ( The absence of a detectable amount of anhydrous cement compounds suggests that the hydraulicity detected in FRA is not a direct result of the presence of unhydrated cement. Instead, it is the pozzolanic effect of unreacted fly ash that can render them the ability to react with calcium hydroxide (Ca(OH) SEM observation was carried out on the individual FRA size fractions under analysis. The observation of the 125 The morphology of FRA in the 250 The observation of FRA in the 500 All FRA in the size fractions between 1 In the absence of unhydrated cement particles (particularly C2S), it is the presence of a significant amount of fly ash together with CH compounds and their reaction that justifies the FRA setting phenomena identified during water absorption tests, in good agreement with results by Poon et al. Several chemical and physical transformations take place in concrete during heating The stoichiometric balance in Eqs. This work studies the physical, chemical and mineralogical characteristics of fine aggregates obtained from crushed concrete waste and compares them with those of natural fine aggregates from various origins. It was found that the amount of fines produced during crushing of the source concrete depends on the jaw’s aperture. The minimum aperture produces approximately 2.5 The smaller size fractions present high mortar contents with scarce presence of natural aggregates. On the other hand, higher size fractions present considerable amounts of natural aggregates, both isolated and containing adhered mortar. In this case the presence of cracks is frequent at the paste/aggregate ITZ, which constitutes a mechanical strength issue. FRA morphology is non-uniform, containing a mixture of C–S–H and CH formations. Fly ash cenospheres are also present, promoting the occurrence of secondary reactions between active silica in fly ash and CH, which leads to FRA cohesive ability and hydraulicity. FRA density is lower than that of FNA as a result of the porous nature of the old cement paste present, either loose or adhered to aggregates. This results on substantially higher water absorption ability, reaching 900% of that of FNA. The study of FRA water absorption kinetics is thus mandatory for the design of concrete mixtures, and an empirical relationship was established between the amount of absorbed water and immersion time. FRA apparent density is also 10% to 15% lower than that of FNA, resulting from its higher porosity. The mineralogical composition and thermal behavior of the recycled aggregates are not significantly affected by particle size, although the relative amount of each phase present varies. All size fractions present high amounts of calcite – arising not only from limestone natural aggregates, but also from the presence of concrete carbonated components – and also silica and feldspars – arising from natural aggregates. Within the XRD equipment detection limit the presence of dicalcium silicate (2CaO·SiO This work shows that natural and recycled fine aggregates have very different characteristics and behavior. The particular features of FRA do not justify restraining them from concrete composition, provided that they are considered in the proposed applications both in terms of the replacement ratio limits and of the rules and design criteria of the manufactured products. The authors gratefully acknowledge the support of the