At present, the most considerable defects of electro-catalytic process lie in low current efficiency and high specific energy consumption. Besides electrodes, current parameters and reaction system, the power supply mode is also of great significance for optimization of electrochemical oxidation. Traditional power supply modes include constant voltage mode, constant current mode and pulse mode. Based on the concept of limiting current density, this paper proposed a linear attenuation power supply mode and set up three different application modes. This novel power supply mode is to make the current input into the electro-catalytic system continuously decay over reaction time, which were simulated adopting a computer-controlled programmable DC power. Acid Red G, phenol, guaiacol, salicylic acid and actual water samples from sewage treatment plant were taken as the target organic substance, furthermore, the advantages and disadvantages of three linear attenuation modes and traditional constant current mode were compared through electrochemical oxidation experiments in terms of varying evaluation parameters. The experimental results indicated that Mode I (same initial current density, different attenuation rates) obtained higher average current efficiency and lower specific energy consumption than constant current mode in order to achieve the equivalent degradation performance. However, the decolorization rate and COD removal rate of Mode I were lower than those of traditional constant current mode. Mode II (direct linear attenuation) and Mode III (constant current before linear attenuation) were superior to the traditional constant current mode with the same input total power in the aspects of decolorization rate, COD removal rate, average current efficiency, specific energy consumption and etc. Those results were further verified in different organic matters wastewater samples and actual wastewater samples. For actual wastewater samples treatment, the experimental average current efficiency and specific energy consumption of Mode II (6.96 %, 0.237 kWh·gCOD-1), Mode III (8.89 %, 0.209 kWh·gCOD-1) and traditional constant current mode (5.18 %, 0.343 kWh·gCOD-1) indicated that, in practical engineering, more preferable current efficiency and lower energy consumption can be achieved by Mode II and Mode III over traditional constant current mode. Those demonstrated that the newly proposed linear attenuation mode (especially Mode III) can effectively improve the current efficiency of electrochemical oxidation process and reduce the specific energy consumption.Electrochemical oxidation (ECO) has been universally acknowledged as a frontier technology and a promising method for treatment of wastewater with organic compounds [ Among the aforesaid operating parameters of the electrochemical oxidation process, the current density is a crucial index that affects the current efficiency and energy consumption of the ECO degradation process. The literature demonstrated that there is a specific limited current density ( When the actual current density is lower than At present, most of researches concentrated in the literature were primarily on to investigate the influence of current density on the treatment process, while, there was scarce report on the impact of current supply mode on the degradation process. Common power supply modes include constant voltage power supply mode, constant current power supply mode and pulsed power supply mode[ In the sequencing batch electrocatalysis process, the solution COD value decreases continuously with the passage of time, thus causing the The effect of current value on the degradation processes has been studied extensively. Nevertheless, the influences of supply mode of current (i.e. power supply mode) on the ECO processes were seldom reported in the literature. To solve that problem, a novel current supply mode (named current linear attenuation input mode) was accordingly proposed and adopted. This mode is to make the current input into the electrocatalytic system continuously decay with the passage of reaction time, thus reducing the waste of electricity in the later stage of electrocatalytic reaction and improving the average current efficiency of the whole process. In this study, based on the Ti/PbO All chemicals used in the experiment were obtained from Sinopharm Chemical Reagent Xi’an Co., Ltd (Xi’an, China), and were of analytical grade without further purification. The pure water was fabricated in a water purification system (EPED-S2-D, EPED, Nanjing, China). Titanium mesh (Purity >99.6%, BaoTi Ltd., Baoji, China) with a dimension of 5 cm × 5 cm were used as the electrode substrate. The Sb-SnO The ECO process was conducted in a thermostatic rectangular plexiglass cell using the two-electrode configuration, and the electrolyte circulated through a peristaltic pump. The Schematic diagram of ECO system is shown in The calculation methods of relevant indexes, such as ARG removal efficiency ( The direct linear attenuation mode refers to a power supply mode that the current density decreases continuously from the beginning at an invariable rate. To facilitate the comparison, Mode I was established, namely, different degradation processes started from the same initial current density, but decreased at various attenuation rates until the reaction was completed. The curves displayed in The characteristic of Mode II was to maintain the input electric quantity consistent during the degradation process, which meant that different degradation processes were required to start with different initial current density and different current attenuation rate. The variation processes of current density with three different attenuation rates are exhibited in The average current efficiency and the specific energy consumption in different attenuation rate modes are shown as To verify the reliability of Mode II, the same ECO system and the same current attenuation mode were employed for degradation of three other organics (Phenol, Guaiacol and Salicylic acid). The results are shown as It can be deduced from the degradation result of Mode II that, at the preliminary stage of ECO process, supplying large electric quantity for system was favorable to enhance the degradation effect. Mode III was consequently proposed, namely, the constant current degradation mode was maintained for a period at the initial stage of reaction, and the current density was subsequently reduced at a certain attenuation rate until the end of the reaction. To compare the degradation effect of Mode III with that of constant current mode, as same as Mode II, three input modes were designed on the premise of ensuring the identical input electric quantity as shown in To verify the reliability of Mode III, the same ECO system and the same current attenuation mode were employed for degradation of three other organics (Phenol, Guaiacol and Salicylic acid). The results are shown as With ensuring the uniform input electric quantity, the effects of varying power supply modes (i.e. constant current mode, Mode II and Mode III) on the electrochemical degradation performance for organic compounds were compared. 60-0 represents the same meaning as described in 3.1.2. The degradation result under the constant current mode in 30 mA∙cm The results of electrochemical degradation for ARG in different power supply mode are exhibited in The actual wastewater sample (AWS) were adopted and tested for verifying the practical applicability of the linear attenuation power supply mode, for which the actual wastewater with the COD of around 230 mg L A linear attenuation power supply mode was proposed in this paper, and three application modes were set up, which were respectively compared with the traditional constant current power supply mode. The experimental results revealed that the higher average current efficiency and lower specific energy consumption could be obtained by Mode I (i.e. same initial current density, different attenuation rates) than by constant current mode in the premise of ensuring the identical degradation capacity. However, the decolorization rate and COD removal rate of Mode I were lower than those of traditional constant current mode. Mode II (i.e. direct linear attenuation) and Mode III (i.e. constant current before linear attenuation) were superior to the traditional constant current mode with the same input total power in terms of decolorization rate, COD removal rate, average current efficiency, specific energy consumption and etc. Especially, among those modes involved in this research, Mode III adopting the constant current first and the linear attenuation current later presented the most favorable superiority in the aspects of those evaluation parameter. The inferences were further verified in different organic substance, indicating that the effective current efficiency improvement of the ECO process and the reduction of energy consumption could be attained by means of linear attenuation power supply mode. The authors declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this paper The authors gratefully acknowledge the financial support from the