In this paper, a process of selective extraction and separation of vanadium (IV) from acid leaching solution of spent oil hydrotreating catalyst by a solvent extraction method with P204 as an extractant was proposed. Because the leaching solution contained a large amount of elements such as nickel, aluminium and iron, the effects of various conditions on the separation of vanadium from nickel, aluminium and iron were investigated and the optimum conditions were determined. At the same time, the thermodynamic discussion on the extraction process of vanadium in the system was carried out. Using kerosene as a diluent and 20% (v/v) P204 as an extractant, the single-stage maximum extraction ratio of 93.47% for vanadium was obtained under the optimum extraction conditions of O/A ratio of 2, oscillation time of 8 min, extraction temperature of 298 k(25 °C) and pH value of initial aqueous phase of 2. After three stages of countercurrent extraction experiments, the concentration of vanadium, iron, nickel and aluminium in the loaded organic phase were 0.377, 0.001, 0.005 and 0.02 g/L, respectively, and their extraction ratios were determined to be 99.21%, 1.02%, 2.857% and 1.942%, respectively, realizing the selective extraction and separation of vanadium. With 2 mol/L of sulfuric acid as a stripping reagent, the complete removal of vanadium from the loaded organic phase could be achieved at O/A ratio of 2 by three stages of countercurrent experiments of vanadium removal. The thermodynamic calculation showed that the enthalpy change of the vanadium extraction in the system was −20.37 kJ.mol−1. This demonstrated that the extraction of vanadium from acid leaching solution of spent oil hydrotreating catalyst with P204 as the extractant was an exothermic reaction.As an important rare metal, vanadium has important strategic and industrial significance due to its corrosion resistance, excellent hardness and tensile strength ( Extraction of vanadium from spent oil hydrotreating catalyst by acid leaching under atmospheric pressure or by pressurized acid leaching is an innovative hydrometallurgical technology, which attracts more and more attention due to its high recovery ratio of vanadium and low environmental pollution ( This paper taking the spent oil hydrotreating catalyst as the research object and P204 as the vanadium extractant, exploring the effects of main process parameters on the vanadium extraction ratio and separation efficiency of vanadium and impurity metals, as well as the thermodynamic behavior of the extraction process of vanadium in the extraction system of P204. The diluent kerosene was purchased from Shanghai Science and Technology Co., Ltd. The P204 (di (2-ethylhexyl) phosphoric acid) used in this work was obtained from commercial channel. The other chemical reagents used in the experiment were of analytical grade. All the reagents used in the experiment were used without any purification treatment. The acid leaching solution used in this work was prepared by a direct acid leaching method of spent oil hydrotreating catalyst containing vanadium, nickel, iron and aluminium, and the leaching conditions were optimized to maximize the leaching efficiency of vanadium. The final experimental results show that the maximum leaching ratio of 88.07% for vanadium can be obtained under the optimum conditions of liquid-solid ratio of 10:1, sulfuric acid concentration of 0.45 mol/L, reaction time of 2 h and reaction temperature of 80 °C, and the optimum leaching ratio of nickel is 75.58%. The ionic concentrations of the main elements in the leaching solution are shown in The pH value of aqueous phase was adjusted by 1 mol/L of sulfuric acid or 1 mol/L of ammonia water. The different concentrations of organic phases were prepared by mixing organic phase (P204) with kerosene. The aqueous phase and organic phase with different volume ratios were transferred into a separating funnel, and the extraction and separation experiments were carried out by means of mechanical oscillation at room temperature of 298 k(25 °C). Preliminary experiments show that 8 min is enough to balance the distribution of vanadium in aqueous phase and organic phase. The extraction temperature experiments were carried out in a constant temperature water bath (±0.5) with a fixed stirring speed. The sealed beaker with aqueous phase, organic phase and rotor was put into the water bath, and the extraction temperature experiments were performed at a fixed stirring speed by changing the extraction temperature. Finally, the separation of the two phases was carried out in a separating funnel. After phase separation, using 2-(phenylamino) benzoic acid as an indicator, the ferrous ammonium sulfate titration method was used to determine the vanadium concentration in aqueous phase. The inductively coupled plasma optical electron spectroscopy (ICP-OES, iCAP Duo6300, Thermo Scientific, UK) was performed to analyze the concentrations of other metal ions, and the extraction ratio was calculated according to the difference between metal ion concentrations in aqueous phase before and after extraction, in which the volume of aqueous phase remained unchanged before and after extraction. According to the principle of conservation of metal concentration, the metal concentration in organic phase was calculated, and the distribution ratio (D) was determined by calculating the ratio of vanadium (IV) concentration in organic phase to that in aqueous phase. The calculation equations are shown as follows: Where, E represents the extraction ratio (%) of metal, C P204 extractant has strong extraction ability for VO H Fe (III) in leaching solution can also be reduced to Fe (II) by H pH value is an important parameter in solvent extraction process. Under different pH values, V (IV) ions will exist in different forms or ionic states. Due to the strong extraction ability of extractant P204 to VO It can be observed in The effects of different pH values of aqueous phase on the extraction ratios of metals and the separation effect of vanadium from nickel, iron and aluminium were studied under the experimental conditions of P204 concentration of 20% ( It can be observed from The effects of P204 concentration on metal extraction ratios and separation efficiency of vanadium from nickel, iron and aluminium were studied under the following experimental conditions: extraction temperature of 298 k(25 °C), O/A ratio of 2:1 and pH value of aqueous phase of 2. The experimental results are presented in As observed from this figure, the extraction ratio of vanadium increases continuously as the P204 concentration increases from 5% ( It also can be observed in The effects of O/A ratio on metal extraction ratio and separation efficiency of vanadium from nickel, iron and aluminium were studied at pH value of aqueous phase of 2.0, extraction temperature of 298 k(25 °C) and P204 concentration of 20% ( As seen from this figure, the phase ratio (O/A) obviously affects the extraction ratio of vanadium. As the O/A ratio is less than 2, the extraction ratio of vanadium increases with increasing O/A ratio. As the O/A ratio is greater than 2, the extraction ratio of vanadium remains basically unchanged. During the whole process, the extraction ratios of nickel, iron and aluminioum are less affected by changing the O/A ratio, and the extraction ratios remains basically unchanged. Thus, the optimum O/A ratio is determined to be 2. According to the results of previous experiments, the optimum extraction conditions are as follows: extraction time of 8 min, extraction temperature of 298 k(25 °C), extractant P204 concentration of 20% (v/v), O/A ratio of 2 and pH value of 2. According to the above phase transition data obtained under the above optimum conditions, the McCabe-Thiele equilibrium isotherm was established to investigate the number of extraction stage of vanadium needed. The experimental results are illustrated in As seen from this figure, as the O/A ratio is 2, the complete extraction of vanadium needs two theoretical stages. However, an actual operation process usually needs an extra stage. Therefore, under the optimum conditions, a three-stage countercurrent extraction experiment is required to achieve the complete extraction of vanadium. The experimental results are presented in As observed from this table, P204 can effectively and selectively extract vanadium under the above conditions. After a three-stage countercurrent extraction experiment, the concentration of vanadium, iron, nickel and aluminium in the loaded organic phase are 0.377, 0.001, 0.005 and 0.02 g/L, respectively. The extraction ratios of vanadium, nickel, aluminium and iron are 99.21%、1.02%、2.857% and 1.942%, respectively, indicating that vanadium is almost completely extracted, and other impurity elements are few or not extracted. Therefore, vanadium can be extracted and separated from acid leaching solution by solvent extraction of P204. The results also fully prove that P204 is a good extractant of vanadium, and it can effectively separate vanadium from other impurities. As an acidic extractant, P204 can extract V (IV) cationic complex (VO Based on Eq. Where, Because D is the ratio of vanadium concentration in organic phase to that in aqueous phase, it can be expressed in Eq. After taking logarithm and rearranging of the two sides of the Eq. The following equation can be obtained by differentiating T on both sides of the Eq. According to the Van't Hoff equation, the following equation can be obtained. Based on Eq. Where, R is the gas constant (8.314 kJ.mol Based on the above analysis, the effect of temperature variation on vanadium distribution ratio in the range of 298.15–338.15 K (25–65 °C) was investigated under the conditions of O/A ratio of 2, P204 concentration of 20% ( Based on the Van't Hoff equation, the plot of logarithm (lgD) of the distribution ratio versus 1000/T illustrated in It can be known that the enthalpy change of vanadium extraction in the system is 20.37 kJ.mol As an effective stripping reagent, sulfuric acid is often used to remove vanadium from loaded organic phase. The effect of sulfuric acid concentration on the removal ratio of vanadium from the loaded organic phase containing 0.377 g/L vanadium was investigated at stripping time of 8 min and O/A ratio of 2. The results are illustrated in The experimental results indicate that sulfuric acid can effectively remove vanadium from the loaded organic phase. The removal ratio of vanadium reaches the maximum value of 94.49% as the sulfuric acid concentration is 2 mol/L, and the value remains basically unchanged as the sulfuric acid concentration further increases. Therefore, the optimal concentration of sulfuric acid is determined to be 2 mol/L. Vanadium in the loaded organic phase can be removed by changing phase ratio at the sulfuric acid concentration of 2 mol/L. According to the as-obtained phase transition data, the McCabe-Thiele equilibrium isotherm was established to analyze the number of vanadium removal stage needed. The results are illustrated in As observed from this figure, when the O/A ratio is 2, the complete removal of vanadium requires two theoretical stages. However, the actual operation process usually needs an extra stage. Therefore, a three-stage countercurrent extraction experiment is needed to achieve the complete removal of vanadium. The final results indicate that the vanadium concentration in the aqueous phase is 0.75 g/L, reflecting that the vanadium in the loaded organic phase is basically removed. Based on the above research, a green process for selective separation and recovery of vanadium (IV) from acid leaching solution of spent oil hydrotreating catalyst containing vanadium, nickel, aluminium, iron and other metals was proposed, and the process flow is presented in A process for selective extraction of vanadium (IV) from spent oil hydrotreating catalyst containing vanadium, nickel, iron and aluminium with P204 as an extractant was proposed. The maximum single-stage extraction ratio of 93.47% for vanadium was obtained under the optimum conditions of extraction time of 8 min, extraction temperature of 298 k(25 °C), P204 concentration of 20% (v/v), O/A ratio of 2 and pH value of aqueous phase of 2. After three stages of countercurrent extraction experiments, the concentration of vanadium, iron, nickel and aluminium in the loaded organic phase were 0.377, 0.001, 0.005 and 0.02 g/L, respectively, and their extraction ratios were 99.21%, 1.02%, 2.857% and 1.942%, respectively, realizing the selective extraction of vanadium. With 2 mol/L of sulfuric acid as a stripping reagent, vanadium could be completely removed from the loaded organic phase at O/A ratio of 1:2 by three stages of countercurrent experiments of vanadium removal, and the vanadium-containing solution with the vanadium concentration of 0.75 g/L could be obtained. The thermodynamic calculation showed that the enthalpy change of vanadium extraction was −20.37 kJ.mol The authors declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this paper. This research was supported by