Microcalorimetric isothermal monitoring was carried out for compost and compost-containing growing medium, to provide fingerprints of compost microbial activity at different conditions. Microbial activity is a key property of composts used in agricultural practice. Two aspects are addressed in this study: (1) microcalorimetric evaluation of compost response to glucose as a model stimulating agent; (2) examination of the impact of compost pre-drying and re-wetting on its biological activity.
                  Addition of glucose solution to the compost involved a strong increase in microbial activity, which was associated with a significant heat evolution without a lag period. In certain cases, this heat evolution was of complicated shape thus manifesting the heterogeneity of microbial populations in composts. Relation between cumulative energy evolved and the amount of added glucose was found to be helpful in distinguishing between aerobic and anaerobic regime of compost microbial activity. As distinct from non-dried compost or growing mixture, glucose addition to samples pre-dried at 65°C resulted in delayed heat response with initial exponential-like heat evolution. This delay in heat evolution suggests that biological activity was significantly suppressed upon compost drying. Such a temperature-induced inactivation process might also result in dominance of a relatively homogeneous microbial population which survived the heating, thus involving a smooth, exponential-like initial step of the heat evolution. Noteworthy, addition of water (without glucose) to pre-dried compost results in an outburst of activity as compared with non-dried compost. This heat evolution outburst was also characterized by a lag period and an initial exponential-like phase. The heat evolution obtained with pre-dried compost upon water addition was not related to the compost wetting energy but rather reflected the formation of new carbon source due to the changes in compost organic matter upon heating or to the dead biomass of those microbial populations that did not resist the compost heating/drying.Compost is a material derived from aerobic decomposition of recycled plant wastes, biosolids or other organic materials. Manures and composts have been used as means to increase soil fertility and crop production all along the history of farming. Such organic materials are, in essence, slow release fertilizers, supplying nutrients through microbially induced mineralization processes Compost is a dynamic organic mixture, undergoing substantial physical, chemical and biological changes during the composting process until it becomes relatively stable Microcalorimetric measurements were applied for estimating microbial activities of soils in several studies Microbial activity in composts may behave in a more complicated manner than in many soils. This is because composts are generally much more chemically and physically heterogeneous as compared with organic matter in many soils, have very high concentration of active biomass, and their organic matter is less stable. This heterogeneity may indeed be responsible to the inconsistent effect of compost in field applications To the best of our knowledge, there are currently no studies that extensively explored the potential of calorimetric technique to monitor microbial activity in composts, and to relate such properties with the role of composts in agronomical practice. This study aims at exploring microcalorimetry as a quantitative as well as descriptive tool to assess compost activity and microbial dynamics. Potential microbial activity in composts may be evident by testing the utilization of a model energy source. This utilization should be affected by environmental factors such as compost drying/hydration which are of evident importance for agricultural practice and, in particular, for microbial expression. Hence, in the present work two aspects are addressed: (1): microcalorimetric evaluation of compost response to glucose selected as a model stimulating agent; (2) examination of the impact of compost drying on compost biological activity. A compost sample (about 0.5 The growing mixture was prepared from a white peat (Klasmann-Deilmann, GmbH) and compost at a ratio of 80:20 peat:compost (v/v). The compost used in this mixture was prepared at the composting facility in Newe-Ya’ar under controlled conditions Fischer Na-montmorillonite (CEC = 90  To study the effect of pre-drying, subsamples were maintained at 65 Microcalorimetric measurements were made on a CSC 4100 Multi-cell Differential Scanning Calorimeter, using four 1.43 Calorimetric procedure involved initial 1–2 Microcalorimetric curves were obtained by continuous recording the power versus time for each sample ampoule versus the reference ampoule. Measurements were generally made in triplicates, i.e. the three sample ampoules were used for three subsamples of identical treatment. The average output was calculated for each data point after correcting the three curves to produce a single final baseline as shown in Due to the time needed for instrument stabilization (30–40 Initially, it was proved that the heat output produced in compost by addition of water or aqueous solution is mostly related to compost biological activity and does not involve remarkable contribution from sample wetting. For this, sterile (autoclaved) compost sample was dried at 65 On the basis of these results, it was concluded that most of the detectable energy related to wetting of pre-dried or wet compost materials must be released during the first short period of instrument stabilization. As such, while considering long-term heat evolution processes in composts, the heat evolved from compost–water interactions may be neglected, and the entire heat output can be assigned to biological activity of the medium. Monitoring the heat output in Sde-Eliyahu compost not amended by glucose revealed a certain (not very substantial) background activity, which was mostly completed after 3–5 The heat evolution curves obtained upon glucose addition were of quite complicated shape. Unless some important kinetic features were missed during instrument equilibration period (first 30–40 Lack of an exponential phase on the heat evolution curve of compost ( The cumulative curves in The response of microbial activity to glucose addition was measured also for the peat/compost growing medium ( Effect of pre-drying (65 To extend the examination of the pre-drying effect, heat evolution of Sde-Eliyahu compost was monitored after different drying periods followed by re-wetting with deionized water ( Importantly, this strong increase of heat evolution on the pre-dried compost upon water addition cannot be related to the energy associated with compost wetting, as proved by testing the heat evolution in sterilized dried compost ( Distinct differences in the heat evolution profile of dried as compared with non-dried compost were observed also upon addition of glucose solution ( Delay in heat response in pre-dried compost samples suggests that biological activity was significantly reduced upon drying. This inactivation process might also be accompanied by the survival of a relatively more homogeneous microbial population, thus involving a smooth, exponential-like initial step of the heat evolution. It is of interest that overall heat effect corresponding to the area under recorded curve in