At present, large mechanical flotation cells of 100 to 300m3 are used in rougher operation in different industrial flotation plants around the world. However, in spite of the advances in fundamental research and the notable growth in equipment size, there is still a lack of reliable data for industrial flotation modelling and simulation. In this work, a procedure for modelling and simulating rougher flotation banks that is based on operating variables and parameters fitted by empirical data from plant measurements is presented.
                  Recently, a new methodology for describing industrial flotation by separating the collection and froth zones has been developed. This approach consists of using a new apparatus for direct bubble load measurement below the pulp–froth interface in industrial cells. The procedure allows independently estimating the froth recovery and the collection zone recovery. Metallurgical characterisation is developed by plant sampling, mass balance adjustment and applying a short-cut method for kinetic characterisation of flotation banks. In addition, the effect of grinding is characterised using flotation models with distributed flotation rates (for each particle size class) and a low number of parameters.
                  From the experimental data, a non-linear distributed model to simulate rougher flotation banks was developed, which allows describing the industrial operation as a function of the main operating variables (e.g., mass flow rate, solid percentage, grinding degree, pulp level and superficial air rate). The simulator was calibrated and validated using experimental data from the rougher operation at El Teniente Division, Codelco-Chile.
                  The new approach is a practical tool that is useful for flotation operation diagnosis, for robust design and analysis of new control and optimisation strategies and for evaluation of the effect that design and operating variables have upon the collection and froth zone performance in large flotation cells. This methodology can be applied to other flotation operations, such as cleaner and scavenger circuits that use mechanical flotation cells.Two types of mechanical flotation cells are employed in industrial applications: self-aspirated and forced-air flotation cells. The main differences between the cells are the type and location of the rotor and the mechanism used for the air input. In self-aspirated cells, the rotor is located near the top of the cell, whereas in forced-air cells, the rotor is located near the bottom. Mechanical cell designs have included some modifications, such as the use of froth-crowders and internal radial launders. These modifications have been focused on improving the froth transport and consequently the mineral recovery. The minimum number of cells per bank can be estimated from a hydrodynamic analysis assuming perfectly mixed cells. For example, it has been observed that when using four or more cells in series, the time scale-up factor required to reach the same recovery of a plug flow operation (batch) with the same flotation rate constant is close to 1.15 (  The behaviour of a flotation bank has been typically modelled as a set of tanks in series with the same properties, i.e., the same residence time distribution, flotation rate and froth characteristics in each cell. At present, important efforts have been made to characterise flotation circuits as distributed systems in order to obtain a more realistic description of the process. The distributed character of a flotation rougher bank requires mass balances around each cell for solid and liquid phases in order to describe the operating conditions downward the bank, i.e. mean residence time per cell, froth depth, entrainment, and solid liberation, among others. In addition, the performance of each flotation cell in terms of mineral recovery and concentrate grade depends on the flotation rates in the collection zone and the cleaning effect controlled by the froth depth. On this subject, Several approaches for flotation process simulation have been proposed in literature which typically simplify or remove the froth phase. For example, Currently, several commercial simulators exist: the JK Simfloat mineral processing simulator ( The simulator reported in this paper is focused on providing a detailed phenomenological description of the flotation process in which a rougher bank has been modelled as a distributed system, i.e., each cell is an independent unit that consists of two different zones: collection and froth, which are linked by mass balance and not hindered by an overall rate constant. Moreover, the different liberation grades for the mineralogical species were taken into account. In order to obtain a representative description of the actual flotation process, the variations in the collection flotation rates and residence time, as well as the froth transport characteristics and the froth recovery downstream from the bank of cells were considered. The simulator has been successfully tested in the rougher flotation SAG plant of El Teniente, Codelco-Chile, which consists of four banks of seven self-aspirated Wemco cells of 130 For modelling, scale-up and analysis purposes, two zones are distinguished in the flotation cell: (a) the collection zone, where the particle-bubble aggregate is formed and carried to the pulp–froth interface (true flotation) and (b) the cleaning zone (froth), located between the pulp–froth interface and the concentrate overflow, where entrained particles have the chance to drop back to the collection zone. This zone is now described by the froth recovery. The global cell recovery This approach is used for both (a) kinetic parameter estimation in the collection zone based on industrial mass balance measurements, which allow obtaining The mineral recovery The hydrodynamic of flotation cells can be characterised by means of the residence time distribution function,  Several models have been proposed in order to evaluate the flotation rate distribution in flotation cells. The Dirac delta function, The rectangular model for the Then, the mineral recovery in the collection zone of class Therefore, the valuable mineral was described by a fraction with a probability (> The same residence time distribution was considered in Eq. Samples for the mass balances per size class were obtained for a complete description of the first 3 cells and the overall bank. The results for the global and froth recovery in each cell allowed estimating the kinetic parameters in cells 1, 2 and 3 and to extrapolate the results for the bank. Additionally, the air flow rate, the froth height and the bubble load were measured during the same sampling campaign in order to characterise the rougher circuit. To characterise the decrease of the flotation rate distribution of mineral class Eq. The cleaning zone was characterised by means of the froth recovery, which can be estimated from bubble load measurement along with a mass balance around the cell. Thus, the froth recovery, It has been shown that Eq. The empirical evidence showed that the froth stability of each cell downstream from the bank is reduced, i.e., the froth selectivity increases along the cells arrangement. Therefore, the  The water recovery, For simulation purposes, the water recovery was modelled as a function of the froth height, the froth stability factor and the superficial gas rate for each cell (Eq. The gangue is recovered into the concentrate by entrainment caused by the water reported to the concentrate stream. The gangue recovered per size class in the In order to evaluate the contribution of each individual cell in the flotation bank recovery, the collection zone recovery by true flotation, The global recovery of mineral Also, the concentrate grade Notice from Eq. The overall recovery and concentrate grade of the flotation bank were calculated by integrating the distributed result of each cell, which were determined by Eqs. The general procedure for developing and calibration of the simulator includes the following steps: Sampling the first, second and third cells of the bank together with sampling the flotation bank as a whole. Characterise the streams in terms of solid percentage by weight, and mass and grades (Cu, Mo and Fe) per size class. Carry out mass balance adjustment per size class and estimate mineral recoveries. Using the feed sample, conduct batch test to determine the R Estimate froth recovery, Eq. Using results from steps iii) and v), obtain the collection zone recovery per size class from Eq. Estimate the flotation rate parameters per size classes from Eq. Characterise the decrease of the flotation rate distribution per size class along the rougher bank using Eq. From Eqs. Estimate gangue recovery from water recovery. First, obtain water recovery using the mass balance results together with the solid percentage by weight. Second, estimate parameters of Eq. Based on the previously adjusted parameters (by regression), Eqs. Therefore, the simulation requires a set of test and previously measured variables to calibrate the flotation models, including: mass balances, feed particle size distribution, batch tests, bubble load, superficial gas rate, residence time distribution and froth recovery. The rougher flotation circuit (SAG plant) at El Teniente, Codelco-Chile, was considered. The rougher circuit consists of four banks with seven self-aspirated Wemco cells (130 For the simulator calibration, measurements of feed, tail and concentrate grades per size class, superficial gas rate, bubble load, solid percentage, gas hold-up, residence time distribution and froth depth profiles along the rougher bank were carried out in the rougher flotation SAG plant (  For visualisation of the simulation responses, a sensitivity analysis for different operating conditions was carried out. The main variables for this analysis were particle size distribution (PSD), froth depth in the first cell of the bank, feed tonnage, feed grade and solid percentage. These variables are interesting for control purposes because of the economic impact in terms of mineral recovery and concentrate grade in industrial flotation banks. The effect of changes in the PSD on the cumulative Cu recovery and the incremental grade along the flotation bank was studied. The following variables were assumed constant for the simulation: feed tonnage 800  A change in the froth height of the first cell, from 5 to 25  The feed tonnage is relatively constant in the rougher flotation SAG plant because the four rougher banks are fed by two SAG mills, reducing the variations in the feed flow rate. An increase in feed tonnage from 600 to 800  The effect of increasing the copper feed grade from 0.9% to 1.1% was evaluated. In this case, the following variables were kept constant: feed tonnage 800 A negligible effect on the cumulative recovery was observed when the feed grade increased from 0.9% to 1.1%, as shown in The solid percentage determines the mean residence time in flotation cells (rheological effects were not considered). An increase in solid percentage by weight from 30% to 40% was analysed while keeping the rest of the operating variables constant: feed tonnage 800  The modelling of the flotation cells by separating the collection and froth zones, without using an apparent rate constant, allows for a better identification of the true flotation process (collection efficiency) as well as the froth separation process (product quality). Changes in the main operating variables yield to the expected mineral recovery and concentrate grade trends, while the effects on the mineral collection and the froth separation were clearly identified. In addition, the distributed approach for the rougher bank modelling involves the decrease of mean residence time (from actual RTD), froth stability and flotation rates, together with the increase of particle size, along the bank. All these information was obtained from plant measurements. The model does not consider reagents as manipulated variables explicitly, but they are partially represented by the flotation rate profile (per size class) along the bank, A procedure for modelling and simulating rougher flotation banks as a distributed process was developed. The model parameters were calibrated from plant operating data using a flotation rate evaluation based on the short-cut method, adjusted mass balances and a new approach to evaluate bubble load and froth recovery. The simulator was validated using experimental data from the rougher operation at El Teniente concentrator, which consists of flotation banks of seven 130 The new approach is a practical tool that is useful for flotation operation diagnosis, for robust design and analysis of new control and optimisation strategies, and for evaluating the effect that design and operating variables have upon the metallurgical performance in large flotation cells. This methodology can be applied to other flotation operations, such as cleaner and scavenger circuits, that use mechanical flotation cells. Funding for process modelling and control research was provided by