With advances in osteosynthesis technology providing improved stability of fixation and better outcomes, surgical treatment has become the standard of care for distal femur fractures. Pre-contoured distal femoral locking plates are the most commonly used implants for fixation. However, healing problems such as delayed union, failure of fixation, and /or nonunion are not uncommon. The fixation construct being “too stiff” is a commonly quoted reason when nonunion/failure of fixation occurs on distal femur fractures fixed with a plate. A flexible fixation construct allowing controlled axial micromotion could help stimulate the bone healing. In order to achieve this goal, plating construct stiffness can be modified by several methods.Distal femur fractures are relatively uncommon fractures, estimated to be about 0.4% of all fractures and 6% of all femur fractures It has been noted that strain at the facture site is critical for a successful healing process. Excessive axial strains as well as shear strain between fracture fragments may both be detrimental to bone healing Rigid fixation constructs aim to provide absolute stability at the fracture site. The healing occurs with primary/direct healing consisting intramembranous healing and osteonal /haversian remodeling without formation of callus. This is preferred type of healing for intraarticular fractures and may be for simple fractures patterns at the metaphysis and diaphysis. Flexible fixation constructs provide relative stability. The healing occurs with secondary/indirect healing which consists of both intramembranous and endochondral ossification with formation of callus. This is commonly applied for comminuted fractures and fractures at the metaphysis and diaphysis. In summary, stability at the fracture site dictates the type of healing. Regarding fixation with plates, compression plating and neutralization plating after anatomic reduction of simple fractures are examples of rigid fixation construct. On the other hand, bridge plating of a comminuted diaphyseal or metadiaphyseal fracture is an example of flexible fixation construct. In the setting of distal femur fractures, if there is an extension of the fracture into the knee joint, anatomic reduction and rigid fixation of the intraarticular component of the fracture providing absolute stability is necessary Dynamic fixation construct usually refers to fixation with intramedullary nail when interlocking screws are placed in a dynamic hole through the nail in a length stable fracture pattern (such as transverse fracture pattern where the length will not change with loading) in contrast to static locking when interlocking screws are placed through round holes. Most of the contemporary femoral and tibial intramedullary nail designs have an oblong hole with an option of placing the interlocking screw in dynamic mode. All static nailing constructs and most of the plating constructs (except anatomic reduction and compression fixation) have some micromotion at the fracture site in torsional and bending stress. While nailing constructs are extremely stiff under axial loads, plating constructs tend to bend under axial loads due to their position outside the mechanical loading axis. This bending results in closing of the fracture gap at the far cortex and a lack of micromotion at the near cortex of the plate. The rationale behind dynamic plating constructs is that a more uniform motion along the longitudinal bone axis is introduced at the fracture site which in turn provides stimulation of bone healing. The typical plating constructs are static and not dynamic in the longitudinal axis of the bone even when a bridging construct is applied for a comminuted fracture. Recently, dynamic constructs for plating were introduced with modifications of the bone-screw or plate screw interfaces While the term Dynamization of a plating construct may be helpful to achieve bone healing before failure of fixation occurs in cases of delayed healing and nonunion. This can be achieved by modifying the fixation construct from a stiff construct to a more flexible construct. The stiffness can be modified to allow more motion at the fracture site by removing screws close to fracture site and/or exchanging locking screws with nonlocking screws as much as possible without compromising the overall construct stability. Evaluation of the cause(s) of delayed healing or nonunion is critical. Dynamization is obviously not a good option when the cause of the delayed healing or nonunion is instability of the fixation construct and may results in catastrophic failure. Implant choices available for the fixation of distal femur fractures include intramedullary nails and plates Numerous, previous studies clearly demonstrated that type of implant and fixation construct influence biomechanical performance The evaluation of any delayed healing and nonunion should include a detailed investigation of the host and biological factors such as smoking and metabolic and endocrine abnormalities The fixation construct being “too stiff” is a commonly quoted reason when nonunion/failure of fixation occurs on distal femur fractures fixed with a plate Options for modifying plating construct stiffness are shown in The specific shape of the implant is associated with construct stiffness. This has been reported in biomechanical studies comparing different types of locking plates used for fixation of distal femur fractures Most of the currently used plates are alloys of stainless steel or titanium. As modulus of elasticity of titanium is lower, the same design stainless steel plate will provide stiffer fixation construct compared to the titanium plate of the same design. Not all stainless steel alloys and titanium alloys used for manufacturing the plates are the same. The ingredients of alloy may be modified to achieve a stiffer or less stiff plate. While titanium plates seems more attractive in fixation of distal femur fractures, the clinical results have not been shown to be superior to stainless steel plates With the reports of fixation construct being “too stiff” as a cause of failure of fixation, recently, plates made of carbon fiber reinforced polyetherketone were designed The type of screws used influence construct stiffness. Using conventional screws only at the diaphysis will provide a less stiff construct compared to when locking screws are used. On the other hand, the use of only conventional screws may compromise the fixation especially in osteoporotic bone and failure of fixation with loosening at bone screw interface and pull-out of the plate may happen. This type of failure could be minimized by using longer plates especially in non-osteoporotic bone. Another option to decrease the stiffness across the fracture site is to increase the distance between proximal and distal points of fixation across the fracture site. This increase in working length will allow more motion across the fracture site and may be preferred especially for comminuted fractures  Modifications of the fixation points or the type of screws used in the shaft affect primarily the bending stiffness. Modifications of the screw-bone or plate-screw interface at the level of the diaphysis induce axial motion without causing any shear or failure of fixation i.e. controlled axial micromotion. This type of modifications can also help with more homogenous circumferential bony healing as stress shielding of the near (lateral) cortex occurs compared stronger bone healing on the far (medial) side of the fracture when fixed locking screw constructs is used. Far cortical locking, dynamic locking screw, and active locking plates are examples of modifications of screw-bone or plate-screw interface delivering symmetric motion. Far cortical locking consists of partially threaded locking screws that lock into the plate and far cortex allowing motion at the level of the screw hole at the near cortex. Improved healing rates have been reported with this design modification The dynamic locking screw is a locking screw consisting of two elements, the sleeve with the thread and the pin with the locking head. Both connected in a way that allows movement within the screw without movement in the bone-screw interface or at plate screw interface Active locking plate provides controlled axial dynamization by elastic suspension of locking holes within the plate When there is delayed healing or nonunion, a process similar to dynamization of nailing constructs, could be considered by modification of fixation construct by several methods ( Removing the screws closer to the fracture site thus increasing the distance without fixation (working length) Exchanging the locking screws closer to the fracture site with nonlocking screws. Exchanging the bicortical screws closer to the fracture site with unicortical screws. Removal of screw(s) crossing the fracture site at the supracondylar area (not the ones crossing the intraarticular fracture site) in cases that was placed with original fixation will eliminate the stiffness across the fracture site Dynamization of the plating construct may provide the necessary stimulus for healing and avoid failure of fixation. Assessment of a fixation construct as too stiff while it actually is too flexible would be a major mistake and will results in quick failure. A pitfall in dynamization is that the fatigue life of the plate might be shortened with dynamization unless bony contact occurs unloading the plate. Intramedullary nailing nails designed specifically for distal femur fractures with multiple interlocking screws in different planes commonly provides adequate fixation for distal femur fractures. Intramedullary nails provide an extremely large axial stiffness by the position of the nail at the center of the load axis Healing problems are not uncommon in treatment of distal femur fractures. Most common type of implant used for fixation is distal femoral locking plate. The stiffness of the fixation construct may be related to failures. The construct stiffness can be modulated with interplay of multiple parameters at the time of original fixation. When delayed healing or nonunion occurs, dynamization of plating should be considered if the stiffness of the construct is deemed to be the problem. The author reports no conflicts of interest. The authors of this manuscript express their thanks to the Osteosynthesis and Trauma Care Foundation for the sponsorship of the publication of this Supplement in Injury.