Despite progress in dentistry, tooth loss in old age is still a reality, even more so in long-term-care residents. However, recent trends indicate that natural teeth are lost later in life. Functional decline and age-related pathologies have to be considered in oral health care for this vulnerable population. Retaining and restoring teeth and oral function in elders is important. Tooth loss significantly impairs masticatory performance, which cannot be fully restored by prosthodontic means. Hence an unconscious change in food intake occurs, often involving malnutrition and withdrawal from common meals. Poor oral appearance and bad breath may further impede social activities. Although a chewing activity may be beneficial for cognitive function, natural teeth can present a considerable risk for fragile elders, in whom aspiration of biofilm can lead to pneumonia and death. The presence of natural teeth is also correlated with higher life expectancy, but socio-economic confounding factors have to be considered. When evaluating oral health in the elderly population, standards and priorities for reporting oral health outcome measures have to be defined. Anatomical indicators such as the number of natural teeth or the presence of prostheses might be one option for reporting. However, functional indicators such as masticatory performance and patient-centred outcome measures may be more relevant. In conclusion, there is an overwhelming body of evidence that maintaining a healthy natural dentition in old age is beneficial from a structural, functional and psycho-social point of view.The permanent natural dentition is meant to last for life. However, physiological ageing and wear may modify dental appearance, morphology and function later in life. In addition, dental decay and periodontal attachment loss may accumulate over a lifetime. Hence the natural dentition in the elderly looks and functions distinctly differently from the dentition of young adults. This paper focuses on describing the changing patterns of tooth retention, the benefits of a natural dentition for masticatory performance, diet and food intake, quality of life, and cognitive functioning and longevity in elderly adults. It further highlights the importance of oral hygiene in fully or partially dentate elders with respect to the adverse effects of chronic periodontal infection and aspiration pneumonia. It further elaborates on the use of standardised and relevant outcome measures in documenting oral health in the elderly population. In this context, standard indicators for scientific and public health research are proposed. Despite developments in prevention, restorative techniques and dental materials, tooth loss is still a reality in both, industrialised and developing countries In general, the rate of edentulism has decreased rapidly in the past few decades in many countries, and tooth loss occurs later in life As a consequence of these developments, we find more and more fully dentate or partially dentate persons in long-term care facilities (LTC). In old age – generally considered 85 years and above – the vast majority of the population in industrialised countries wears removable prostheses, with the majority being completely edentulous Physiological ageing is often complemented by multiple chronic diseases, polypharmacy, frailty, and finally the loss of autonomy and dependency for the activities of daily living (ADL). Impaired vision, lower tactile thresholds, and reduced dexterity render oral hygiene measures a challenge, and natural teeth are much more complex and time-consuming to clean than an edentulous mouth with a complete denture. Poor motor control and fragile oral tissues aggravate denture use, and reduced neuroplasticity hampers the adaptation to replacement prostheses. Age-related, mostly chronic pathologies, as well as physiological ageing, will also have to be considered in preventive oral healthcare in this vulnerable population. Institutionalised elderly people, especially those with cognitive impairment, generally have more a compromised oral health, including fewer teeth, than their peers who live independently In particular, fixed and removable implant restorations can present a challenge in dependent elders, both with regard to the handling of the prosthesis as well as to its cleaning by both patients and caregivers Tooth loss leads to a deterioration in chewing efficiency How many teeth are needed for maintaining satisfactory oral function? The shortened dental arch concept, as introduced by Kayser Improving chewing efficiency only through a dental restoration does not necessarily change the dietary intake, as other factors such as habits, food preferences, general health, mobility, culture, and cooking skills – as well as cognitive impairment and appetite – may play a role The term ‘Quality of Life’ has been used in medicine and psychology as a subjective indicator for more than 30 years At all ages, a healthy natural dentition and a pleasing dental appearance contribute to Quality of Life. Bad breath and dental deterioration may foster social isolation, limit participation in social activities, and influence the judgements we make about another person's personality traits OHRQoL can be evaluated by several instruments Apart from the psychological effects of tooth loss, impaired OHRQoL can largely be explained by the shortcomings of both conventional and implant-supported tooth replacement. A low number of natural teeth and deficiencies in masticatory performance are significant predictors of low OHRQoL in the older population It is well documented that patients with cognitive impairment have worse oral health than their cognitively intact peers. They not only have a lower number of natural teeth, but also present with a higher prevalence and incidence of caries and with more untreated lesions than their cognitively healthy peers Another mechanism proposed as being a contributing factor for developing cognitive impairment is the presence of oral infections, such as periodontitis. Martande Animal models have tried to avoid these confounding factors and confirm that introducing poor mastication experimentally or administering a soft diet in mice may inhibit learning and memory performance Reversing decline in cognitive function by improving chewing function through restorative means remains speculation, although preliminary clinical studies have suggested this reasoning Weijenberg Cross-sectional epidemiological studies mostly indicate a greater number of teeth in the over 90-year age strata, which was a first indicator for higher mortality in the edentulous part of the population When evaluating oral health in the elderly population, standards and priorities for reporting oral health outcome measures have to be defined. Anatomical indicators such as the number of natural teeth or the presence of fixed or removable prostheses might be one option for reporting Functional indicators for oral health might be related to the masticatory performance. A recently developed bolus-kneading test, which measures colour mixing ability, provides an easy-to-apply and standardised evaluation method Oral health may equally be reported by the presence of disease or its long-term sequelae, frequently measured by the DMF index, Community periodontal index, Eichner index or the prevalence of a particular disease or dysfunction. Besides these ‘objective’ indicators of oral health and disability, the patient's perception is key in evaluating the treatment needs of the ageing population. Reporting of patient-centred outcome measures is standard in today's clinical studies. OHRQoL instruments such as OHIP Given the previously mentioned benefits of retaining the natural dentition until late in life, a plea for oral hygiene measures and minimally invasive restorations is indicated. Occlusal load from natural teeth stimulates the periodontal bone. Mechanoreceptors in the periodontal ligament enhance tactile sensitivity. But most importantly, natural dentition assures competent food comminution and fosters a healthy diet by allowing mastication of a large variety of foodstuffs. Good chewing performance is physical exercise for the chewing muscles and pumps oxygenated blood to the brain. ‘Active chewing’ enhances the clearance of the oral cavity, not only from food debris, but also from biofilm. Hence natural teeth foster the ‘self-cleaning’ of the mouth during a meal. And finally, natural teeth provide an age-adequate dental appearance, hence favouring social interaction and active participation in society. There is an overwhelming body of evidence that maintaining a healthy natural dentition in old age is beneficial from a structural, functional and psycho-social point of view. The goals of oral healthcare for the elderly population should therefore be to treat and prevent oral infection, foster Oral Health-Related Quality of Life, assure oral comfort, and provide the means to restore oral function where necessary and assure an acceptable dental appearance This paper summarises a presentation given by Frauke Müller at the ‘Oral Health for an Ageing Population’ workshop organised by FDI World Dental Federation in Lucerne, Switzerland, from May 3–5, 2016. This article was made possible through an unrestricted grant from GC International AG. FDI World Dental Federation thanks GC International AG for their generous support and commitment towards the promotion of oral health for an ageing population. The authors declare that they have no conflict of interest.