Loss of magnetic medium solids from dense medium circuits is a substantial contributor to operating cost. Much of this loss is by way of wet drum magnetic separator effluent. A model of the separator would be useful for process design, optimisation and control. A review of the literature established that although various rules of thumb exist, largely based on empirical or anecdotal evidence, there is no model of magnetics recovery in a wet drum magnetic separator which includes as inputs all significant machine and operating variables.
                  A series of trials, in both factorial experiments and in single variable experiments, was therefore carried out using a purpose built rig which featured a small industrial scale (700 mm lip length, 900 mm diameter) wet drum magnetic separator. A substantial data set of 191 trials was generated in the work. The results of the factorial experiments were used to identify the variables having a significant effect on magnetics recovery.
                  Observations carried out as an adjunct to this work, as well as magnetic theory, suggests that the capture of magnetic particles in the wet drum magnetic separator is by a flocculation process. Such a process should be defined by a flocculation rate and a flocculation time; the latter being defined by the volumetric flowrate and the volume within the separation zone. A model based on this concept and containing adjustable parameters was developed. This model was then fitted to a randomly chosen 80% of the data, and validated by application to the remaining 20%. The model is shown to provide a satisfactory fit to the data over three orders of magnitude of magnetics loss.The process of dense medium separation is of considerable importance to the minerals industry. Large amounts of coal are processed by this method, while iron ore is the major metalliferous ore processed. However considerable amounts of other ores—including diamonds, manganese, barytes, tin, tantalum, and lead/zinc—are also treated. The dense medium used in dense medium separation is a suspension of either magnetite or ferrosilicon (or a mixture of both) in water. Magnetite media are used for coal, and ferrosilicon based media are used for metalliferous ores where a higher density medium is required. These materials are chosen both for their high density and for their magnetic properties. It is the latter which allows the recovery and reconcentration of medium solids from dilute streams using magnetic separation. While non-magnetic solids have been used—silica sand for coal washing and galena for metalliferous processing—these are not in common use today. A major operating cost in dense medium separation is in replacement of lost medium solids. According to In an industrial context the performance of the wet drum magnetic separator is often poor. Analysis of data collected in plant surveys There is no consensus in the literature as to the contribution which magnetic separator losses make to total medium loss in dense medium plants. This almost certainly reflects the dependency of medium loss distribution on such diverse factors as ore type (porosity), plant condition, medium type, operating practices, etc., which all vary substantially from plant to plant. It is also difficult to reconcile measured losses with long-term consumption because of very short-term loss episodes which are often missed when sampling.  The JKMRC has conducted many surveys of medium loss, at Tom Price, Mt. Newman, Renison, Groote Eylandt Mining, Bow River and Q-Mag among others. Some of these data were summarised in In general, magnetic separators seem to contribute 20–40% of the adhesion and magnetic separator measurable component, though this proportion will fall where adhesion losses are abnormally high; for example with porous ores. On the other hand, the measurement of effluent loss in magnetic separators almost certainly underestimates this source since most intermittent sampling procedures will tend to miss the short-duration loss episodes which are known to occur Magnetic separators are therefore an important though not necessarily dominant source of medium loss. Since their performance can deteriorate markedly if not operated correctly or properly maintained, they deserve close attention. Although there are various rules of thumb used by equipment manufacturers and plant designers to match hardware to a given duty this is generally imprecise. There is no model of the wet drum magnetic separator which takes into account a range of important variables, and which predicts the performance of the separator. It is the objective of the present work to develop such a model. The model should include as variables as many of the various machine variables as are found to be significant, as well as the operating parameters which describe the quality and quantity of feed to the separator. An important performance outcome of the wet drum magnetic separator is the recovery of magnetics. Loss of medium is a major component of dense medium plant operating costs. A model which predicts medium loss allows a plant to be optimised in its design and operation with regard to medium losses. It is the scope of the present work to develop such a model, and to demonstrate its practicality. The wet drum magnetic separator in a dense medium plant has an unusual role for a piece of mineral processing equipment in two aspects; it receives as feed material which should (and generally does) report almost entirely to concentrate, and it is ancillary to the main process. The latter in particular has caused it to be largely ignored, both in practice and in the literature. There is a body of empirical advice and anecdotal information; much of which is of doubtful value, due often to important variables not having been specified. Some study has been made of the important properties of magnetite or ferrosilicon which impinge upon their recovery. Very little real modelling of the wet drum separator has been done.  In their reviews of the state of the art of dense medium recovery circuits,  Based on operating experience at the Iscor iron ore mines, Testwork done by  This model consisted of 10 regression equations for misplacement of both magnetics and non-magnetics as a function of size for each of the five magnetic separation stages in the concentrator. These regressions were all two parameter log/log plots, with the sole exception of the misplacement of non-magnetics on the rougher stage which was a quadratic. A relationship was also observed between slime non-magnetics misplacement and water split to concentrate; this is analogous to the similar effect seen with other processes such as froth flotation and hydrocyclone classification.  In further studies of the wet drum magnetic separator with magnetite, The magnetite used in this work was a commercial dense medium magnetite obtained from Commercial Minerals. Its size distribution, obtained by laser size analysis, is shown in The ferrosilicon used was Samancor 150D grade, a milled product having a nominal size distribution shown in The test rig constructed at the JKMRC an Eriez wet drum magnetic separator, ancillary equipment to provide a sufficient supply of slurry to conduct each test, and a sampling system to allow the abstraction of concentrate and tailings samples of sufficiently low variance. The Eriez wet drum separator was a type HDMA of 900 mm diameter and 700 mm drum length, shown schematically in The slurry circuit consisted of an agitated sump, a pump, a demagnetising coil, and connecting pipework. Both tailings and concentrate streams from the separator gravitated to automatic Vezin type sample cutters; the tailings stream was a combination of the spigot and weir overflow streams. Within the shell of the sampler, a cutter rotated at 30 rpm; when this passed through the stream of material to be sampled some was diverted to an axially located outlet. The sample fraction collected was determined by the angle between the cutter blades. The slurry for each experiment was prepared in the sump. In all tests, 800 l of water was used; this was estimated by a mark on the inside of the sump. The appropriate amount of magnetite or ferrosilicon, pre-weighed into containers, was then added to give the required pulp density. As actual pulp density was determined for each trial no great accuracy was sought in achieving the required pulp density. During the addition of solids the agitator was activated but the pump was not. When the solids were reasonably dispersed the pump was activated and slurry was circulated on bypass. In order to fully disperse the solids and to break down any aggregates present in solids reclaimed from previous runs, this bypass circulation was continued for at least 5 min prior to each run. Ferrosilicon slurries were dosed with 500 g of sodium nitrite per ton of ferrosilicon in order to passivate the ferrosilicon and prevent corrosion The pickup and discharge gap settings were set using spacers of appropriate size; thus there was no possibility of measurement error in these settings. The magnet position was set against a calibrated scale. The spigot valve settings were always set with the valve being opened. When the physical settings of the separator had been adjusted to those required for each trial the separator drum rotation was switched on, and the bypass valve was adjusted to the required setting. Once feed was going to the separator, about 2–3 min were allowed for the separator to come to steady state, then samples were taken. These samples were collected in ten increments over a period of about 20 s using Vezin rotary sample cutters. Sample was collected from all parts of each flow stream and all material in the stream had the same probability of being collected. About 15 kg of tailings and 1 kg of concentrate were collected over a period of 20 s by this system. The material not abstracted as sample gravitated to the sump and was recycled. Since the sample cutters collect a known fraction of the material passing through the sampler, it is possible to estimate the mass and volumetric flowrate of both concentrate and tails and, by summation, of the feed after each trial. Both wet and dry sample weights were measured using appropriate laboratory techniques In general concentrate samples were not subjected to laboratory magnetic separation by Davis Tube as they were considered to be sufficiently clean. This was confirmed experimentally—the amount of non-magnetics present could not be determined in most samples. The experimental error when using the system described above was determined by an experiment in which 16 samples were taken at about 5-min intervals under a fixed set of conditions. To more fully simulate the practice with real experiments, the bypass valve was fully opened between each trial; thus error in re-setting the bypass valve was included in the error determined, as was the error due to depletion of the test charge. However no other adjustments were reset between trials. Very low experimental errors were obtained for all values determined in this work. This was considered to be an excellent result given the number of physical processing and testing steps involved in arriving at these results. This is illustrated in No correlation was found between any of these results and run order. This might be expected to have some effect due to the depletion of slurry in the sump as the run progresses. A reduction in sump level will slightly alter the suction head to the pump which might be expected to affect its performance—although this was not seen it was routine procedure to perform all trials of any factorial experiment in random order. In this way any change due to run order is not added to the effect of any test variable, but rather is manifest as experimental error. The experimental campaign opened with a series of eight full or partial factorial experiments in which either four or five independent variables were examined. Other independent variables were changed between factorial experiments. This was done to establish the importance of the process variables chosen for study and to determine the effects of each of these on the main process outcomes. Clearly any model which is developed should be in general accord with the trends found in these factorial experiments. Another aspect of the factorial experiments was to identify those variables which could usefully be studied further in subsequent experiments in which a single variable would be varied incrementally, and to accumulate further data for modelling over a wider range of values. The effects of each of the five independent variables considered (pickup gap, discharge gap, magnet position, bypass valve setting, and spigot valve setting) on magnetics recovery were calculated according to the method given by A notable finding of this work was that pickup gap had a significant effect on magnetics recovery in seven out of the eight factorial experiments. Under conditions which gave high recovery increasing the pickup gap gave an increase in magnetics recovery. Not surprisingly the bypass position had a significant effect on effluent magnetics content in seven factorial experiments, and on magnetics recovery in four factorial experiments. Opening the bypass valve, thereby reducing the flowrate through the separator, had a universally beneficial effect. In contrast to the observations of A set of incremental experiments was done after the results of the factorial experiments were available. They complement the factorial experiments in that variables which could not easily be examined in factorial experiments (for example non-magnetics contamination and feed solids content) are considered, or variables which were investigated in the factorial experiments were examined over a much wider range of values (for example magnet position). In these experiments, one variable was changed over a range of values, or in some experiments this was done while a second variable was set at either a high or a low value. In such experiments, the interaction between the two variables was also examined. The results of all trials in both factorial and incremental experiments are tabulated elsewhere The conceptual model of the collection mechanism described by This may be modelled mathematically as a flocculation process, which is described by If magnetic recovery is a flocculation process, then the proportion of unflocculated particles is equivalent to the loss. Thus the fractional loss ( This term Note that the last term here is effectively a Reynolds Number. Thus we have The non-parameterised terms This equation has been fitted to the available data using a proprietary model fitting package which offered three fitting methods; Levenberg-Marquardt, Nelder and Mead, and a so called Genetic Algorithm. The latter is the least sophisticated mathematically of the three. It is based on an analogy with gene splicing and genetic mutation; its optimisation is, like evolution, purely random. However it is extremely robust, and quite insensitive to the values of the initial guesses required by all three methods. Its best use is as a means to generate very good initial guesses for one of the other two methods. Another advantage of this method is that it will not always be trapped in local minima. This is due to its random element. A useful test for a Levenberg-Marquardt or a Nelder and Mead minimum is to give the Genetic Algorithm a chance to seek an even better minimum. Values of susceptibility of 3.48 for magnetite and 5.1 for ferrosilicon were used. These values were determined at 1000 Gauss, and were provided by Samancor The parameters in this model are those which, based on the dimensional analysis used to derive it simplifies the model, it indicates those variables which are significant determinants of the process outcome, and it increases the number of degrees of freedom in the model. Parameter elimination was used to reduce the original eight parameters to six, without loss of statistical model quality. These parameter values are also shown in  The error in the model, manifest in the standard deviation shown in The ratio of mean squares is an In particular it is inherent in the model that all that is required for recovery is to be included in a floc. While there is ample justification This model was then applied to the remaining 37 data sets (20% of the total available). It should be noted that the model is independent of this smaller data set, having been generated only on the larger data set; this then serves to test the model's applicability to independent data. Comparison of the predicted value with the observed actual values gave the results shown in It is then a reasonable assumption that for any further data falling in the range over which the model was developed, the model will predict the level of magnetics loss to a degree of precision and accuracy which is adequate for process design and optimisation. The observed standard deviation of the predicted value from the observed value here may be taken as that which would be obtained from the model in general. The standard deviation of the logarithm of the magnetics loss of 0.3 is equivalent to a relative error in the loss of times two. While this will not allow precise prediction of the loss in a design situation, it offers a considerable improvement on the various rules-of-thumb previously employed and is sufficiently accurate for broad design need. In addition it provides an understanding of which variables to change (and in which direction) to rectify the poor performance of existing installations. From the perspective of the recovery, the model is very good. For example if a predicted recovery for a particular set of conditions is 99.9%, the actual recovery would be expected to be between 99.8% and 99.95%. A model has been developed to predict loss of magnetics in a wet drum magnetic separator in dense medium applications. This model is based upon the concept that magnetics are recovered in a flocculation process, and thus it may be represented by a first order flocculation rate and a residence time. The model form was obtained by dimensional analysis, incorporating the flocculation process and several fittable parameters. Based on a data set of about 145 trials, and using a non-linear stepwise regression technique, parameter values have been estimated which give the best fit of the model to the data, resulting in a model containing six parameters. The model has been validated against a further independent dataset of about forty trials. The model predictions are satisfactory over the range of the experimental data utilised. The model developed is valid over the range of data used in the fitting of model parameters, and for the type of machine used in the test work. However since the model is based on mechanistic sub-models, it is probable that some extrapolation is possible. Similarly it is reasonable to expect that in order to apply the model to other machines not all parameters would need to be re-estimated. The model will predict magnetics loss content to the accuracy stated in Prediction of performance of materials other than the magnetite and the ferrosilicon used is outside the scope of the model. However the model should work with new materials simply by determining susceptibility to put in the magnetics loss model, and by estimating a new g or h parameter in the solids content model (which relates to the drainage rate of a particular material). There is no model to predict the contamination of the concentrate by non-magnetics other than that at feed contamination below about 85%, the concentrate grade will be 99% or better. The development of such a model is hampered by the difficulty in determining concentrate grade accurately at levels approaching 100%. In addition such a model would be of limited value, since feed contamination values of greater than 85% are seldom encountered except in secondary separators. Here the impact of low-grade concentrate is almost inconsequential, since the vast majority of the concentrate returning to the circulating medium comes from the primary separator. (If the primary recovery is 99.9%, and even if the secondary recovery is also 99.9%, then the ratio of primary concentrate to secondary concentrate mass flows is 1000:1.) A model to predict the solids concentration of the separator product, which is important for densification considerations, is the subject of a separate paper.