In the Schwarzwald area, southwest Germany, more than 400 hydrothermal veins hosting different gangue and ore mineral assemblages cross-cut the crystalline basement rocks. Many of the post-Variscan fluorite–barite–quartz veins are considered to have precipitated through mixing of a deep saline brine with meteoric, low salinity waters. This hypothesis was tested using carbon, sulfur, and oxygen isotope data of sulfides, sulfates and calcite, coupled with fluid inclusion studies. Primary hydrothermal calcites from the deposits show a positive correlation of their δ13C (V-PDB) and δ18O (V-SMOW) values, which range from −12 to −3‰ and from 12 to 18.5‰, respectively. Carbon and oxygen isotope compositions of paragenetically young, remobilized calcite types are shifted towards higher values and range from −12 to −1‰ and from 20 to 25‰, respectively. We developed an improved calculation procedure for modeling the covariation of carbon and oxygen isotopes in calcite resulting from mixing of two fluids with different isotopic compositions and total carbon concentrations. In our model, the carbon speciation in the two model fluid end-members and the fluid mixtures are calculated using a speciation and reaction path code. The carbon and oxygen isotope covariation of primary Schwarzwald calcites can effectively be modeled by a mixing trend of a deep saline brine and a meteoric, low salinity water. Sulfur isotope data of barites from 44 hydrothermal fluorite–barite–quartz veins vary from 9 to 18‰ (CDT), sulfide ore minerals show δ34S values between −14.4 and 2.9‰. Calculated sulfide–sulfate equilibrium temperatures are in the range between 300 and 350°C. These temperatures differ significantly from the formation temperatures of 150 to 200°C of most of the deposits as estimated from fluid inclusions, and are interpreted as preserved paleotemperatures of the deep aquifer. This assumption has been carefully checked against possible contamination of an equilibrated sulfide–sulfate system from the deep aquifer with sulfate from surface-derived sources, considering also the kinetics of the sulfide-sulfate isotope exchange. A combination of the S isotopic results with microthermometric fluid inclusion data and constraints on the temperature of the meteoric water was used to calculate mixing ratios of the two fluid end-members. The results indicate that mass fractions of the deep saline brine in the mixed fluid were between 0.5 and 0.75. Considering all geologic, geochemical and isotopic information, we propose that the majority of the post-Variscan hydrothermal veins in the Schwarzwald area were precipitated by district-scale mixing of a homogeneous deep saline brine with meteoric waters.Fluid mixing is a widely recognized process in upper crustal hydrothermal systems (e.g., Stable isotope investigations of sulfur and carbon are important tools for deciphering the processes involved in the formation of hydrothermal mineralizations and can provide critical information about (1) the temperature of formation, (2) the physico-chemical conditions of the mineralization processes, and (3) the origin of the elements in solution (e.g., In this paper, we quantify fluid mixing ratios by a combination of stable isotope and fluid inclusion investigations. We propose a model for the calculation of calcite precipitation trends, which considers the isotopic composition of the fluid end-members through isotopic mass balance as well as the thermodynamically calculated carbon speciation in the mixed fluid. We show that geochemical data of many individual deposits from an area of 120 by 40 In the Schwarzwald area, southwest Germany, Variscan crystalline basement rocks have been exposed during the formation of the Tertiary Rheingraben structure. The ortho- and paragneisses of the basement were intruded by granitic magmas around 335–315 The Schwarzwald hosts an extraordinary number of hydrothermal vein-type deposits. Within an area of 120 by 40 They have been classified into (1) quartz veins, which are most probably of Variscan origin, and (2) post-Variscan fluorite–barite–quartz veins with highly variable metal assemblages. The present contribution will focus on the post-Variscan mineralizations. Most of these veins do not host minerals suitable for radiometric dating. A few measurements of pitchblende (U–Pb and U–Xe, Xe–Xe), hematite (U–He), and K-bearing minerals (K–Ar) revealed three distinct mineralization events. These are 300–240 Most of the post-Variscan veins are oriented sub-parallel to the Rheingraben structure or they follow fracture zones which were active since late-Variscan times ( The results of a relatively limited sulfur isotope study of sulfide and sulfate minerals from 21 Schwarzwald deposits have been reported by Carbon and oxygen isotope data were reported from the Freiamt-Sexau mining area and from the Schauinsland deposit ( As summarized above, the post-Variscan hydrothermal veins of the Schwarzwald crystalline basement show a large range of different ore and gangue mineral assemblages, and were formed through a sequence of mineralization events from late-Variscan to Tertiary times. Despite this large spectrum, fluid inclusions from almost all deposits show very similar characteristics with predominantly NaCl–CaCl For this study, samples of sulfides, barite, and carbonates from 44 different post-Variscan deposits have been analyzed. The locations are shown in Mineral separates of hydrothermal sulfides, sulfates, and carbonates were prepared by careful hand-picking under a binocular microscope, followed by cleaning in doubly distilled water. Sulfides and sulfates were measured after procedures given in Doubly polished thin sections of fluorite, quartz, barite, and calcite have been prepared for fluid inclusion measurements from samples representative of the different mineralization stages of the veins. The microthermometric measurements were performed with a Linkam THMS-600 heating-freezing stage mounted on a Leica DMLP microscope. The calibration was done with synthetic fluid inclusions using the triple point of CO The results of the δ The carbon and oxygen isotope data are summarized in Equilibrium temperatures of sulfide–sulfide and sulfate–sulfide mineral pairs have been calculated using fractionation factors given in We hypothesize that the temperature range of 300–350 Although the homogeneous sulfate–sulfide isotopic temperatures indicate a common deep source for both aqueous sulfate and sulfide, they do not exclude that at least part of the sulfate budget was derived from mixing with meteoric waters. Such a model has been favored by different authors for the Schauinsland deposit ( Another possible model for sulfate deposition is oxidization of aquoeus sulfide being supplied by a reduced, saline brine through mixing with meteoric water. In this case, the instantaneous oxidation and precipitation processes are too fast for establishment of isotopic equilibrium between dissolved sulfide and the aqueous sulfates formed via oxidation. The sulfide ore minerals should then display isotopic compositions very similar to barite, with only a very small fractionation between sulfide and sulfate minerals detectable ( To strengthen our point, we have assessed the potential effect of contamination of a high-temperature brine transporting aqueous sulfate and sulfide in isotopic equilibrium by mixing with sulfate from meteoric water. Quantification of such a process requires reasonable estimates of the equilibrium temperatures, the sulfate concentrations and sulfur isotope composition of both end-member fluids, and the fluid mixing ratio. We know from fluid inclusion studies that the temperatures of formation of the hydrothermal vein deposits range from 150 to 200 Using these data as a basis, we can evaluate how robust the calculated sulfate–sulfide equilibrium temperatures are against meteoric contamination. Contamination of an equilibrated sulfate–sulfide system in the deep saline brine by sulfate supplied by mixing with surface-derived meteoric waters would result in a significant displacement of the calculated equilibrium temperatures. The impact of this contamination depends (1) on the mixing ratio of the two fluids, (2) on the concentrations of sulfate in the brine and the meteoric water, and (3) on the difference between the δ To constrain the concentration ratio of aqueous sulfate in meteoric water and brine, Mixing with sulfate derived from Triassic sediments having a δ The measured δ To overcome these limitations, we have derived a modified and improved set of equations, which we have combined with calculations using a speciation and reaction path modeling code. The results of these calculations predict the aqueous carbon speciation more accurately and incorporate the effects of different starting pH values of both end-member fluids. The speciation calculations for several mixing scenarios were performed with the HCh software package ( For mixing of two fluids having different isotope compositions, the isotopic mass balance for carbon isotopes is given by ( To calculate the carbon isotope composition of calcite, the species distribution for dissolved inorganic carbon has to be considered. For geologically reasonable pH and redox conditions, CO We have performed a number of model calculations applying the above equations, using the carbon isotope fractionation factors Using the reconstructed model fluids, we have calculated different fluid mixing scenarios. To model the isotopic data of primary calcites from the Schwarzwald district, reasonable estimations of the isotopic compositions of the two fluid end-members have to be made. The selected values should reflect the isotopic compositions of the most likely sources for both fluids, as constrained by the available geological and isotopic information. The meteoric water was probably in contact with the marine limestones of the Mesozoic sedimentary units covering the crystalline basement. Surface waters from limestone aquifers typically show δ The δ Using the estimated temperatures of both end-member fluids, the modeled carbon speciation during mixing ( The compositional range of secondary or remobilized calcites can be explained by low-temperature reaction and isotopic exchange with meteoric waters. Remobilization of calcite having a δ Consistent sulfide–sulfate equilibrium temperatures of about 300 The isotopic compositions of hydrothermal calcites precipitated via mixing of the two fluids have been modeled by a combination of isotopic mass balance equations and speciation calculations. Geologically reasonable estimates for the isotopic compositions of the two fluid end-members have been integrated into the model, permitting reconstruction of paleo-mixing-lines that reproduce the measured covariation of δ Most likely, this hydrothermal system has been active from Mesozoic to recent times. A major Jurassic alteration event which affected the crystalline basement and the Triassic sedimentary cover ( This project was made possible by funding from the German Research Council (DFG) to G.M. We thank three anonymous reviewers for their constructive comments, and the guidance of Edward Ripley which were most helpful for improving the paper.