Coal, a prime source of energy needs in-depth study of its various parameters, such as proximate analysis, ultimate analysis, and its biological constituents (macerals). These properties manage the rank and calorific value of various coal varieties. Determination of the macerals in coal requires sophisticated microscopic instrumentation and expertise, unlike the other two properties mentioned above. In the present paper, an attempt has been made to predict the concentration of macerals of Indian coals using artificial neural network (ANN) by incorporating the proximate and ultimate analysis of coal. To investigate the appropriateness of this approach, the predictions by ANN are also compared with conventional multi-variate regression analysis (MVRA). For the prediction of macerals concentration, data sets have been taken from different coalfields of India for training and testing of the network. Network is trained by 149 datasets with 700 epochs, and tested and validated by 18 datasets. It was found that coefficient of determination between measured and predicted macerals by ANN was quite higher as well as mean absolute percentage error was very marginal as compared to MVRA prediction.The development of any country is directly related to per capita consumption of energy. Coal is one of the prime sources of energy in India, and accounts for nearly 70% of the total commercial energy produced by the country Coal is an extremely complex heterogeneous material that is difficult to characterize. Coal may be defined as an organic rock composed of an assembly of macerals, minerals and inorganic elements held molecularly by the organic matter. The elementary composition of coal is very simple, carbon (C), hydrogen (H) and oxygen (O) being the principal constituents, along with small amounts of nitrogen (N) and sulfur (S). Chemically, coal consists of a mixture of complex organic compounds along with small amounts of inorganic mineral matter and moisture. Physical characteristics of coal vary with the rank of the coal. Chemical composition of the coal is defined in terms of its proximate and ultimate (elemental) analysis Takahashi and Sasaki Ravi and Reddy (1999) proposed ranking of coking and non-coking coals of India for industrial use, using fuzzy multi-attribute decision-making (FMADM) model. They used proximate analysis to predict the fixed carbon, volatile matter, moisture content and ash content of the Indian coal. They considered these parameters as fuzzy sets over the range of data, on the basis of available literature. Singh et al. Normally, determination of proximate and ultimate analysis of coal is a simple and easy task as compared to identification and determination of concentration of macerals by petrographic study, which is very laborious and time-consuming as well as requires expertise to identify a particular type of macerals, perhaps to the overlapping of reflectance of one macerals type with another. Hence, an attempt has been made to determine the concentration of macerals, taking into account the ultimate and proximate analysis by artificial neural network. The artificial neural network (ANN) is a new branch of intelligence science, and has developed rapidly since the 1980s. Now a day, ANN is considered to be one of the intelligent tools to understand the complex problems. Neural network has the ability to learn from the pattern acquainted with before. Once the network has been trained, with sufficient number of sample data sets, it can make predictions, on the basis of its previous learning, about the output related to new input data set of similar pattern The chemical composition of coal is determined either by the proximate analysis or by the ultimate analysis. The proximate analysis consists of the parameters, like moisture content (M), volatile matter content (VM), ash content (A) and fixed carbon (C). The first three parameters are determined by experimentation in the laboratory and then fixed carbon is calculated gravimetrically using the following formula. Ultimate analysis of coal involves the estimation of proportion of carbon, hydrogen, oxygen, sulfur and phosphorus. The amount of carbon, hydrogen, nitrogen and sulfur are determined directly, and that of oxygen is obtained by the following formula. Coal quality is a function of three fundamental, independent factors: Coal rank. Organic petrology. Inorganic petrology/geochemistry. Coal quality can subsequently be expressed by a number of direct parameters, each largely independent of each of the other fundamental parameters: Vitrinite reflectance. Macerals: vitrinite, fusinite, etc. Mineral matter, sulfur, trace elements. Coal is composed of a number of distinct organic entities called macerals and lesser amounts of inorganic substances – minerals. The inorganic constituents of coal can be expressed on the basis of parameters such as ash yield and sulfur content. The organic constituents, the macerals, are singly and particularly in combination, fundamental to many coal properties. Macerals are defined by both their color/reflectance and morphology. The two cannot really be separated. It is not always easy to decide which category a maceral is in; even coal petrographers don’t always agree. Macerals are phytogenetic organic substances or optically homogeneous aggregates of phytogenetic substances possessing distinctive chemical and physical properties. Macerals are the remains of plants and degraded plant materials. They have some special characteristic (chemical and physical) attributes. On the microscopic level, coal is made up of organic grains called macerals. Coal petrographers separate the macerals into three maceral groups, each of which includes several maceral types. The groups are liptinite, vitrinite, and inertinite. The vitrinite group derived from coalified woody tissue, the liptinite group derived from the resinous and waxy parts of plants and the inertinite group derived from charred and biochemically altered plant cell wall material. Identification of these macerals is mainly based on its form and optical properties (e.g. reflectance). Thus, the morphology reveals the genesis of macerals. Their optical properties can be related in principle to their molecular and chemical constitution. Macerals are defined according to their grayness in reflected light: liptinites are dark gray, vitrinites are medium to light gray, and inertinites are white and can be very bright. Liptinites are composed of hydrogen-rich hydrocarbons derived from spores, pollens, cuticles, and resins in the original plant material. Vitrinites are composed of “gelified” wood, bark, and roots, and contain less hydrogen than liptinites. Inertinites are mainly oxidation products of other macerals and are consequently richer in carbon than liptinites or vitrinites. The inertinite group includes fusinite, most of which is fossil charcoal, derived from ancient peat fires. Thin sections are not often used in analyzing the types and amounts of macerals in coal. It is very difficult to make thin sections of coal. Coal scientists need some way of rapidly preparing samples for routine examination. An easier technique is to work with polished sections of coal. The surface of many coals can be polished until it resembles a black mirror. Then reflectance microscopy is used to examine the coal. This type of microscopy is commonly used with opaque samples. The coal is mostly shades of grey. Some macerals do show shades of red and orange, but this is not in the same sense as with thin sections. From the viewpoint of coal petrology, the genesis of coal is primarily the genesis of macerals, microlithotypes, and lithotypes. Macerals are the most uniform microscopical constituents of coal and are comparable with minerals present in other rock types. Microlithotypes are typical maceral association that can be identified under the microscope, and lithotypes are layers of coal seams which can be distinguished with the naked eye. Besides the parent plant material and the initial decomposition before and during the peat stage, the degree of coalification (rank) is decisive for the microscopic appearance of macerals. The essence of the petrographic approach to the study of coal composition is the idea that coal is composed macerals, each having a distinct set of physical and chemical properties that control the behavior of coal. Morphology and reflectance under incident light are the main features, which distinguish macerals and the macerals groups under the microscope. In addition to their appearance, macerals have many other different physical and chemical properties. Again though, the properties of macerals change as a function of rank or maturation. They cannot be considered as a single molecular species with a well defined chemical structure. Since, coal is opaque and friable, the preparation of thin and polished sections is comparatively very difficult, time-consuming, and requires greater attention and skills. Also, it is generally not easily possible to make section of high rank coals. Artificial neural network (ANN) is a branch of the ‘Artificial Intelligence’, other than, Case Based Reasoning, Expert Systems, and Genetic Algorithms. Classical statistics, Fuzzy logic and Chaos theory are also considered to be related fields. The ANN is an information processing system simulating the structure and functions of the human brain. It attempts to imitate the way in which a human brain works in processes such as studying, memorizing, reasoning and inducing with a complex network, which is performed by extensively connecting various processing units. It is a highly interconnected structure that consists of many simple processing elements (called neurons) capable of performing massively parallel computation for data processing and knowledge representation. The paradigms in this field are based on direct modeling of the human neuronal system Neural networks are able to detect similarities in inputs, even though a particular input may never have been known previously. This property allows its excellent interpolation capabilities, especially when the input data is noisy (not exact). Neural networks may be used as a direct substitute for auto correlation, multivariable regression, linear regression, trigonometric and other statistical analysis techniques. When data are analyzed using a neural network, it is possible to detect important predictive patterns that were not previously apparent to a non-expert. Thus, the neural network can act like an expert. Particular network can be defined using three fundamental components: transfer function, network architecture and learning law A network first needs to be trained before interpreting new information. Several different algorithms are available for training of neural networks but the back-propagation algorithm is the most versatile and robust technique, which provides the most efficient learning procedure for multilayer neural networks. Also, the fact that back-propagation algorithms are especially capable of solving prediction problems makes them so popular. The feed forward back propagation neural network (BPNN) always consists of at least three layers: input layer, hidden layer and output layer. Each layer consists of a number of elementary processing units, called neurons, and each neuron is connected to the next layer through weights, i.e. neurons in the input layer will send then outputs as inputs for neurons in the hidden layer, and similar is the connection between hidden and output layer. Number of hidden layers and number of neurons in the hidden layer change according to the problem to be solved. The number of input and output neuron is same as the number of input and output variables. To differentiate between the different processing units, values called biases are introduced in the transfer functions. These biases are referred to as the temperature of a neuron. Except for the input layer, all neurons in the back propagation network are associated with a bias neuron and a transfer function. The bias is much like a weight, except that it has a constant input of 1, while the transfer function filters the summed signals received from this neuron. These transfer functions are designed to map a neurons or layers net output to its actual output, and they are simple step functions either linear or non-linear functions. The application of these transfer functions depends on the purpose of the neural network. The output layer produces the computed output vectors corresponding to the solution. During training of the network, data is processed through the input layer to hidden layer, until it reaches the output layer (forward pass). In this layer, the output is compared to the measured values (the “true” output). The difference or error between both is processed back through the network (backward pass) updating the individual weights of the connections and the biases of the individual neurons. The input and output data are mostly represented as vectors called “training pairs”. The process as mentioned above is repeated for all the training pairs in the data set, until the network error converged to a threshold minimum defined by a corresponding cost function, usually the root mean squared error (RMS) or the summed squared error (SSE). In      So, the net output from hidden layer is calculated using a logarithmic sigmoid function       The total error function is given by    The update of weights for the ( There are many researchers who have done extensive work to determine the proximate and ultimate analysis vis-à-vis macerals of different coal seams in India only. The range of values of different input parameters have been taken and decided by the various published works All the input and output parameters were scaled between 0 and 1. This was done to utilize the most sensitive part of neuron, and since output neuron being sigmoid can only give output between 0 and 1, the scaling of output parameter was hence necessary. Feed forward network is adopted here as this architecture is reported to be suitable for problem based on problem identification. Pattern matching is basically an input/output mapping problem. Closer the mapping, better the performance of the network. Thus, based on the above discussion and objective of the investigation under consideration, one network was designed to predict the two outputs. The architecture of the network is tabulated below: To test and validate the ANN model, the new data sets have been chosen. These data were not used while training the network, as that will validate the use of ANN in more versatile way. The results are presented in this section to demonstrate the performance of the networks. The mean absolute percentage error (MAPE) and coefficient of determination between the predicted and observed values are taken as the performance measures. The prediction was based on the input data sets discussed above. The performance of the ANN during training is shown in The purpose of multiple regressions is to learn more about the relationship between several independent or predictor variables and a dependent or criterion variable. The goal of regression analysis is to determine the values of parameters for a function that cause the function to best fit a set of data observations provided. In linear regression, the function is a linear (straight-line) equation. When there is more than one independent variable, then multi-variate regression analysis is used to get the best-fit equation. Multiple regressions analysis solves the data sets by performing least squares fit. It constructs and solves the simultaneous equations by forming the regression matrix, and solving for the co-efficient using the backslash operator. The MVRA has been done by same data sets and same input parameters which we used in ANN. The equation for prediction of Vitrinite by MVRA is Training of the neural network was done using seven input parameters, one hidden layer with five hidden neurons and three output parameters. As Bayesian regulation  In this study, it was shown that it is possible to predict the macerals contents of Indian coals from proximate and ultimate analysis using artificial neural network. Using Bayesian regulation and optimum number of neurons in the hidden layer, the mean absolute percentage error (MAPE) for vitrinite, liptinite and inertinite were 5.39%, 9.80% and 6.99%, respectively by ANN. The corresponding coefficients of determination were 0.9684, 0.95 and 0.9602, respectively. The prediction by MVRA shows very high errors. The coefficient of determination for vitrinite, liptinite and inertinite by MVRA were 0.6495, 0.6668 and 0.5438, respectively and by MAPE were 14.90%, 20.01% and 108.03%. Considering the complexity of the relationship among the inputs and outputs, the results obtained by ANN are highly encouraging and satisfactory. ANN could provide a back-up approach to laboratory methods of macerals analysis. So, ANN can be a better supplement for verification and cross-checking of laboratory results.