A useful tool to document structural inversion inside a shear zone is the identification of overprinted structures, which can increase the complexity of the internal fabric of shear zones. In the case of thrust faults, shear zones can also be problematic due to the occurrence of structures connected to flexural slip along bedding in the recumbent forelimb. Therefore identification of superimposition among different structures can help to distinguish among these configurations inside a shear zone. In Central Apennines (Italy), favourable conditions along the outcrop of Mt. Tancia's thrust allowed the discovery of two sets of superimposed fabric elements referring to two opposite senses of shear. The first is related to thrusting (top-to-E–NE), whereas the second is likely associated to reactivation in normal sense (top-to-W–SW). The fabric elements have been mapped and their distribution inside a semi-brittle shear zone has been defined. High angle extensional shear planes occurring only in the uppermost part of the shear zone (closest to the main thrust plane) have been interpreted as a new generation of C-planes, connected to negative reactivation, instead of Riedel shear planes. The overprinting relationship defined inside the shear zone helps in discriminating whether the observed structures developed in the footwall of the main thrust or on the recumbent limb of the hanging wall's anticline. The deformation inside the shear zone can be described using a simple shear model at the outcrop scale, where reoccurrence of fibrous calcite on shear C-planes should control rotation of S-planes; these are dissolution planes parallel to the XY-plane of the local strain ellipsoid. At thin section scale, instead, veins maintaining the same orientation suggest a coaxial deformation due to repeated crystallization events controlled by fluid pressure and differential stress variation.Structural reactivation is a fundamental feature of deformation in continental lithosphere. Faulting produces zones of weakness that tend to repeatedly accommodate successive crustal strain. Thrust fault reactivation by a subsequent normal fault is defined as negative inversion (after In the Central Apennines, favourable conditions along the outcrop of Mt. Tancia's thrust allowed the recognition, classification and localization inside a semi-brittle shear zone of several sets of fabric elements both at outcrop and at thin-section scale. Superimposition of two sets of fabric elements referring to two opposite senses of shear have been recognized inside Mt. Tancia's shear zone. High angle extensional shear planes occurring in the uppermost part of the shear zone (closest to the main thrust plane) have been interpreted as a new generation of C-planes, connected to negative reactivation, rather than Riedel shear planes. This interpretation is based on these planes' relationship with the other structures inside the shear zone and on their spatial distribution. Moreover, these data suggest that the resulting fabrics can be explained by a complex interaction between the imposed kinematics and the geometry of the main thrust plane. The overprint relationship defined inside the shear zone allows us to distinguish whether the observed structures developed in the footwall of the main thrust or on the recumbent limb of the hanging wall's anticline. The N–S-trending Mt. Tancia's thrust front is located in the western sector of the Central Apennines fold and thrust belt, deformed from Oligocene to Recent ( Mt. Tancia's thrust zone crops out South of Rieti ( On the main plane, kinematic indicators, consisting of striations and grooves, indicate a top-to-E–NE sense of transport of the thrust's sheet. The overall geometry defines a transpressional thrust front with a dextral component of shear. At the outcrop scale, the hanging-wall of Mt. Tancia's thrust is offset by an extensional conjugate system, which offsets the fault wall southwestward, with a displacement of about 50 The shear zone, about 200 Based on the observed combinations of fabric elements, the shear zone has been divided into three parts, starting from the undeformed rock to the main contact: (i) a lower zone (Z1), (ii) a transitional zone (Z2) and (iii) an upper zone (Z3), closer to the main contact ( The Z1 (lower zone) has a thickness of about 50 The Z2 zone has a thickness of about 100 The Z3 (upper) zone is about 50 In the uppermost 4 Occurrence of extensional structures inside a shear zone is largely documented and discussed ( The new C-planes are strongly localized in this part of the shear zone, instead of being distributed all over the deformed fault rocks. Variable density of Riedel shear occurrence inside a brittle shear zone is explained by New C-planes occur in shear zones where F1 foliation, instead of parallel, assumes an angular relationship (about 40°) with the main thrust plane, which varies its dip angle passing from a flat to a ramp geometry ( Several thin sections were collected from Mt. Tancia's shear zone. Each sample was oriented in the field; back in the laboratory, they were reduced and cut to obtain sections normal to the S/C planes intersection and parallel to the fibrous calcite on the C planes. The orientation of the section with respect to the C-planes was marked for each sample on the thin section by reorienting the sample in the laboratory using a sand box. The locations of samples for thin sections are shown in Different types of veins are recognizable, likely associated with different events of crystallization:     In thin sections from Z1, dissolution planes are closely spaced, anastomozed, sub-parallel to the fault wall and largely folded ( The wide occurrence of veins in Mt. Tancia's shear zone suggests that the plausible deformation mechanisms were hydrofracturing and pressure-solution. Many authors have described how these two mechanisms can act inside a shear zone as a function of stress regime, magnitude of differential stress, progressive stages of sediments' diagenesis and rises and drops of fluid pressure ( The calcite crystals in the thin section show a twinning deformation. This deformation mechanism in calcite becomes important starting from a very low grade of deformation and can be used as temperature, strain and possibly stress indicators ( There is a widespread acceptance of the idea that simple shear is prevalent in shear zones. This model, generally applied to ductile shear zones ( In the case of Mt. Tancia's shear zone, the observed S dissolution planes are assumed to lie parallel to the XY-plane of the local finite ellipsoid, based on several pieces of evidence: (i) the S dissolution cleavage is quite continuous from Z1 to the undeformed rock around the shear zone, with the same geometric characters; (ii) slip did not occur on S-planes; (iii) L1 intersection is quite perpendicular to shear indicators (fibrous calcite) on C-planes, and parallel to kinematics indicators on the main plane. A progressive reduction of the angle between S- and C-planes and an increase in C-planes density occur from the undeformed zone towards the main plane at the outcrop scale; S-planes are re-used as shear planes just in the upper part (Z3) of the shear zone (closer to the main thrust plane). This evidence suggests that a deformation developed with the S-planes parallel to the XY-plane of local strain ellipsoid in domains between discrete shear surfaces (C-planes). Both rotation of S surfaces and slip on C surfaces accommodate the total strain at outcrop scale ( On the other hand, deformation observed at thin section scale seems to be better described with a different approach. As already described, veins show several crystallization events, due to the interaction between fluid pressure and differential stress variations, but the orientation of veins keeps quite constant, suggesting that no rotation of strain axes took place during deformation. Veins opened approximately normal to the direction of maximum instantaneous lengthening; during deformation they become wider and propagated laterally outward parallel to the instantaneous shortening axis. This suggests the occurrence of components of coaxial deformation inside the shear zone. Some authors point out that, although the bulk deformation in a shear zone may approximate to simple shear, smaller volumes inside the shear zone can follow a coaxial deformation path ( Even the geometry observed in Z1, and interpreted as the result of a structural inversion in a normal sense of shear, shows numerous analogies with inverted ductile shear zones. Evidence of structural inversion consists of superimposition of structures inside the shear zone that are incompatible with the previous recognized sense of shear. This methodology has been adopted by several authors ( A simplified 2D analysis has been performed using a PC drawing program, with the aim of better describing the development of these new fabric elements inside the Mt. Tancia's shear zone ( The starting configuration is composed of a simple square with a marker line inclined by 45° (S-plane). For a top-to-NE sense of shear (dextral in Reactivation in the opposite sense of shear determines a rotation of the previous structures in the opposite sense (models B and C in In model C the starting angle of passive marker is 10°. It simulates the S/C planes (defined above as F1 foliation) associated with top-to-NE kinematics. As shown in Closer to the outcropping thrust plane the configuration of the strain ellipsoid during structural reactivation varies again. Here in fact F1 foliation shows a footwall ramp relationship with respect to the main fault plane ( The analysed fault rocks associated with Mt. Tancia's thrust, document a structural (sensu I would like to thank Dott.ssa Patrizia Costa Pisani and Sofia Mariano for the kind help in the sampling of the shear zone. Many thanks to Professors Carlo Doglioni, Goffredo Mariotti and Eugenio Carminati for the useful discussions both in the field and in laboratory. The paper greatly benefited from the constructive reviews by the Editor, T.G. Blenkinsop, and the two referees, G. Cello and C. Doglioni.