In the last thirty years, portable X-ray fluorescence (pXRF) has grown from prototypes to being a key technique for field geochemical analyses, especially for mining and environmental applications. This technology provides real-time or near real-time decision support for operational field decisions (exploration, mining, site remediation or waste management), provides a cost-saving alternative to classical laboratory analysis programs, and deals efficiently with remote or harsh field conditions. The ability to rapidly collect a large number of samples and replicate analyses facilitates acquisition of higher data density compatible with geostatistics.
                  pXRF can be used profitably for sample screening and selection tasks, dynamic sampling plans based on field observations and measurements, grid mapping of a site and determining relative element abundance. In waste management and remediation, pXRF is used to identify unknown waste composition, and verify waste loads before disposal or treatment.
                  In all applications, having robust QA/QC plans and systematic laboratory controls on selected samples are essential for ensuring reliable measurements. The best overall results are usually achieved through a clever combination of field (pXRF) and lab data, with pXRF providing the bulk of the data at low cost, on larger data sets and potentially with better reliability than lab-based campaigns based on a limited number of samples.This paper reviews the story of portable X-ray fluorescence spectrometry, or hand-held XRF, (pXRF) and how it has been developed for applied geochemistry (mainly for the mineral industry and environmental activities). It also reviews its current potential and limitations, and how to make the most of this flexible technology while avoiding common pitfalls. Research from which these conclusions are drawn is available elsewhere and quoted as references. Instrument suppliers provided technical support for this research, but the author has no direct link with them. pXRF began its life as prototypes in the late 1970s and early 1980s, and was tested for exploration ( Outside the USA, one of the earliest documented exploration applications of pXRF used a pioneering instrument developed in Russia, the RRK-103 “Poisk”. In that study, Between 1984 and 2000, a Chinese team developed the IED-2000P pXRF analyser incorporating a 238Pu isotope source (Ge, in It was first used as a detection tool for lead paint in housing ( The easy, handheld operation led to early use for scrap metal sorting for recycling purposes. This is beyond the scope of geochemistry but was a key driver for the development of lightweight analysers. This broader market offered cheaper units for exploration or environmental purposes. The ability of early instruments to reliably analyse Pb, Zn, Cu and As meant they could be used at contaminated sites as well as mining areas. In both applications, they were used as a screening and fast mapping tool. In mining, they were used for regional exploration first, and applications for grade recognition came later. In environmental studies, they were first used for scoping investigations on soil and sediment. However, their qualitative identification abilities were soon used for waste management ( Applications of pXRF in mineral exploration before 2000 were rarely reported, either for confidentiality reasons or because of reluctance by the exploration geochemists. There were instances of investigation and publication though ( A successful attempt at using pXRF for exploration purposes was made at Mt. Lyell (  pXRF was investigated for its potential for grade control ( Silicate rock analysis, a strong domain for laboratory XRF at the time, was not really developed in the early pXRF period, though the pioneering work of Similarly, no example of pXRF application in mine waste management and closure works is known before 2000, despite this technology being used for solid waste management elsewhere. Application of pXRF in mineral exploration using surficial sediments is also quite young. One of the first publications using till was presented and published by      pXRF was the first analytical technique able to provide relevant information on-site to field geochemists, and in so doing broke the time barrier between sampling, results and decisions, first in environmental investigations, then in mineral exploration ( The introduction of X-ray tubes as a substitute for source emitters ( Modern instruments provide a high level of operator safety, due to built-in controls, but they are nevertheless radiation emitting devices. Their possession and operation is strictly regulated in many countries, even with variable standard operating procedures between countries. Operator training and certification is often mandatory, and always recommended. Since X-ray tubes are used as sources, the spectrometers emit only when operated. The high level of absorption provided by target solids implies that hazards occur only if operated in the air, with a poor contact surface, improper shooting angle, or with defective instruments. This implies periodic maintenance and emission controls. pXRF is now a routine analytical method for elements with medium to high atomic mass (K to Pb, and Th and U, The effective element range and limit of detection varies between analysers, depending mainly on tube voltage and anode (Rh, Ag, W), detector technology (a better range is achieved with large area Silicon Drift SDD detectors than with traditional Si-PIN detectors), beam collimation and filtration. The lower analytical limits (or limits of detection, LOD) vary with tube and detector specification and analyser geometry, but also with sample matrix composition. Higher abundance of heavier major elements, especially iron, negatively affects trace element detection. The best instruments are now capable of LOD in the 5 to 100 mg/kg range for elements with Z between 19 (K) and 68 (Pb). LOD vary between elements with emission lines and possible interferences. Each instrument has therefore its own specific element range, to be considered before selecting an analyser for a specific application. On most instruments, pXRF calibration is not the same for trace (soil mode) and major (mining mode) concentrations. These modes are not based on the same calibration principles (fundamental parameters for mining mode, Compton normalisation for soil mode). So this overcomes the “broken line” calibration issues observed on very large concentration ranges (data from If both trace and major level concentrations are desired, a change of mode is needed without moving the analyser between two measurements. This is longer and not very easy, but it improves accuracy. pXRF calibration techniques were reviewed by Various operation modes are available with pXRF spectrometers ( Spectrometer nose contact with sample can be made more reproducible using measurement stands, but this is only possible near the site, not on the site itself. Laser induced breakdown spectroscopy (LIBS) ( Proton induced X-ray emission (PIXE), despite promising attempts ( pXRF measurements were soon compared to laboratory results, with variable success. Reasons for observed discrepancies included sample preparation (point-and-shoot measurements vs. laboratory homogenised samples, see Conversely, correct pXRF measurements compared to mild digestion analyses were unfairly suspected of high bias. This is easily explained because most digestion techniques extract only a part of the analyte, while pXRF, a physical technique, analyses the whole element contents, regardless of chemical bonds. The first ETV studies and standard ( Recently, dedicated sample preparation equipment for the field ( Faster measurements, such as point-and-shoot on soil or roughly prepared media, cannot usually provide accurate absolute concentrations, because they do not provide any compensation for sample matrix heterogeneity, granularity, porosity or moisture. However, when media are naturally fine grained and homogeneous, this limitation may be removed. In the case of till, the homogeneous matrix is naturally suitable for pXRF analyses, without being very sensitive to moisture and structural changes. For example, in Finland a very good correlation between pXRF, labXRF and AR based ICP-OES and ICP-MS results using till was reported by Another approach to mineral grain-size heterogeneity is multiple shooting of a clean rock face, such as a split core ( Given the improvements in analytical precision, one of the most critical parameters in analytical uncertainty is now matrix homogeneity. This cannot be assessed through lab samples, unless multiple samples are collected for each point. Heterogeneity is best quantified on site before selecting the lab sample, or on each subsample if a composite sample is to be analysed. Matrix heterogeneity is a challenge for pXRF measurements, as they deal with very small sample volumes. However, this apparent limitation may be turned into an asset, as repeated pXRF measurements across a sample provide a quantitative assessment of its heterogeneity and scale. So pXRF's spot measurement capabilities, instead of being a drawback, can be profitably used for detailed investigations of heterogeneous samples. This was first noticed by for mineralogical and geochemical observations on ore and mineralised rocks, on hydrothermal alteration patterns, to investigate their geometry, mineral and genetic processes ( for soil and waste heterogeneity, to investigate pollution sources and pathways for dispersion ( More practically, repeated pXRF measurements on a sample prior to packing for the laboratory significantly improve sample representativeness. Estimations of sample heterogeneity can be made easily and inexpensively by performing repeated shoots at short distance, either in situ or on the sampling bag ( In other geological applications, Sensitivity to trace element variations in a common matrix is one of pXRF's strong points. Therefore absolute precision is not strictly necessary for decision-making, for instance in soil remediation, ore extraction or waste management. Measurement uncertainty reporting and regular lab calibration on a small number of samples provide confidence level estimates and safety margins ( Samples with large concentration differences from the threshold values for given elements allow on-site decisions to be made without having to wait for laboratory results. Unexpected or ambiguous results will prompt immediate complementary measurements, according to dynamic work plans ( Systematic reporting of uncertainty data means that pXRF measurements can be used routinely for geostatistical or geometallurgy purposes, with better data density and significance than sparse accurate lab results ( If this small number of samples is replaced by a large number of pXRF measurements, even with a higher analytical uncertainty (i.e. 10 or 20%, depending on the sample preparation protocol), the confidence level of the decision will be actually higher than with a small number of lab samples ( pXRF measurement accuracy can be improved by running lab controls on a selection of samples based on analyte distribution: laboratory sample selection should cover the whole range of abundances for the elements of concern, to monitor their accuracy throughout the range. This may allow the development of site-specific calibration of pXRF measurements, laboratory sample selection may focus on samples near the decision level for the elements of concern. Best practices for cooperation between the field geochemist using pXRF and the laboratory include: an exploratory study with pXRF on various facies or media, along with the collection of carefully selected lab samples, a tailored field protocol and matrix-adapted calibration, based on the expected element ranges, screening samples for laboratory controls being regularly collected and screened on pXRF element distribution or location criteria, regular pXRF analyses on the residual fraction of samples returned by the laboratory. Blind replicate lab analyses and analysis of standards are helpful too, as with any survey. The most suitable laboratory tests are physical techniques (ED-XRF, INAA). When wet chemical techniques (ICP-AES, ICP-MS, GFAAS) are used for refractory elements (W, Sn, Ti, Zr, Ta, Nb, etc.), the digestion method has to be the most comprehensive possible: alkali sintering followed by multi-acid digestion, i.e. a total dissolution method, to ensure full mineral dissolution.  An additional recent feature of interest for such operations is GPS embedding in analysers, or GPS communication. Pairing pXRF data with GIS devices, while working with scanned site blueprints on screen, allows for instantly obtaining elemental maps ( The relationship between data density and uncertainty must especially be considered when using the Triad approach ( Due to its low operating costs, denser data sets can be collected with pXRF, either by more closely spaced measurements, or by repeated measurements over time. This significantly reduces the sampling uncertainty issues related with the selection of small numbers of laboratory samples ( In both mining and environmental projects, many decisions are based on chemical analysis results. While project evaluation or feasibility is based on certified laboratory results and on threshold values, to limit investigation costs many operational decisions have to be taken at the site as quickly as possible. Results from pXRF are available within minutes, while laboratory results come after days or weeks, especially at remote sites. In conventional practice, decisions are based on a given or calculated threshold value, with a safety margin for sampling errors and uncertainty. This is made easier when uncertainty is directly reported by the instrument, and when sampling error can be constrained by repeated on-site measurements ( There are many operational situations in which the delay between sampling and receiving laboratory results entails significant costs. In mining exploration, this obviously applies to whether to drill further or not, but also to deciding where to drill or to sample, while field teams and equipment are mobilised. This is even more obvious in remote locations, far away from laboratory logistics. Potentially large cost savings can be made from not waiting for laboratory results, and orientating exploration resources (ground teams, drilling rigs, and more) towards the most promising targets. In environmental investigations, the sampling plan will be more cost-efficient if it can be carried out without returning to the field. During remediation options, relevant decisions can often be made on batches of soil or waste without storing them while waiting for results. For such situations, the confidence level of on-site pXRF results has to be carefully monitored by a QA/QC program, to assess the confidence level for operational decisions. This incorporates a sampling and analysis plan, hence quantified sampling errors, and sample-specific analytical uncertainties. It is also used for systematic planning and for performance-based measurement systems ( If compliance has to be based upon this type of measurement, a correlation has to be determined between field and laboratory measurements. Bias or systematic shift are acceptable as long as the dispersion stays within accepted limits ( Decisions can be made safely as long as the uncertainty on the pXRF result, including instrumental uncertainty and a provision for bias, is smaller than the difference between the result and the compliance value ( For a long time, the issue of the reliability of pXRF data was considered mainly from the absolute accuracy point of view. So lab-based XRF decisions were safer, and pXRF use was restricted to screening tasks. With improved equipment, and the increasing reference base, it became clear that even if pXRF measurements on field samples provided less accurate data, these data sets were nevertheless consistent for sample ranking, for geochemical signatures and for spatial distribution, since most of the inaccuracy was only bias. The impact of loose sampling density on the reliability of decisions was overlooked, despite the availability of reliability assessment methods such as DQO ( On a more general basis, within usual budgets, better analytical accuracy is obtained from laboratory analyses, but on fewer samples; while slightly lower accuracy is obtained from pXRF field analysis, but with better known uncertainty and far larger data sets ( Beyond the acceptability of pXRF data, Once these possible pathways are taken into account, a geochemist has the final say, deciding which is best adapted for his or her purpose (taking into account DQO, confidence in the decision, compliance, time and budget) and what the share of field measurements (pXRF) and certified laboratory analyses should be in the investigations. pXRF is able to analyse many commodity elements down to a few mg/kg in rocks, soil or stream sediment. It can also determine associated elements (tracer) elements for certain types of ore deposits (e.g., As, Sb, Se, Bi; Cu for Au, Access to sub-mg/kg elements (Nb, Hf, Ta, Ag, Au, PGEs) and to rare earth elements (REE) is more challenging, but manufacturers are pushing instrument limitations further every day through improvement of detectors. However, the X energy and detection constraints for some elements (individual REEs, for instance) still require heavier instruments that are transportable but not hand-held ( XRF's limitations have until now precluded its use with elements lighter than Mg, elements for which LIBS may provide an alternative ( Clever combinations of elements allowed A good example of multielement application is given by   The recognition of hydrothermal alteration zones is often possible using Ca, Fe, K or Al, even though the analysis of some other elements is difficult or impossible (Mg, B, Li, Na). Because pXRF performs fast and inexpensive measurements with good reproducibility it can usefully be used to scan old sample collections for new purposes such as identifying targets for new commodities and quickly selecting prospects. This is applicable also to core libraries, with the added benefit of dynamic sampling around observed anomalies. An important limitation of pXRF for rare or precious elements results from nugget distribution, which is poorly accounted for by the small beam diameter and investigation depth of the X-rays, since these are usually submillimetre and vary with atomic weight ( More generally, the small X-ray beam size makes pXRF sensitive to spot sample heterogeneity ( For till samples, pXRF capabilities in microanalysis allow mapping of elemental distributions related to mineralogy at the macroscopic scale (core, outcrop). This may provide valuable insights on ore texture, ore-forming processes and hydrothermal alteration ( Several factors converge into systematic bias, in which raw pXRF results are lower than laboratory analyses on the same sample. These include: additional air in the sample due to simpler preparation, and to less controlled distance between sample and window, moisture, which attenuates the signal ( instrument features, including different fundamental parameter calibration and less powerful sample excitation. This bias does not affect all elements evenly and it depends on matrix composition. It cannot be easily corrected unless a site-specific calibration is performed using trustworthy laboratory analyses. However, its rate (usually 10 to 30% provided that the right analytical mode is selected, e.g. However there are some opposite types of case, where pXRF was found to provide higher, but more accurate results than laboratory wet chemical techniques, especially ICP-AES or ICP-MS, for more refractory elements such as Cr or Ti (  Despite these limitations, pXRF data have been used for demonstrating exploration results. This was made possible through the application of robust procedures and QA/QC schemes such as those recommended by The suitability of pXRF data for exploration results reporting under JORC or NI 43–101 regulations was discussed by In many cases, testing ore grade on the pit or gallery wall can be attempted, but it always needs site-specific calibration, depending on the commodity's concentration range ( The main issue with waste management is predicting acid drainage, but another issue is identifying potentially toxic elements that may be released by acid leaching. pXRF may effectively detect Pb, Zn, As, Cu and many other elements (V, Cr, Mn, Co, Ni, Ge, Se, Nb, Mo, Pd, Ag, Cd, In, Sn, Sb, Te), directly or indirectly (for instance, sub-ppm Cd through Zn) in leachable waste. Examples were given for Pb, Zn, Cu, Cd and As by pXRF has many applications in accelerated environmental assessment of closed mining and metallurgy sites ( After closure, pXRF can be used for the reassessment of waste for reprocessing ( pXRF was immediately successful for the analysis of fine-grained homogenous media (soil, sediment) and for the elemental characterization of coarser media (metal scrap, residual waste). It was also tested on water ( pXRF provides invaluable help at the reconnaissance stage of a site diagnosis ( The cost and delay for large sets of lab analyses precludes that alternative in most cases. The amount of information obtained from pXRF grids is much better than what can be obtained from a limited set of analyses on composite samples. Besides this, samples for laboratory analysis can be selected in an optimal manner using these data.  The ultimate recognition of pXRF ability to screen soil is its recent election to  Soil contamination applications were recently extended to metal monitoring in crops ( Most remediation operations require immediate, on-site data for management decisions. This is especially true for ex situ operations. Precise determination of uncertainty means batches are kept controlled under regulatory values with an acceptable confidence level. On-site analyses will support decisions in a more cost-effective way, and within the required time frame ( During the remediation of a former gold mine ( One of the issues of real-time monitoring is the need to deal with dry samples, for soil or for dredged sediments. Direct measurements were known to be biased for moisture levels above 20% ( Once remediation work is completed, it is more efficient to check if remediation objectives were met using pXRF screening, similar to the initial diagnosis. It may be especially efficient for checking before official inspection. Another similar type of application is hazard mapping in populated areas, for agricultural use ( The properties of pXRF, described above for exploration and environmental geochemistry, can be applied in almost any area of geochemistry: lithofacies or alteration identification in geomapping ( Indirect applications of pXRF were widely extended to other soil properties for agricultural uses and soil functionality, using its multivariate capabilities ( pXRF applications for industrial waste (scrap metal, plastics, treated wood), for archaeologic purposes (non-destructive in situ analysis) and for testing industrial products are not described here, as they are beyond the domain of geochemistry. The major feature of pXRF is that it can provide data on most geologic materials in almost any situation. But, in spite of the apparent simplicity of readings, the kind of information produced depends totally upon the level of sample preparation. Direct point-and-shoot counting on raw surfaces will provide only semi-quantitative information, and in many cases nothing more than an abundant/present/absent classification for most elements. This might provide useful trend analyses at a site scale, and valuable insights on mineral processes (ore genesis, alteration, waste segregation) that complement bulk sample analyses. On the other hand, measurements performed on lab-ready samples, properly milled, dried and homogenised, often compare satisfactorily with laboratory analyses. Do keep the analyser in contact with the sample. Any air layer between the sample and the instrument window will affect analysis results, especially for lighter elements. Avoid shooting samples through sample bag or protector films, unless you use the same bag or film for all the samples, and you are ready to accept the resulting bias. Don't mix point-and-shoot results and pXRF analyses on prepared samples. The strong points of pXRF are its ability to deliver usable results within minutes, to provide large numbers of measurements or analyses for a fraction of the cost of laboratory analyses, and, even better for decision-making, its unequalled ability to fit into dynamic sampling plans ( Don't mix pXRF field results and lab analyses on maps or in tables. Even though pXRF results can compare reliably and allow ranking, their absolute values may differ from lab results, especially if they are obtained from roughly prepared samples. Mixing lab and field results can lead to misclassification or erroneous topologies. Separate maps have to be drawn when results for both analysis types are available ( You can use geochemical maps drawn from pXRF measurement grids, but don't report them with absolute values unless a representative subset was also analysed in the laboratory. Measurements obtained with a rough sample preparation, or even no preparation, can be compared together and show a good sensitivity to element variations, even if the absolute concentrations are biased. The resulting map will show an accurate topology, but the scale has to be relative ( Do select the right analytical mode carefully. You need to take into consideration the expected concentration range and the study's objectives. In most cases, the soil mode offers an adequate coverage of trace level elements, while the mining mode is required for more accurate determinations of higher concentrations. A change of mode may thus be needed without moving the analyser between two measurements. If screening at various levels is only needed, the geochemistry mode, available on some analysers, is faster. Do have to hand a selection of certified reference materials (CRMs) for regular measurement. Besides the necessary double-check of performing laboratory analyses on selected samples, selected certified reference materials (CRMs) should be regularly measured, and those results incorporated into the instrument's QA/QC scheme ( Do make your own internal standards that match matrix composition better. CRMs with matrix compositions similar to studied samples are not always available, so we recommend preparing internal standards from a local sample of known composition ( Do only use custom calibration on homogeneous matrix samples. Calibrating pXRF instruments with specific factors calculated from laboratory analyses may significantly improve accuracy ( Do verify calibrations for each instrument if several pXRF analysers are used. These instruments provide a robust framework for analysis, but variations may be observed between them ( Do ensure traceability of results for instrument and operating parameters. When several instruments are used within a project, regardless of whether they are identical or different models or brands, measurements such as counting time by filters should be traceable to their instrument and its operational parameters. Instrument cleanliness and battery life are also important. Do perform an orientation survey with laboratory analyses before using pXRF extensively in a project. A preliminary orientation study is required for any large project based on pXRF data. This identifies matrixes and element ranges, and defines a suitable sampling protocol. An early comparison between field results and laboratory analyses provides an insight on possible biases and elements for a QA/QC frame. Do ensure systematic QA/QC monitoring of pXRF results. This is required if pXRF field measurements have to be used as data by the project. This is even more essential if operational decisions are based on them. QA/QC protocols are the same as in the laboratory, with blanks, CRMs and standards, systematic and random duplicates, and careful performance monitoring of each instrument ( The current status of pXRF in applied geochemistry encompasses several situations in the mining and environmental sectors: Providing a cost-saving alternative to classical laboratory analysis programs. Based on this sole criterion, pXRF is a risky bet for junior exploration or remediation companies, unless an experienced operator and adequate procedures are involved, Dealing with remote or harsh field conditions, and providing geologists with decision support information of key importance for exploration planning by diminishing laboratory sample lots and without waiting for shipping and laboratory delays ( Providing real-time or near real-time decision support for operational decisions (exploration and drill-hole management, ore extraction and processing, site remediation or waste management), Optimising data quality and data density in the perspective of a full site information system (geometallurgy, environmental) by providing 2D and 3D grids compatible with geostatistics, and controlled by lab analyses on selected samples, Providing higher sampling density data sets and therefore achieving better fitness for purpose than lab-only data sets ( Besides these ambitious applications, pXRF can be used profitably by most geochemists for sample screening and selection tasks: Quick ranking of samples on site, and selection for laboratory analysis of a smaller number of relevant samples, Dynamic sampling plans based on field observations and measurements, allowing better investigations than blind field work completed before laboratory analyses are available, Grid mapping of a site, using relative element abundance classes, and laboratory confirmation of the absolute abundance values. Both in the mining and environmental worlds, pXRF is an important technology for: Accelerated site diagnosis, Investigating anomalies, Input and output material monitoring, In waste management, pXRF is used profitably for: Identifying unknown waste, Selecting samples for the lab, and selecting the substances to be analysed, Verifying waste loads before disposal or treatment. To summarise these findings, pXRF is now a fundamental tool for the geochemist in exploration, mining and in environmental geochemistry. It does not substitute laboratory analyses ( Close cooperation between the field analysis team and the laboratory tends to improve the quality of the former and the cost-effectiveness of the latter significantly, with improved geochemical survey performance as a result. The best results are usually achieved through a well-planned combination of field and lab data, with pXRF providing the bulk of the data at low cost, allowing large data sets and better reliability than exclusively lab-based campaigns based on a limited number of samples. This research was supported by various projects with funding by the