We report the rapid microwave-assisted hydrothermal synthesis of mesoporous hydroxyapatite (HAp) nanocrystals with controlled size, morphology, and surface area using various organic modifiers as regulators. The products were analyzed for their crystalline nature, phase purity, morphology, particle size and pore size distribution. Results indicated that ascorbic acid, cetyltrimethyl ammonium bromide (CTAB) and polyvinylpyrrolidone (PVP) play an important role to obtain needle like, rod like and fiber like mesoporous HAp nanocrystals with different specific surface area by controlling growth habit of HAp along c-axis. In addition, the prepared samples were B-type carbonated HAp similar to bone minerals. Therefore, the present approach can be a promising way to obtain precursor for making tissue engineering scaffolds, drug/protein delivery carriers and bone fillers with tunable characteristics.Hydroxyapatite (HAp) is a biomaterial and it has received much attention from researchers for making scaffolds for tissue engineering, carriers for drug/protein delivery, fillers for filling bone defects, and coatings on metallic implants due to its inherent properties such as bioactivity, biocompatibility, osteoconductivity, and similarity with the main inorganic components of the hard tissues of vertebrates A number of synthetic techniques were used to prepare nanocrystalline HAp including sol–gel, wet precipitation, hydrothermal, microemulsion, and microwave irradiation method Calcium nitrate tetrahydrate (Ca(NO HAp nanocrystals were prepared using microwave assisted hydrothermal reactor in the following manner: 100 ml of 1 M Ca(NO The obtained precipitate was dried at 110 °C for 5 h and crushed into powders. To prepare HAp nanocrystals with different sizes and morphologies, organic modifiers such as ascorbic acid (0.1 M), CTAB (0.1 M), and PVP (1 g) were used and the samples obtained were referred as HAp-2, HAp-3, and HAp-4, respectively. Also, an identical experiment was conducted without organic modifier and named as HAp-1. The crystalline phase of the synthesized samples was determined by Difray- 401 X-ray diffractometer (JSC Scientific Instruments, Russia) using chromium radiation (  FTIR study can provide information about the functional groups of HAp (phosphate, and hydroxide ions) and impurities (carbonate and water molecules) present in the samples. FTIR spectrum of the synthesized samples is shown in Normally, CO Typically, four distinct vibrations of phosphate were observed in Raman spectrum of HAp. They were symmetric stretching, triply degenerate asymmetric stretching, triply degenerate bending and doubly degenerate bending vibrations  TGA and DSC curves for the prepared samples are shown in Morphological features of the prepared samples are shown in The formation of different types of nanostructure in the presence of different organic modifiers can be explained as follows: when a calcium precursor is added with phosphate precursor, an amorphous calcium phosphate (ACP) is formed initially in aqueous medium. The growth habit of HAp can be along the Ascorbic acid is also known as vitamin C, which plays an essential role in mineralization process However, CTAB acts as a soft template and it can form rod like micelles due to its interaction with phosphate anions at aqueous condition PVP is a surface-regulating polymer and is widely used for the synthesis of one-dimensional HAp nanostructure. Nathanael et al. Nitrogen adsorption/desorption isotherms, their corresponding BET line, and BJH pore-size distributions of samples are shown in Nowadays, the design of biomaterials should not only be restricted to substitute them physically but to actively involve them in controlled reactivity with the components of biological fluids (ions, proteins), implying bone regeneration. Nanocrystalline non-stoichiometric carbonated HAp forms the hard tissue of vertebrates, hence HAp is still a promising candidate for bone substitute materials. An increasing focus on the fabrication of bioactive HAp-based materials with desired properties that can be adjusted to specific requirements is sought A rapid microwave-assisted hydrothermal method has been proposed to prepare mesoporous HAp nanocrystals with tunable crystalline nature, particle size, morphology, and surface area. With the aid of ascorbic acid, CTAB, and PVP, we can obtain needle like, rod like, and fiber like mesoporous HAp nanocrystals with specific characteristics by controlling the crystal growth habit of HAp under rapid microwave-assisted hydrothermal treatment. Hence, the developed method could be a potential tool to prepare precursor materials for making tissue-engineering scaffolds, drug/protein delivery carriers, and bone fillers with tunable characteristics. G. Suresh Kumar would like to express his sincere thanks to