Water shut off and performance control in oil reservoirs involve many techniques both for reducing the water cut and for enhancing oil production with the aim of making it economical and environmental friendly. Therefore, suitable nanoparticles for injection in an oil reservoir regarding nano size, spherical morphology, and better dispersibility were synthesized by one step, facile, and inexpensive method and then characterized in this work. In addition, new magnetorheological (MR) fluids based on the crude oil and the nanoparticles were developed, and the analysis of their rheological properties carried out by rotational and oscillation tests showed their ability of forming gel-like structure. Furthermore, from the core flooding experiment investigated, values of both resistance factor and residual resistance factor showed that the MR fluids exhibit a solid-like form with the magnetical field applied in oil reservoirs, thereby reducing the water cut.Water shut-off techniques that are used for reducing water cuts in crude-oil fields ( There are two main techniques for conformance control. The first one is to enhance shear viscosity of a driving fluid during flooding operation with a polymer solution (partially hydrolyzed polyacrylamide (HPAM) ( For preparing the magnetic conformance control fluid, magnetite as a dispersed phase was fabricated following the procedure formerly reported ( Morphology of the magnetite was considered using both scanning electron microscope (SEM) (S-4300, Hitachi, Japan) and transmission electron microscopy (TEM) (Philips CM200, USA), while its particle size distribution was inspected with particle size analyzer (ELS-Z, Otsuka, Japan). Magnetic property of the magnetic particles was measured in their powder sample at the ambient temperature via vibrating sample magnetometry (VSM) (7407, Lake Shore, USA). More complete characterizations have been reported elsewhere ( A same procedure was followed for four cores of Berea sandstone in which their gas permeabilities were measured by the gas perimeter and saturation was then performed with brine (4.2 wt% NaCl and 1.8 wt% CaCl  On the other hand, although the proposed magnetic conformance control fluid will be finally used in the porous media, the MR behavior has to be considered using a rheometer first. The main factor is a weight percent of the dispersed phase in a continuous state because a low concentration of magnetite might not show MR properties, and a high concentration cannot be injectable through core samples. To find an optimum concentration, we performed a steady shear rate study using several magnetite weight percent values at different magnetic field strengths. For preparing MR fluids, the calculated amount (based on the desired weight percent concentration) of magnetite is well dispersed in two kinds of crude oil as a carrier fluid by using a vortex. A magnetic field strength sweep test was performed in a fixed shear rate (7.3 1/s), which is a dominant shear rate in the porous media in oil reservoirs, and this shear rate is proposed for laboratory studies in the literature ( Another point is that magnetic saturation for different suspensions occurs at different magnetic field strength values, and these values increase with the concentration. Since the viscosity of the suspension during the flooding process is very crucial for real-scale application ( Two of important parameters for evaluating performance of the conformance control fluid are elastic modulus (G′), representing an elastic response of the fluid to store elastic energy which could be recovered afterwards and loss modulus (G″), representing irreversible energy portion that has been consumed to start the flow ( In which: When the viscous part still governs the elastic portion, tan For both conformance control fluids, G′ and G″ were investigated through a frequency sweep test. For the conformance control fluid in the light oil ( A very common set up for the core flooding experiment ( The pressure drops of cores in both light and heavy oils were compared with or without an induced magnetic field to investigate performance of the conformance control fluids. Conformance control fluids can decrease the effective permeability of water, and to study this ability, the resistance factor (RF) can be used. RF is a proportion of a differential pressure for the conformance control fluid injection to that for the primary water injection ( In order to ascertain that the reduction in the permeability will remain in the post-flush water flooding, a residual resistance factor (RRF) represents a proportion of differential pressure for post-flush water flooding to that for an initial water flooding as follows (  Due to high-volume water production and also the inverse environmental effect of the produced water, the water shut off process is an important target in oil-field engineering. However, there are many limitations and drawbacks of each technique. In this study, the performance evaluation of a new conformance control fluid based on the MR effect is investigated. For this purpose, magnetite nanoparticles were fabricated in a facile, one step and inexpensive procedure to make the nanoparticle synthesis on a large scale feasible. Magnetite nanoparticles showed appropriate characteristics for injection to the oil reservoir in terms of the size and morphology and magnetic properties for preparing MR fluids. Two types of crude oils with a wide range of API that can be called light oil and heavy oil were selected as the carrier fluid for the MR fluids to be used as the conformance control fluids. A series of rheological tests, including magnetic field strength sweep test and rotational and oscillation tests were performed to select the nanoparticle concentration in the carrier fluid and evaluate the MR effect. MR studies using the rheometer showed that both proposed conformance control fluids in light oil and heavy oil have this ability to form solid-like structures by applying a magnetic field because its elastic modulus is higher than its loss modulus. To verify the former ability in porous media, four Berea sandstone cores (two for the light oil and two for the heavy oil) were studied by performing the core flooding test with and without applied magnetic field intensities. To compare effect of applied magnetic field, one core of each crude oil category without the magnetic field and another one with the magnetic field were investigated. The pressure drop increased even without the magnetic field due to the reduction of permeability due to nano-flooding, and it increased dramatically after the magnetic field was applied. This shows the ability of the magnetite nanoparticles for forming columns in pores as is expected for MR fluids. RF and RRF also showed the permeability reduction not only during the injection of the conformance control fluid but also during the post-flush water flooding. Overall, it is concluded by performing rheological studies and the core flooding experiment that the conformance control fluids based on both the light and heavy oils can form the solid-like state required for reducing water production. This work was supported by