The rare earth elements (REE) are vital to modern technologies and society and are amongst the most critical of the critical elements. Despite these facts, typically only around 1% of the REE are recycled from end-products, with the rest deporting to waste and being removed from the materials cycle. This paper provides an overview of the current and future potential of the recycling of the REE, including outlining the significant but currently unrealised potential for increased amounts of REE recycling from end-uses such as permanent magnets, fluorescent lamps, batteries, and catalysts. This future potential will require a significant amount of research but increasing the amount of REE recycling will contribute to the overcoming some of the criticality issues with these elements. These include increased demand, issues over security of supply, and overcoming the balance problem where primary mine-derived sources overproduces lower demand REE without necessarily meeting demands for the higher demand REE.The International Union of Applied and Pure Chemistry (IUPAC) defines the rare earth elements (REE) as the 15 lanthanide elements plus Sc and Y Current global primary REE production is about 130,000 metric tons of rare-earth oxide (REO) equivalent content per year The small amount of the REE used in the majority of end-products containing these elements combined with the difficulty of the collection, extraction, and recovery of the constituent materials within end-products has hampered the recycling of the REE to date The majority of current REE recycling is from permanent magnets, but even this is in relatively low amounts via approaches that include Traditional hydrometallurgical recovery techniques where magnets are dissolved in acids (or potentially in the future using ionic liquids) before the REE are precipitated out of solution. Pyrometallurgical recovery techniques where REE alloys are remelted, are separated from alloyed transition melts in a liquid metallic state, are refined in an electroslag process, or are dissolved out of alloys by reaction with a molten flux, with the REE then supercooling with the flux to form a glass. The approach used depends on the nature of the REE alloys within the magnets. Gas phase extraction methods where the REE are transferred to a volatile chloride phase and are separated based on differences in volatility. The manufacture of NdFeB magnets also utilises a number of grinding, cutting and polishing operations that can lead to nearly a third of input REE being lost as manufacturing scrap Energy-efficient and longer lasting compact fluorescent lamps have increased in use over the past two decades, leading to a coincident increase in demand for the REE in the form of REE (predominantly Y, Eu and Tb) phosphors (e.g., The REE are extensively used in catalysts employed during hydrocarbon cracking and contain around 3.5% by weight of La with lesser amounts of Ce, Pr, and Nd Rechargeable nickel metal hydride (Ni-MH) batteries contain around 10% REE that are present in order to impart hydrogen storage capabilities The future potential for the recycling of the REE is prevalent on the type of material being recycled, and a significant amount of laboratory-based research has been undertaken to develop potentially scalable approaches that would enable the broader recycling of the REE. However, recycling of the REE currently requires extensive dismantling and the development of efficient collection infrastructure. As described above, another major issue blocking future developments in the recycling of the REE is the lack of cost effective methods to purify the mixtures generated during the recycling of consumer devices such as WEEE. Some recent advances in research in this area provide insights into approaches that can tackle this issue. For example, Bogart et al. It is important to also acknowledge that recycling is one among many possible responses to perceived REE supply risks. On the supply side, research and exploration should focus on the discovery of new mineral deposits, adapting existing mines to process the REE (e.g., monazite from heavy mineral sands mines; On the demand side, research and development should focus on finding substitutes for the REE in different technologies or the finding of alternatives for these technologies altogether (if possible). While these latter approaches may seem less likely given generally low substitutability ratings The REE are among the most critical of the critical elements yet current efforts to recycle these valuable commodities are seemingly relatively ineffective. There is significant potential to increase the amount of the REE recycled from major end-uses, such as permanent magnets, fluorescent lamps, batteries, and catalysts; however, a significant amount of research is needed in all of these areas to increase the amount of these elements. Increased amounts of REE recycling has the potential to play a key role in addressing a number of criticality issues with these elements, including meeting increased demand, increasing their security of supply, and overcoming the balance problem between higher and lower demand REE and the concentrations of the REE available from primary mine-derived sources. This work builds upon previous research which has included support from