A charge-barrier capacitive deionisation system was tested for electrochemical removal of Total Dissolved Solids (TDS), nitrates and ammonium ions. Several experiments were conducted with inorganic species spiked in tap water. The system efficiency was first evaluated using experimental statistical designs with different concentrations of NaCl (150 to 3000mg/L). The raw water conductivity and the targeted residual TDS in treated water were the key process variables. Power consumption increased linearly as the difference between these two values increased. Water recovery rate and electrical consumption, which varied respectively from 63.9% to 95.8% and from 0.45 to 5.35kWh/m3, were adequately described by a simple linear regression model (R
                     2: 0.98 and 0.99, respectively). Additional experiments performed on nitrates (100mgN–NO3/L) and ammonium ions (1000mgN–NH4/L) showed high levels of removal. A rise in TDS concentration led to a decrease in their removal due to the competition for electrodes carbon adsorption sites. It was concluded from this study that this technology offers an innovative alternative for demineralising water. However, assays should be conducted in natural waters and in a steady-state manner to confirm data obtained and get long-term performance.Drinking water supply is a major concern in developed and developing countries. Over the next 25 Multi-stage flash process (MSF) represents 43.5% of world production Capacitive deionisation (CDI) has been developed recently. It consists of the process of removing ions through their adsorption on the surface of two oppositely charged porous electrodes. This electrochemical process is conducted at low voltage (typically 0.8–1.5 During the purification cycle, cations and anions from aqueous solutions are drawn towards the cathode and anode, respectively, upon application of a voltage. The capacitive system collects ions over time from the influent water and releases effluent of gradually increasing salinity due to the limited ion adsorption capacity of the electrodes. Therefore, the purified water results from a blend of waters having various conductivities between the start and the end of the purification cycle. When (i) the electrodes are saturated with ions or (ii) the effluent conductivity level rises above the required conductivity, the electrodes are regenerated by applying a reverse potential to allow the adsorbed ions to be released into a concentrated waste stream. The loading cycle is repeated following the regeneration and purge cycle. The efficiency of CDI mainly depends on the surface area and adsorption properties of electrodes. Despite the high electrical conductivity and chemical stability of conventional activated carbon materials, operational problems including binder degradation and low overall capacity were observed The general purpose of this study was to determine the feasibility and performance of electrochemical removal of TDS, nitrates and ammonium ions by using proprietary charge-barrier CDI technology (DesEL Technology from The work described in this paper has been undertaken to validate the charge-barrier CDI technology by pursuing two specific objectives: Study the TDS removal from raw waters having different concentrations of NaCl. The system performance was evaluated using experimental statistical designs Determine nitrates and ammonium ions removal and evaluate the influence of TDS (NaCl and sulfates) on their removal. The electrodes, manufactured using a proprietary process, are mainly composed of powdered activated carbon with an organic binder. The electrodes are 0.250 The treatability tests were performed using a capacitive deionisation pilot unit (DesEL 9K, The DesEL process was configured by specifying five parameters on the control panel through a Human Machine Interface (HMI): the adsorption (purification) time may range from 120 to 600 the desorption (regeneration) time ranges from 60 to 240 the purge time (s) is present at the end of the desorption time and should be long enough to purge out the concentrate, before the next treatment cycle; the conductivity of the treated water (Low Conductivity Set Point, µS/cm) is set to a value that depends on the required removal of inorganics from raw water and ranges from 0.01 to 1.0 the conductivity of the concentrated waste (High Conductivity Set Point, mS/cm) ensures that sufficient concentrate is removed from the stacks and may range from 1.0 to 20.0 These parameters are interrelated and their values must be optimized to achieve a specific treatment objective A process and instrumentation schematic is provided in In this study, the High Conductivity Set Point was specified at its minimal value (1.0 Inorganic species (NaCl, NaNO The evolution of purified and purged water conductivity (mS/cm), time (s), flowrate (L/min), pressure (psi), voltage (V), intensity (A), influent water pH and the volume of purified water and concentrated stream were logged by a laptop computer using DataWorx PLC data logging software ( The experimental designs were conducted in batches using NaCl concentrations of 150, 1000 and 3000 Statistically designing experiments is useful when many input variables may influence the performance of the process. Moreover, the interaction among the parameters can be evaluated with limited number of experiments Different designs were studied depending on the influent TDS concentrations. For a NaCl concentration of 1000 Two assays were performed to illustrate the typical operation of the DesEL 9K pilot plant depending on whether a recirculation was observed during the purification cycle. The values of the input variables are presented in The treatability results of all experiments ( The DC power supply of the DesEL pilot plant was set to operate at a constant voltage output of 5.0 The TDS removal was studied under different experimental conditions. The application of statistics offers an empirical relationship between the independent variables and the dependant variables. Models were chosen according to the correlation coefficient In the analysis of variance (ANOVA) and for the tested conditions, it was found that the duration of the regeneration cycle had no impact on the water recovery rate whereas the duration of the purification, regeneration and purge cycles had little or no impact on the electrical consumption. From this study, the two key variables affecting performance were identified as the raw water conductivity ( From It was intended to use the charge-barrier CDI technology to treat waters polluted with high concentrations of nitrates and ammonium ions. Their presence in drinking water is toxic for human beings, especially nitrates, and elevated concentrations worldwide have increased focus on alternative removal processes As expected, a rise in TDS concentration led to a decrease in nitrates and ammonium ions removal due to the competition for electrodes carbon adsorption sites. Nitrates removal decreased from 98.0% to 88.0% when adding 1000 IX, RO and ED are suitable water treatment processes to treat nitrate-laden water. Charge-barrier CDI exhibited an alternative for removing nitrates and ammonium ions from drinking water. The use of charge-barrier CDI did not require any chemical to regenerate the carbon electrodes, which avoided the formation of a secondary waste by-product. Concentrations of nitrates in treated water were reduced to less than 11.8 Finally, the experimental design focused on the removal of various concentrations of TDS, nitrates and ammonium ions in an influent with low concentration (2.0–2.5 Charge-barrier capacitive deionisation was effective at removing TDS (80.9%–94.3%), nitrates (88%–98%) and ammonium ions (71.9%–88.1%) from water streams. Power consumption ranged between 0.45 and 5.35 The writers would like to acknowledge the staff of the NSERC Chair on Drinking Water and CREDEAU, as well as Mélanie Bolduc and Denis Bouchard, for their support in the laboratory work. They would also like to thank Leonard Seed and Dr. Gene Shelp (