The integrin-binding secreted protein developmental endothelial locus-1 (DEL-1) is involved in the regulation of both the initiation and resolution of inflammation in different diseases, including periodontitis, an oral disorder characterized by inflammatory bone loss. Here, using a mouse model of bone regeneration and in vitro cell-based mechanistic studies, we investigated whether and how DEL-1 can promote alveolar bone regeneration during resolution of experimental periodontitis. Compared with WT mice, mice lacking DEL-1 or expressing a DEL-1 variant with an Asp-to-Glu substitution in the RGD motif (“RGE point mutant”), which does not interact with RGD-dependent integrins, exhibited defective bone regeneration. Local administration of DEL-1 or of its N-terminal segment containing the integrin-binding RGD motif, but not of the RGE point mutant, reversed the defective bone regeneration in the DEL-1–deficient mice. Moreover, DEL-1 (but not the RGE point mutant) promoted osteogenic differentiation of MC3T3-E1 osteoprogenitor cells or of primary calvarial osteoblastic cells in a β3 integrin–dependent manner. The ability of DEL-1 to promote in vitro osteogenesis, indicated by induction of osteogenic genes such as the master transcription factor Runt-related transcription factor-2 (Runx2) and by mineralized nodule formation, depended on its capacity to induce the phosphorylation of focal adhesion kinase (FAK) and of extracellular signal-regulated kinase 1/2 (ERK1/2). We conclude that DEL-1 can activate a β3 integrin–FAK–ERK1/2–RUNX2 pathway in osteoprogenitors and promote new bone formation in mice. These findings suggest that DEL-1 may be therapeutically exploited to restore bone lost due to periodontitis and perhaps other osteolytic conditions.Developmental endothelial locus-1 (DEL-1) developmental endothelial locus-1 alveolar bone crest bone γ-carboxyglutamic acid–containing protein cement-enamel junction DEL-1–deficient epidermal growth factor-like repeats and discoidin I–like domain 3 extracellular signal-regulated kinase 1/2 focal adhesion kinase glyceraldehyde-3-phosphate dehydrogenase integrin β-3 ligature-induced periodontitis lymphocyte function-associated antigen-1 macrophage antigen-1 Runt-related transcription factor-2 epidermal growth factor knockout focal adhesion kinase single guide RNA CRISPR RNA mitogen-activated protein kinase/extracellular signal-regulated kinase kinase fetal bovine serum α-minimum essential medium quantitative real-time PCR horseradish peroxidase analysis of variance. The importance of these homeostatic functions of DEL-1 becomes phenotypically evident in DEL-1–deficient ( Because inflammation resolution is a prerequisite for wound healing and regeneration of bone and other tissues ( The ligature-induced periodontitis (LIP) model is used extensively to study induction of bone loss in different animal species ( We next examined directly the role of DEL-1 and its structural features in bone regeneration. Using the quantitative model outlined above ( To rigorously strengthen this notion using an independent approach, we used We next examined whether the capacity of DEL-1 to promote The extracellular matrix plays a major role in the osteogenic differentiation of progenitor cells ( Additional evidence implicating the β3 integrin–induced FAK-ERK1/2 signaling pathway in the osteogenic activity of DEL-1 was obtained by showing that the ability of DEL-1-Fc to promote mineralized nodule formation in the MC3T3-E1 system was blocked by inhibitors of FAK (PF-562271) or ERK1/2 (U0126) or when DEL-1[RGE]-Fc was used in lieu of the WT molecule ( To confirm and expand on the data with the MC3T3-E1 cell line treated with exogenous DEL-1 ( In this paper, we have shown that endogenous DEL-1 is required for effective bone regeneration during the resolution of experimental periodontitis. Moreover, exogenous DEL-1 could rescue the impaired bone regeneration capacity of DEL-1–deficient mice, suggesting novel therapeutic applications for DEL-1. The present study is, to the best of our knowledge, the first to show that DEL-1 induces new bone formation The study by Oh To rigorously test the biological relevance of the observations in the MC3T3-E1 cell line system, we used primary calvarial cells from 3-day-old WT, The ability of DEL-1 to promote inflammation resolution through β3 integrin–mediated apoptotic cell efferocytosis, as we showed recently ( Intriguingly, DEL-1 (also known as EDIL3, for Periodontitis, an oral inflammatory disease characterized by loss of bone support of the dentition, remains a serious public health and economic burden ( DEL-1 was shown to protect against inflammatory pathologies, including bone loss, in mice and nonhuman primates, and the results from these models are consistent with human clinical observations; this is not surprising, given that human DEL-1 has ≥96% amino acid sequence identity with its mouse and nonhuman primate counterparts ( The generation of C57BL/6  Full-length human DEL-1 as a fusion protein with the human IgG1-Fc fragment (DEL-1-Fc), DEL-1 lacking the discoidin I-like domains (DEL-1[E1-E3]-Fc), and a point mutant of DEL-1 in which Asp was replaced by Glu in the RGD motif of the second EGF repeat (DEL-1[RGE]-Fc) were generated and purified as described previously ( Groups of 8-week-old mice were subjected to experimental periodontitis by tying a 5-0 silk ligature around the maxillary left second molar for 10 days. The contralateral tooth was kept unligated as a baseline control. To enable periodontitis resolution, the ligatures were removed at day 10, and the mice were sacrificed 5 days later (at day 15). Periodontal bone loss was assessed morphometrically in defleshed maxillae using a dissecting microscope (×40) equipped with a video image measurement system (Nikon Instruments, Melville, NY). Specifically, the distance from the cement-enamel junction (CEJ) to the alveolar bone crest (ABC) was measured on six predetermined points on the ligated second molar and the affected adjacent regions ( Coronal sections of the ligated molars were prepared and stained with modified Masson's trichrome staining kit (Abcam (Cambridge, MA), catalog no. ab150686), which stains mature (old) bone and connective tissue in blue, whereas it stains immature new bone (osteoid) and collagen in red ( The murine osteoblastic progenitor cell line (MC3T3-E1 subclone 4) was purchased from ATCC (Manassas, VA) (catalog no. CRL-2593). Primary cultures of osteoblastic progenitor cells were derived from 3-day-old WT, For osteogenic differentiation, the osteoblastic progenitors were cultured in “osteogenic medium” (50 μg/ml ascorbic acid (catalog no. 1043003, MilliporeSigma) and 10 m Total RNA was extracted from cultured cells using TRIzol reagent (Life Technologies, Inc., catalog no. 15596018) according to the manufacturer's instructions. 500 ng of total RNA was reverse-transcribed using the High-Capacity RNA-to-cDNA Kit (Thermo Fisher Scientific, catalog no. 4387406), and real-time PCR with cDNA was performed using the Applied Biosystems 7500 Fast Real-Time PCR System according to the manufacturer's protocol. TaqMan probes and gene-specific primers for detection and quantification of murine genes investigated in this study were purchased from Thermo Fisher Scientific. Data were analyzed using the comparative (ΔΔ Following treatment, cell lysates were prepared using the radioimmune precipitation assay buffer (catalog no. sc-24948, Santa Cruz Biotechnology, Dallas, TX) supplemented with Halt protease and phosphatase inhibitor mixture (catalog no. 78440, Thermo Fisher Scientific). Protein content concentrations were determined using the Bradford protein assay (catalog no. 23200, Thermo Fisher Scientific). The samples were then subjected to SDS-PAGE and subsequently transferred onto a polyvinylidene difluoride membrane (Immobilon-P; catalog no. IPVH00010, MilliporeSigma), blocked with Starting Block (TBS) blocking buffer (catalog no. 37542, Thermo Fisher Scientific), probed with primary antibody (4 °C overnight), and then incubated with corresponding secondary antibodies at room temperature for 1 h. After enhanced chemiluminescence using Luminata Forte Western HRP substrate (catalog no. WBKLS0100, MilliporeSigma), the protein bands were imaged using the FluorChem M imaging system (ProteinSimple, San Jose, CA). Rabbit polyclonal antibodies to FAK (catalog no. 3285), phospho-FAK (Tyr-397; catalog no. 3283), and AKT (catalog no. 9272), as well as rabbit mAbs to phospho-AKT (Ser-473; clone D9E; catalog no. 4060), ERK (clone 137F5; catalog no. 4398), phospho-ERK (Thr-202/Tyr-204; clone D13.14.4E; catalog no. 4370), Pulldown experiments were performed using the Pulldown polyHis protein:protein interaction kit (catalog no. 21277, Thermo Fisher Scientific) as per the manufacturer's instructions. Briefly, MC3T3-E1 cells were cultured in a T75 flask at 37 °C for 48 h. After reaching confluence, the cells (∼1 × 10 To knock down integrin β3 in MC3T3-E1 cells, the shRNA pLKO.1 construct specific for integrin β3 (catalog no. TRCN0000009620, MilliporeSigma) was used. Empty pLKO.1 vector (catalog no. SHC001, MilliporeSigma) served as control. Knockdown efficiency was confirmed by immunoblotting using rabbit mAb to β3 integrin. Glyceraldehyde-3-phosphate dehydrogenase (GAPDH), detected by rabbit mAb to GAPDH (clone 14C10; catalog no. 2118, Cell Signaling Technology) was used as loading control. For transfection of shRNA, cells were plated in 6-well plates at a density of 1.5 × 10 For the comparison of three or more groups, data were evaluated by one-way ANOVA and Dunnett's or Tukey's multiple-comparison test, as appropriate. Regarding comparison of two groups only, a two-tailed Student's All data are contained within the manuscript. D.-Y. Y., T. M., and X. L. data curation; D.-Y. Y., T. M., and X. L. formal analysis; D.-Y. Y., T. M., and X. L. validation; D.-Y. Y. and T. M. investigation; D.-Y. Y., X. L., and T. K. methodology; D.-Y. Y. and G. H. writing-original draft; T. K. and K. B. resources; T. C. and G. H. conceptualization; T. C. and G. H. writing-review and editing; G. H. supervision; T. C. and G. H. funding acquisition; G. H. project administration.   