A new method is explored to improve the precipitation of gibbsite from sodium aluminate solution by adding methanol to the pregnant liquor. The stability of sodium aluminate solution decreases in the presence of methanol, leading to faster crystallisation than the normal seeded precipitation process. The effects of methanol amount, caustic concentration, reaction time and temperature, stirring and feeding mode are systematically investigated. Considering possible industrial application, the optimum conditions are 1:1 volume ratio of methanol to sodium aluminate solution, ~170 g/L Na2O and 1.55:1 caustic to aluminate ratio at 60 °C. The feeding mode and feeding rate have no significant effect on the final yield when moderately stirred. Under these conditions, 70% precipitation can be reached within 24 h, which is about 20% higher than the Bayer seeded precipitation practice of at least 56 h. Characterization of the crystals using XRD, SEM, and PSD shows a typical gibbsite phase composed of super-thin sheets with an average diameter of ~90 µm. IR and Raman spectra analyses suggest that added methanol captures water molecules from the aluminate ion hydration sphere thus catalyzing the crystallisation process.The rate limiting step of the Bayer process is the seeded precipitation of Al(OH) If the crystallisation time can be shortened, the production efficiency can be enhanced. If the yield can be augmented, the plant throughput can be increased. Many studies have been done and generally three kinds of intensification measures are undertaken: seed activation, adding surfactants, and introducing ultrasound and magnetic field ( In practical production processes, the main adjustments that can be made to enhance the precipitation include decreasing the molar caustic ratio ( At present, besides the conventional crystallisation processes using different methods such as temperature control and evaporation, more research is focused on anti-solvent crystallisation whose aim is to reduce the solubility of the solute and hence create supersaturated solution. Related work has been extensively reported in both the organic and inorganic fields ( In this paper, the crystallisation of gibbsite from caustic aluminate solution in the presence of methanol is systematically studied and the role of methanol discussed. The effects of methanol amount, caustic concentration, time, temperature, stirring and feeding mode on the precipitation yield and morphology are investigated. The products are characterized and analyzed by XRD, SEM and PSD (particle size distribution). All the chemicals used in this work, including NaOH, Al(OH) The sodium aluminate solution was prepared by dissolving required amounts of aluminum hydroxide into hot sodium hydroxide solution in a polytetrafluorethylene (PTFE) vessel. The solution was heated to the desired temperature (110–120 °C) with constant stirring. When the solution became clear, it was filtered twice and diluted with deionized water to the designed concentration. The obtained solution was reserved for further use in an oven at a constant temperature of 80 °C. The batch reactor used in this work was a three-neck flask with a volume of 500 mL. A 60 mm two-blade mechanical stirrer was used to stir the solution and a liquid feed pump was used to add methanol. The reactor was heated by a thermostatic water bath with an accuracy of ± After the temperature of the precipitation reactor reached the pre-set value, 150 mL aluminate liquor with pre-adjusted Na The yield or precipitation ratio (  The physico–chemical structure of sodium aluminate solution is strongly dependent on the concentration of the system and is very critical in the precipitation of aluminum hydroxide from the solution. Due to the difficulty in examining the precipitation mechanism, abundant research work on the effects of different factors has been done in this laboratory to increase the yield. An important factor is the dosage of methanol added to a fixed system. Due to the differences in the physico–chemical properties of methanol and water and their ability to dissolve Na It can be seen from According to the solubility curve of Al(OH) Undoubtedly, a higher yield of aluminum hydroxide with high volume ratios of methanol to caustic solution must be weighed against a higher cost of raw materials, a higher energy consumption for recycling methanol and poorer quality of the products. When the volume ratio reaches 2:1, the morphology of gibbsite becomes irregular and hard to control, and according to the SEM images the thickness of the crystal product is only in the nanometer range. Upon decreasing the volume ratio, the crystal thickness increases to 0.3 µm (@ 1:1) and 1.6 µm (@ 0.5:1) and the products become well-formed. In view of these results, further experiments in this work were performed using a volume ratio of methanol to sodium aluminate solution of 1:1. It was known that a longer precipitation time results in a greater yield of aluminum hydroxide. To determine the optimum time, the effect of time on the precipitation ratio was investigated as summarized in In the early stage of the reaction, the yield is less than 3% because of the characteristic metastability of the solution and the existence of an induction period. Thus, the new method has the similar autocatalysis characteristics to the conventional seeded precipitation process ( The degree of actual supersaturation is the most important parameter in a crystallisation process. Correspondingly, in the sodium aluminate solution, the concentration, The effect of the initial concentration of Na  From theoretical calculation ( Although the low Na The results in terms of the effects of increasing the caustic ratio The solubility of alumina in sodium hydroxide solution depends greatly on temperature, so the precipitation ratio at different temperatures should be significantly different. In the experiments, the temperatures were controlled to below the boiling point of methanol (64.5 °C) and the results in Agitation is imperative in many crystallisation processes as it reduces the influence of diffusion through the boundary layer. The feeding mode of methanol can affect the proportion of methanol to water in the aqueous system at the early stage of the reaction and therefore results in a difference in the solubility of Al In this work, the precipitated aluminum hydroxide was characterized using XRD, SEM, and Mastersizer 2000. From the SEM and PSD analyses, it can be concluded that the size of the precipitate is dependent on the precipitation ratio, which has been confirmed in seeded precipitation processes studied by other researchers. High precipitation ratio leads to small particle sizes and irregular morphology. For example, in this research the average particle size at 60 °C was 30 µm larger than that at 30 °C and larger particles were obtained with a Na A solution obtained from an alumina plant containing 180 g/L Na The XRD shows a typical gibbsite phase of aluminum hydroxide whilst the particle size distribution showed a very narrow size distribution with an average diameter of 90 µm. Individual particles characterized using SEM appeared to be spherical in shape ( In order to uncover the function of methanol in the new process, infrared and Raman spectroscopies were used to investigate the structure of the initial pregnant solution, methanol and the mixture. As shown in The spectrum peaks indicate that the structure of Al(OH) The addition of methanol intensifies the nucleation and crystallisation of sodium aluminate solution, which has the potential to enhance the throughput of a Bayer plant. Methanol can be readily distilled from the liquor and recycled whilst the caustic liquor with high The experiments have shown that many factors, including the amount of methanol, concentration of caustic, time, temperature, stirring and feeding mode influence the degree of supersaturation, rate of precipitation and yield as well as the morphology of the crystals. When industrial practice is taken into consideration, the optimum conditions for well-formed crystals are: slow rate of addition of an equal volume of methanol to sodium aluminate solution; 170 g/L Na IR and Raman spectra of the mixed methanol aluminate solution indicate that aluminum exists mainly as the Al(OH) The financial supports from the National Natural Science Foundation of China under grant No. 50874099, the National Hi-tech Research and Development Program of China (863 Program) under grant No. 2006AA06Z129, and the National Basic Research Development Program of China (973 Program) under grant No. 2007CB613501 are gratefully acknowledged.