The aim of this study is to investigate the actions of sugarcane bagasse and cassava wastewater (two residues from the food industry) when used as hematite depressants. Additionally, the effect of each residue preparation method on the flotation results was analysed. The efficiencies of the depressors were investigated through microflotation tests utilising samples of pure hematite and quartz from Quadrilátero Ferrífero, which is in the state of Minas Gerais (Brazil). The pH of 10.5 was selected due to its frequent use in the concentration of iron ore via flotation in Brazil. Three residue gelatinisation methods (natural, heated, and conventional) were evaluated to determine the most efficient method for the flotation process. Further, zeta potential measurements were performed on the hematite to ascertain the performances of the residues. Microflotation test results showed that hematite recovery decreased with increasing depressant concentration, for all reagents. Finally, the actions of residues gelatinised with the addition of sodium hydroxide (i.e. the conventional method) were shown to be similar to that obtained from corn starch, which indicates their potential application in the flotation process.Flotation is widely used in the beneficiation of ores that require comminution below 150 μm to achieve mineral extraction. For iron ores, reverse cationic flotation is the most common method, because the combination of reagents (typically starch and amine) promotes effective mineral selectivity at a relatively low cost. Each year in Brazil, more than 300 million tons of iron ore concentrate are obtained through flotation using a combination of starch and amine ( Depressants modify the flotation process by either inhibiting the collector's action on the mineral(s), or by rendering the surface of the mineral(s) hydrophilic character ( Most starches are composed primarily of the polysaccharides amylose and amylopectin. Amylose is a predominantly linear macromolecule formed of α-ᴅ-glucose monomers linked at C-1,4. Amylopectin is formed of α-ᴅ-glucose monomers linked at C-1,4 and C-1,6 (  Several studies have sought reagents to replace corn starch in the flotation of iron ores, such as starches extracted from cassava, potato, rice, and sorghum ( Because starch extraction from commercial sources rarely reaches 100%, starches can remain in plant residues after processing. Therefore, the aim of this study is to evaluate the actions of two different residues from the food industry as hematite depressants: sugarcane bagasse and cassava wastewater. Sugarcane is the raw material in the production of several products, such as sugar and ethanol. As the world's largest producer of sugarcane, Brazil produces approximately 25% of the global total ( According to the Brazilian Institute of Geography and Statistics (2019), Brazil is expected to produce approximately 20 million tons of cassava in 2019. Cassava wastewater, which is popularly known as The performances of the residues were evaluated through microflotation tests and compared with that of corn starch. Various gelatinisation methods and depressant concentrations were tested and zeta-potential measurements were performed to ascertain the actions of the depressants on the surface of the hematite. A hematite sample from Quadrilátero Ferrífero was comminuted in a ball mill and passed through Tyler sieves to obtain the size range chosen for the microflotation tests (−212 µm + 74 μm). Due to the presence of impurities, the sample was subjected to a Carpco Wet High-Intensity Magnetic Separator, model 3X4L. The obtained magnetic fraction was then dried and homogenised for use. The quartz sample, also from Quadrilátero Ferrífero, was comminuted in a porcelain mill and sieved to obtain a grain size of 212–74 μm. Next, the sample was leached to remove possible impurities and cleaned with concentrated hydrochloric acid (37% HCl) for 12 h. The sample was then washed successively with water to attain a neutral pH, dried, and homogenised for use. The compositions of the samples were evaluated using a PANalytical X'Pert3 Powder X-ray diffractometer equipped with a copper tube and a Cu-Kα radiation wavelength of 1.5406 Å. The system has a 2θ range of 5° to 90°, an operating voltage of 45 kV, a current of 40 mA, and a collection time of 15 min. Data was obtained with data collection software, the obtained diffractograms were interpreted using HighScore Plus software, and a Powder Diffraction File (PDF-4) database provided by the International Centre for Diffraction Data. Qualitative analysis and mineralogical quantification used the Rietveld refinement method. The densities of the samples were obtained with an Ultrapyc 1200e helium pycnometer, and each obtained specific mass corresponded to the average of three measurements. Microflotation tests were performed in a modified Hallimond tube with a total internal volume of 300 mL and an extender to minimise the hydraulic entrainment of the particles. A mineral mass of 1.0 g was used in each test, and duplicate tests were performed to ascertain experimental error. The chosen pH was 10.5, which is typical in iron ore cationic flotation. Nitrogen was used for flotation at a flow rate of 80 cm Zeta potential measurements were performed to elucidate the interactions between the depressants and the hematite surface. The most effective gelatinised depressants in the microflotation tests were chosen for the zeta potential measurements. The zeta potential measurements were performed using a Zeta-Meter 4.0 system. Mineral suspensions of 0.1% (w/w) were prepared with a particle size of below 38 μm and a NaNO The obtained diffractograms of the mineral samples indicated that the predominant phases were hematite and quartz. The measured densities of the hematite and quartz samples were 5.18 g/cm   To analyse the performances of the residues, a maximum hematite recovery limit of 10% was established, and depressant concentrations yielding recovery values within this limit were deemed ideal reagent concentrations.  For the sugarcane bagasse, the ideal concentrations were 400 mg/L, 200 mg/L, and 25 mg/L for the natural, heated, and conventional preparations, respectively, and the corresponding hematite recoveries were 4.9%, 6.3%, and 7.5%. Therefore, gelatinisation with NaOH was more efficient in the flotation process when compared with the other gelatinisation methods proposed herein. Further, sugarcane bagasse prepared using the natural method depressed hematite at 400 mg/L, which was unexpected because starch is insoluble in distilled room temperature water. However, as shown by The cassava prepared using only distilled room temperature water produced a slight decrease in hematite recovery with increasing depressant concentration and failed to reach the 10% hematite recovery limit; its lowest hematite recovery was 16%, which was achieved at a depressant concentration of 600 mg/L. Because starch is insoluble in room temperature water, the poor performance of the cassava wastewater prepared according to the natural gelatinisation method could therefore be due to the absence of gelatinised starch. Further, and as mentioned before, the lack of soluble sugars in the cassava wastewater suggests that only the presence of starch influenced the recovery of hematite by this residue. The heated and conventional gelatinisation preparations exhibited similar performances and the ideal concentration for both was 10 mg/L, which is the same concentration reported herein for corn starch. The hematite recovery of corn starch at the ideal concentration (10 mg/L) was 8.5%, while the ideal concentration of the heated and conventional gelatinisation preparations of cassava wastewater achieved hematite recoveries of 2.7% and 7.2%, respectively, which demonstrates the potential of this residue. Another interesting observation based on The quartz recoveries were evaluated only for the ideal depressant concentrations to ascertain any depressant actions on the mineral.  Zeta potential analyses were performed on the depressants prepared with the addition of NaOH (i.e. the conventional gelatinisation method) because their performances were similar to that of corn starch. The occurrence of adsorption at pH 10.5 is evidenced by the microflotation curves in According to Microflotation experiments indicated that cassava wastewater presented satisfactory results when gelatinised using both heating and conventional methods, and that the ideal depressant concentration for both preparations was 10 mg/L. However, cassava wastewater gelatinised with distilled water did not significantly depress hematite. Further, of the three preparations of sugarcane bagasse, the one gelatinised according to the natural method was found to be the least effective hematite depressant, while the sugarcane bagasse gelatinised with the addition of NaOH was the most efficient and possessed an ideal concentration of 25 mg/L. Microflotation tests verified that none of the residues had a depressant effect on the quartz, indicating that all reagents possessed good selectivity in relation to the mineral species studied. Zeta potential measurements demonstrated that the most efficient residues for hematite depression (sugarcane bagasse and cassava wastewater prepared with the addition of NaOH) each had a low impact on the zeta potential values of hematite in the pH range above the IEP of the mineral. Finally, these residues influenced the zeta potential of hematite in a manner similar to the commonly used reagent corn starch. The authors declared that there is no conflict of interest. The authors would like to thank the Coordination for the Improvement of Higher Education Personnel (CAPES) and the National Council for Scientific and Technological Development (CNPq) for all funds provided for this research. The authors, also would like to thank the Federal University of Ouro Preto.