Precipitation stripping of Nd(III) carbonate from Nd(III)-loaded D2EHPA was investigated using a mixture of NH3 and (NH4)2CO3 as a stripping solution.
                  Precipitation stripping of Nd(III) was achieved with appropriate NH3 and (NH4)2CO3 concentrations, however, it is necessary to make the concentration of NH3 greater than that of D2EHPA, and to keep the (NH4)2CO3 concentration above 0.3 kmol m−3.
                  Increase in NH3 and (NH4)2CO3, over a concentration range suitable to recover Nd(III) carbonate, results in an increase in soluble Nd(III) in the aqueous phase, and thus a decrease in percent stripping.
                  The precipitates produced in the aqueous phase were identified as Nd2(CO3)3·8H2O from the Nd(III) content, IR spectra, X-ray diffraction pattern, and thermal analyses. By calcining the precipitates at 873 and 973 K, cubic Nd2O3 and a mixture of cubic and hexagonal Nd2O3, respectively, was produced.
                  The distribution of D2EHPA in an aqueous phase of high alkalinity was extremely limited. The ammonium salt of D2EHPA was formed by contact of D2EHPA in the organic phase with the aqueous phase of high alkalinity, resulting in a shift in the distribution equilibrium of Nd(III). Thus, Nd(III) is stripped into the aqueous phase and reacts with (NH4)2CO3 in stripping solution to form Nd(III) carbonate.Rare earth elements have very similar properties, making their separation in pure form extremely difficult. However, recent developments in ion exchange and solvent extraction technologies have shed new light on how to separate these elements. Rare earth elements have been widely utilized for functional materials in recent years Solvent extraction is recognized as a useful method of separating rare earth elements, particularly with the spread of their industrial use. In general, separation by solvent extraction is achieved by steps of extraction and stripping. If we add a precipitating agent to the stripping solution, we often directly recover desired metal ions as chemical compounds. This method is known as precipitation stripping (or crystallization stripping) Here, the possibility of precipitation stripping Nd(III) carbonate from Nd(III)-loaded D2EHPA using an aqueous NH The extractant D2HEHPA made by Daihachi Chemical Industry as a commercial brand of DP-8R was used without further purification. This reagent was diluted with kerosene to definite concentrations. Organic solution containing Nd(III)-loaded D2EHPA was prepared by extracting Nd(III) from a solution prepared by dissolving a predetermined amount of Nd The concentration of Nd(III) in the organic phase was set at 0.02 kmol m For the study of the distribution equilibrium of D2EHPA in aqueous and organic phases, synthetic solutions were used. For this purpose, NH Equal volumes, 2.0×10 Filtration of the precipitates using a 0.2-μm membrane filter and washing with acetone were repeated several times, and the precipitates recovered were dried in a thermostat maintained at a constant temperature of 313 K. After the chemical analyses of Nd(III) content, the precipitates were subjected to IR spectra, X-ray diffraction, and thermal analyses. For the determination of the Nd(III) content of the precipitates, the titration method was applied after the precipitates had been dissolved in HNO A 2.0×10 To examine the possibility of precipitation stripping of Nd(III) carbonate from Nd(III)-loaded D2EHPA, experiments were performed using NH In the experiments, Nos. 1 to 7, NH    Comparing the absorption bands of the IR spectra of D2EHPA and those of the precipitates obtained at the interface between the aqueous and organic phases, it is seen that the absorption bands of both materials almost coincide with each other. However, the precipitates obtained at the interface exhibited a slight deviation toward a lower wave number from the peak near 1200 cm The precipitates produced in the aqueous phase have absorption bands at the wave number 3400–3200 and 1500–1300 cm  It was found that the precipitation stripping of Nd(III) carbonate from Nd(III)-loaded D2EHPA can proceed by selecting suitable concentrations of NH   D2EHPA is a specific alkyl phosphoric acid (acidic organic phosphoric compound) extractant which has a high molecular weight and is a stronger acid than a carboxylic acid, such as Versatic Acid. The acidic extractant forms salt in an alkaline solution. Salt generated from weak acid, such as VA10, is known to distribute in the aqueous phase, but the distribution behavior of D2EHPA in aqueous and organic phases has not been reported. A knowledge of the distribution equilibrium of D2EHPA salt in the aqueous and organic phases is important to the development of methods of recycling D2EHPA and the design of a closed circuit system in the precipitation stripping of Nd(III) from Nd(III)-loaded D2EHPA using aqueous NH   Data relating to the distribution equilibrium of D2EHPA in aqueous NH Neglecting the adduct of water, these reactions can be expressed by: From the findings mentioned above, it can be concluded that the increase in NH Precipitation stripping of Nd(III) carbonate from Nd(III)-loaded D2EHPA was investigated using a mixture of NH The principal results obtained are summarized as follows. (1) Precipitation stripping of Nd(III) from Nd(III)-loaded D2EHPA with NH (2) The increase in NH (3) Precipitates produced in the aqueous phase are carbonates of Nd(III). Judging from the Nd(III) content, IR spectra, X-ray diffraction pattern, and thermal analyses, including DTA and TG, the precipitates are Nd (4) The distribution of D2EHPA in the aqueous phase at high alkalinity was extremely low, and quite different from that of VA 10. However, the distribution ratio of D2EHPA in the organic to aqueous phases was around 50. (5) Ammonium salt of D2EHPA formed on contact of D2EHPA in the organic phase with the aqueous phase of high alkalinity, resulting in a shift in the distribution equilibrium of Nd(III). Thus, Nd(III) is stripped into the aqueous phase and reacts with (NH