End of Life Vehicles (ELVs), together with Waste from Electric and Electronic Equipments (WEEEs), are re-known as an important source of secondary raw materials. Since many years, their recovery allowed the restoring of great amounts of metals for new cars' production. However, the management of electronic systems embedded into ELVs is yet rarely considered by the scientific literature. The purpose of the paper is trying to fill in this gap through the proposition of an innovative economic model able to identify the presence of profitability within the recovery process of automotive Waste Printed Circuit Boards (WPCBs). Net Present Value (NPV) and Discounted Payback Time (DPBT) will be used to demonstrate the validity of investments in this type of plants. Furthermore, a sensitivity analysis on a set of critical variables (plant saturation level, gold (Au) content, Au market price, Au final purity level, WPCBs purchasing cost and opportunity cost) will be conducted for the evaluation of the impact of significant variations on results. Finally, the matching of predicted European ELVs volumes (during the period 2015–2030) and NPVs coming from the economic model will quantify the potential advantages coming from the implementation of this new kind of circular economy.In the past twenty years, the booming consumer electronics industry rapidly changed the economic and social landscape ( The recycling of scrap automotive electronics (e.g. Electronic Control Units (ECUs)), together with its environmental impacts, does not appears to have been adequately assessed by the experts ( Some authors identified the potential support in the development of new circular economies given by the recovery of automotive electronic systems, but no practical applications are available in literature ( The existing economic models assessing the profitability of recycling plants are very few, and specialized on a particular phase of the process ( The limited technological development of scrap automotive electronics processes was assessed by some authors as one of the main reason for the lacking of literature focused on this topic. This way, the implementation of new kinds of plants (e.g. mobile recycling plants) was not taken into account since now ( Given that, the aim of this paper is threefold. From one side, there is the need to define a mathematical model able to assess the potential profitability characterizing all the phases of a typical WPCBs recovery process (or dismantling, pretreatment and refining). From a second side, this calculation has to be done on different types of plants (for example, field and mobile ones). Finally, the potential profitability has to be linked with the available previsions on future ELVs generated volumes for the quantification of the expected market dimension. The important findings of this investigation could be very helpful to governmental and industrial actors for a direct comparison with results coming from similar types of models available in literature, so to better understand the lost opportunity, by trying to define corrective measures for the management of these new types of e-wastes. The paper is organized as follows: Section ECUs are among the most valuable electronic devices embedded in modern vehicles. They are able to perform the reading of signals coming from sensors embedded in a car, and control the behaviour of many sub-systems, as engine, air conditioning system, infotainment system, safety devices, etc. ( Before the treatment of any kind of WPCBs amounts, there is a materials' characterization phase. This means a definition of the set of materials embedded in a certain amount of WPCBs, by chemically analysing a sample of them. This is a relevant phase because it allows to: (i) comprehend the presence (or not) of valuable materials (this way a WPCB is classified as high, medium or low grade waste), and (ii) define the expected revenues coming from their recovery. In literature, the common ways to characterize WPCBs are essentially two: (i) considering already available data coming from other papers or intra-governmental reports ( Small WPCBs, going from 0.2 g up to 8.7 g; Medium-small WPCBs, going from 8.8 g up to 52.9 g; Medium-big WPCBs, going from 53.0 g up to 134.2 g; Big WPCBs, going from 134.3 g up to 477.9 g. This choice was purely objective and derives from the fact that waste automotive PCBs are very different in terms of size, shape and composition, depending on their functionality ( Starting from the main assumption that scrap automotive electronic devices are, in effect, WPCBs, consequently it is possible to consider the same technological process followed for the recycling of WPCBs coming from WEEEs ( During disassembly, both the casings embedding PCBs and toxic components present on the main board are separated. Toxic components (e.g. condensers or batteries) are disassembled and destined to specific treatments for hazardous materials. Instead, casings (generally, Aluminium (Al)-made elements) can be directly sold to smelters, becoming an additional source of revenues for recyclers. The pretreatment process is implemented through a series of dedicated machines, or shredders, grinders and separators (based on several physical principles). During pretreatment, WPCBs are crushed into micro pieces up to become a uniform powder, through the use of shredders and grinders. After this phase, powders are separated basing on their composition, by distinguishing metal from non-metal powders ( The economic model that will be proposed in Section After having defined the typical phases constituting a WPCBs recycling process, the next step is the plant's capacity sizing. Given the features of a recycling process (very similar to a productive plant), the sizing activity does not takes into account only the expected level of service ( 240 t powders/year (mobile plant); 576 t powders/year (field plant). These two configurations of a plant are proposed together because, within the EU-28, there are very different distributions of e-wastes from one country to another and within the same country. In some cases, a field plant is useful to recover great amounts of wastes from a specific location. In other cases, a mobile plant able to be transferred from one location to another is preferable to guarantee always a correct saturation of the plant ( Given the literature gaps reported in Section The main features (see Section A costs comparison of different PCBs dismantling processes (e.g. manual versus mechanical techniques) ( A costs comparison of different PCBs disassembly processes (e.g. on a specific product) ( A cost comparison of different PCBs shredding + separation processes (e.g. different technologies and plants dimensions) ( A cost comparison of different powders refining processes (e.g. through hydrometallurgical technologies) ( An evaluation of theoretical economic models for PCBs recycling ( An assessment of potential revenues coming from the recovery of entire PCBs (  Given the current state of literature about economic models related to e-waste recycling processes, it is now possible to evidence the main differences between the proposed model and the existing ones. DCF is a well-known economic assessment method estimating the attractiveness of an investment opportunity. The standard practice is to define a vision of future events precise enough to be captured in a DCF analysis ( Only cash inflows and outflows are considered within the analysis; The determination of investment's cash flows is based on the incremental approach; The aggregation of occurring cash flows during different years requires the adoption of an appropriate discount rate. A critical point of this method is that its reliability completely depends by the level of confidence of future cash flows. Several economic indexes can be chosen to represent profitability, as evidenced in Section NPV is defined as the sum of present values of individual cash flows; DPBT represents the number of years needed to balance cumulative discounted cash flows and initial investment; IRR identifies the discount rate at which the present value of all future cash flows will balance the initial investment. However, among these three indexes only NPV and DPBT were selected, because of the poor relevance of criticisms related to them. In fact, NPV does not consider the size of the plant and DPBT ignores both instant and value of cash flows. However, these indexes provide a single result. Instead, IRR can cause conflicting answers (multiple IRR can occur) when compared to NPV in mutually exclusive investments ( The profitability of a recycling plant is influenced by two main variables, or materials embedded into WPCBs and plant capacity. For this reason the set of selected scenarios evaluated in this paper are eight. They are obtained by a combination between the four WPCBs groups (Small WPCBs, Medium-small WPCBs; Medium-big WPCBs and Big WPCBs) and the two sizes of the plants (240 t/y and 576 t/y) – please see Section Economic and technical inputs are proposed in After having defined the economic model structure (and related input values), all the financial indexes useful for the assessment of the investment will be estimated in Section The economic evaluation of a project allows the easing of its application in a real context, where profitability is verified. In fact, as in waste recycling processes, this could represent not only an environmental protection action, but also an economic opportunity. As already presented in Section Field plants present a longer lifecycle than mobile plants (10 years out of 5 years). This aspect, starting from equal gross profits, explains the reaching of greater NPVs. Furthermore, from one side economies of scale are exploited. Instead, from the other side, the higher number of recycled WPCBs allows to recover a higher amount of Au ( A scenario with a mobile plant treating Small WPCBs presents a higher NPV (66,304 k€) than a scenario with a field plant treating Big WPCBs (55,656 k€). This means that the percentage of Au embedded into WPCBs has greater effect than dimensions. However, it is of utmost importance to consider that these results were obtained by hypothesizing a full saturation of plants. To this aim, in the next section of the paper, a sensitivity analysis will be implemented on both non-saturated plants. Instead, there are no market data related to WPCBs original applications and this pushed the authors to consider mono-core plants. However, future research objectives are the evaluation of multi-cores plants, able to treat all types of WPCBs independently from their dimensions and primary industrial application. To this aim, being the Au content a critical variable, during the sensitivity analysis also this aspect will be considered. Furthermore, scientific literature and past pilot plants experiences evidenced as recycling plants flexibility plays a relevant role ( Instead, the costs distribution analysis shows as the operational costs are equal to 95.1% for a field plant and 89.1% for a mobile plant. These results are coherent with respect of what proposed by other works ( In order to strengthen the obtained results, a sensitivity analysis oriented to alternative scenarios (if compared to what presented before) is implemented in the next section. NPV results are based on assumptions of a set of input variables. However, compared to the baseline scenario, the critical variables can record changes with respect to initial estimations ( The financial profitability is verified in all the one hundred twenty alternative scenarios. WPCBs purchasing and opportunity costs variations are not so relevant. Instead, the most significant offsets comes from a possible low level of wastes in input. In fact, whereas both mobile and field plants have to work with a saturation of 50% (or treating 120 kt and 288 kt, respectively), NPVs are reduced of about 50%. Plants flexibility could allow the treatment of other types of wastes, but this could reduce expected profits. Basing on what evidenced by the literature, WPCBs are valuable components embedded into WEEEs. The IMDS demonstrated as automotive WPCBs are even valuable items, and their Au content could be higher than in WEEEs. Furthermore, the wide Au market price variation could determine critical offsets. However, results – even in less advantageous situations – offer relevant economic opportunities. Hence, further additional costs needed to obtain a higher Au purity level are easily compensated. Results proposed by this paper clearly define the sustainability of these recycling plants from an economic perspective. A global overview on the economic impact related to the recovery of these wastes within the European market is described in the next section. The aim of this section is to support the quantification of potential revenues coming from the correct management of e-wastes coming from automotive scraps and try to analyse their expected trends in the next 15 years. To do that, the first data required was the overall amount of expected ELVs generated from 2015 up to 2030. These data, together with related trends, were gathered directly from the literature (  End of Life Vehicles are one of the most important sources of secondary raw materials. However, studies demonstrating the embedded value in their electronic systems are quite rare. Even if, from one side, this issue gives space to a potentially new research stream, from another side it represent a big limitation in terms of available data. Hence, this paper suffers of a lack of proved information and the entire economic and sensitivity analysis are done starting from both expected values and data coming from similar sectors. Interesting improvements of this work could be the assessment of environmental impacts of the recycling process, analysis of different configurations of closed-loop supply chains, and definition of corrective policies to current ELV directives. Future directions in this research stream are expected to be the assessment of recycling issues coming from the treatment of hybrid and full-electric cars or auto-guided vehicles. The intention of the paper was not only to partially fill in this literature gap, but also propose something of interesting from a practical point of view. Hence an economic model evaluating potential revenues and costs coming from the recycling of scrap automotive electronics was implemented and described into detail. The obtained indexes (e.g. NPV and DPBT) demonstrated the validity of investments in two different types of plants (mobile and field ones) and for all the four types of WPCBs considered. Economic values obtained from the model are so high, and different from common values available in literature, because of the relevant presence of Au in automotive WPCBs. A sensitivity analysis done on critical variables (e.g. plant saturation level, Au content, Au market price, Au final purity level, WPCBs purchasing cost and opportunity cost) allowed to test the robustness of theoretical evaluations. Finally, the matching of predicted ELVs volumes in the next fifteen years and expected NPV allowed to define the potential dimension of a market dedicated to the treatment of these wastes. These results could be useful for all the actors involved, with different roles, in closed-loop supply chains, as governments, recyclers, OEMs, consumers and other stakeholders, constituting the starting point for the definition of a new kind of circular economy.