Grassland management intensification can greatly influence nitrogen (N) dynamics between aboveground and belowground compartments mainly because of the large amount of available N forms, which are repeatedly added to soils. A better understanding of how chronic fertilisation might affect N use efficiency (NUE) in plants can contribute to reducing N losses from soils and improve the sustainability of managed grasslands. Here we address how NUE might be affected by (1) the addition of key nutrients (e.g. N, P, K, Mg) in different combinations, (2) grazing by rabbits, and (3) liming (i.e. CaCO3 applications) in a 22-year-old permanent grassland experiment established in Berkshire, UK, in 1991. We first calculate seven different NUE indexes, which are known to respond either to changes in soil N availability (i.e. endogenous N inputs from soil N mineralization processes) or to exogenous N inputs (i.e. synthetic N fertiliser). We found that plant NUE calculated as plant biomass produced per unit of N acquired significantly decreased under the chronic addition of multiple nutrients (NPKMg) and was even lower under N-only applications. Most NUE indexes significantly decreased under grazing but greatly increased under liming applications. We found evidence that NUE indexes, which accounted for endogenous N sources decreased at increased rates of soil N mineralization. Finally, we found no significant relationships between any of the NUE indexes and estimates of soil N losses (Mg N ha−1) or N retention in soils (i.e. units of soil N retained per unit of N added) calculated from changes in net soil N budget over 22 years. Our study carried out on relatively acidic sandy soils suggests how liming applications in combination with low levels of multi-nutrient additions (NPKMg) can significantly improve plant biomass production per unit of N added thus contributing to enhance the sustainability of managed grassland ecosystems.Human-managed grassland ecosystems are often artificially 'improved' to increase their primary productivity (i.e. grass yields). Grassland improvement has been mainly achieved through regular nutrient fertilisation (e.g. Nitrogen (N), Phosphorus (P) additions to soils), liming (i.e. the application of Calcium and Magnesium-rich materials to grassland soils) and livestock grazing ( In this study we use a long-term ecological experiment to address how nitrogen use efficiency (NUE) might respond to multiple grassland management practices. We assume that variations in NUE result from differences in nutrient retention and acquisition by plants ( The basic tenet is that plant communities growing on artificially N-fertilised soils are more productive but have significantly lower NUE when compared to less productive communities growing on N-poor soils, which have higher NUE ( Grazing can also affect NUE because mammalian herbivores tend to create and maintain a grassland community, which has higher relative yields compared to ungrazed pastures and also improved digestibility of forages ( The addition of liming materials to soils (e.g. CaCO Despite experimental evidence that N fertilisation, grazing and liming can significantly affect NUE, very few studies have so far addressed the long-term effects of these three practices on NUE. Greater NUE by plants could help reduce overall N fertilisation rates and decrease N leaching from soils ( Here we specifically address how 22 years of different nutrient fertilisation, grazing (by rabbits) and liming treatments (1) have influenced plant NUE, and (2) whether changes in NUE are potentially related to changes in soil processes such as soil N mineralization or the ability of grassland soils to retain or lose N. In order to produce estimates of NUE, which are comparable with previous estimates, we applied seven different calculation methods, which have been used and reported in multiple literature studies ( To our knowledge, no studies have so far simultaneously addressed potential long-term effects of multiple management practices (i.e. nutrient fertilisation, liming and grazing) on plant NUE. Here we use a well-replicated grassland experiment established in 1992 at Silwood Park, Berkshire, UK to test the following hypotheses:      Our study was carried out in Nash’s Field, a mesotrophic grassland ( Plant species composition of Nash’s Field is dominated by the following grass species: Common Bent ( Five soil cores were collected between 6th and 7th of May 2014 to a depth of 20 Soil bulk density (BD) was measured from samples collected on the 7th May 2014 for each of the 80 plots with a soil corer (20 A further 80 soil samples were collected on the 18 We measured plant aboveground biomass and analysed available data on plant community composition. Aboveground plant biomass was harvested inside a 25 We followed indications from previous studies, which measured NUE indexes across different ecosystems ( Nitrogen use efficiency (NUE Nitrogen response efficiency (NRE Nitrogen uptake efficiency (NupE Partial factor productivity (PFP Agronomic efficiency (AE Recovery efficiency (RE Physiological efficiency (PE NupE Multiple factors associated with seasonal changes (i.e. temperature and moisture) can affect plant productivity and N dynamics ( Soil N retention efficiency (NRtE) was calculated by subtracting mean soil N pool values (Kg N ha The Nash’s Field experiment is laid out as a split plot design with four randomly located blocks (i.e. larger plots) within which nutrient fertilisation, grazing and liming treatments are nested. In our model, blocks were assigned as random effects and the other treatments (grazing, liming and nutrient application) were assigned as fixed effects. Mixed effects ANOVA was performed to test for treatment effects (i.e. nutrient addition, liming and rabbit grazing) on multiple plant NUE indexes ( We found that N addition either alone or in combination with other nutrients (i.e. P, K, Mg) significantly reduced NUE We found that NUE We found that plant species diversity was significantly positively related to NUE Our findings show how NUE We found that NUE We also found evidence that limitation of key nutrients such as P or Mg can reduce plant NUE. For example, our results show significantly lower NUE under the N-only treatment especially when measured with the RE Despite potential effects from limiting nutrients, our data shows no significant differences in NUE between treatments with or without potassium (K) ( We found that grazing (principally by rabbits) significantly reduced NUE According to our third hypothesis we found that liming determined an increase in NUE Whilst we found a positive effect on NUE indexes in response to liming, we suggest that these responses may be site-specific and may not translate to non-acidic soils. This is because NUE may be higher in limed soils when compared to non-limed equivalents due to inherent deficiencies associated with acidic soils. For example, in acidic soils plant growth can be limited by nutrient deficiencies ( Our fourth hypothesis predicted that NUE indexes would decrease with increases in rates of soil N mineralization. We found this expectation confirmed only for NUE Our final hypothesis was that N losses from soils would be lower where plant NUE is higher. We found, however, no relationship between NUE indexes and total soil N losses or soil N retention efficiency. Several studies show that high NUE can result in lower soil N losses ( Our findings show how NUE is significantly lower in plants growing on soils receiving either inorganic (synthetic N fertiliser) or organic forms of N (from animal waste) or both. Our evidence is the NUE is higher when the contribution of endogenous sources of N (i.e. soil N mineralisation rates) are included in equations to determine good nutrient management practice. Our findings also show how the practice of agricultural liming can significantly increase NUE and this could be related to soil pH-induced effects on soil N availability and N use by plants. NUE The authors declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this paper. This research paper was financed in part by the Supplementary material related to this article can be found, in the online version, at doi: The following is Supplementary data to this article: