The phosphate–dolomite separation has a limited separation selectivity using conventional flotation. The utilization of bacteria alone or in presence of collector offers a good solution in terms of increasing the separation selectivity. In this study, the bioflotation was tested using two bacterial strains (Corynebacterium-diphtheriae-intermedius, CDI, or Pseudomonas Aeruginosa, PA) in the presence of amphoteric collector. Statistical design of experiments (DOEs) was used to screen, optimize, and study the factors mutual interactions. The screening design indicated that the bacteria concentration, bacteria conditioning time, and collector dosage are the most significant parameters. In addition, full factorial design indicated that the presence of bacteria improves the separation selectivity. Moreover, it was found that the PA performs better than CDI in presence of collector in terms of lowering the MgO % and increasing P2O5%. A concentrate containing 0.69% MgO and ∼30.8% P2O5 with a recovery of ∼80% can be obtained at 11.4×107
                     cells, 20min and 4.0kg/t for pH, PA concentration, PA conditioning time, and collector dosage, respectively.The surface characteristics of the separated minerals control the separation results in terms of achieving a good selectivity The attachment of bacteria onto mineral surfaces was found to play an important role in improving the separation selectivity in flotation and flocculation. Several studies utilized the difference in surface properties between two minerals for selective attachment of bacteria Several studies asserted in the literature, using the bioflotation, indicated that the bacteria can modify the mineral surface either by interaction of bacteria with mineral surface or the interaction of bacteria with the collector used On the other hand, despite biobeneficiation processes were utilized for separation of different ores from their impurities such as coal, sulfides, and gold Therefore, the main objective of this study is the removal of dolomite impurities from the phosphate ore (Abu-Tartur locality, Egypt) by the bio-flotation process. In this process, two strains of bacteria (i.e., CDI and PA) were used in presence of amphoteric collector. The factors affecting the flotation process were investigated using statistical design. Firstly, the screening (Placket–Burman) design was used to identify the most significant variables followed by optimization of the process by full factorial design. Moreover, the comparison between the used bacteria was addressed. Furthermore, the interaction between controlling factors was highlighted. A representative sample of phosphate ore, Abu-Tartur locality, New Valley, Egypt, was used. It was primarily crushed by a jaw crusher followed by a roller crusher to −2 An amphoteric reagent (dodecyl-N-carboxyethyl-N-hyroxyethyl-imidazoline), Lianyungang Chemicals Plant, Jiangsu Province, China, was used as a collector for dolomite (reverse flotation). Analytical grade of NaOH and H The bacteria (CDI, Corynebacterium-diphtheriae-intermedius; and PA, Pseudomonas aeruginosa) used in this study were isolated from the surface of Abu-Tartur phosphate ore at the Microbiology Department, University of Florida, USA. The bacteria were grown in a liquid medium containing 30% mycological agar, 10.0 Flotation experiments were performed using a micro-flotation column (2 The first statistical design to be applied is called “Plackett–Burman” design. It aims at screening the statistically significant parameters from those non-significant. The following seven parameters are studied: microorganism type, microorganism concentration, collector dosage, pH of the medium, conditioning time with microorganism, conditioning time with collector, and mode of addition of microorganism. In addition, four more parameters are added as dummies to compute the experimental error. It is worth to mention that the PB design does not take the interaction between factors into account.  The 2 For each run, the products are chemically analyzed and the MgO % and MgO % removal were calculated. The studied parameters are collector dosage, concentration of bacteria (PA or CDI) and bacteria conditioning time. The other operating parameters were fixed at the following levels: pH 11, mode of addition (B  The statistical software package Design-Expert 6.1, Stat-Ease, Inc., Minneapolis, USA was used for regression analysis of experimental data and to plot contour graphs. Analysis of variance (ANOVA) was used to estimate the statistical parameters. The significances of all terms in the polynomial were judged statistically by computing the It is known that the flotation process can be affected by many parameters. Some of these parameters are related to the chemistry of the system, such as collector type and concentration, pH of the medium, and modifier type. Other parameters are physical or mechanical such as, among others, time of conditioning and its speed, and flotation speed. In presence of bacteria, more parameters should be addressed, e.g. type and concentration of microorganism, mode of its addition, time and intensity of conditioning, etc. It is expected, therefore, that the number of operating parameters that affect the flotation performance will be large. For these reasons, the experimental designs were used. The Plackett–Burman design aims at screening the statistically significant parameters from those non-significant. The following seven parameters were studied: bacteria type (CDI or PA), bacteria concentration, collector dosage, pH of the medium, conditioning time with bacteria, conditioning time with collector, and mode of addition of bacteria. In addition, four more parameters are added as dummies to compute the experimental error.  Analysis of the results, The conditioning time of collector is statistically insignificant and hence it will be fixed at its lower level (5 Collector dosage, concentration of bacteria and its conditioning time are significant and affect the grade and recovery of the bio-flotation process. These parameters need further investigation since the obtained grade does not yet comply with that required for phosphoric acid production (MgO A 2  On the other hand, using PA, the MgO (as low as 0.63%) can be achieved. In addition, there are three experimental runs that have the MgO content less than 1%. Comparing the results, On the contrary, PA seems to be very selective in case of applying the amphoteric collector in the flotation process. It is clear that increasing the bacteria concentration negatively affects the MgO content and P It should be mentioned that the best selectivity using PA was achieved in experiments 5 and 7,   The optimum conditions for bio-flotation of phosphate using the PA, based on the results shown in The summary of the results, The above results clearly illustrate that the interaction between the bacteria type and collector nature plays, also, an important role in determining the degree of selectivity that can be achieved. Thus, in bio-flotation of phosphate using a collector of amphoteric nature, it is better to apply the PA and not CDI.  Similarly, Two strains of bacteria namely (CDI and PA) were used to modify the dolomite and phosphate surfaces and enhance the conventional flotation using amphoteric collector. Statistical design was used to screen seven factors namely, bacteria type, pH, collector conditioning time, collector dosage, bacteria conditioning time, bacteria concentration and mode of addition followed by 2