Proximal femoral fractures may be extra or intra-capsular injuries, and they occur with about the same frequency in the elderly population. They are more common in women, with the inter-trochanteric extra-capsular injuries occurring in a relatively older segment of the population. Basically, all femoral neck fractures, where the fracture line is primarily within the joint capsule, are called ‘Intra-capsular’ fractures of the hip. Fractures that involve the articular surface should be considered a more complex variety and some authors even consider them separately. A host of names has been given to intra-capsular patterns, varying from ‘transcervical’ to ‘Subcapital’ injuries, and the prognosis in these cases is much worse. On the other hand, those at the base of the neck, are primarily extra-capsular and are separate entities, requiring different forms of stabilisation, and having much better union rates. Koval and Zuckerman, A lot of detail has now been gleaned about the blood supply to the proximal end of the femur, which has some unique features. The arterial supply becomes tenuous after injury, endangering the femoral head, risking subsequent avascular necrosis and collapse. The arterial arcades which supply the blood to the head and neck maybe divided into three major groups; these were clearly described by Crock. An extra capsular arterial ring, located at the base of the femoral neck, and encircling it. Ascending cervical branches arise from this arterial ring on the surface of the femoral neck. The arteries of the ligamentum teres, which also supply a significant part of the blood supply. The extra-capsular arterial ring is formed posteriorly by a large branch of the medial femoral circumflex artery and anteriorly by a branch from the lateral femoral circumflex artery. The ascending cervical branches or retinacular vessels ascend on the surface of the femoral neck in anterior, posterior, medial, and lateral groups; the lateral vessels are the most important. Their proximity to the surface of the femoral neck makes them vulnerable to injury in femoral neck fractures. As the articular margin of the femoral head is approached by the ascending cervical vessels, a second, less distinct ring of vessels is formed, referred to by Chung In contrast to the elderly population, femoral neck fractures in young adults can only occur with significant force. Kocher suggested two mechanisms of injury in all age groups. In the elderly, the injury is more commonly due to a direct blow over the greater trochanter during a fall. In young adults, the more common injury is a lateral rotation force applied to the extremity, with or without a proximally directed force. With deforming force, the head is held fixed by the anterior capsule and iliofemoral ligaments while the hip rotates externally. By this rotation, the posterior cortex of the neck impinges on the lip of the acetabulum, and the neck buckles. This leads to a complete break in the anterior cortex, and also causes buckling of the posterior cortex ( The radiological examination In all intra-capsular fractures, the synovial fluid bathing the fracture may interfere with the healing process. Angiogenic-inhibiting factors in synovial fluid can also inhibit fracture repair. Additionally, as the femoral neck has essentially no periosteal layer, all healing must be endosteal. These factors, along with the precarious blood supply to the femoral head, make healing unpredictable and non-unions fairly frequent. In the developing countries, we still see patients with delays in treatment due to poor medical facilities, missed diagnosis (especially in polytraumatised young adults), or improper surgical techniques. The factors known to contribute to non-union of the femoral neck include vascular insufficiency, inaccurate reduction, and loss of fixation. The first one is usually not in our control, but the latter two, along with delayed diagnosis, make up a significant number of cases still encountered in the developing world. In the recent past, improved treatment, earlier diagnosis, and an understanding of the treatment regimens of femoral neck fractures has drastically reduced the incidence of non-union after these injuries. Inspite of this, non-unions are still estimated to occur in 10–20% of patients in the developed world in all age groups. With anatomical reduction and stable fixation, the incidence of non-union should be acceptably low. However, in a meta-analysis of 106 reports of displaced femoral neck fractures (seen at all ages) by Lu-Yao et al., non-union occurred in a cumulative 23–37% of fractures. The appropriate treatment depends on several factors, including the age and physical status of the patient, the viability of the femoral head, the amount of resorption of the femoral neck, and the duration of the non-union. The effect of surgical delay on the incidence of avascular necrosis and non-union after displaced femoral neck fracture has been reviewed by several investigators. Massie Manninger et al. Historically, most of these cases were managed by different kinds of osteotomies, in which the femur was divided near the lesser trochanter and was either angulated to provide a line of weight bearing more directly beneath the femoral head, or was displaced medially. The mechanical advantages of an osteotomy are that the line of weight bearing is shifted medially and that the shearing force at the non-union is decreased because the fracture surface tends to become more horizontal. These advantages are greater after the angulation osteotomy than after the displacement osteotomy. A serious disadvantage is produced if the femoral neck and head are placed in an extreme valgus position, and this position must be avoided if possible because it shortens the lever arm between the trochanter, on which the abductor muscles pull, and the head, which is the fulcrum. In 1936, Pauwels In treating non-unions with a viable head, the angulation osteotomy was not intended to provide a partial pelvic support but rather to shift the line of weight bearing medially and to change the inclination of the fracture surfaces. Blount Another operation, arthrodesis, involves different procedures where the hip is fused, and is mentioned only for the sake of completion. Some authors advocate it as an option in children and adults less than 21 years of age who have frank non-unions in which the femoral head is not viable. The advantages of an arthrodesis for non-union of the femoral neck are freedom from pain and stability during weight bearing; this may lead to a useful extremity that allows ambulation and weight bearing, albeit with a limp. This can occasionally be recommended in adults under the age of about 50 years whose work is heavy manual labour, or after the failure of previous surgery with an infection in the hip. A major disadvantage is the delayed onset of severe degenerative changes in the spine and contralateral hip, as well as significant difficulty in subsequent conversion to an arthroplasty. In the present day scenario, the best option perhaps is to obtain union in these fractures by the best possible method, and to avoid the development of AVN and the ensuing collapse of the head. In 1984, the senior author published the results of cases with delayed or neglected fractures which were treated by a combination of internal fixation, accurate reduction and fibular osteosynthesis. The few reports that have been published concerning neglected fractures of the femoral neck in young adults emphasise that the outcome is usually poor. It is desirable to try to salvage the femoral head in young adults, and this often calls for some form of bone graft. The literature reports many techniques, This involves open reduction of the fracture, which should be accurate and stable, special modifications in the anterior capsular incision to try and save anterior vessels, and the use of a fibular graft to supplement the fixation achieved by an AO cancellous screw. Since the inception of the methodology of fibular osteosynthesis, the approach used at our institute has been one modified from the standard Watson–Jones approach. This positions the patient in a semi-supine position, with a sandbag under the buttock, and allows good radiological imaging as well as making manipulation of the leg easier. This approach allows an easy exposure of the anterior aspect of the hip through the inter-muscular interval between the sartorius and the gluteus medius muscles, by splitting the iliotibial band and the tensor fascia lata muscle. The skin incision is about 15 A separate team can harvest the fibula from the contralateral side, or the same team may do so from the ipsilateral side prior to the hip exposure. Using a 12 Over a 20-year period, more than 150 cases with varying degrees of neglect have been treated by the above regimen ( The two main problems encountered were resorption and compromise of the vascularity of the femoral head. It is not possible to achieve accurate reduction of neglected fractures by closed methods, and repeated attempts at manipulation further harm the blood supply to the head of the femur. Careful open reduction causes only minimal additional insult to the blood supply. A T-shaped incision in the anterior capsule will ensure that the arcade of vessels at the base of the neck is not damaged ( Our choice of a cortical graft has certain advantages. The fibula is easy to harvest and, provided that sufficient care is taken, leads to minimal morbidity at the donor site. The trifin shape of the fibula stabilises the fracture by preventing rotation, and the drilled holes in its surface may promote bony in-growth. The graft acts as a biological Smith–Petersen nail. The subchondral placement of the bone in avascular or osteopenic femoral heads may minimise structural collapse until re-vascularisation takes place ( In our experience, we encountered fibular graft fractures in four cases. One of them went on to uneventful union, while three developed significant complications needing secondary intervention. The central part of the fibula in the case that united ultimately became part of the primary compressive trabeculae of the femoral neck. The incidence of AVN reported in the literature is between 8% and 35% after fracture of the femoral neck, and is probably higher in neglected displaced cases. The radiological features of developing AVN are well known, but without performing a bone scan it is difficult to say with certainty whether re-vascularisation of the femoral head is occurring. We took the following signs to be indirect evidence of re-vascularisation of the femoral head: reconstitution of the trabecular pattern, incorporation of the fibula into the femoral head proximal to the fracture line, and little or no progression of structural collapse after a sufficiently long period of follow-up. These features correlated well with the clinical findings, although over time minor radiological changes may be seen. Our findings suggest that the fibular graft, by providing structural support and promoting union, indirectly contributes to re-vascularisation of the femoral head. Another aspect to note is the fate of the fibular graft inside the femoral neck. Long-term evaluation of these grafts in extra-osseous situations for reconstruction of cortical defects after excision of tumours, etc., has shown the hypertrophy of these grafts. However, no long-term assessment of the intra-osseous fate of the fibular graft in cancellous bone exists. The authors have analysed a few cases after periods ranging from 8 to 19 years, and have found that the rate of incorporation is variable. Some fibulae get incorporated completely, while the others may be seen as almost complete scars of the original bone (data on file, submitted for publication). The reasons for this variability are not known, and maybe dependent on local vascularity and other host factors. Our experience shows that preservation of the femoral head in young patients with neglected fractures of the femoral neck is achievable. The fibular graft acts as a biological implant, and its incorporation into host bone is evident after sufficient follow-up. Avascular heads may re-vascularise after union. Review of specimens removed in cases undergoing THA showed excellent incorporation of the fibular autograft in the cancellous bone of the femoral neck This underlines the fact that the bond of the bone graft with the host bone strengthens with time, making the fibula a reliable combination of fixation device and bone graft. Open reduction ensures good alignment of the fracture: the anterior approach minimises vascular insult. A postoperative spica, which can easily be tolerated in these young individuals, maybe needed in cases with excessive resorption of the neck, or perceived instability of the reconstruction. Despite being cortical, the fibula serves as a good bone graft which is almost completely incorporated into the host. The complications include leg-length discrepancy and coxa vara, which are a small price to pay for a united femoral neck and a vascular femoral head; these may also be treated by adduction osteotomy once the fracture has united.