Although coal–gas interactions have been comprehensively investigated, most prior studies have focused on one or more component processes of effective stress or sorption-induced deformation and for resulting isotropic changes in coal permeability. In this study a permeability model is developed to define the evolution of gas sorption-induced permeability anisotropy under the full spectrum of mechanical conditions spanning prescribed in-situ stresses through constrained displacement. In the model, gas sorption-induced coal directional permeabilities are linked into directional strains through an elastic modulus reduction ratio, R
                     
                        m
                     . It defines the ratio of coal bulk elastic modulus to coal matrix modulus (0<
                     R
                     
                        m
                     
                     <1) and represents the partitioning of total strain for an equivalent porous coal medium between the fracture system and the matrix. Where bulk coal permeability is dominated by the cleat system, the portioned fracture strains may be used to define the evolution of the fracture permeability, and hence the response of the bulk aggregate. The coal modulus reduction ratio provides a straightforward index to link anisotropy in deformability characteristics to the evolution of directional permeabilities. Constitutive models incorporating this concept are implemented in a finite element model to represent the complex interactions of effective stress and sorption under in-situ conditions. The validity of the model is evaluated against benchmark cases for uniaxial swelling and for constant volume reservoirs then applied to match changes in permeability observed in a field production test within a coalbed reservoir.Knowledge of changes in coal permeability due to gas sorption-induced effective stress is crucially important for the evaluation of both primary gas production from coalbed reservoirs and for CO For primary gas production, as the gas pressure reduces below the desorption point, methane is released from the coal matrix to the fracture network and the coal matrix shrinks. As a direct consequence of this matrix shrinkage the fractures dilate and fracture permeability correspondingly increases. Thus, a rapid initial reduction of fracture permeability (due to change in effective stress) is supplanted by a slow increase in permeability (with matrix shrinkage). Whether the ultimate, long-term, permeability is greater or less than the initial permeability depends on the net influence of these dual competing mechanisms. ECBM involves the injection of CO The potential impacts of the coal sorption and related swelling characteristics of coals have been investigated experimentally. The effects of water content on swelling and sorption have been explored for CO Nevertheless, some experiments have focused on the anisotropic characteristic of coal. Water transmission characteristics have been shown to be significantly different Based on experimental observations, a variety of models have been formulated to quantify the evolution of permeability during coal swelling/shrinkage. Despite the complexity of models applied to represent the evolution of coalbed methane reservoirs, few accommodate feedbacks of both anisotropy and coal–gas interaction on the evolution of permeability — including the important roles of linked stress-deformation and gas flow and adsorption/desorption processes. The effect of stress on the evolution of flow anisotropy in orthogonally fractured media ( In this study, a novel permeability model is developed to define the evolution of gas sorption-induced permeability anisotropy under in-situ stress conditions. Gas sorption-induced coal directional permeabilities are linked to directional strains through the elastic modulus reduction ratio (the ratio of coal mass elastic modulus to coal matrix modulus) that represents the partition of the total strain for an equivalent porous coal medium between the fracture system and the matrix. It is assumed that only the partitioned fracture strains are responsible for the changes in directional permeabilities. These new relations are the key cross couplings that link effective stress-related and sorption-related changes in permeability to fluid pressure and gas content. These constitutive relationships are incorporated into a finite element model to represent the complex interactions of stress and chemistry under in-situ conditions and to project their impact on rates and magnitudes of gas recovery. The validity of the general model is evaluated against results for special cases representing uniaxial swelling, constant volume reservoirs, and for the case of a coalbed methane production well test. The incorporation of gas sorption-induced coal permeability anisotropy into the multiphysics simulation of coal–gas interaction represents a new and important contribution to this subject. The overall approach is illustrated in The mechanical properties of a discontinuous medium containing orthogonal fractures and orthotropic response can be represented by the properties of an equivalent continuous medium ( The coal is a homogeneous, isotropic and elastic continuum, and the system is isothermal. Strains are infinitesimal. Gas contained within the pores is ideal, and its viscosity is constant under isothermal conditions. Gas flow through the coal medium is assumed to be viscous flow obeying Darcy's law. According to the first assumption (a), the strain–displacement relation is expressed as The gas sorption-induced strain Combining Eqs. The mass balance equation for a single component gas is defined as Assuming that the effect of gravity is relatively small and can be neglected, the Darcy velocity may be defined as Substituting Eqs. In the analysis of coal permeability the fractured coal mass is treated as a discontinuous medium comprising both matrix and fractures (cleats), as illustrated in Changes in coal permeability are determined by the redistribution of effective stresses or strains due to changed conditions such as gas injection. Typically, stresses and strains will evolve at different rates in the different Cartesian directions, i.e., Δ The initial porous coal is substituted either by a discontinuous model with uniform fracture spacing The coal fracture porosity Fracture and matrix deformation are both linear and fully recoverable, and deformations in normal closure or opening are the predominant permeability alteration mode. Therefore, coal permeability changes can be defined as a function of the variation of aperture in corresponding directions i.e., Δ The coal matrix is functionally impermeable, and the dominant fluid flow within the fractures may be defined by an equivalent parallel plate model. This enables the strain-dependent effective porosity and the strain-dependent permeability field to be determined if induced strains can be adequately partitioned between fracture and matrix. The schematic diagram regarding the fracture aperture change and the effective stress alteration is shown in Simplifying this equation, gives If assuming Because Based on the above analysis, for the 3D case with three orthogonal sets of fractures, coal directional permeability, For the 2D case with two orthogonal sets of fractures, coal directional permeability, Results from field and laboratory experiments indicate that coal permeability can change significantly during adsorbable gas injection (e.g. CH Thus for 3D case we have For the 2D case with two orthogonal sets of fractures, coal directional permeability, For a system containing a single gas phase the sorption-induced volumetric strain Substituting Eq. From Eq. Then, the partial derivative of porosity Substituting Eq. In our analysis of coal deformation, the fractured coal mass is represented as an orthotropic fractured medium which is replaced as an equivalent continuous medium. When we conduct flow analysis, we partition the total effective strain from the equivalent medium between coal matrix and the fracture system. Only the partitioned strain for the fracture system contributes to the permeability change. When the rock mass reduction ratio is unity, i.e. The total effective strain is the difference between the total strain, as determined by the constrained boundary conditions, and the free swelling strain. Therefore, the boundary conditions also control the evolution of coal permeability. In the following sections, we use three examples to illustrate these principles. These are respectively conditions of (1) uniaxial strain; (2) constant reservoir volume; and (3) the behavior of a field case. For the case of uniaxial strain, the lateral strains, Δ Substituting these Eqs. into Eq. As shown in Eqs. For the displacement controlled (or constant reservoir volume) case, strains in all directions, Δ As shown in Eq. It is generally believed that the in-situ response of a coal gas reservoir to gas production (injection) can be approximated either by the uniaxial deformation-permeability model (  For the uniaxial strain assumption, Eqs. For the constant reservoir volume assumption, Eq. A field scale model is used to simulate the performance of coalbed methane production under in-situ conditions. Input parameters for this simulation are identical to the parameters used in Section 5. The simulation model geometry is 200 In this simulation, the reservoir volume remains unchanged throughout the production. This assumption requires that global strains within the coal seam are zero. However, this constraint does not preclude sorption-induced shrinkage (or swelling) of individual coal blocks and complementary opening (or closing) of fractures. The direct consequence of these internal transformations is the isotropic change in permeability defined through Eq. As shown in that equation, the change in coal permeability is defined only by the swelling strain. This represents the ideal case, i.e., 100% of the swelling strain contributes to the effective stress-induced coal deformation. However, only a portion of the effective stress-induced coal deformation contributes to the permeability change as this is modulated through the parameter1 A novel permeability model has been developed to define the evolution of gas sorption-induced permeability anisotropy under in-situ stress conditions. This was implemented into a fully coupled finite element model of coal deformation and gas flow and transport in a coal seam. Based on the model evaluations and the analysis of coupled processes, the model adequately and consistently reflects the conceptual assumptions: The directional permeability of coal is determined by the mechanical boundary conditions, the ratio of coal bulk modulus to coal matrix modulus, the initial fracture porosity, and the magnitude of the coal sorption-induced strain. The boundary conditions control the magnitudes of total strains while the modulus reduction ratio partitions the effective strain (total strain minus the swelling strain) between fracture and matrix. For restraint conditions of uniaxial strain and for a constant volume reservoir, changes in coal permeability are determined only by the change of gas pore pressure and the swelling strain. In both cases, the influence of effective stress is substituted by the change of gas pore pressure and the swelling strain. Analysis including the effect of the fully coupled processes illustrates how coal permeability evolves both in space and in time. These evolutions are the direct outcomes of feedbacks of coal–gas interaction on the evolution of permeability, stress deformation, gas flow and adsorption/desorption processes. This work was supported by the