Employing waste agricultural straw into iron ore sintering is a promising approach to realize efficient energy utilization and environmental protection. In this paper, the characteristics of four types of straw-based fuels including raw straw (RS), preformed straw (PS), straw char (SC) and preformed straw char (PSC) were assessed. The results indicate that RS and PS mainly consisted of volatile matters, which was pyrolyzed in the downstream of combustion zone. This property of RS and PS led to lower fuel utilization and then decreased the bed temperature for minerals melting. Recommended replacement percentage of RS and PS to coke breeze was restricted at 10%. Compared with RS and PS, SC had the advantage of improving fuel utilization and ensuring higher bed temperature. But SC showed considerably faster combustion speed than coke breeze, which accelerated sintering speed excessively when SC replacing coke breeze exceeded 20%, and the suitable replacement percentage of SC to coke breeze was 20%. PSC ingeniously integrated the advantages of PS and SC by joint preformation-carbonization process. Comparable sintering performance was achieved when improving the replacement percentage of PSC to coke breeze to 40%, and its capacity for reducing CO2, SOx and NOx emissions achieved 24.5%, 26.6%, and 28.2% respectively.Biomass is widely regarded as a renewable and sustainable energy source throughout the world, which comes from living or living organisms such as plants, animals and their byproducts China is the biggest manufacturer for crude steel throughout the world, during the making process of which large amount of fossil energy is consumed. The amount of CO Therefore, replacing fossil fuels with biomass fuel has the fine potential to effectively reduce the part of CO In sinter production, iron ores, fluxes (dolomite, limestone and quicklime), solid fuels (usually coke breeze and anthracite) and return fines (sinter with size range of − For assessing the influences of preparation techniques on the properties of straw-based fuels, preformation and carbonization processes were employed. When used as the substitute for coke breeze in sinter pot trials, the raw straw was manually cut into small pieces with size range of 3–5 The ultimate analyses of fuels were performed using a CHNOS Elemental Analyzer, model Vario EL III (Elementar, Germany), while proximate analyses were performed with an Automatic Proximate Analyzer, model SDTGA5000 (Sundy, China). The calorific values of fuels were measured by an automatic calorimeter, model SDACM4000 (Sundy, China). The density of fuels was selected to evaluate the preformation process. Eq. In Eq. The combustibilities of fuels were examined using a simultaneous TG-DSC analyzer, model STA449C (Netzsch, Germany). Before analysis, 10 Sintering trials were conducted in a sinter pot of depth 700 8 K-type thermocouples were stalled along the sinter pot vertically ( For measuring the temperature change of flue gas throughout the sintering process, a K-type thermocouple was installed in the windbox. Two types of infrared flue gas analyzer, a DELTA 65–3 and a Vario Plus (MRU Corporation, Germany), were used to analyze the concentration of CO, CO The return fines balance (RFB), which is the ratio of the mass of produced return fines to the mass of afforded return fines, was taken as an important indicator to validate the tests of typical sintering indexes including sintering speed, sinter yield, tumbler index, and productivity, and these tests were conducted only when the RFB was in the range of 1    For further elucidating the differences of combustibility between coke breeze and two kinds of straw char, TG-DSC analysis was also applied to reveal the combustion characteristics of fuels in air atmosphere. As could be seen from During the sinter pot trials, the mass of straw-based fuels for each run was calculated on the basis of heat balance by Eq. The influences of straw-based fuels replacing coke breeze on sinter operation and granule size distribution are shown in  The reason for the influences of straw-based fuels on sintering indexes had been revealed through elucidating its influences on the temperature and atmosphere of sintering bed as given in  The influences of straw-based fuels on the emissions of CO, CO As for RS and PS, which could only replace 10% of the coke breeze, relevant theoretical emission reduction percentage for CO As stated above, RS characterized low energy density, high specific surface area and porosity ( Compared with RS, PS achieved higher energy density and lower porosity ( The present research focused on the utilization of waste agricultural straw in iron ore sintering process. For ensuring proper sintering performance and achieving maximum pollutants reduction capacity, the basic physicochemical characteristics, combustibility, application effect and environmental impact of four types of straw-based fuels including raw straw (RS), preformed straw (PS), straw char (SC) and preformed straw char (PSC) were compared. The main findings were summarized as follows: RS and PS mainly consist of volatile matters, which would be pyrolyzed before the flame front in sintering bed. These properties of RS and PS lead to lower fuel utilization and bed temperature for minerals melting. For ensuring the sintering performance, recommended replacement percentage of RS and PS for coke breeze is restricted at 10%. Compared with RS and PS, SC has the advantage of improving fuel utilization and creating higher bed temperature for minerals melting. But one important drawback of SC is that it shows considerably faster combustion speed than coke breeze, which would accelerate sintering speed excessively when replacing SC to coke breeze at a replacement percentage more than 20%. Preformed straw char ingeniously integrates the advantages of PS and SC by joint preformation-carbonization process. Comparable sintering performance was achieved when improving the replacement percentage of PSC to coke breeze to 40%. It was also observed that among these four types of straw-based fuels PSC has biggest potential to reduce CO The authors are grateful to the National Natural Science Foundation of China (51304245), the Postdoctoral Science Foundation (2013M540639), Hunan Provincial Co-Innovation Center for Clean and Efficient Utilization of Strategic Metal Mineral Resources.