Niobium–tantalum ore containing euxenite, samarsakite and fergusonite was leached using sulphuric acid. Niobium and tantalum were extracted from the leach liquor with the tertiary amine, Alamine 336, using kerosene and xylene as diluents and n-decanol as a modifier. The effect of contact time, sulphate and fluoride concentrations in the aqueous phase, extractant concentration and aqueous to organic phase ratio were investigated. Both elements were extracted to different extents, with tantalum extraction slightly greater. The separation factor was greater for kerosene diluent. Selective stripping was performed using either 50 g/L potassium hydroxide or 25 g/L ammonium carbonate solutions for niobium and tantalum. Tantalum was stripped first and Ta(OH)5 was precipitated during stripping. The separation of niobium from tantalum was achieved at this point. Niobium was then precipitated by adding ammonia.The mineralogical composition and chemical analysis of niobium–tantalum ore, obtained from Kab Amiri in the eastern desert of Egypt, is given in Solvent extraction with Alamine 336 as a liquid anion exchanger may be used to recover and separate tantalum and niobium from sulphate leach liquors    In sulphate/fluoride media, both niobium and tantalum should be present as fluoride complexes for the exchange extraction reaction to take place according to the equation: The present paper reports the results of a study of effect variation in the concentrations of various components of the aqueous and organic phases on the extraction of niobium and tantalum by Alamine 336 from sulphate/fluoride media. Both aliphatic (kerosene) and aromatic (xylene) diluents were tested. The recovery of niobium and tantalum from the organic solvent by stripping with solutions of potassium hydroxide or ammonium carbonate was also investigated. The feed solution was prepared by leaching a sample of the ore, ground to −75 μm (−200 mesh), with 10.8 mol/L sulphuric acid for 3 h at 80 °C at an ore/acid ratio=1:3 (w/v). The leach liquor contained 11.49 g/L Nb, 10.05 g/L Ta and traces of thorium and rare-earth elements but negligible amounts of U and Ti. The leachability of these elements from the Kab Amiri ore is weak because they are present only in the refractory mineral davidite The effect of variation in the concentration of aqueous components on the extraction of niobium and tantalum was studied by adding appropriate amounts of 97% sulphuric acid or 48% hydrofluoric acid as well as 30% hydrogen peroxide. The reagents were obtained from BDH. Organic phases were prepared by dissolving Alamine 336 (Henkel) in the relevant diluent and pre-equilibrated by shaking three times with sulphuric acid of a concentration similar to that present in the feed solution to convert the amine to the hydrosulphate form. To avoid the production of a third liquid phase, which may often occur when tertiary amines are contacted with mineral acids  Stripping and precipitation were carried out by contacting loaded organic phases for both diluents with solutions of either 50 g/L potassium hydroxide (BDH) or 25 g/L ammonium carbonate (Vickers Lab). Niobium and tantalum concentrations were determined by flame atomic absorption spectrometry (Varian Spectron AA10). The compositions of the precipitates obtained from the stripping process were analyzed by scanning electron microscopy (CAM SCAN series 4 ISIS 200 E/X system with pentajet detector) and X-ray diffraction (Philips model PW 223/20). Aqueous feed solution containing 0.5 mol/L sulphuric acid, 0.2 mol/L hydrofluoric acid and 0.2% hydrogen peroxide was contacted with 10% Alamine 336 at an A/O phase ratio of 1:1 for various contact times in the range 0.5–5.0 min  Equal volumes of the organic solvent, containing 10% Alamine 336, and a feed solution, containing 0.2 mol/L HF and 0.2% H Solvents containing different Alamine 336 concentrations within the range 5–25% by volume were contacted for 2 min at an A/O phase ratio 1:1 with feed solution containing 0.2 mol/L HF, 0.5 mol/L H Aqueous feed solution containing 0.2 mol/L HF, 0.5 mol/L H It may be observed that the optimum conditions for extracting both niobium and tantalum in the kerosene system occurred when the feed solution contained 0.2 mol/L HF, 0.5 mol/L H  HF concentration was varied from 0.1 to 2.0 mol/L in aqueous media adjusted to 0.5 mol/L H  As the concentration of Alamine 336 was increased from 5% to 25% in xylene/ The feed solution containing 0.5 mol/L HF, 0.5 mol/L H It was observed from the data for this system that the optimum extraction conditions for niobium differed from those for tantalum. The best extraction efficiency of niobium was achieved for a feed solution containing 0.5 mol/L HF, 0.5 mol/L H From the above results, it was observed that niobium and tantalum are extracted to differing extents with both Alamine 336/ Tantalum shows different behaviour; its extraction with Alamine 336 in kerosene is greater than with xylene. Kerosene has a lower dielectric constant, which decreases the aggregation of the long-chain amine, thus making more available for complexing the metal On the other hand, the sulphuric acid content of the aqueous feed solution has a great influence on the extraction of niobium and tantalum. The acid should transfer from the aqueous phase to form the hydroacid salt of the amine for the ion exchange reaction, The extraction of niobium and tantalum decreases with increasing sulphuric acid concentration Different volume ratios of the aqueous and the organic phases were contacted to construct the extraction isotherm. The feed solution of the first system containing 0.2 mol/L HF, 0.5 mol/L H A preliminary study of the recovery and separation of the extracted niobium and tantalum by stripping with the alkali hydroxide or ammonium carbonate was undertaken. Loaded organic solvent for these tests was prepared by contacting 9 volumes of the feed solution with 1 volume of either the Alamine/ Ammonium carbonate solution was also tested for stripping of niobium and tantalum from the organic phases. Equal volumes of the loaded solvents in both diluents and 25 g/L ammonium carbonate solution were contacted for 15 min; 88.2% of the niobium was stripped from the loaded kerosene solvent and 55% of niobium from the xylene. Tantalum was precipitated and separated from niobium in the strip solution. About 99.3% and 94.8% of the tantalum was recovered from stripping of the solvents diluted in kerosene and xylene, respectively, in a precipitated form. Ammonia solution was used for precipitating the stripped niobium from the carbonate solution at pH 8. Increasing the ammonium carbonate concentration to 50 g/L caused the precipitation of both niobium and tantalum in the strip solution. Analysis, by scanning electron microscopy, of the niobium and tantalum precipitates obtained after stripping showed that the niobium and tantalum products had purities of 91.2% and 92.7%, respectively. From the experimental results, it is possible to say that the optimum conditions for extraction and separation of niobium from tantalum occurred when 10% Alamine 336 diluted in kerosene was contacted with feed solution containing 0.2 mol/L HF, 0.5 mol/L H However, such a process cannot be regarded as more than a preliminary proposal at best. The purity of the products that has been achieved is promising but not yet adequate. The separation of the two metals was not achieved until the final stripping step and did not occur during the extraction. Also, no investigation of multi-stage loading or stripping was undertaken, and no experiments were done on the scrubbing of either metal from the loaded organic phase. Further investigation of a multi-stage counter-current extraction process could be based upon the use of extraction isotherm data for each diluent presented in The following general conclusions can be drawn: The extraction ability of Alamine 336 for niobium and tantalum from sulphate/fluoride media is dependent on the diluent used. Ten percent Alamine 336 in either kerosene or xylene was able to extract both niobium and tantalum from the fluoride/sulphate feed solution but with little separation. The extraction of both niobium and tantalum improved when the concentration of sulphuric acid in the feed solution was 0.5 mol/L, while the hydrofluoric acid concentration should be in the range 0.2–0.5 mol/L for the best niobium extraction and 0.1–0.2 mol/L for the best tantalum extraction. Separation between niobium and tantalum was achieved during stripping, especially with the solvent Alamine 336/ Niobium was efficiently stripped from 10% Alamine 336 in kerosene by 25 g/L ammonium carbonate with a recovery of 88.2%. A recovery of 99.3% tantalum was attained by precipitation from the strip solution. The purity of niobium and tantalum products was 91.2% and 92.7%, respectively. To develop a viable process with products of sufficient purity further work on counter-current loading and scrubbing is required. The first author wishes to thank Dr. Nevill Rice for supervising this work. Thanks are extended to the Head of the School of Process, Environmental and Materials Engineering, University of Leeds, UK, for the provision of the experimental facilities. Special thanks are due to Mr. Simon Lloyd for his technical assistance during this work. Thanks are also due to Dr. Fathi Ammar (Nuclear Materials Authority-Egypt) for the XRD analysis and Mr. John Harrington (University of Leeds) for the SEM analysis. The first author also wishes to thank the Egyptian Government for the post-doctoral Scholarship to carry out the work at the University of Leeds.