Even though ca 1746 people and over 3000 cattle were killed in 1986 by sudden release of about 800 million m3 of CO2 from Lake Nyos volcano in northwest Cameroon, the lake's formation history is not known. Here we report results of a lithostratigraphic and petrogenetic study of Nyos volcano that allows us to confirm its phreatomagmatic (maar) origin. Eruptive products are divided into 2 units, the phases of each of which are closely related in time. Unit A comprises 4 phases, the last (A-4) represents the cataclysmic phreatomagmatic formation of Nyos maar and may have been triggered by collapse of the vent system of the previous (A-1 to A-3) phases, and/or reactivation of basement faults. After a repose period, activity shifted NE of the maar to form Unit B products. The B-1 phase of this unit deposited the scoria now covering most of the Lake Nyos area. Unit B-2 constructed the Fon's cone. A small lava flow (Unit B-3) represents the latest phase of volcanic activity of Nyos volcano. Based on area-thickness estimation methods, a total of ca 0.8 km3 of eruptive material was produced from the volcano. Geochemical data suggest that magma of the 2 units probably formed by melting of the same garnet-bearing OIB-like asthenospheric mantle source, and evolved mainly by crustal contamination and fractional crystallization in independent magma batches that erupted without mixing. Our results provide a basis for advice on general hazard mitigation in the Lake Nyos area.Lake Nyos, an infamous volcano in western Cameroon ( Lake Nyos maar was formed on Precambrian quartz monzonite basement complex Ar/Ar-dated at Volcanological field surveys were carried out in the Lake Nyos area for a total of 3 weeks between 2013 and 2015. Surveyed parts included internal lake walls accessed by boat, and the immediate lake peripheries in its northern parts ( Thin sections of juvenile materials in each of the identified units were prepared for microscopic observation. Their crystal contents, mineral assemblages and petrographic features were observed under the polarizing microscope, and described. Mineral chemistry of phenocrysts was determined by electron probe microanalysis at the Earthquake Research Institute of the University of Tokyo (JEOL8800), and at Kobe University (JEOL8900), using a focused beam with an accelerating voltage of 15 kV, and a beam current of 12 nA. Glass compositions were analyzed by scanning electron microscopy–energy dispersive spectroscopy (SEM-EDS, JEOLJSM-T330A + OXFORD INCA X-act) systems in Ibaraki University. Operating parameters were set at 15 kV for the accelerating voltage with beam diameter of 5 μm and count rate of 7.0kcps for 40s. Corrections of the analyses were made according to the XPP matrix method. Whole-rock compositions of major and trace elements were determined by X-ray fluorescence (XRF), using RIGAKU PRIMUS II system in Ibaraki University, with the general glass bead method of 1:2 in dilution. Carefully selected hand specimens of field samples were crushed, and xenolithic fragments removed before the samples were washed, dried and powdered using an agate mill. In the case of samples collected from stratigraphic units composed of small-sized scoria, multiple clasts (>1 cm in diameter) were combined to make rock powder for glass beads. Loss-on-ignitions (LOI) was determined by weight loss after fusion at 850 °C for 2 h. Major element chemistry is given on a normalized volatile-free basis. Whole-rock rare earth elements (REEs) were determined in Ibaraki University for selected samples by inductivity coupled plasma mass spectrometry (ICP-MS), using Agilent 7700/Mass Hunter, with helium (He) collision mode. Aliquots of powdered samples (used for major element analyses) were dissolved in PTFE beakers by a mixture of 60% HClO We also carried out new radiocarbon dating of paloesoils found between the stratigraphic units. This was done using the Lake Nyos has an irregular shape with 1930 m (N-S) x 1180 m (W-E). The lake is 210 m deep, has a flat bottom, and the southern cove at is <30 m ( The Fon's scoria cone is situated 1 km northeast of Lake Nyos maar. Although seemingly simple as a structure, the cone is complex. The main cone (700 m in basal diameter, 150 m in height and 0.03 km Unit A-1 is a poorly sorted explosion breccias mainly composed of basaltic juvenile fragments, containing poorly vesiculated volcanic bombs with chilled crust ( This unit covers Unit A-1 at the eastern lakeshore (location 202, This is a basaltic lava flow at the lakeshore with a maximum thickness of at least 15 m ( Unit A-4 is the most voluminous unit in the area. It can be divided into proximal and distal facies. The proximal facies is well visible around the (current) buildings on the NE lakeshore. It shows remarkable cross-bedding and dune structures. It is not clearly sorted, and consists of angular to rounded, lithic fragments and juvenile scoria in a sand-sized matrix (lacking silt) that is rich in isolated mantle (olivine, pyroxene) and crustal (quartz, feldspar) crystals. Although its dominant lithic components are juvenile basaltic clasts (including bombs with chilled crust), it also contains approximately 3% accidental rocks such as granite and peridotite. The maximum size of the lithic fragments is 30 cm. The thickness is >30 m at the lakeshore and it partly makes a flat depositional surface at the rim of the Nyos maar. Unit A-4 can be seen directly covering Unit A-3 or A-2 outside the lake. The thickness decreases exponentially to a few meters. The distal facies, over 1 km from the source (see below), shows moderate to well-sorted and parallel laminations ( We performed grain size and componentry analyses for Units A-4 and B-1 of location 252 ( Unit B-1 is composed of clast-supported scoria covering Unit A-4 with a thin (few centimeters) interbed of brown soil around Lake Nyos maar ( Unit B-2 consists of basaltic bombs directly emplaced on Unit B-1. We recognized impact sag structures of its bombs on the surface of Unit B-1. The bombs are commonly found in the periphery of Fon's (main) scoria cone and the NE crater. There are two types of basaltic bombs: xenolith-poor (up to1 vol%) and xenolith-rich (>3–5 vol%). The latter type is abundant in, and around the NE crater, suggesting derivation from the crater. On the other hand, >1 m large bombs of the former type are found at the south foot of the Fon's cone, suggesting that their source is the main cone. The distribution of the former type is within 500 m south to western circuit of the cone ( Unit B-3 is a small lava flow generated at the end of the activity of Fon's cone. It flew for <1 km southwestwards from the main cone. It is characterized by a blocky surface and contains megacrysts (~1 mm) of olivine and clinopyroxene. We did not find basaltic bombs on Unit B-3, suggesting that it effused after Unit B-2. Its eruption volume is estimated to be ~0.001 km There are some petrologic studies of juvenile basaltic materials of Nyos volcano ( Petrological features of juvenile materials from Nyos volcano are quite similar for Units A (from Nyos maar) and B (from Fon's cone). The rocks commonly consist of phenocrysts, xenocrysts and groundmass (  There is no compositional zoning between olivine cores and rims. Units A-2 and A-3 range in composition from Mg# 70–90, (Mg# = molar MgO/(MgO + FeO)) with broad peaks at Mg# 75–83 ( There is no remarkable systematic change from core to rim compositions ( Again, no systematic change from core to rim compositions ( The chemistry of glassy parts of scoria samples from Units A-2 and B-1 was determined. Although Unit B-1 samples are relatively more altered (see  There have been no previously published reports of Nyos volcano geology that discussed the detailed intra- and inter stratigraphic relationships between the maar and NE (Fon's) cone products. Based on detailed field surveys, we established the eruption sequence of the Nyos volcano into Units A (A-1 to A-4) and B (B-1 to B-3), starting from the bottom (oldest) to the top (youngest). Our systematic tephrochronology and petrology studies make it possible to identify, correlate and map each of the eruptive units of the volcano ( Eruptive activity would have started by the explosion that deposited Unit A-1. The granitic breccia-rich facies of this unit suggests opening of a vent. Its limited areal distribution in the eastern part of the lake situates this initial vent in the eastern part of present Lake Nyos maar. The presence of blocky fragmentation of dominant basaltic clasts and chilled crust of bombs indicates that the explosion occurred by interaction of magma and (a limited amount of) ground water. After the explosive expulsion of Unit A-1, ejection of scoria fall (A-2) and lava flow (Unit A-3) occurred successively. The lithic-poor, well sorted nature of the scoria fall deposit that travelled for at least 3 km from the source (location 232, We estimate the total volume of erupted material from the Nyos volcano (maar and Fon's cone) to be ~0.8 km The formation age of Lake Nyos maar is still a strenuous debate because of its link to the potential collapse and attendant flood hazard, of the pyroclastic material that forms a natural dam to the north of the lake. Available age proposals span at least 3 orders of magnitude from 400, 8700, 12,300, 110,000, to 350,000 years ( Analytical data for the 45 samples are given in As mentioned in The observation that the Nyos rocks carry mantle xenoliths may apriori suggest that they were brought to the surface fast enough not to have undergone fractional crystallization in shallow magma chambers or magma pockets. However, variations in major and trace elements of the rocks point to a not so simple picture. Magnesium number correlates positively with compatible (e.g., Ni, Cr, V, Co) and negatively with incompatible (e.g., Rb, Sr) elements, with Unit A samples at the more evolved end of the trends (see Supplementary Fig. S1). Such variations point to olivine fractionation. The positive MgO vs. CaO/Al Rocks that are generated via open system magma mixing typically show crystals in disequilibrium with the host magma, and are chemically zoned (see Even though samples of Units A and B show clearly different chemical trends on major and trace element variation diagrams ( Mantle xenoliths from Nyos volcano contain amphibole and phlogopite ( Lake Nyos maar is located on a major NE fracture ( We carried out the first detailed studies of the tephrochronology and petrogenesis of Nyos maar volcano in northwest Cameroon. Eruptive products are stratigraphically divided into 2 units, the first (Unit A) comprises 4 phases of volcanic activity closely related in time. The last of these phases (A-4) represents the cataclysmic phreatomagmatic formation of the Lake Nyos maar. Field evidence suggests that this maar forming phase might have been triggered by collapse of the vent system of the previous (A-1 to A-3) phases that brought in a huge amount of ground water. The collapse was either caused by effusion of voluminous magma that deposited Unit A-3, and/or reactivation of pre-existing tectonic faults. The lava that forms Unit A-3 issued from the vent that eventually became today's Lake Nyos maar. It travelled for >10 km down via north and northeast of the Nyos valley. The truncated nature of the present Lake Nyos maar crater may have been caused by these multiple phases of eruptive activity. After a repose period long enough for a thin (10 cm) soil layer to develop on Unit A pyroclastic material, activity shifted 1 km NE of the maar to form Unit B products of the Nyos volcano. The first phase of activity here would have been sub-Plinian. It deposited the highly vesicular and now rapidly eroding scoria (B-1) that is widely distributed in the Nyos area today. This was followed by Strombolian activity (B-2) that constructed the main edifice of the Fon's cone. The last phase of volcanic activity in the area is represented by the effusion of a small lava flow (B-3) from a previously truncated cone. It is estimated that a total of ~0.8km We present major, trace and some rare earth element data for 45 rock samples from Units A and B of the Nyos volcano. Data screened for meteoric alteration and crustal contamination suggest that magmas that formed the 2 units were produced by small degree partial melting of the same garnet-bearing ocean island basalt (OIB)-like asthenospheric mantle source. After separation from the source, the magmas then evolved mainly by crustal contamination and fractional crystallization in independent magma batches that subsequently erupted without mixing. The HFSE composition of Nyos rocks suggests that they were produced from a source that was previously ‘spiked’ by carbonatitic fluids. Such carbonate metasomatism might be responsible for the CO Our work should constitute an important basis for hazard and vulnerability analyses in the rehabilitation of the Nyos area for potential return of the 1986 gas disaster victims. Reactivation of the fault system in Lake Nyos area could have played a role in the formation of the maar. Seismic monitoring of the area is needed in relation to the potential collapse of the Lake Nyos dam. The CO None. Fieldwork in Lake Nyos maar was supported by the SATREPS NyMo project funded by the Government of Cameroon, the Japan International Cooperation Agency (JICA) and the Japan Science and Technology Agency (JST). We greatly appreciate review comments from Profs Emmanuel Suh and Károly Németh, and handling of the MS by Prof. Heidy Mader, that helped to improve the paper. This work was supported by  Supplementary data to this article can be found online at