As nickel-based superalloys have been widely used in turbine blades of turbo-chargers in automobile industries, this article has presented the creep behavior of the Inconel-713C nickel-based superalloy. For this objective, forced-controlled creep testing has been performed at the temperature of 850°C and under the stress of 585.5MPa. Then, the effect of the solutioning process on creep (time-dependent) properties of the superalloy was investigated. Optical and scanning electron microscopies were utilized to study the material microstructure, before and after creep testing. The X-ray diffraction (XRD) spectrometry was also used to detect different phases in the superalloy. Results showed that solutioning at 1200°C for 1h had a lowering effect on the creep rupture time of the Inconel-713C superalloy, as the mean size of the γ′ particles crystallite was about 6.8nm. When the superalloy was aged for 16h at 930°C, an insignificant effect with respect to the as-cast sample could be observed, due to the precipitation of NbC carbides (at grain boundaries) and the coarsening behavior of γ′ particles. Consequently, different microstructures led to different creep fracture mechanisms for this alloy. The decomposition of MC carbides to M23C6 was also observed for all samples after creep testing.Nickel-based superalloys have been widely used in different applications, where require high strengths at high temperatures. Most types of these superalloys are age-hardenable, as they have γ′ particles with the chemical composition of Ni Zhao et al. Singh et al. As a conclusion on the literature review, still there is a lack of sciences about the creep behavior of superalloys, especially the Inconel-713C nickel-based superalloy. Although several articles In this research, the studied material was chosen as the Inconel-713C nickel-based superalloy. This alloy has been widely used in turbine blades of turbo-chargers in automotive industries The first sample was the as-cast product of the mentioned material. The second sample was solutionized at 1200 After preparing different cylindrical specimens, they were tested by the forced-controlled tensile creep testing machine. Creep testing was done according to ASTM-E139-11 Before and after creep testing, samples were metallographically polished up to a 2000-grit surface finish, using SiC papers. Then, they were chemically etched in a fresh solution of the marble etchant, containing HCl, CuSO As a first result before creep testing, microstructures of the studied alloy in as-cast, solutionized and solutionized/aged states are shown in The shape of γ′ particles was semi-spherical and the shape of γ′ clusters was rounded in the most regions, which located both at grain boundaries and inside grains of the γ matrix. The mean size of γ′ clusters was about 120 SEM images in XRD results in The as-cast sample had a phase of AlNi It was noticeable that Cr-rich M The size of the γ′ particles crystallite for different samples is reported in The comparison of creep strain-time curves between three samples is shown in As the literature According to As reported in the literature For a better discussion, the Orowan equation has been utilized for investigating the creep behavior. The Orowan improvement in the material strength could be calculated as follows The mechanism for three distinct regimes under creep testing could be explained as following notes. Activated dislocations overcame the Orowan strength to slip along <110> directions on {111} planes, in the γ matrix channel through the primary stage of the creep phenomenon The microstructure of different samples after creep testing are shown in More microstructural details of crept samples were studied under SEM images. SEM images in the longitudinal direction for all samples are presented in SEM fractographs of crept samples are displayed in In this article, properties of the Inconel-713C nickel-based superalloy were investigated, when heat treating was performed on as-cast samples under creep loading. Obtained results could be listed as follows, The strain-time curve showed a typical tertiary stage for as-cast and aged samples, despite the solutionized specimen. The solutioning heat treatment had a lowering effect on the creep lifetime of the Inconel-713C superalloy, due to the small size of the γ′ phase crystallite and the long distance between γ′ particles. Obtained results in this research suggested that the ageing heat treatment at 930