Blasting is necessary for many operations in underground and open pit mines. Explosives are employed not only in mining operations, but also in civil construction works. Blasting is applied where mechanical means such as bulldozers or hydraulic excavators are unable to break up and excavate the rock mass. When a charge of explosive is detonated at certain depth inside of a drill hole, gases at very high pressure and temperature are formed. Although blasting is considered one of the cheapest and fastest ways to break rocks, only a small proportion of the energy released by the explosives, approximately 15–30%, Among all the negative effects caused by blasting, ground vibrations can be the most dangerous since they can damage structures of nearby buildings. In addition, if the frequency of ground vibrations is within the natural frequency range of the structure, it may lead to more damage due to the phenomenon of resonance. Prediction of ground vibrations is very important in order to reduce possible damage from blasting. The most commonly used descriptor of ground vibration is peak particle velocity (PPV). Dauetas et al. In ornamental stone quarries, blasting is carried out in order to eliminate fractured zones and other zones where the rock mass is not of high enough quality to be of ornamental value. These blasts are carried out using small amounts of explosive. When the rock mass is very large, as in the case analyzed in this paper, it is necessary to determine the maximum charges that can be applied while ensuring that the surrounding ornamental stone will not be damaged. Currently, the technique used to avoid damaging the surrounding rock is mechanical precutting through chain saw or diamond wire (to a lesser extent, precut blasting is also used). The objective is to isolate the rock mass to be blasted. Using mechanical precutting involves some disadvantages, such as high economic cost, reduction of production rate and limitation of the total charge of explosive. In the present work, a methodology to obtain the attenuation equation for the rock mass surrounding the blasting site is proposed. Besides vibration monitoring, rock mechanical tests and seismic refraction method were applied in order to obtain rock characteristics and seismic wave propagation velocity. The tests were conducted at “Alpi” marble quarry located in the town of Pinoso in the southeast of Spain. Vibrations can be easily modeled using the general law of the blasting vibration attenuation equation. This law, as shown in Eq. Eq. Besides the general law, several empirical equations are used in blasting monitoring to estimate the peak particle velocity. Some of the existing equations, adapted to the general law, were provided by the USBM, Langefors and Kihlström, It is important to highlight the difference between the particle vibration velocity and the propagation velocity of the seismic waves. Among the many types of seismic waves, two general categories can be identified: body waves, which travel below the surface, and surface waves, which travel across the surface. Body waves are divided into longitudinal or primary waves (P-waves) and transverse or secondary waves (S-waves). For this type of study, only body waves are taken into account. If seismic waves are considered as elastic waves, the propagation velocity of P and S waves is related to rock mass density The ratio The Alpi quarry is located in Monte Coto, one of the most important marble mining areas of Europe. The area is within the municipality of Pinoso and belongs to the province of Alicante in the southeast of Spain. The extracted ornamental stone is a cream color stone, fine-grained, compact, with a uniform background that may show small, irregularly scattered veins slightly darker than the surrounding rock, and is known as “Crema Marfil Coto Marble”. From a geological perspective, the rock is a nummulite limestone from the Eocene and belongs to the Prebaetic System. The rock mass is massive and quite homogeneous (GSI values around 70). The mining area stretches for several kilometers and is operated by different mining companies. The marble mass is being worked using an open cast mining method through descending benching. The mean height of the benches is 7 This research project aims to estimate the damage criteria and site-specific law of attenuation of the rock surrounding blasting zones. Ground vibrations induced by explosives were measured by seismographs in three directions for a sufficient number of shots. Laboratory test were also conducted in order to obtain rock mechanical properties, and seismic refraction technique was applied to determine propagation velocity values of the seismic waves. The final result will be the “charge-distance law”, the relationship that determinates the maximum allowable amount of explosive at a certain distance that ensures no damage to the rock mass with ornamental value. Ground vibrations were recorded for thirty-five blast events, considered as rights, at different distances from the blasting points. The maximum amount of explosive charge per delay and the distance between blast holes and monitoring stations were measured carefully. The three ground vibration components, transverse, vertical and longitudinal, were registered by means of three seismographs with triaxial geophones (Instantel Minimate Pro 6). Peak particle velocities, among many other data, were provided directly by the analysis software implemented in the seismograph. For the present study, vertical blast holes were drilled with a 90 As seen in table, many blast holes have around 9 However, the main objective of the present study is to determine the law of attenuation for small distances. For example, upon recalculating the law for distances of less than 50 Besides, the same procedure has been carried out using Eqs. The graph of the relationship between PPV and distance for the measured field data and the attenuation law obtained according the predictors used is presented in The attenuation law from Eq. In order to characterize the rock mass, ten boreholes were carried out at different locations in the quarry. The core rocks showed the high degree of homogeneity and an absence of significant variations, supporting other studies carried out recently in other quarries in the area. From the extracted rock, 38 cylindrical rock samples of 63 As previously mentioned, the seismic refraction method was applied to obtain the propagation velocity values of P and S waves. Five profiles were carried out at different locations in the quarry to obtain reliable mean values. For all the tests, explosive charges were the energy source and 24 geophones were employed. The mean values for P and S waves obtained were 3530 The following equations relate particle velocity ( Using the values of the seismic wave velocities, Poisson's ratio and Young's modulus, and taking as reference a vibration velocity of 100 Based on the results of the combined stress for On a practical level, a factor of safety must be introduced in order to ensure the integrity of the rock mass. For example, an acceptable factor for mining is 1.5 ( The findings provided by this study have led to the exploitation of a new bench at the Alpi quarry in which the production rate has increased by more than 80% due to the elimination of mechanical precutting procedures using chain saws and diamond wire, which were previously necessary to isolate the rock to be blasted from the surrounding ornamental rock. Bench height has increased from 7 The study has obtained very satisfactory results for the mining company by reducing operating costs and minimizing the time spent removing sterile rock before beginning production on new ornamental stone benches. Currently, the exploitation of the bench started after the completion of this study is about to be finished. No signs of damage, such as fissures, have been found in the ornamental stone due to blasting. In addition, the recovery rate has remained unchanged in relation to the previous method. In this paper, a methodology to avoid damage to ornamental rock masses near blasting sites is presented. Field data of blast-induced ground vibrations were taken in a marble quarry in order to determine the law of attenuation. In addition, geomechanical tests were conducted in order to obtain rock properties and refraction seismic technique was applied to determine seismic wave velocities. From these data, the specific law of attenuation was obtained. This law provides the maximum permissible charge per delay at a certain distance in order to ensure the integrity of the rock mass. The information provided in this study allows fundamental values to be calculated at which mechanical precutting can be substituted for blasting. This leads to a reduction in excavation time and, therefore, a reduction in operation costs. There is room for improvement in this methodology as arrivals to geophones for small distances are close to limits of detection. By using geophones with a better response to this type of events, future studies will be able to describe the law of attenuation more precisely over smaller distances. This has been taken into account for future research. The authors acknowledge the financial support provided by Alpi Quarry Company and the efforts of the staff of the quarry during the field investigation.