Worldwide consumption of manganese is increasing, nevertheless huge amounts of manganese from hydrometallurgical processes still end up as waste since the recovery of manganese from multi-metal solutions at low concentrations is not considered feasible. Poor iron control typically prevents the production of high purity manganese. This work studies a number of precipitants in manganese recovery and iron separation from sulfate solutions. The precipitation reagents were compared from the point of view of selectivity and economy. Carbonate precipitation is a fast and effective method for the recovery of manganese from bulk solutions. Subsequent leaching of metal carbonate is also easier and consumes less acid than, for example, hydroxide or sulfide precipitates. In order to avoid gypsum formation, soda ash should be used instead of limestone. It was found that efficient selective iron removal from MnSO4 solutions is achieved with combined O2 or air oxidation and CaCO3 precipitation at pH >5.8 and at a redox potential of >200mV. Effective mixing and sufficient retention time are essential to make the method technically efficient and economically feasible.Iron control plays a significant role in the processing of hydrometallurgical solutions of metal refineries. Iron is one of the most abundant elements in the Earth’s crust and it is present in several sulfide and oxide ore minerals. Iron is also involved in several natural redox processes. In hydrometallurgy, control of iron is difficult due to the rather low oxidation potential of Fe In sulfide precipitation, Fe From an economic point of view, the ratio of iron to manganese in tailings solutions is critical. Compared to, for example, cobalt, copper or, nickel plants, the Mn process is more cost-sensitive; a result of the less valuable end-product. On the other hand, increased demand for stainless steel and greater use of batteries in electrical devices and vehicles have lead to increased consumption of manganese. ( Precipitation, as jarosite, goethite, or hematite, is the most common method currently used to remove iron from leaching solutions. This process is, however, problematical because of the high temperature demands. Furthermore, the gelatinous and metastable solids produced can be difficult to process ( The aim of this work is to study manganese recovery from multi-metal sulfate solutions containing Mn, Fe, Ca, Mg, and Na at low concentrations (<5 Precipitation occurs when the product of the metal and its counter-ion concentrations (activities) rise over a critical value (solubility product, An authentic metal solution after removal of base metals (a tailings solution) was used in the experiments. One aim of the experimental work was to study metal precipitation and solution chemistry. Precipitation of metals was studied by measuring solution concentrations and redox potentials as a function of pH. The measured redox potentials at the experimental conditions are used with the calculated Eh-pH diagrams to estimate the form of the precipitates. Calculations were carried out using HSC Chemistry® 6.1 software developed by Outotec Oyj for chemical reaction and equilibrium calculations. A further aim was to study the properties of solid precipitates. In order to compare the solid properties, settling rate (cm/min) and filtration capacity (kg dry solid/m All reagents were laboratory pro analysis grade and de-ionized (DI) water was used in dissolution and diluting. Carbonate precipitation was studied using NaHCO The aim of the primary precipitation experiment was to study Mn recovery from bulk tailings solution. Iron selectivity was an essential parameter for the subsequent leaching and pilot plant experiments. All solid reagents were fed into the reactor as slurry with a concentration of 200 The leaching characteristics of the metal hydroxides and carbonates were studied with H The Fe separation process was simulated on a larger scale with an authentic metal solution. The reactors for leaching and iron precipitation had a volume of 10 and 20 Samples were taken with a 5 Metals analysis of the aqueous samples was done by plasma emission spectrometry (Iris Intrepid II XDL ICP-AES) with 10 Precipitation of iron and manganese with different reagents was studied in order to find optimal conditions for the production of a MnSO Carbonate precipitation of iron and manganese from an authentic multi-metal solution using NaHCO A window for optimal precipitation conditions can be seen in There is no selectivity window for iron and manganese with Manganese and iron precipitation in two experiments with a Ca(OH) The precipitation of iron as hydroxide was similar to the precipitation as carbonate. A window for optimal precipitation conditions, indicated with a shaded area, can be seen in No window for selective separation can be found. Manganese and iron precipitate simultaneously with sulfide precipitation ( Oxidative precipitation of iron and manganese was analysed from the authentic solution using a SO No clear window for selective iron and manganese precipitation can be found in All the precipitation reactions were fast, but differences were found in the settling rate and filtration capacity of the precipitate and acid consumption in leaching. The effect of the reagent feed rate on the above-mentioned properties was also studied. The results are shown in The settling properties of the solids were very dependent on the reagent feed rate. However, with Na The results clearly show that acid consumption in leaching with carbonate precipitation is significantly smaller than with hydroxide precipitate. Iron was leached similarly from both precipitates with the same acid ratio. This finding also confirms iron to be precipitated with the same mechanism as FeO·OH independently of the precipitant. Moreover, the parallel experiments with varying acid concentration (from 0.5 to 2 Based on a comparison of reagent consumption, separation selectivities, and leaching characteristics, it can be said that carbonate precipitation is a feasible approach for manganese recovery and iron separation from sulfate solution, with Na Continuous precipitation and leaching were studied in 9- and 20-L reactors. Based on low acid consumption in the leaching experiments and the best Fe–Mn selectivity, Na Leaching of Mn and Fe from the primary precipitate with 3.5 Several chemicals can be used to effectively precipitate manganese and iron from sulfate solutions. Soda ash is the most cost-effective reagent for the simultaneous recovery of Mn and Fe, due to its relatively low price, and good filtration and leaching properties. Oxidative precipitation with O The financial support and cooperation of Talvivaara Mining Company is gratefully acknowledged. The authors thank Ms. Krista Pussinen and Ms. Anne Hyrkkänen for assistance with the experimental and analytical work.