The sulfidization-xanthate method is a commonly used method for recovering smithsonite. The attenuation law of the sulfide layer on the surface of smithsonite was investigated by microflotation test and Local electrochemical impedance spectroscopy (LEIS). The microflotation test showed that the recovery efficiency of smithsonite decreased from 82.58% to 64.16% when the sulfidization time increased from 2 to 10 min. It was indicated that the newly formed sulfide layer is unstable and decays with an extension of sulfidization time. After sulfidization of smithsonite, its surface conductivity is changed. The LEIS method was used to in situ study the conductivity of smithsonite surface. It was revealed that when the sulfidization time was 10–30 min, the electrochemical impedance increased from 7.58 × 104 to 7.68 × 104 and the conductivity deteriorated. It was indicated that the newly formed sulfide component is unstable and begins to decay.Zinc-oxide ore is an important zinc resources and smithsonite is one of the most important components of zinc-oxide ore [ Local electrochemical impedance spectroscopy (LEIS) provides a powerful method for the in situ studying of surface characteristics of the substrate, such as surface defects, surface heterogeneities and surface reactivity [ The smithsonite was from Yunnan Province, China. After manual purification and impurity removal, smithsonite was obtained with a purity of 97%. The sieves production with the particle fraction of −74 + 38 μm was used for in microflotation experiments. Chemical multi-element analysis shows that the Zn, SiO Microflotation test: Microflotation experiments were conducted at room temperature in a mechanical agitation flotation machine(RK/FGC, Wh-rock, China). 2 g of smithsonite was added to a 40-ml flotation cell. Afterward, the sample was mixed with 40 mL of deionized water. The slurry was stirred for 1 min and adjusted to pH 10 for 3 min. Sodium sulfide at 1 × 10 LEIS: The blocky smithsonite was polished by hand with wet silicon carbide paper. Then, freshly polished smithsonite was wiped with alcohol and cleaned ultrasonically for 5 min. The sample was immersed in Na To investigate the attenuation law of the sulfidization layer, the sulfidization time was tested, with the results shown in Based on the ion-exchange reaction of the sulfidization mechanism, the sulfidization reactions of smithsonite are described as follows [ According to Eqs. The attenuation of the sulfide layer is characterized by the change of the recovery efficiency of smithsonite in the micro-flotation test. Because sulfidization is an electrochemical reaction process, the surface conductivity of smithsonite changes with the attenuation of the sulfide layer. The study of the smithsonite conductivity is important for exploring the attenuation of the sulfide layer. During the LEIS test, the distance between the probe tip and the substrate (smithsonite) remains almost constant. The current display signal in the image depends on the morphology and the product of the substrate. The chemical impedance on the smithsonite surface was investigated at different sulfidization times. The test results are shown in  The smithsonite microflotation test showed that the recovery efficiency of smithsonite decreased from 82.58% to 64.16% when the sulfidization time increased from 2 to 10 min. It was indicated that the newly formed sulfide layer is unstable and decays with an extension of sulfidization time. The attenuation law of the sulfide layer on smithsonite surface was investigated by the LEIS method. It was revealed that the chemical impedance was decreased from 8.44 × 10 The chemical impedance on the smithsonite surface was increased from 7.58 × 10 The authors declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this paper. Financial support from the