The metal extraction efficiency of bioleaching processes can be greatly improved by using stirred-tank reactors. However, owing to the high cost of acquiring and maintaining these, their use is restricted to the treatment of high-grade ores and concentrates. Unlike gold, the copper industry is not far from achieving commercial implementation of stirred processes on an industrial scale. Recent research has focused on the development of continuous bioleaching processes for the treatment of copper flotation concentrates.
                  The aim of the present work was to optimize a process for continuous bioleaching of chalcopyrite concentrates using moderate thermophilic microorganisms and silver ions. The best results were obtained using a series of three reactors under the following experimental conditions: 45 °C, 14 days residence time, 2 g Ag/kg of concentrate (silver deposition stage at 35 °C), stirring rate adjusted to 350 rpm, pH between 1.2 and 1.4 and redox potential between 400 and 500 mV vs. Ag/AgCl. The optimized continuous bioleaching system was able to dissolve copper steadily at a concentration higher than 11 g/L.The aerated stirred reactor improves both the yield and the efficiency of bioleaching processes. The higher costs associated with the manufacture and maintenance of these vessels restrict their use to the treatment of high-grade ores and concentrates. Most of the existing commercial plants that work with stirred bioreactors recover gold from arsenopyrite concentrates. Unlike gold, the commercial implementation of this process for the recovery of copper from concentrates is still in its infancy. However, in the last few years several technologies and processes have shown promising results on both laboratory and pilot scales. The IBES (Indirect Bioleaching with Effects Separation) and BRISA ( In 1998, a one-year stirred-tank bioleaching pilot test conducted at the copper mines in Mt. Lyell, Tasmania (Australia) demonstrated the technical and commercial feasibility of copper concentrate bioleaching with moderate thermophilic microorganisms ( In the framework of the European Union Research Programme, a group of European partners (BRGM, France; University of Warwick and MIRO, UK; Boliden, Sweden and Cognis, Germany) worked under the project HIgh-temperature bacterial OXidation, HIOX® from 1996 to 1999. The goal of this project was to put a new thermophilic microorganism for the bioleaching of chalcopyrite concentrates to use by proposing an economical and environmentally friendly industrial process for the recovery of copper. Several continuous chalcopyrite bioleaching studies using extreme thermophilic microorganisms have been conducted under this project. The results were very promising, with copper extraction exceeding 90% in 5 days residence and a pulp density of 12% ( Recent research in bioreactors has shown promising results on the bioleaching of copper flotation concentrates with mesophilic microorganisms ( An excellent example of the increasing importance of stirred-tank bioleaching was the creation of a new consortium, Alliance Copper Limited (ACL), between Codelco and BHP Billiton ( Most existing commercial plants and planned plants use mesophilic or moderate thermophilic microorganisms with a temperature growth range between 40 and 50 °C. One atypical case is the semi-commercial industrial reactor (300 m In general, the principal objective of a bioleaching study is to overcome the main drawback of the process scale-up: the low kinetics. In the case of chalcopyrite, the studies indicate formation of a passivating film on the surface during dissolution, which prevents direct contact between the solution and the mineral and limits the electrochemical transport required for the electrochemical dissolution mechanism to act ( One of the most common solutions to this problem, and to the slow kinetics of bioleaching processes in general, is to raise the temperature. However, the use of extreme thermophilic microorganisms can present a number of difficulties such as: lower oxygen solubility in water; these microorganisms are less resistant to high metal concentrations and to catalysts like silver, and they present lower mechanical resistance than mesophilic microorganisms to attrition of their membrane. Moreover, leaching reactions are exothermic, raising the temperature of stirred tanks to 40–50 °C, which is the optimum range for the growth of moderate thermophilic microorganisms. In many cases, industry has preferred these moderate thermophilic microorganisms because they are more resistant to higher pulp densities and higher heavy metal concentrations than extreme thermophiles ( The basis for selection and design of the most suitable reactor for a biomining process must be the physical, chemical and biological characteristics of the system. Special attention should be given to the complex nature of the pulp, which consists of an aqueous solution with cells in suspension and adhering to the mineral, and also a suspended solid and air bubbles ( Yet another alternative in chalcopyrite bioleaching is the use of silver as a chemical catalyst. Copper recovery from chalcopyrite has been improved through the use of silver as a catalyst in both chemical and biological leaching systems, and the reaction mechanisms Silver sulphide is formed on the mineral surface by means of a chemical reaction involving an interchange between the silver and the copper and iron from the chalcopyrite lattice. The silver sulphide dissolves in the presence of an oxidizing agent such as ferric ion: In bioleaching, the bacteria play an indirect role in the process, facilitating the oxidation of Fe Reaction The regeneration of Ag The reaction of silver with mineral sulphides other than chalcopyrite has also been considered in the bioleaching process. The aim of the present work was to optimize a process for continuous bioleaching of chalcopyrite concentrates with moderate thermophilic microorganisms and silver. To that end, different variables were studied (residence time, silver concentration, stirring, redox potential and temperature) to obtain copper concentrate solutions. A differential flotation chalcopyrite concentrate, named RT, was used (for origin and chemical composition see X-ray diffraction of mineral RT showed the presence of chalcopyrite (CuFeS The culture was one of moderate thermophilic microorganisms (named TMRT) grown from acid mine drainage from Río Tinto (Huelva, Spain). The culture was composed mainly of S-oxidizing bacteria with ability to oxidize different sulphide minerals, especially copper sulphides. An important feature of the culture was that its heavy metal resistance at low pH was higher than that of other moderate thermophiles described in the literature. Moreover, the culture also contained different Fe-oxidizing microorganisms, but in smaller proportions ( The culture was grown in an orbital shaker at 45 °C, pH 1.5 and 150 rpm in Norris medium, modified without iron (  In the first three continuous bioleaching experiments, all the tanks including the feeding tank had an effective capacity of 2.4 L. The reactors were thermostatted and closed to avoid evaporation of the solution. Temperature was controlled with a thermocouple (T). The air supply for bacterial growth (500 mL/min) was controlled by differential water manometers (D) and injected into the reactors through glass capillaries (O). Flasks (F) were placed between both devices to prevent the backward of the liquid. The last test was performed in an improved system. The improvement chiefly affected the stirring system, in which baffles were used and a flow of air was supplied from the base of the reactor. Additionally, the first reactor (6 L) was twice the volume of the second and third reactors (3 L) in order to increase the residence time and to encourage adaptation of the microorganisms. All the continuous experiments were preceded by a discontinuous stage designed to adapt the culture to the test conditions. Once each reactor was inoculated, metal concentration in solution (Cu, Fe, Zn), pH, redox potential and bacterial population were measured. The continuous feed was started once the optimum culture growth was attained. The pulp density was 5% in all tests. Evaporation was restored periodically with distilled water, pH controlled and adjusted (with sulphuric acid 20% v/v) to below 1.5; redox potential was measured (vs. Ag/AgCl) and a sample was removed to determine i) the number of cells in the liquid phase using a Thoma counting chamber (depth 0.1 mm) with a phase-contrast microscope, and ii) iron and copper concentration using atomic absorption spectrophotometry. The end of the experiment in each reactor was reached when the bacterial population and the amount of dissolved metal stabilized. The overall yield was determined by mass balance of the solid residues and the feeding solutions, in each reactor and in the collector. This balance is expressed by the following equation: The main errors associated with this balance are loss of solids during filtration and loss of liquid in the cakes. That error was calculated as a function of the difference between the two terms of the equality. The variation of the concentration of metals (g/L), pH and redox potential in the tank reactors (R-1, R-2 and R-3), in the feeding tank (A) and in the collector (P) is shown for each test. The results depicted in the initial portion of each figure ( At the beginning of the continuous tests, the metal concentration in solution and the cell population diminished. This indicates that the gradual increase of metal concentration observed during the previous discontinuous stage was a result of bacterial action. However, once the continuous test started, the feeding of fresh pulp into reactor R-1 and the output of concentrated solution from reactor R-3 produced a diluting effect, reducing the metal concentration in each reactor. In the continuous experiments, the optimum residence time was determined by the stabilization of metal concentration in solution in the zone of maximum bacterial growth. When these curves trended upwards the residence time would be shorter, and when they trended downwards the time would be longer. The goal was to achieve a constant yield for better control of the system. The duration of continuous experiments should be at least twice the residence time of a discontinuous process, since the system requires a time equal to the residence time to evacuate all metals accumulated during the discontinuous stage. In fact it is during the second stage that the system functions in continuous mode according to the experimental conditions. The first continuous test was performed at 45 °C, with 20 days residence time (across the three reactors) and without silver. The variation of iron, copper and zinc in solution is shown in The system achieved the highest yield in reactor R-1 during the discontinuous stage, with dissolution of 26.6% Fe, 48.2% Cu and 44.4% Zn in the mineral. However, the lowest metal concentration in solution was achieved in the first reactor during the continuous stage. The dissolution of copper and iron in reactor R-3 was practically double than in reactor R-2, and in the latter it was double than in R-1. Such differences are to be expected since there is an increase of metal concentration in solution as the pulp passes through the reactors in cascade, so that the mineral reaching each reactor is subject to heavier attack and hence is free of surface products (flotation reagents, oxidized phases) which can be harmful to bacterial activity. For that reason, the microorganisms in reactor R-3 were supplied with a more readily soluble substrate which substantially increased the dissolution yield.  The variation of copper concentration ( The dissolution rate of zinc remained practically unchanged during both discontinuous and continuous stages, as sphalerite is the most soluble mineral in the concentrate ( The bacterial concentration in solution during the continuous experiment was stable, attaining high concentrations, above 10 These results indicate that in spite of the long residence time tested, the dissolution yield achieved was still low. The next step was therefore to catalyse the process with silver. A new continuous bioleaching experiment was performed at 45 °C with 15 days residence time (across the three reactors) using 0.3 g Ag/kg of concentrate, fixed on the mineral surface at 35 °C for 24 h. This amount was chosen on the basis of previous studies which demonstrated that lower amounts were insufficient to catalyse chalcopyrite dissolution, whereas amounts higher than 0.3 g Ag/kg of concentrate did not improve the mineral dissolution ( The results of this test are shown in Based on the catalytic effect of silver ions on chalcopyrite dissolution, it was decided to use a shorter residence time (15 days) than in the preliminary experiment (20 days). Stabilization of the system was readily achieved during the continuous stage, indicating that the decision to shorten the residence time was the right one. The copper dissolution rate increased in the three reactors during the continuous stage, but the differences among them diminished. In any case the overall dissolution yield of this metal was twice that (24.5%) achieved in the test without silver ( The bacterial population was high, even more abundant than in the test without silver, indicating that silver did not affect culture growth and that the moderate thermophilic bacteria tolerated silver well ( The redox potential in steady state was lower than in the absence of silver. This is probably related to a decrease of the Fe (III)/Fe (II) ratio produced by consumption of ferric ion during regeneration of the catalyst according to reaction Previous studies have shown that the catalytic effect of silver on chalcopyrite is strongly affected by the temperature of fixation (  During the continuous stage, a steady state of metal dissolution was achieved half way through the experiment. A higher iron concentration was reached, close to 6 g/L ( The most important differences between this test and the one carried out at 45 °C were: a) an increase in the amount of iron and zinc in solution, principally in the last two reactors ( The increase in the redox potential and free bacteria in suspension, with iron as the main oxidizable substrate, was probably the result of selection of Fe-oxidizing bacteria in the culture caused by a reduction in temperature. According to several authors ( Bacterial selection of this microorganism occurs when redox potential is high because it is less sensitive to high concentrations of ferric ion. The strong Fe-oxidizing tendency of A 5 °C reduction in temperature modified the proportion of Fe-oxidizing microorganisms in the mixed culture, raised the redox potential of the solution to above 500 mV vs. Ag/AgCl causing chalcopyrite passivation ( This temperature-dependant bacterial selection could negatively affect the activity of S-oxidizing bacteria, which is inhibited in the presence of high concentrations of ferric ion. These conditions promote passivation of the chalcopyrite surface and are unfavourable to its dissolution. From these results it seems clear that the control of redox potential is extremely important for the system, and this variable would therefore be a good indicator of the effectiveness of chalcopyrite catalysis. The last continuous bioleaching test was performed under the best conditions established during the previous experimentation: in an improved system at 45 °C. The main changes introduced were: The stirring rate was optimized to avoid settlement of the solid. The use of a stirring rate in excess of 400 rpm during experimentation produced a more homogeneous pulp, but this affected bacterial growth negatively by increasing cell attrition and reducing the adherence of microorganisms to the mineral, which is necessary for oxidation of the sulphur that forms on the chalcopyrite surface. A homogeneous pulp was achieved by improving the design of the reactors: placing baffles in the walls, using a screw propeller capable of generating greater turbulence, and supplying air from the centre of the reactor bottom to give better gas distribution. As a result, the solid was kept in suspension and mass transfer and optimum conditions for the growth of bacteria were achieved. The volume of the first reactor was doubled to increase the residence time, considering that there is constant dilution in that reactor due to continuous input of pulp. The mineral was washed and silver was deposited on it at 35 °C to eliminate surface compounds (flotation reagents and oxidation products) that could interfere with the interaction between silver and chalcopyrite. Recent studies have shown that the growth of moderate thermophilic microorganisms in continuous cultures and in the presence of silver favours their S-oxidizing ability but inhibits their Fe-oxidizing capability ( During the test, different variables were modified to find the best bioleaching conditions and to improve the overall yield of the process.  The metallic dissolution decreased in all the reactors at the beginning of the continuous process, indicating that the residence time was too short to achieve stabilization of the system. Therefore, a new residence time of 10.5 days was tried after day 60 of the test. However, the system did not respond as expected. The redox potential rose since the bacteria had longer to generate Fe (III), and the feeding tank produced less dilution ( The increase of Zn in solution was associated with an increase of the redox potential, leading to passivation of the chalcopyrite. The consumption of Fe (III) during Zn dissolution produced a reduction of the Fe (III)/Fe (II) ratio and hence of the redox potential, which again favoured chalcopyrite dissolution. The highest copper dissolution in the three reactors was achieved with 2 g Ag/kg of concentrate, at a redox potential between 400 and 500 mV vs. Ag/AgCl and at a pH lower than 1.5. The last two variables were responsible for the resulting stable and abundant bacterial population ( These experiments demonstrate the effectiveness of a mixed culture of moderate thermophilic microorganisms and silver for dissolution of chalcopyrite concentrates. The best results were obtained with three tanks in series at 45 °C, a residence time of 14 days, a silver concentration of 2 g/kg of concentrate fixed on the mineral surface at 35 °C, a stirring rate of 350 rpm, a pH between 1.2 and 1.4 and a redox potential between 400 and 500 mV. The continuous bioleaching system produced copper solutions with concentrations higher than 11 g/L and an overall copper yield of 66%. Dissolution in the first reactor increased when the residence time was doubled with respect to the other reactors, as microorganisms were able to adapt better thanks to a constant supply of fresh pulp. Silver substantially raised the rate of chalcopyrite dissolution and copper extraction when the redox potential was lower than 500 mV vs. Ag/AgCl. Reducing the temperature caused selection of Fe-oxidizing microorganisms and a consequent increase of the Fe (III)/Fe(II) ratio. High Fe (III) concentrations inhibited the activity of S-oxidizing bacteria and favoured passivation of chalcopyrite and dissolution of pyrite and sphalerite. The stirring rate was adjusted to optimize homogenization of the pulp and the presence of microorganisms. A stirring rate higher than 350 rpm reduced the effectiveness of the culture due to increased cell attrition and poorer adherence of microorganisms to the mineral, which is necessary to oxidize the sulphur that forms on the chalcopyrite surface. The authors wish to express their gratitude to the Comisión Interministerial de Ciencia y Tecnología (CICYT) of the Spanish government for funding this work. Furthermore, one of the authors (L. Cancho) wishes to express her gratitude to the Comunidad Autónoma de Madrid for the graduate grant that helped her to carry out these research studies.