The nucleation mechanisms of palladium nanoparticles from 1mM [PdCl4]2−
                     +1M NH4Cl electrolyte (pH=3.4) on graphene surface were studied using cyclic voltammetry, chronoamperometry and field emission scanning electron microscopy (FESEM). It was found that due to high catalytic properties of Pd nanoparticles/graphene surface, the hydrogen co-reduction during Pd electrodeposition occurs. The kinetics of electrochemical nucleation and growth of Pd nanoparticles was also evaluated using Mirkin–Nilov–Heerman–Tarallo (MNHT) model. Regarding the simultaneous reduction of hydrogen ion on the surface of the growing Pd nuclei, a modified model developed by Palomar-Pardavé et al. [M. Palomar-Pardavé, B.R. Scharifker, E.M. Arce, M. Romero-Romo, Electrochimica Acta 50 (2005) 4736] was employed to estimate the kinetic parameters of the process. It was shown that the steady state nucleation rate (I
                     st) and the rate constant of hydrogen reduction (k
                     H) increase exponentially with a potential shift to more cathodic values. Using the relation between Gibbs free energy of formation for a critical nucleus (ΔG
                     c) and I
                     st, it is concluded that there is no thermodynamic barrier against nucleation of Pd on graphene in the electrode potential range studied in this work (E
                     =−0.3 to −0.5V vs. Ag/AgCl).Palladium is a well-known noble metal with high catalytic activity and promising potential applications due to its hydrogen adsorption properties. In addition, Pd shows a high catalytic activity toward electrooxidation of small organic molecules such as formic acid. As a result, the application of Pd nanoparticles, as anodic electrocatalysts in fuel cell, has increasingly attracted the attentions of researchers during recent years On the other hand, carbon nanostructures are highly conductive carbon scaffolds with large surface areas on which the metallic catalysts can be dispersed In this regard, many efforts have been paid for developing noble metal particles on graphene substrate. For instance, Hu et al. could successfully obtain Au nanoparticles on graphene A careful literature survey shows that less attention has been paid to the mechanisms of electrochemical nucleation and growth of noble metal nanoparticles and usually these works have been limited to the catalytic activity assessment Regarding the high active surface of graphene, the study of nucleation and growth of noble metals on its surface is an interesting subject; this is especially true when metal electrodeposition is accompanied by other reduction process such as hydrogen reduction reaction which can be catalyzed by electrodeposited noble metal/graphene. The present study addresses a fairly complete investigation of the electrochemical nucleation of Pd nanoparticles on graphene with the help of current–time transient (CTT) applying Mirkin–Nilov–Heerman–Tarallo (MNHT) model Modified Hummers’ method A pure graphite electrode (5 All electrochemical experiments were performed in a conventional three-electrode electrochemical cell in volume of 100 The morphology and the size of electrodeposited Pd nanoparticles were characterized by field emission scanning electron microscopy (FESEM) using a HIT-S4160 equipment with electron beam energy of 15  According to the pourbaix diagram, the reversible potential of 1 Furthermore, according to pourbaix diagram at In The nucleation and growth at initial stages of Pd deposition on graphene/graphite electrode were investigated by potentiostatic transient measurements. As can be seen, all the transients have similar shape (same trends) with characteristic and well-defined current maxima. Although the transient maxima are more defined and shifted toward shorter times at higher overpotentials. The general trends of the CTTs is an initial sharp drop in current due to adsorption and/or double layer charge And (ii) hydrogen reduction which occurs on the surface of interacting growing palladium nuclei as In Scharifker and Mostany theory, thickness of the diffusion layer during overlapping is assumed to be only a function of time. On the other hand, Mirkin and Nilov For simplification of this complicated equation, the function The nonlinear fitted CTT corresponding to The steady state nucleation rate, defined as According to atomistic theory of electrochemical nucleation, the Δ Based on the linear plot shown in Assuming that hydrogen reduction is a charge transfer controlled process which satisfies the common Butler–Volmer relationship From the slope of the linear fitting ( It is worthy of note that the obtained values of hydrogen reduction reaction rate constant ( Information on the shape, size and number density of electrodeposited Pd nanoparticles can be obtained by FESEM observations. As seen in Assuming that one surface feature can provide at least one active deposition site, it would be expected that the number of active sites is equivalent with number of surface features. But the results obtained in the current work do not confirm this approach because there are some significant points concerning the electrocrystallization of metals. First is the nature of active sites. It is very likely that the number of the observed surface feature does not equal with the number of active sites estimated via 3D deposition kinetic models; i.e. the nature of the active site cannot be considered as a physical feature on the electrode surface because of its rather electronic nature To sum up, the theoretical model cannot realistically describe the interaction between the growing particles in the advanced deposition stages giving rise to the maximum of current transients; the problem that reported for other electrodeposition systems The experimental evidences indicated that hydrogen reduction occurs with Pd electrodeposition which motivated by high catalytic properties of Pd nanoparticles/graphene surface. Theoretical modeling of Pd nucleation and growth was successfully carried out by subtracting the CTT corresponding to hydrogen reduction from the experimental CTT. It was also found that there is an exponential correlation between the steady state nucleation rate of Pd and also the rate constant of hydrogen reduction with potential. Furthermore, the number of active nucleation sites on graphene surface obtained by theoretical models, is about one order of magnitude higher than that of reported in the case of glassy carbon and pencil graphite substrates. Regarding the estimated number of Pd atoms in a critical nucleus in the range of applied cathodic potential, it was shown that there is no thermodynamic barrier for the nucleation of Pd on graphene and only the kinetics governs the nucleation process. Moreover, the charge transfer coefficient of hydrogen co-reduction was 0.14. At This work is a part of project number 90003270 with Iran National Science Foundation (INSF). The authors appreciate