Purpose
                  To compare biomechanical outcomes of 4 different arthroscopic techniques for fixation of tibial eminence fractures.
               
                  Methods
                  Twenty-four skeletally mature, fresh-frozen cadaveric knees were divided into 4 comparison groups based on the fixation method: screw fixation (group A), traditional sutures fixation with 2 FiberWire sutures (group B), a modified suture technique with 2 FiberWire sutures that created neckwear knots to firmly trap the fracture fragment (group C), or suture anchors which was based on the suture bridge technique primarily used in the shoulder for repair of rotator cuff tears and greater tuberosity fractures (group D). A tibial eminence fracture was created in each knee for subsequent fixation. After fixation, each knee underwent cyclic loading of 100 N to assess the displacement change after 500 cycles of the fixation construct. Afterward, a single tensile failure test load was performed to assess the ultimate failure load, stiffness, and failure mode for each specimen.
               
                  Results
                  All specimens survived cyclic testing and were subsequently loaded to failure. Group C had the highest ultimate failure load (P < .05) and group D had the lowest displacement compared with the other 3 groups (P < .05). Different failure modes were found among the 4 groups.
               
                  Conclusions
                  Suture fixation using the neckwear knots technique provides superior fixation with regard to higher ultimate failure load, and absorbable suture anchor fixation with the suture bridge technique provides less displacement under cyclic loading conditions. Both techniques exhibited superior biomechanical properties compared with traditional screw and suture fixation.
               
                  Clinical Relevance
                  The new techniques showed satisfactory biomechanical properties and provided more choice for surgeons in the treatment of tibial eminence fractures.Tibial eminence fracture is a serious injury involving bony avulsion of the anterior cruciate ligament (ACL) from the intercondylar eminence. In the present work, we conduct a biomechanical comparison of 4 fixation techniques for tibial eminence fractures of cadaveric knees in vitro. We determined the strength and resistance to displacement of screws, sutures, and suture anchors under cyclic and load-to-failure conditions. Screws and sutures fixation are among the most common fixation methods and have yielded satisfactory results. Twenty-four skeletally mature (mean age 48.8 ± 12.1 years, range 29-72 years), fresh-frozen cadaveric knees were used for this study. No knees had signs of previous abnormalities or injuries. Specimens were transported overnight at −20°C and thawed for 24 hours at room temperature before preparation and testing. Biomechanical properties of cadaveric knees are similar to those of living knees after thawing. Specimens should be kept moist with saline irrigation throughout the study. A prospective bone mineral density (BMD) analysis of these specimens was performed before biomechanical testing. Each sample underwent dual-energy x-ray absorptiometry for determination of BMD (in grams per square centimeter). Researchers were blinded to the BMD of specimens during fracture preparation and biomechanical testing. After BMD testing, an oscillating saw was used to create standardized 2 × 2 × 0.5-cm inverted pyramidal fracture fragments for each specimen. Average fracture size and morphologic characteristics of these specimens have been reported in the literature. Group A, screw: single fully threaded cannulated screw (3.5 × 35 mm) (Synthes, West Chester, PA). Group B, suture: two No. 2 FiberWire suture (Arthrex, Naples, FL). Group C, suture: two No. 2 FiberWire suture (Arthrex). Group D, suture anchor: Two 2.3-mm bioabsorbable anchors (Smith ＆ Nephew, Andover, MA) loaded with No. 2 FiberWire sutures (Arthrex) and one 4.5-mm Footprint anchor (Smith ＆ Nephew). First, the fracture fragment was reduced, then a guide pin was inserted in the central portion of the fracture fragment at a 60° angle in the sagittal plane. The guide pin was then overdrilled with a 3.0-mm cannulated drill. An antegrade, cannulated, 3.5 × 35-mm, fully threaded cortical screw was then placed in lag fashion and tightened over the guide wire until fixation was achieved. The guide pin was then removed ( After reduction, a guide wire was inserted into the anterolateral portion of the fragment for provisional fixation. Then, an Acufex ACL drill guide (Smith & Nephew) with the angle set to 45° was used to drill in a retrograde manner from the medial side of the tibia into the fracture fragment. Then, 2 parallel tunnels were created with a 2.4-mm drill-tip guide wire. Drill holes were started 1 cm apart and 1 cm distal to the articular surface of the medial tibial plateau and entered 1 cm apart on either side of the anteromedial bundle of the ACL. Using a 24-gauge wire loop, doubled No. 2 FiberWire suture (Arthrex) was penetrated into the ACL just proximal to the avulsion fragment. Then the wire loop was advanced into each drill hole and through the bony fragment, exiting from the opposite sides of the ACL insertion. At last, the wire loop was pulled through the tunnels before they were tightened over the bony bridge to secure the fracture fragment ( First, the fracture fragment was reduced, then a guide wire was inserted into the anterolateral portion of the fragment for provisional fixation. Then, an Acufex ACL tibial guide (Smith & Nephew) with the angle set to 45° was used to drill in a retrograde manner from the medial side of the tibia into the fracture fragment. Two parallel tunnels were then created using a 2.4-mm drill-tip guide wire. The holes were located at the anteromedial and anterolateral margins of the fracture site. A folded No. 2 FiberWire suture was then delivered around the base of the ACL. The 2 free ends of the folded suture were then passed through the loop on the opposite terminus to form a neckwear knot around the ACL adjacent to the fracture fragment. An additional loop ligature was performed around the base of the ACL using another suture in the same manner as above. The limbs of the 2 sutures were respectively retracted from the medial and lateral tibial tunnels using a suture retriever introduced through the tunnels. Finally, the sutures were tightened over the bony bridge with the knee in 30° of flexion ( Fracture fragments were manually reduced and provisionally secured using a guide wire. An awl was used to create a pilot hole at the posteromedial edge of the fracture site, where a 2.3-mm bioabsorbable anchor (Smith & Nephew) loaded with 1 strand of No. 2 FiberWire was placed. The 2 free ends of the suture were then respectively shuttled using a suture retriever to pierce the ACL fibers adjacent to the fracture fragment. Another 2.3-mm bioabsorbable anchor was placed at the anteromedial margin of the fracture site. The free ends of the loaded suture were then passed through the ACL slightly anterior to the previous suture in the same fashion. The awl was used again to create a pilot hole in the midlateral edge of the fracture site. A 4.5-mm Footprint anchor (Smith & Nephew) was then loaded with the free ends of the sutures before insertion into the midlateral hole to create the suture bridge ( The specimen was mounted on the material testing machine (WDW4100 universal testing machine, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Changchun) at 30° of knee flexion and neutral internal-external and varus-valgus rotation ( All statistical analyses were performed using SPSS software for Windows, standard version 17.0 (SPSS, Chicago, IL). A nonparametric variance analysis (Kruskal-Wallis test) was used to statistically analyze the results. When an overall group difference was observed, a multiple comparison test (Student-Newman-Keuls test) was used to compare all groups and determine the source of the difference. Significance was set to The BMD values among the 4 fixation groups were not significantly different (mean, 0.81 ± 0.12 g/cm The FiberWire sutures with neckwear technique exhibited the highest ultimate failure loads and the screw group had the lowest; no statistical differences were found between groups B and D ( Different failure modes were observed in this study. In the screw fixation group, 2 specimens failed as a result of screw pullout from the fracture fragment, whereas the other 4 failed because of screw pullout from the epiphysis. Group B specimens failed because of suture cutting through bone (n = 4), fracture fragment breakage (n = 1), and suture rupture (n = 1). All of the group C specimens failed by suture cutting through bone, except for 1 sample that failed by ACL rupture. In the suture anchor group, failure modes included anchor breakage (n = 2), pullout from the epiphysis (n = 3), and suture rupture (n = 1). In biomechanical comparison of different fixation techniques, we found that sutures using the modified suture technique had the highest ultimate failure, whereas the suture anchor showed the lowest displacement with cyclic loading. The results proved our original hypothesis that the 2 new techniques could provide superior fixation for displaced tibial eminence fractures, when compared with traditional screw and suture fixation. In this study, we compared the biotechnical properties of screw fixation, suture fixation, and 2 other techniques that have rarely been reported. Specimens in different groups were confirmed to be equivalent by BMD testing to reduce the influence of bone quality, and standardized 2 × 2 × 0.5-cm fracture fragments were created for all specimens to reduce the potential influence of eminence fracture size. The biomechanical testing including the cyclic loading protocol and the load-to-failure protocol. The cyclic loading protocol was taken from that of Tsukada et al., The importance of implant strength is affirmed by the number of studies published on biomechanical evaluation for tibial eminence fracture fixation techniques. Suture fixation may be the most popular maneuver among the fixation systems used in arthroscopic treatment of avulsion fractures because of its advantage of usability in all types of fractures, The suture anchor method based on the suture bridge technique has been gradually introduced for fixation of tibial eminence fractures because of its prominent clinical efficacy in the treatment of rotator cuff tears and greater tuberosity fractures. Suture fixation using the neckwear knots technique and suture anchor fixation with suture bridge technique exhibited satisfactory biomechanical properties compared with the other 2 traditional fixation methods. However, in addition to biomechanical differences, clinical factors may influence the choice of fixation technique for tibial eminence fractures. The technique used for each patient should be determined according to the relevant indications. We chose the technique best suited to provide the greatest benefit for each patient. For example, screw or suture anchor fixation may be more suitable for pediatric and adolescent tibial eminence fractures to preserve the proximal tibial physis in skeletally immature patients. However, if the operative space is too limited to perform suture anchor fixation, it is better to choose suture fixation, even in a skeletally immature patient. Further clinical study comparing these fixation techniques may be needed, and if clinically these demonstrate no difference, the ease and time savings of the simpler technique may indeed be preferred. First, the specific fixation techniques were performed in an open manner rather than arthroscopically, which allowed for anatomic reduction of the fracture fragment and relatively easy fixation. But in the clinic, arthroscopic anchor placement, screw placement, and making suture knots can be very challenging because of insertion angles and the patella and patellar tendon. Removal of soft tissues surrounding the knee may also have altered forces normally experienced by the ACL. However, this was necessary to create accurate and reproducible fracture fragments. Suture fixation using the neckwear knots technique provides superior fixation with regard to higher ultimate failure load, and absorbable suture anchor fixation with the suture bridge technique provides less displacement under cyclic loading conditions. Both of the 2 fixation techniques exhibit superior biomechanical properties compared with traditional screw and suture fixations. The authors acknowledge Hao Zhang and Ketao Wang for their contribution toward the analysis and interpretation of data when drafting the manuscript. The authors are also grateful to American Journal Experts (AJE) for their help with English language editing. 