In this study, the Box–Wilson statistical experimental design method was employed to evaluate the effects of important variables such as amount of Na-Oleate, salt (MgCl2) concentration and stirring speed on the shear flocculation of celestite. Response function coefficients were determined by the regression analysis of experimental data and the predictions were found to be in good agreement with the experimental results. The optimum Na-Oleate amount, MgCl2 concentration and stirring speed were determined as 1.5kg/t, 0.1M and 500rpm, respectively, when considering flocculation recovery.Fine and ultra fine particles are inevitable in ore dressing applications because of mechanized mining methods, comminution process and greater size reduction needed for adequate liberation of the minerals From these methods, shear flocculation having advantages due to the formation of very stable flocs which withstand enough to the disruptive forces at higher shear rates, possibility of the aggregation even at high zeta potentials As considered from the physico-chemical point of view, the shear flocculation is a kind of aggregation of fines It is known that the electrokinetic behaviour of the particles affects the process recovery and the selectivity in the concentration process; based on the surface properties, such as froth flotation, flocculation and oil agglomeration. Shear flocculation recovery and separation efficiency, which are achieved by flocculation, depend on a number of factors including the surface properties of the solid, the nature of the flocs and certain properties of the aqueous medium. It has been observed that ionic strength of the aqueous medium affects the flocculation performance. The presence of electrolytes or pH control de-stabilizes the fine particle suspensions prior to flocculation due to the elimination of the charge barrier. This situation allows the forming of small flocs Celestite is the principal and most abundant source of strontium mineral. Celestite is particularly used for production of strontium carbonate, nitrate and hydroxide. In this study, the Box–Wilson experimental design method was used in order to investigate the effects of important variables on shear flocculation of celestite sample taken from Sivas (Turkey). This experimental design is a response surface methodology used for evaluation of a dependent variable as functions of independent variables. The Na-Oleate amount, MgCl The celestite sample was obtained from Barit Maden Türk A.Ş. in Sivas-Turkey. It was dry-ground (in a ball mill) and sieved to −20 Na-Oleate (C The experiments were performed in a 400 The zeta potential of the celestite samples were determined depending on pH values (in the absence and presence of Na-Oleate). It was also measured at experimental conditions of axial points, factorial points and center point using a zeta potential analyzer (Malvern Instruments, Zetasizer NanoZ model). A Box–Wilson statistical experimental design method was used to determine the effects of major operating parameters on flocculation recovery and zeta potential. The Box–Wilson design is a response surface methodology, an empirical modeling technique, devoted to the evaluation of the relationship of a set of controlled experimental factors and observed results. This optimization process involves three major steps, performing the statistical design experiments, estimating the coefficients in a mathematical model, and predicting the response and checking the adequacy of the model. The design principle includes three type of combinations, the axial ( Three operating parameters as named as the amount of Na-Oleate ( The flocculation recovery or zeta potential ( The flocculation recoveries and zeta potentials obtained from the experiments, which consisted of six axial ( Experimental results were modeled using a Statistica 5.0 regression analysis program to determine the coefficients of the response function [Eq. The effects of operating variables on the flocculation recovery and zeta potential were determined by obtaining projections of the response functions on certain planes of known parameter values. As it is known, the flocculation recovery or the extent of flocculation depends on surface properties of particles and the nature of the flocs. The electrokinetic properties of the particles could be affected by the pH value of aqueous medium. Therefore, the control of pH values of aqueous medium is primarily important. The effect of pH values on the shear flocculation recovery and zeta potential (with and without 1.0 As it can be seen in Oleate adsorption on celestite surface increases the negative value of zeta potential of celestite ( In literature, oleic acid and their soaps have ionized forms as R In the light of above findings, the decreasing flocculation recovery at high pH values (pH 13) and low pH values (pH 4) may be based on the high electrostatic repulsive forces between mineral particles. Also, it can be shown in The variations of the shear flocculation recovery and zeta potential of celestite depending on the stirring speed and Na-Oleate amount at a constant MgCl As shown in As seen in  The effect of MgCl The flocculation recovery and zeta potential as a function of MgCl  It can be seen from The conclusions obtained from this study are as follows: The Box–Wilson statistical experimental design procedure was seen to be applicable in modeling to evaluate the effects of important variables on the flocculation recovery and zeta potential of agglomerated product in shear flocculation of celestite. Response function predictions determined by regression analysis were in a good agreement with the experimental results. The flocculation recovery decreased with an increase in stirring speed and the zeta potential of the celestite decreased with an increase in stirring speed depending on Na-Oleate amount and MgCl The flocculation recovery increased with the increasing Na-Oleate amount up to 1.5 The flocculation recovery and the negative zeta potential values of the celestite decreased with the increasing MgCl Considering flocculation recovery and zeta potential, the optimum Na-Oleate amount, MgCl