Nanoindentation was performed in the (001) and (110) planes of magnesium oxide single crystal. The results showed that pop-in events were observed in both cases, which were accompanied by acoustic emissions. The energy released in a pop-in event was related to the acoustic emission energy. The pop-in indicated the onset of plastic deformation. Using the Hertzian contact theory and the measured pop-in load, the critical shear stresses for slipping on the (001) and (110) planes were estimated. The stress value for the (001) plane was about 17% higher than that of the (110) plane.Magnesium oxide (MgO) single crystal is an excellent substrate material for the deposition of high quality high temperature superconductor thin films Nanoindentation has been well received as a valuable tool for measuring the elastic modulus and hardness of emerging materials This paper reports our investigation of the pop-in phenomenon and acoustic emissions and the associated deformation mechanism during nanoindenting on the MgO (0 Crystallographic planes of (0 Nanoindentation tests were conducted on a Triboindenter™ (Hysitron Inc., Minneapolis, MN) to study the critical shear stress for slipping in MgO crystals. A three-sided cube corner diamond tip of a nominal radius of 100 A pop-in event is a typical feature occurred during nanoindenting, which refers to a sudden jump, or discontinuity, of the indenter movement without distinct change in the applied load on the indenter Acoustic emission (AE) signals were monitored continuously using the TriboAE As the cube corner tip is sharp and easy to be worn, its radius is thus expected to be greater than the nominal value. To achieve the actual tip radius, the elastic part of the load–displacement curves obtained from the nanoindentation tests was fitted using the Hertzian contact between a semi-sphere (tip) and a planar surface with infinite boundary (specimen). The approximation of a spherical tip is reasonable because the indentation depth in the elastic deformation regime was less than 20  The onset load for pop-in was measured and plotted against the maximum indentation load in Acoustic emission (AE) was found to be accompanied with a pop-in event. Typical time histories of the AE signals obtained from the nanoindentation of (0 The relationship between the AE amplitude and the pop-in load is shown in As shown earlier, the onset load for pop-in is in fact the transition load from elastic to elastoplastic deformation during nanoindentation. Therefore, the pop-in load can be used to determine the critical shear stress for the onset of plastic deformation. In this work, the shear stresses on the main slip planes of the MgO single crystal (see When indenting on the MgO (1 The minimum and maximum pop-in loads were also used to estimate the possible variation of maximum shear stresses on different slip planes. The calculated stresses are summarized in As can be seen from Accompanied with the pop-in event was an AE signal emitted. It is well documented that the occurrence of an AE signal is often attributed to the abrupt change in deformation status in a material, such as phase transformation, fracture, cracking and dislocation avalanche. In this case, the generation of AE signal is most likely because of the deformation transition from elastic to elastoplastic modes under indentation. The magnitude of an AE emission is dependent on the energy level of the pop-in event. Therefore, it is not surprising to see that the amplitude of the AE signals was proportional to the pop-in load (see As reported previously, the shear stresses induced from the indentation load are responsible for the dislocation nucleation and gliding along the slip planes of brittle solids, such as MgO In this work, using the pop-in loads measured and the Hertzian contact theory, the critical shear stresses on the slip systems of MgO (0 Thus, the dislocations nucleation and gliding should first start on the 45° slip plane for the (0 The transition of deformation of MgO (0 Using the Hertzian contact theory and the pop-in onset load experimentally measured, the critical shear stresses for the onset of plastic deformation of MgO (0 ZGD and RKK are grateful to the financial support from the When indenting on the MgO (0 When indenting on the MgO (1 The distribution of elastic stress within a specimen underneath a spherical indentation with radius of Then the stress components in a slip plane along the coordinate axes of (