A large-flow microstructured reactor has been designed and fabricated using microfluidics and 3D printing technology. The finite element model is used in order to study the mixing processes of the species in the reactor. The flow is cut by convection and then mixed with chaos into several zigzag channels to induce recirculation mixing. The distribution of pressure, concentration and inlet velocity of each channel are obtained by solving successively the Navier-Stokes equation and the diffusion-convection equation in the steady state form. The results illustrate the effect of both flow rate and reactor geometry on hydrodynamics efficiency and the influence of flow rate and reactor geometry on fluid dynamics. The simulation reveals the combined contribution of chaotic mixing and laminar flow recirculation with Reynolds number (Re) 1 < Re < 400. In the experimental study, microfluidic solvent extraction of copper from sulfate solution containing Cu2+ and Fe3+ using DZ988N show the extraction efficiency of copper to be greater than 75% while the extraction efficiency of iron is less than 5% at high flow rates, with the characteristics of high extraction efficiency, large treatment capacity, and wide range of application.In the field of miniaturization, mixing processes occurring at microscale were first investigated by Mengeaud et al. In the field of hydrometallurgy, the extraction equipment has been developed rapidly in theoretical research and industrial application The studies on the application of microfluidic technology in solvent extraction have shown the advantages comparing to the conventional solvent extraction. Most microreactor used for solvent extraction can be divided into microchip, capillary, microstructural and industrial reactor according to their structure and treatment methods “3D-printing” refers to a set of additive manufacturing techniques, which can create solid three-dimensional (3D) objects layer-by-layer under precise digital control A rapid and efficient mixing is an important step in both multicomponent analytical systems and microreaction technology In order to better visualize the mixing mechanism of large flow microstructured reactor, numerical simulations were envisaged to study the mixing effects induced by chaos mixing and recirculation phenomena. To establish this model, the following assumptions are proposed: (i) the variations of the concentration do not modify the viscosity and the density of the fluid (diluted solutions and no free convection); (ii) the channel walls are assumed to be smooth (roughness and experimental imperfections are neglected); and (iii) the wall surface tension forces are neglected and the medium is assumed continuous. In all the models, the mixing process occurring at microscale is studied by solving the momentum and mass transport equations in two steps. First, the Navier-Stokes equation (Eq. The Reynolds number, which represents the ratio between momentum and viscous friction, is defined as: where ‘ All of the simulations were carried out using the multiphysics computational analysis software Comsol multiphysics based on the finite element method. The laminar flow Navier-Stokes equation is used to calculate the flow velocity field within the microchannel. The velocity field is used in the convective-diffusion equation to determine the concentration distribution of the species by mixing operation. Both algorithms are based on the Gauss inversion method. The global model consists of two coupled simulations, namely, fluid dynamics convection and diffusion simulation. We have set a normal velocity at inlet, ambient pressure at outlet and no slip along the walls. Numerical simulation of mixing even under laminar conditions usually results in high cell Peclet numbers. For high cell Peclet numbers the numerical diffusion constant, i.e. diffusion due to numerical errors, is comparable or even larger than the real diffusion to be studied in the simulation For all the simulations, the fluid considered is water. Initially the whole model was filled with water, whereas water entering through the inlet was marked with tracer particles to visualize the flow pattern. The particle tracking method is based on the advection of a scalar ‘‘marker’’ variable with the flow of a single homogenous fluid All the equations were solved using the finite elements method The boundary conditions of first simulation for the transient state simulation were set to a constant velocity of In order to integrate more microchannels into the reactor and to achieve an equilibrium of extraction faster, first of all, the one derived configurations featuring a periodic step (s) of 2.12 mm are envisaged. The following studies focus on the hydrodynamic effects induced by the zigzag configuration. The plot in  The large flow rate extraction can be realized by the superposition of 78 microchannels in a 3D printed large flow microstructure reactor. But the extraction effect of the reactor is difficult evaluated by hydrodynamics, which attributes to that the flow pattern can’t be monitored by microscope during the actual extraction process. Therefore, the fluid simulation was used to study the contribution of each chamber of 3D printed microstructured reactor to high extraction efficiency. Taking the symmetry of the geometry into account the flow field is completely characterized by the velocity field within one-half of the reactor as shown in The effect of inlet velocity on the velocity of each microchannel inlet is shown in From the simulated velocity results, when the inlet velocity has the minimum value As described in Sections 2.2 and 2.3.2, the main structure of a 3D printed high flow microstructure reactor consists of two fluid compartments (as shown in The binary STL format converted into a model is imported into the software FlashPrint of the 3D printer configuration and the pre-printing pre-processing is performed as shown in The extractant DZ988N (a mixture of 5-nonylsalicylaldoxime and 2- hydroxy-5-nonyl-acetophenoneoxime with a volume ratio of 1:1, 70%) was supplied by De Song Technology Co., Ltd., China. The Mextral DT100 (containing >99% aliphatics and <0.5% aromatics) was supplied by Hallochem Group Co., Ltd., China, and was used as diluent. The proportion was calculated in advance, then the aqueous phase in this experiment was prepared by dissolving CuSO The experimental setup is illustrated in Inductively coupled optical emission spectrometry (ICP-OES, Leeman prodigy 7, U.S.A) was used to measure the ion concentration of Cu and Fe in the aqueous phase before and after extraction (Cu The interfacial tension and viscosity of the fluid play an important role at small-scale dimensions. The relative strength of the two determines the shape of the droplets in the liquid–liquid slug flow which usually depends on the number of capillaries, defined as Equation The extraction efficiency is determined as follows The separation factor is calculated using the following equation Based on results of previous studies When the flow rate is less than 0.236 m/s, the extraction efficiency of copper decreases and then increases sharply. When the flow rate is greater than 0.236 m/s, the extraction efficiency of copper decreases gradually followed by gentle rise. When the rate is equal to 0.236 m/s, the extraction efficiency of copper is 90.26% while it is <5% for iron (see In general, the residence time of the fluid in the microchannel decreases as the flow rate increases. So when the extraction does not reach equilibrium conditions, the extraction efficiency decreases as the contribution of residence time to the extraction efficiency is greater than the recirculation effect caused by the flow rate. However, the result is the contradictory. At high flow rates, capillary numbers of 0.4, the stress caused by viscous stress is stronger than that caused by the interfacial tension. This can lead to large deformations of the drops and asymmetric shapes Mixing simulations of species in a zigzag microchannel and a large-flow microstructured reactor have been performed by a finite element method. The simulation results were as follows: when the Reynolds number is high, the mixing was effectively improved by the recirculation generated at each angle of the zigzag passage. The chambers of the large flow microstructured reactor effectively promoted the mixing of the fluid, such as the fluid in the fluid distribution chamber, the backflow caused by the resistance of the wall surface and the collision with the fluid entering the fluid distribution chamber at the center resulted in a chaotic flow in the chamber. The structure of the fluid distribution chamber not only realized the effective mixing of the two-phase fluid, but also avoided the delamination of the two-phase fluid by chaotic mixing. In addition, solvent extraction of Cu from sulfate solutions containing Fe at different flow rates using a large-flow microstructure reactor was carried out. The results showed that at high flow rates, the extraction efficiency of copper was greater than 75% and the extraction efficiency of iron was less than 5%. It was shown that the reactor could achieve a high extraction efficiency at high flow rates. The following further studies have been proposed: (i) increasing the number of microchannels and study the extraction at higher flow rates; (ii) extending the length of the channel and study the effect of residence time on the extraction efficiency. This work was supported by the