Fly ash from municipal waste incineration (MWI) is regulated as a hazardous waste because it contains considerable amounts of heavy metals and hazardous organic materials such as dioxin. Primary fly ash contains 0.8 wt.% Zn and 0.12 wt.% Pb, 1.37 wt.% Fe while secondary fly ash contains 40.18 wt.% Zn, 10.7 wt.% Pb and 2.12 wt.% Fe in addition to large amount of sodium chloride and potassium chloride. Therefore, it should be treated for detoxification or for the recovery of these metals as secondary resources. The recovery of these heavy metals by acid leaching using different acids such as sulfuric, hydrochloric and acetic acid was carried out. It was found that sulfuric acid leaching is effective where most of Zn was dissolved and also hydrochloric or acetic acid leaching was effective where most of Pb and Zn were dissolved. However, the acids dissolve also some impurities together with Pb and Zn from the fly ash. Therefore, alkaline leaching using NaOH as leachate was carried out. It was found that alkaline leaching suffers from low solubility of Zn. In order to improve Zn solubility, washing the solid residue using 2 or 5 wt.% HCl was carried out. It was found that almost all Pb (more than 97 wt.%) and about 68 wt.% Zn were leached from secondary fly ash by this method. This investigation has shown that hydrometallurgical treatment of fly ash by means of alkaline leaching followed by dilute acid washing is a potentially feasible method. A recommended flow sheet for alkaline leaching is proposed.Incineration of municipal solid waste (MSW) has two main advantages: reducing the volume by about 90% and reducing the chemical reactivity of hazardous organic compounds In Japan, there are three treatment methods for fly ash: (1) immobilization using cement. The concrete product from this method is deposited in controlled landfills. (2) Immobilization using new water soluble chelating polymer decreasing the volume of the ash to small size pellets. The small pellets produced from this process are sent directly to landfills or mixed with cement prior to being sent to landfill. (3) Melting of fly ash or mixture of fly ash and bottom ash at high temperatures in furnace to convert the majority of ash into slag that mainly consists of silica, aluminum, iron, and calcium and immobilizing small portions of heavy metals. This slag is used in road construction. During the melting process, the majority of the heavy metals are vaporized as volatile metal chlorides and concentrated in newly formed fly ash from the furnace (secondary fly ash, SFA). This method is being used in Japan on a large scale. Since some of the elements (i.e. Zn, Pb) are present in SFA at concentrations that allow an economic recovery, SFA could be considered as an “artificial ore”. It is actually used as feed material to some smelters to produce Pb and Zn. However, if the concentration of chloride ion is high, this SFA is unacceptable for smelting processes. In such cases, acid or alkaline leaching followed by solvent extraction would be an alternative recovery process. The leach residue could be easily processed into a bound road construction material. The leaching characteristics of the stabilized residue meet the most severe standards of the future Building Materials Decree in the Netherlands. This means the residue may be applied without any provision. In contrast, fly ash immobilized by cement, as mentioned earlier, could not even meet the less severe standards The aim of this study was to investigate Pb and Zn recoveries from primary and secondary fly ashes using different acidic leach liquors such as H The samples of primary and secondary fly ashes employed in this study were collected by the electrostatic precipitator and kindly donated by NKK, Japan. Metal contents, e.g. Zn, Pb, Fe, Mg, Al, Ca, Na and K, were determined using a Shimadzu model ICPS-1000 Π ICP/AES spectrometer after aqua regia (HNO For preparation of a sample for technological testing, the original sample was thoroughly mixed by the ring and cone method, quartered three times. Since the material was so hygroscopic that agglomeration was likely to be promoted, the samples were dried in a vacuum dryer overnight before the leaching test. Percentages of the metals were calculated on dry weight basis. Particle size distribution of dried samples of PFA and SFA was measured by using a particle size separator consisting of seven sieves to separate bulk fly ash into seven particle size ranges <20, 20–54, 54–75, 75–89, 89–106, 106–250 and >250 μm. The sieves were shaken on a sound wave hand sifter shaker to achieve fractionation. Ash samples (30 g) were placed in the top sieve. Particle size distribution of the fraction <20 μm was measured using dynamic light scattering ELS800, electrophoretic light scattering. X-ray diffraction was performed on the powder sample of as received PFA and SFA using Rigaku-Denki, model RINI 1000 X-ray diffractometer. Since the PFA and SFA contained high levels of Ca, Cl, Na and K that could negatively affect the leaching experiments, pre-washings were carried out by shaking 0.5-g fly ash with different volumes of de-ionized water (5, 7, 10, 13, 17 and 20 ml) for 20 h at 30°C, followed by filtration using glass fiber filter. Analysis of elements in the washing solution was carried out using the ICP/AES spectrometer. The washed fly ashes were dried using a vacuum dryer. Dried pre-washed fly ash was leached using different kinds of leach liquors such as HCl, H In case of acid leaching of PFA and SFA, the residues were washed twice with water. The total volume of the washes was equivalent to the volume of leach liquor. The leach liquor and the washing solutions were collected separately. In the case of alkaline leaching, the residues were washed twice using water, 2, 5 or 10% wt. HCl acid. The total volume of the washes was equivalent to the volume of leach liquor. The leach liquor (L) and the washing solutions (W  Most of the available literature reported that X-ray diffraction for PFA is quite complex. The reported information is quite different among authors due to this complication. For example, Warren et al. Similar to PFA, XRD of SFA is quite complex, and there is no literature available related to XRD of SFA. Total dissolution experiments were carried out using aqua regia at boiling temperature. The insoluble residue was double baked until totally dissolved. The results of chemical analysis are listed in The presence of high contents of salts such as those of Na, Ca, and K in the fly ash consumes a large amount of acid during the leaching step and also may complicate the separation between Zn and Pb from the leach liquor using solvent extraction process. Therefore, pre-washing was carried out on both PFA and SFA prior to the leaching step. The results of PFA and SFA pre-washing using different volumes of water are listed in To evaluate the leaching behavior of Pb and Zn from fly ash, different acid and alkaline leach liquors were tested. Series of leaching experiments were carried out using H The advantage of employing sulfuric acid was to dissolve Zn and other metals from the fly ash leaving Pb, which is insoluble in sulfuric acid solution. Pb in residue can be dissolved using different acid or alkaline solutions. Effects of leaching time, acid concentration and temperature on primary and secondary fly ash leaching were examined and the results are shown in   It is remarkable from The advantage of employing hydrochloric acid lies in its ability to dissolve all heavy metals in the PFA or SFA, generating leach solutions that contain both Pb and Zn, which can be separated by means of solvent extraction. The solid leach residue, free from heavy metals, could be suitable for solidification with cement. From the above-mentioned experiments using sulfuric acid, it was found that temperature and time had only a slight effect on the leaching behavior of both PFA and SFA, and additionally, 30°C and 5 min were enough for acid leaching. Therefore, the effect of only acid concentration was examined in this part. The results for PFA and SFA are shown in Similar to the leaching experiments using hydrochloric acid, the experiments using acetic acid were carried out at 30°C, L/S ratio=7 mL/g and for 60 min. The effects of acetic acid concentration on the leaching of PFA and SFA are shown in It is clear from the above-mentioned acid leaching test that acid leaching is effective and it can nearly quantitatively dissolve Pb and Zn in some cases. But, since many other impurities such as Fe, Mg and Al are also acid soluble, it needs the separation from Pb and Zn and purification processes. Alkaline leaching has advantages that only Pb and Zn, amphoteric metals, are dissolved in alkaline solution while other impurities remain in the solid residue, which makes the separation process more convenient. Sodium hydroxide solution was used in this study and main factors affecting the leaching process, namely sodium hydroxide concentration, L/S ratio and temperature were systematically tested. The filtration process was also examined. The effect of NaOH concentration varying from 0.25 to 5 N on the leaching of PFA and SFA was examined and the results are shown in The effect of L/S ratio was examined by carrying out a series of experiments in which L/S ratio was varied from 7 to 25 mL/g. In this experiment, 3 N NaOH was used as an example of high concentration NaOH and 0.75 N was used as an example of low concentration NaOH to elucidate the leaching behavior for PFA and SFA. As shown in A series of experiments was carried out to clarify the effect of leaching temperature on the dissolution of Pb and Zn using 0.75 N NaOH. The results are shown in The results reveal that Pb recovery was increased from 47 up to 80 wt.% in the case of SFA and from 20 up to 53 wt.% in the case of PFA by elevating temperature from 30°C to 90°C, respectively, which means that the reaction is endothermic and temperature-dependent. On the other hand, Zn recovery was very poor, no more than 8 wt.%, which means that the reaction was relatively temperature-independent in both cases of PFA and SFA. A white precipitate, the main components of which are Pb and Zn, appeared in the filtrate during the filtration and washing with water, which made the filtration process difficult. The amount of precipitate increased as NaOH concentration increased. Some amount of this precipitate remained in the solid residue insoluble in washing water, causing loss of these metals (Pb and Zn) during the filtration and therefore deteriorating the efficiency of the recovery process. The results of filtration followed by water washing are listed in The results of filtration process followed by washing using dilute HCl (0.1 N) are shown in As shown in  The presence of 40 wt.% Zn and 10.7 wt.% Pb in the SFA makes this an attractive material for simultaneous metal recovery and detoxification. Results from leaching and recovery of metal values from PFA and SFA have been presented. This is clearly more effective than alkaline leaching, which suffers from low solubility of Zn. It was found that 10 wt.% HCl dissolves 62.5 wt.% Zn and 39.5 wt.% Pb from PFA and 94 wt.% Zn and 77 wt.% Pb from SFA while leaching using 20 wt.% acetic acid dissolves 62 wt.% Zn and 94 wt.% Pb from PFA and 97 wt.% Zn and 98 wt.% Pb from SFA. But, unfortunately, the acids also dissolved some impurities such as Fe, Mg and Al. Alkaline leaching has the advantage that it dissolves only Pb and Zn from the fly ash leaving all other impurities in the solid residue. Alkaline leaching using 3 N NaOH followed by washing of the residue using 5 wt.% HCl dissolves 98 wt.% Pb and 68.6 wt.% Zn, while that followed by water washing dissolves 81.4 wt.% Pb and 35.3 wt.% Zn from SFA. This investigation has shown that leaching of PFA and SFA using alkaline solution is a potentially feasible method for simultaneous detoxification and metal recovery. The present work was financially supported in part by the Sumitomo Foundation (1997). The authors gratefully acknowledge the kind provision of ICP analysis by the Industrial Research Center of Saga, Japan and also the kind donation of sample of fly ash by NKK Japan.