Particle size reduction of dry granular material by mechanical means, also known as milling or comminution, is undoubtedly a very important unit operation in pharmaceutical, agricultural, food, mineral and paper industries. Particle size reduction rate was studied by conducting parametric studies experimentally and computationally using Discrete Element Method (DEM). Studies were performed with lactose non-pareils (spheres) to understand the effect of blade speed (rotational), feed rate, and blade-wall tolerance in a Wiley mill. The size and shape of the resulting progeny of particles were analyzed by sieve analysis and microscope/image analysis techniques respectively. The feed rate determines the hold up of material in sizing chamber and hence energy required for size reduction. Greater size reduction was observed at higher speeds and low feed rates owing to the greater centrifugal force experienced by the particles and longer mean free path lengths respectively. Particle shape analysis revealed fragmentation to be the dominant mechanism of size reduction at higher speeds. Increase in blade-wall tolerance resulted in accumulation of powder bed which was found to be significant at low impeller speeds. Single particle impact studies were performed using Dynamic Mechanical Analyzer to determine the force required to break the granule. In this method, the granules were subjected to a quasi-static compression process and the corresponding force was continuously recorded. The flow and fragmentation of non-pareils were simulated using DEM, an explicit numerical technique scheme, which calculates interaction forces between grains for each grain-grain contact, and the resulting motion of each grain. The fragmentation of each spherical particle was simulated using the Grady's Algorithm. The diameter of the resultant progeny particle was evaluated based on the fracture toughness of material, propagation velocity of longitudinal elastic waves in the material, and the induced strain rate.Particulate processing is commonly encountered in a wide variety of industries such as paper, ceramics, mineral, food and pharmaceutical manufacturing. It has been estimated that roughly 60% of all manufactured products require some sort of particle processing The particle size distribution of the material after comminution depends on complex interaction between the operational parameters and material properties. Surface characteristic and fracture pattern of size-reduced powder under an applied energy are influenced not only by the material properties, but also by the mill design and operation variables. The machine parameters depend on the mill involved and for impact mills typically consist of rotor speed, feed rate, screen size, impeller wall tolerance Unlike population-based models, which ignore particle–particle interaction, DEM explicitly considers inter-particle and particle-boundary interactions, providing an effective tool to model fracture and fragmentation phenomena. Fragmentation of particles was modeled using a composite-particle approach by Khanal This paper describes the use of discrete element method (DEM) for studying particle flow and fracture under impact in a Wiley Mill. The discrete element method (DEM), proposed by Strack and Cundall Comminution was performed on Lactose non-pareils obtained from Paulaur Corporation (Cranbury, NJ) of diameter 1.0–1.2 Breakage studies for single particles have been carried out using different approaches such as ultrafast load-cell The communition experiments were performed in a laboratory scale Wiley Mill (as seen in It is important to obtain an insight into the different ways in which impacts can generate damage to the granules. “Damage” or “breakage” is the general term referring to the reduction in mass of a mother particle due to external forces. Different mechanisms are involved in particle breakage which can be identified to some extent by performing shape analysis of particle fragments using an optical microscope equipped with a camera (Olympus SZ61) and image analysis software. These mechanisms involve: attrition caused by low magnitude normal forces acting on a particle, and abrasion caused by low magnitude tangential forces. Fracture/fragmentation of a particle is major internal breakage of a particle due the application of very large or repeated external forces. In fracture, there is drastic reduction in the size of particles To quantify the effect of operational parameters on size reduction, average particle size was computed by sieve analysis. The data obtained following sieve analysis was plotted in the form of d Numerical simulations of communition of spherical particles in the Wiley Mill were performed using the Discrete Element Method (DEM). DEM, originally developed by Cundall and Strack The flow chart of the simulation process is given in The major computational tasks of DEM in each time step are as follows: (i) add/delete contact between particles thus updating neighbor lists, (ii) compute contact forces from contact properties, (iii) sum all forces and torques on particles and update position and (v) determine the trajectory of the particle by integrating Newton's laws of motion (second order scalar equations in three dimensions) using a central difference scheme, Verlet's Leap Frog method. This described algorithm was successfully used (as a code written in C language and fine tuned to run in 32 and 64 bit Linux clusters) to model granular flow in realistic blenders Grady derived a simple model of dynamic fragmentation by balancing the available kinetic energy against the energy associated with the new surface created in the process. The fragments are supposed to be stress free upon their formation so that all the stored elastic energy is available for fragmentation Based on Grady's model the particle size of fragment following fracture is given by Eq. The strain rate is calculated from the rotational velocity of the impeller and the radial distance between the center of the rotation and the impact point. Following fragmentation, the resultant particles are considered as spheres, obeying the laws of conservation of total mass and momentum The granule breakage on impact to a rigid surface depends upon the material properties of the granule/surface and the impact velocity of the granule. It is plausible that for any given granule the specific force required to cause a failure to the granule is different in the static and dynamic loading (impact) conditions. The inequality between static and dynamic failure is largely due to the acceptance of creep (permanent deformation caused when certain materials experience low static forces) and high strain rate effects (increased resistance to deformation in some materials when exposed to high forces over very short periods). To investigate these effects, the breakage force using DMA under high loading rates of 0.5 In practice it is desired that the milling process generates a narrow particle size distribution. Fragmentation can often lead to a broad size distribution. Mostly it is the impeller speed and the mechanical properties of material that determine the prevalent mechanism of size reduction and hence the final size. Based on material properties harder materials, do not display much attrition at lower impeller speeds whereas brittle particles undergo in some amount of attrition or surface wear. At higher speeds size reduction by impact may dominate due to catastrophic fragmentation. To investigate the effect of speed, experiments were conducted at 600, 850 and 1140 In this equation y At each impeller speed, there exists a value of feed rate at which the mill behaves efficiently. At very high feed rates, the capacity of mill may increase beyond its nominal value thereby compromising its comminution rate and increasing power consumption of mill. As a consequence, the particle size distribution at the outlet becomes wider. To understand the effect of feed rate, experiments were performed at three different levels; 60 600 1140 The blade clearance is determined by the intrusion of four knives from the inner wall of mill. A larger value can result in continuous rolling of powder bed and hence significantly diminish the rate of size reduction. On the other hand a very small tolerance can result in formation of excessive fines. For these experiments a clearance of 2.5 600 1140 The flow and fragmentation of particles in the Wiley mill are simulated using DEM as described in 600 1140 The effect of feed rate is studied by creating apertures of different sizes at the base of the hopper. The operational speed during the simulation is 600 600 1140 The effect of impeller wall tolerance was approximated by creating long hammers (1800 glued particles) and short hammers (3200 glued particles) thereby providing a tolerance of 2.5 and 4 The presented DEM model can predict the size of the all the particle present in the mill as a function of time. From the simulation data the average particle size was obtained and compared to the experimentally determined average particle size (d50) collected at different time intervals. The data were plotted as a variation of the dimensionless size (ratio of the average size to the initial size) against the elapsed time as a function of speed ( The experimental and computational methods were developed to study comminution of granular materials in a Wiley mill. The mechanical and flow properties of lactose are taken into account in order to develop a fundamental understanding of their effect on milling performance. DEM simulations were used to examine the breakage rate in the lactose nonpariels processed in a lab scale Wiley mill. It was found that the speed and mass flow rate play an important role in comminution of powder bed. Very high mass flow rates resulted in flood feed conditions at lower speeds that caused the mode of breakage to change from fragmentation to attrition. Increasing the impeller wall clearance decreased the particle size reduction at both the impeller speeds. However the effect on communition was more significant at lower impeller speeds. The low velocity of particles attained at lower speeds caused them to settle at the base of mill than impact the wall thereby reducing fragmentation. In these simulations the breakage algorithm does not depict the effect of attrition on particle size distribution as it does not account for mechanism of surface removal. Nevertheless the simulations could still capture the difference in breakage behavior upon changing the experimental operational conditions. This suggests that simulations can be used to direct future experimental design hence providing a better understanding of the process. The current study establishes the feasibility of using DEM based fragmentation model to study comminution. Moreover the computational model showed reasonable similarity to the trends gathered from the experiments. To facilitate thorough understanding of the communition process a future study focusing on the steady-state behavior of milling would be addressed. Moreover the current DEM model can be easily modified to determine the stress distribution  We gratefully acknowledge the support of NSF-Center for Pharmaceutical Processing Research (CPPR) for funding this project. I would also like to thank undergraduate students Nathan Bergman, Gretchen Stern, Jennifer Nguyen, Kirandeep Kaur, Rhandin DeSantis, Nabia Mouli, Amanda Savath, and Emily Butterworth for assisting in the experimental research. We are grateful to Profs Fernando Muzzio and Robin Bogner for sharing the basic DEM code and the Imaging Analysis Facility respectively.