In this work, the possibility of bottom-up creation of a relatively stable aqueous hydrocortisone nanosuspension using microfluidic reactors was examined. The first part of the work involved a study of the parameters of the microfluidic precipitation process that affect the size of generated drug particles. These parameters included flow rates of drug solution and antisolvent, microfluidic channel diameters, microreactors inlet angles and drug concentrations. The experimental results revealed that hydrocortisone nano-sized dispersions in the range of 80–450nm were obtained and the mean particle size could be changed by modifying the experimental parameters and design of microreactors. The second part of the work studied the possibility of preparing a hydrocortisone nanosuspension using microfluidic reactors. The nano-sized particles generated from a microreactor were rapidly introduced into an aqueous solution of stabilizers stirred at high speed with a propeller mixer. A tangential flow filtration system was then used to concentrate the prepared nanosuspension. The nanosuspension produced was then characterized using photon correlation spectroscopy (PCS), Zeta potential measurement, transmission electron microscopy (TEM), differential scanning calorimetry (DSC) and X-ray analysis. Results showed that a narrow sized nanosuspension composed of amorphous spherical particles with a mean particle size of 500±64nm, a polydispersity index of 0.21±0.026 and a zeta potential of −18±2.84mV was obtained. Physical stability studies showed that the hydrocortisone nanosuspension remained homogeneous with slight increase in mean particle size and polydispersity index over a 3-month period.Recently, formulations containing nano-sized drug particles have been found to be promising candidates for enhancing the solubility of poorly water soluble drugs ( Techniques of drug nanosuspension preparation can be categorized into two principle classes; top-down and bottom-up technologies. The “top-down” technologies are the mechanical comminution processes of larger drug particles, as in milling (jet mills and pear-ball mills) and homogenization (high-pressure homogenizers). The “bottom-up” technologies begin with the molecules which are dissolved and then precipitated through non-solvent addition as in supercritical fluid (SCF) technology, spray-freezing into liquid process, evaporative precipitation into aqueous solution (EPAS) and liquid solvent change process ( As indicated by the name, the term microfluidics involves fluid in small scale channels (micro) devices ( The aim of this study is to investigate the possibility of producing a nanosuspension of hydrocortisone, a practically water insoluble glucocorticoid drug ( Hydrocortisone, Hc (98%), hydroxypropylmethylcellulose, HPMC (3.5–5.6 cP, 2% in H The equilibrium solubility of Hc in water, ethanol, and in different ethanol/water combinations was determined by the shake flask method. Excess amounts of hydrocortisone were added to 2 Streams of an ethanolic solution of Hc and water were pumped through a set of microreactors (Epigem Ltd., UK) with different channels diameters (0.1, 0.5 and 1 Drug solution (10 The Hc nanosuspension was concentrated at 20 The Hc content in the nanosuspension was assayed spectrophotometrically at 247 The particle size of the produced dispersed systems was analyzed by photon correlation spectroscopy, PCS (Zetasizer Zeta potential of the nanosuspension was measured by a zeta meter (Zetasizer, Nanoseries, Malvern Instruments, UK). The measurement was performed after dispersion of the samples in water. The zeta potential (ζ) was calculated from electrophoretic mobility using Henry's equation ( Samples of unprocessed Hc were examined using scanning electron microscopy by the Quanta 400 SEM (FEI Company, Cambridge, UK) after being mounted onto a graphite layer on an aluminum cylinder under vacuum. Characterization of the external morphology of Hc nano-sized particles in suspension was determined using transmission electron microscopy (TEM). A drop of Hc nanosuspension was adsorbed on the surface of copper grid and dried at ambient temperature. Owing to the poor conductivity of organic samples, negative staining with an aqueous 2% magnesium uranyl acetate solution was applied for 2 A differential scanning calorimeter (TA Q2000, USA) was used to obtain DSC thermal profiles of hydrocortisone. Samples of processed and unprocessed Hc (≈4 X-ray powder diffraction patterns of the dried Hc samples were obtained using a Siemens D5000 diffractometer (Siemens, Germany), using Cu Kα radiation ( Physical stability of the obtained Hc nanosuspension was investigated at 25 In order to obtain an indication of the amount of drug to be precipitated under experimental conditions, the solubility of Hc in different ethanol–water combinations were determined. The experimental ethanol/water solubility profile of Hc at 25 As illustrated in In a preliminary study, the impact of different processing parameters of the microfluidic precipitation process (flow rates of solvent and antisolvent, internal diameters of channels, inlet angles and drug concentration levels) on particle size was investigated at room temperature (25 Results also generally indicated that as the internal diameters of the microreactor channels reduced, a slight decrease in particle size was observed. This could be attributed to higher mixing performance as a result of a higher share rate ( Sharper inlet angles (10 and 25°) resulted in slightly reduced particle size ( Other results (data not shown) revealed that slightly smaller sized particles resulted from higher drug concentrations, which may be attributed to higher supersaturation levels and nucleation rates obtained. In an order to prepare Hc nanosuspension, the Hc nano-sized particles (prepared using a 10°, 0.5 A mixture of stabilizers (0.2% HPMC After nanosuspesion formation, another crucial step for potential pharmaceutical application is to increase drug concentration. This process was carried out in this study using tangential flow filtration (TFF). In TFF, also known as cross flow filtration, the feed stream passes parallel, rather than perpendicular as in normal filtration, to the membrane face as one portion passes through the membrane (permeate) while the remainder (retentate) is recirculated back to the feed reservoir. The flow of sample solution across the membrane surface in TFF sweeps away aggregating molecules that form a “membrane-clogging” gel. Furthermore, TFF can be easily scaled up and conducted under aseptic conditions (  The crystalline structure of Hc before and after nanoprecipitation was assessed by comparing the DSC thermal and XRPD profiles of unprocessed (raw Hc) and processed Hc (the powder recovered after centrifugation and drying of the nanosuspension). The DSC profiles showed a sharp peak at 224 The storage stability of nanosuspensions is important, as finely dispersed particles in an aqueous phase have a high tendency to agglomerate together leading to the formation of larger aggregates. Ostwald ripening (the process of growing of larger particles on the expense of smaller particles due to enhanced solubility of the latter) presents an additional stability problem. Furthermore, due to the relatively high energy of the amorphous state, particles may relax to the lower-free energy crystalline form. The determination of the zeta potential (property related to the double electric layer on the surface of colloidal particles) of a nanosuspension is essential as it provides an indication about the physical stability of nanosuspensions ( Microfluidics technique has been described as a simple method for drug nanosizing. The results have shown that a relatively stable aqueous hydrocortisone nanosuspension can be obtained using a bottom-up approach using microfluidic reactors. Particle size is directed by modifying the processing conditions and design of microfluidic reactors (internal diameters, and inlet angles). Changes in flow rates were found to have the dominant effect on size of the generated particles. The tangential flow filtration technique was efficient in concentrating the drug nanosuspension. These results illustrate the opportunity to formulate hydrocortisone in nanosuspension form as a drug delivery system for use in ophthalmic preparations. Further work on the ocular bioavailability of the prepared hydrocortisone nanosuspension is being carried out. Hany Ali would like to thank the Egyptian Government (Ministry of High Education, Egypt) for financial support.