To control the degradation of Magnesium alloys, uniform nano-hydroxyapatite (n-HAP) coating was applied on AZ31 Magnesium alloy using both direct and pulse voltage electrodeposition methods. The in vivo corrosion of AZ31 with n-HAP coating was investigated by electrochemical tests. The results showed that by the pulse electrodeposition method brushite (DCPD or CaHPO4·2H2O) was not formed. Also, the results indicated that the degradation of AZ31 Magnesium alloy substrate and the amount of hydrogen evolution was significantly decreased after surface was modified by n-HAP coating, so that the rate of hydrogen evolution decreased from 0.1 to 0.01mlcm−2
                     h−1.Nowadays titanium alloys and stainless steels are widely used as temporary implant devices. Numerous research works aimed at evaluating compatibility of said alloys with human body showed that these alloys release cytotoxic ions which are harmful for the body AZ31 Magnesium alloy with elemental composition of (Wt%) 96.3% Mg, 2.8% Al, 0.9% Zn was cut into rectangular specimens of 15×10×2 The electrolyte for deposition of n-HAP was prepared by mixing a solution of 0.042 The morphology of the coating was identified by a high resolution scanning electron microscope (FESEM model Hitachi SU 8040, 40 A three-electrode corrosion cell was used for electrochemical measurements. The counter electrode was made of platinum and the reference electrode was saturated calomel electrode (SCE). The exposed area of the working electrode (AZ31 alloy coated with HAP) to the solution was 1   When direct potential is applied, concentration polarization prevents the super saturation needed for deposition of hydroxyapatite. But in the pulse electrodeposition method, the relaxation time in pulse power allows ions to diffuse from the bulk of the solution to the cathode surface and therefore reduce the concentration difference. Thus by pulse electrodeposition of n-HAP, the post-treatment of deposited coatings for elimination of DCPD is not required; a very important point, since research has shown that hydroxyapatite is the most stable calcium phosphate in the body which could help the damaged organ for longer times before being decayed  Results of the amount of hydrogen evolution is shown in Nano-hydroxyapatite (n-HAP) coating was applied on AZ31 Magnesium alloy by the electrodeposition method. Results showed that pulse electrodeposition coating did not require post-treatment for elimination of dicalcium phosphate dehydrate (DCPD) and they did not have micro-cracks. Electrochemical tests showed that pulse electrodeposition coating improved the degradation behavior of AZ31 Magnesium alloy and also the amount of the hydrogen generated in simulated body fluid (SBF).