Goltas limestone is used in cement production. The design of blast pattern at Goltas limestone quarry is given in two steps. Firstly, the prediction of mean fragment size from Kuznetsov's equation Secondly, measuring mean fragment size by image analysis and, afterwards, changing pattern in order to get the required fragmentation. By changing the blasting geometry, the optimum blast configuration can be found which will give the required result. Therefore, the crusher efficiency can be improved and the cost of crushing can be reduced in the cement production by a reduced mean fragment size. Blasted limestone is send to crushers to reduce its size. So, producing fragments as fine as possible reduces the work of crushers. Also, the finer the muck, the more material that can be crushed, and the lower the operating cost per unit will be. Liner costs, repair and maintenance will decrease and the crushing rate per hour will increase. The decrease in bridging time at crushers is two-fold in that it also cuts down on truck delay time at the crusher, which in turn gives higher truck and shovel productivity. The capacities of loading machines are also increased by eliminating oversize boulders In the assessment of blasting results rapid analysis of muckpile fragmentation is important. So meaningful conclusions from blasting trials can be drawn and equipment productivity can be related to muckpile properties. Once the reliability of the method has been established then the blasting trials can be meaningfully compared. Optimal blast design by more accurate, and rapid fragmentation assessment is required by the industry. The keynote paper at Fragblast-5 workshop given by Cunningham Image analysis can only process what is shown on the image, which represents only the surface of the objects. Particle sizes that can be analyzed usually fall into a certain range. In other words, big boulders could be divided into smaller ones and fine particles could be grouped into bigger particles. This segmentation problem is very common with almost every digital image processing system, Fine sizes are often underestimated. The capability of commercial Split technique, designed to predict size distribution of muckpiles from photographic or video image data, is improved by Kemeny et al. More accurate assessment of mass distribution from surface distribution. The assessment of relative size differences in the distribution by greater accuracy. Liu and Tran The cost of blasting is directly proportional to the amount of explosive used. The cost of blasting may be defined as the cost of placing sufficient explosive energy into the ground to break the rock to an effective degree of fragmentation. Chosen smaller burden and spacing (pattern) increases fragmentation, and increases specific charge and the blasting cost. AN–FO is used in the blast holes as a main blasting agent and its quantity changes with the blast hole diameter. AN–FO has the following two advantages, which are its lower cost and completely fills the hole when loaded by bulk, resulting in an excellent coupling The degree of fragmentation is found to be proportional to the quantity of AN–FO used, and the mechanical strength and the structural condition of the limestone such as the presence of bedding planes, joints and the orientation of discontinuities The estimation of fragmentation in blast muckpiles by means of standard photographs is described by Van Aswegen and Cunningham The steps in designing a blast pattern were: Determination of fragmentation from basic theory: Determination of burden distance, for a chosen hole diameter. Prediction of mean fragment size from Kuznetsov equation. Application of the two fragmentation measurement techniques to Goltas, (i) standard photographic technique, (ii) automated image analysis technique. Changing blast design in order to get the required fragmentation. The compressive and tensile strengths of limestone are tested. The compressive strength is 90–140 Earlier research work on determination of correct burden and in turn the size of the hole diameter using slab blasting technique (by single blast holes) in discontinuous limestone has shown that the burden distance, Bench height=12 Cunningham (1987)    Qe—mass of explosive per blast hole being used (11  Vo—rock volume (m The predicted mean fragment size is calculated as Measuring fragmentation by image analysis (a) standard method and (b) automated system (Split) is given below. The estimation of fragmentation in blast muckpiles by means of standard photographs was first introduced by Van Aswegen and Cunningham Firstly, a brief description and creation of standard photos are given and then the fragmentation prediction (the value of The Rosin–Rammler distribution equation is generally accepted as approximating the size distribution of rock in blast muckpiles. The equation is as follows: Seven model rockpiles from Goltas limestone quarry each weighing 100 Close-up photograph images digital photographs were captured by a digital camera (Kodak DC 265) from each rockpile of different To provide a basis for the estimation of fragmentation in photographs of real muckpiles, a set of prints was made up for each value of The following example shows how a muckpile photograph can be analyzed by the standard photographic technique. The size of the two ball images on the muckpile photograph ( Three standard photos (with known fragmentation) were sent to Split Engineering Company (USA) to check the accuracy of its assessment. A table tennis ball (37.5 The image of a muckpile photograph ( A good correlation in The mean fragment sizes predicted from standard photo method was 23 The blasting trial with a new pattern is carried out in the field and the fragmentation is measured. The analysis by standard photographs gave more uniform distribution A brief method of blast design is given in the paper. The crusher efficiency is improved and the cost of crushing is reduced by a reduced mean fragment size of limestone. The Kuznetsov equation is applied to predict the mean fragment size, A higher correlation is observed between predicted and measured values of mean size with the increase in index of uniformity, The predictions are better for both standard photograph method and image analysis systems, for more uniform distributed fragments. Also the difference between measured and predicted values of mean fragment size is reduced as uniformity improves. At present, the standard photographs can be used together with automatic systems for more accurate fragmentation prediction.