Data reconciliation in hydrometallurgy process is less common than in mineral processing, due to the more complex mathematical formulation of the problem to describe the process balances that can include multiphase and multi-component reactions and mass transfer. In this case, to avoid thermodynamic violations, the use of inequality constraints, in addition to the classical equality mass and energy balances, can be mandatory. This paper presents two case studies of data reconciliation for a gold extraction plant using the direct optimization of a nonlinear objective function and nonlinear constraints that includes equality and inequality equations. The problems are solved using a sequential quadratic programming algorithm and the results demonstrate the applicability of this approach to data reconciliation in hydrometallurgical processes generating reliable results, without mass balance or thermodynamic violations.Data reconciliation is a classical technique that has been widely applied in processing engineering to improve the accuracy of measurements by reducing the effect of random errors. In spite the indubitable benefit of this systematic technique in process monitoring, analysis, control and optimization, the application of data reconciliation in hydrometallurgical process and particularly in gold processing plants has received much less attention and is the object of this study. Since the seminal paper of The mineral industry and academia recognized earlier the applicability of data reconciliation to improve plant audits based on more accurate data; as a result, this technique has been an active research area in mineral processing for more than thirty years ( Even though data reconciliation is a classical technique, nowadays a lot of attention is still given to simultaneous data reconciliation and parameter estimation, dynamic data reconciliation, detection of gross error data, and the use of robust optimization schemes to deal with large problems and the nonlinear constraints, as in the case of the problem analyzed in this work ( Data reconciliation in hydrometallurgical processes is not widely used as in mineral processing and only a very few applications can be found in the literature. This lack of application in such an important area seems to be related to the difficulty in the problem formulation and especially in the reliability of the reconciled results. A problem that can arise in hydrometallurgical processes data reconciliation is the violation of thermodynamic constraints with the reconciled data; for instance, in solvent extraction, the concentration of the chemical species extracted from the aqueous phase after the reconciliation must be higher at the organic phase exit than in the entrance, while the concentration in the aqueous phase must be lower at the exit than the entrance, which in presence of larger random errors may not hold. An analogous problem is found in heat exchangers data reconciliation where the high and low temperature levels in the cooling fluid and in the hot fluid cannot be modified by the reconciliation, as exemplified by Data reconciliation in gold processing plants is particularly challenging because the metal ore content is very low and its distribution is non-homogeneous; in addition, many plants treat ores from different sites with very different characteristics and steady-state operation cannot always be guaranteed. Only two systematic studies of data reconciliation in gold processing plants are available in the literature. In the first case,  This paper presents the first study on nonlinear data reconciliation of industrial hydrometallurgical plants that deals simultaneously with nonlinear equality and inequality constraints and upper and lower bounds for the variables. The main objective of this paper is to provide an alternative approach for steady-state data reconciliation in hydrometallurgical processes that gives accurate and reliable results. The method is illustrated with two case studies that correspond to different configurations of a cyanidation plant. In the first case, the process includes precipitation and filtration and more emphasis is given to the leaching-recovery section of the plant. In the second case, the process includes recovery by activated carbon and the grinding-classification-leaching section of the plant is analyzed in more detail. This paper is organized as follows. Section The steady-state data reconciliation can be defined as a nonlinear programming problem, which means an optimization problem with a nonlinear criterion and linear and nonlinear constraints with equality and inequalities. The weighted least square is a widely used criterion for data reconciliation, and the constraints are the material and energy balance equations and other physical relationships. Mathematically, the steady data reconciliation problem can be expressed as follows ( If there are no inequality constraints the problem given by Eq. In the case of linear or bilinear constraints (i.e. the product of two variables) the problem has an analytical solution ( In the more general case where there are constraints of equalities and inequalities, this problem can be formulated using the augmented Lagrange function, defined as follows: Nonlinear programming, also known as mathematical programming or general constrained optimization, is a generic designation that includes the optimization problems that have nonlinear objective functions ( The solution of the nonlinear programming problem given by Eq. The problem given by Eqs. The solution of nonlinear programming problems can be challenging because the feasible regions can be non-convex or discontinuous and the objective function can have local minima ( In the next sections, the two case studies of data reconciliation in gold hydrometallurgy related to the Doyon Mine plant (Cambior, Inc.) are presented. This plant is located in Northwestern Quebec (Canada) and treats an ore from the Abitibi mineralized zone. The first case corresponds to the plant 1980s configuration for which a previous data reconciliation study was done by The data set used in this case study is one of the data sets presented by The measured variables and the corresponding assumed relative standard deviation of the measures (RDS The studied sections of the Doyon plant 1980s configuration (see The mass balances for the main species in each node of the graph (see In this work the original nonlinear constraints are used directly without transformation, and the complete set of equality and inequality constraints used is presented in Data reconciliation of the measured variables and the estimation of the unmeasured variables were performed by solving the system of nonlinear equations given by the objective function (Eq. The measured flow rate, solid concentration and ore and liquid gold content in the plant streams were used as preliminary estimates for non-measured ore and solution flow rates throughout the plant using the ore and solution mass balance for each node. The resulting system of nonlinear equations was solved using the Gauss–Newton method. The data reconciliation problem, which has 57 variables, 28 linear constraints and 18 nonlinear constraints, was numerically solved using the nonlinear programming software NPSOL v.5.0 (  The plant configuration used in the second case study is presented in The data set used in this second case study was collected in the plant during a sampling campaign performed on December 1998 at the grinding, classification, dewatering and primary leaching sections (see The measured variables and the corresponding assumed standard deviation of the measures (RDS Note that for most of the non-measured variables, identified by “NA”, the relative standard deviation (RSD The studied sections of the plant (see The mass balances for the main species in each node of the graph (see Initially the measured flow rate, solid concentration and ore and liquid gold content in the plant streams were used for a preliminarily estimation of the non-measured ore and solution flow rates throughout the plant using the ore and solution mass balance for each node. The resulting system of nonlinear equations was solved using the Gauss–Newton method. Data reconciliation of the measured variables and estimation of the unmeasured variables were performed by solving the system of nonlinear equations given by the objective function (Eq.  This paper presents two case studies of nonlinear data reconciliation for two different configurations of a gold extraction plant. In the first case the plant includes grinding, leaching, thickener, filtering, and precipitation sections while in the second case a more detailed description of the grinding, classification and primary leaching sections is done. The data in both cases were measured during sampling campaigns and reconciled by using the direct optimization of a nonlinear objective function and nonlinear constraints that included equality and inequality equations. The problems were readily solved using a sequential quadratic programming algorithm and the results demonstrated the applicability of this approach to provide reliable and accurate results in gold processing plants data reconciliation without thermodynamic violations. It is expected that the technique illustrated in this work will be useful to solve other data reconciliation problems in gold extraction plants and also to solve data reconciliation in other complex hydrometallurgical processes. This research was supported by (i) Ore mass balance: (i) Ore mass balance: