In flotation systems, it is generally assumed that the bubble size presents an inverse correlation with the gas hold-up. However, this hypothesis is not systematically true. The focus of this work is to study the effect of solid particles on the bubble size distribution and gas hold-up, as well as the correlation between the bubble size distribution and gas hold-up in column flotation. Experiments were conducted in two and three-phase systems using a laboratory flotation column (5.6cm internal diameter, total height of 650cm), and mixtures of quartz (hydrophilic gangue) and talc (naturally hydrophobic mineral), classified in four different size fractions. For the studied flotation system, experimental results are compared with literature correlations and models to reveal that hydrophobic particles affect the gas hold-up through three different mechanisms modifying the Sauter mean diameter and rise velocity, namely (1) surface interactions, and the joint antagonistic effect of (2) bubble loading and (3) coalescence.In flotation systems, gas dispersion plays a critical role for particle collection (recovery) and froth mass transport (selectivity). To evaluate this effect at the industrial scale, the bubble surface area flux ( The gas hold-up is another important parameter used to characterize the hydrodynamic conditions of bubble column reactors (   To date, most of the laboratory-based research has been conducted on gas-water (two-phase) systems. Since one cannot conclude that results in two-phase systems necessarily apply for slurries, ‘surrogate’ solids such as talc, silica and coal have been used. Although such synthetic feed material are idealized/simplified compared to natural ores, they provide important insights about the nature of three-phase systems in flotation ( Little is known about the physical mechanisms causing the observed macroscopic effects. The majority of literature on the topic points to a decrease in gas the hold-up with increasing solids concentration ( Most of the literature focuses on the effect of solid particles on a single hydrodynamic parameter, either the gas hold-up ( Experimental data were generated using a fully automated laboratory column flotation set-up depicted in A frit-and-sleeve sparger, detailed below, was located at the bottom of the column to provide steady air flow rates through local PID controllers. Temperature and absolute pressure sensors were mounted at the bottom of the column to compensate for standard condition flow rate measurements (referred to a given temperature and pressure). A conductivity-based sensor ( The column was operated under automatic control of froth-depth, gas rate, shearwater and feed flow rate. The froth zone level was measured and controlled using a sensor exhibiting eleven conductivity cells as described by The frit-and-sleeve sparger consisted of a porous stainless steel ring concentrically installed within a cylindrical sleeve ( This kind of sparger thus provides an additional degree-of-freedom to control the bubble size with the water velocity, i.e. In order to continuously monitor the bubble size, the McGill bubble viewer ( Parameters of the bubble size distribution – such as the Sauter mean diameter, mean and variance at actual conditions (i.e. not corrected to reference conditions) – were then determined by image analysis. With this regard, the Circular Hough Transform (CHT)-based algorithm presented by Quartz particles were used as a hydrophilic gangue (+ For its constant efficiency over a rather long period of time, a polyglycol frother (F150) was selected. The superficial gas and feed velocities were set at 1 All experiments were in closed circuit, i.e. the tailings and concentrate streams were recirculated to the feed tank. Shearwater was drawn from the top of the feed tank through a strainer to avoid fine particles to be entrained. The test procedure consisted in preparing the slurry feed with a given size fraction, and conducting the trials one after the other with increasing frother concentration. The procedure was repeated for every size fraction.  The most significant impact of solids is to increase the bubble size. This becomes apparent when introducing 4% (w/w) (40% talc and 60% quartz) in the presence of 25  At lower frother concentration (5  According to the above-mentioned hypothesis, talc surfaces exposed to bubble surfaces would play an important role on the adsorption of frother. Frother up-taken by particles is obviously not a desirable effect in flotation. However, it must be taken into account in cases where a finer grind size is considered to improve the degree of liberation, as it will lead to a larger total surface of particles in the slurry. Similarly, increasing the solids fraction in a flotation circuit, for instance to increase the production rate, could also lead to higher frother consumption. To check the variation of frother up-take by increasing particle total available surface, a set of tests have been conducted. Four talc particle size-classes (53/75 It is worth emphasizing that neither the effective frother concentration nor the frother up-take was directly quantified in this work. The frother concentration was simply calculated from the amount of F150 added to the volume of water. However, the proposed experimental design allowed qualifying frother up-take indirectly, and therefore characterizing the effect.  It is worth mentioning with this regard that talc particles exhibit a flattened shape, entailing that the surface area to volume ratio remains approximately constant regardless of the particle size. This could explain why finer mineral feed apparently does not seem leading to increased frother up-take and bubble coalescence. Tests 4 to 9 in Different hypotheses have been postulated in the literature to explain the influence of hydrophobic particles on gas hold-up. The effects would be to: promote bubble coalescence leading to a reduction of the gas hold-up ( lead to bubble break-up, which in turn increases the gas hold-up ( increase the apparent viscosity, and thus the gas hold-up ( increase bubble wake entrainment effects which decrease the gas hold-up ( change the radial gas hold-up and flow profiles, thus leading to a reduction of the global gas hold-up ( increase the weight of bubbles once attached, and therefore increase the gas hold-up ( Each of these hypotheses is examined hereafter. Bubble coalescence occurs due to the bridging effect of particles ( In the present study, a frit-sleeve sparger was used. The mechanism of frit-sleeve spargers does not permit particles to induce bubble coalescence during the generation stage since the water injected to the sparger does not contain solid particles. Therefore, the observed coalescence would occur along the collection zone. Coalescence-induced break-up occurs as one form of coalescence mechanism in which very fine bubbles are generated along with very large ones ( On the other hand, it was suggested that in a three-phase fluidization system, ‘sharp’ particle edges could penetrate and break some bubble surfaces. This would cause bubble to break-up into smaller ones, thus leading to an increase in the gas hold-up. The coexistence of both large and small bubbles was demonstrated above in Based on the equation of Increased slurry viscosity through the addition of solid particles can stabilize the bubble wake. This, in turn leads to an increase of the bubble velocity, and thus a reduction of the gas hold-up ( In the present work though (4% w/w solids or α Using a laboratory flotation column (4.47 The radial gas hold-up was not evaluated in the current study. However, more recently It must be emphasized that The added weight following hydrophobic particle attachment is known to reduce the bubble velocity and consequently increase the gas hold-up ( In addition to loading, it is possible that the bubble shape also plays a role in the difference of rise velocity, images taken revealing that larger bubbles tended to be less spherical than smaller ones (see Among the presented mechanisms, coalescence (and coalescence/induced break-up) and bubble loading can be used to explain the variations of gas hold-up with the bubble size for two and three-phase systems as depicted in By manipulating the shearwater rate, different bubble size distributions can be generated while the gas rate and frother concentration remain constant (25 Adding solids produced coarser and more spread out bubble size distributions (see On the other hand, comparing the obtained results of the gas hold-up in three-phase and two-phase systems also revealed that in a few cases, notwithstanding coarser bubble size distributions, the addition of solids led to higher gas hold-up values. The increased weight of bubbles explains this behavior – in spite of the effect bubble shape favoring faster rise velocity for less spherical bubbles –, i.e. the bubble rise velocity decreases as bubble loading increases. Results from the test conducted at different frother concentrations in the presence of solids lead to the same conclusion: coalescence and bubble–particle attachment are the main mechanisms explaining how the presence of solids affect the ties between the bubble size and gas hold-up. Reducing the frother concentration below the CCC value revealed the effect of having larger bubbles in the swarm. At the same time, decreasing the number of bubbles due to coalescence increases bubble loading, and thus decreases the rise velocity.   Very similar bubble size distributions – and gas hold-up – were measured at 15 and 25 Experimental results presented in this paper allowed studying the effect of solid particles on bubble size distribution and gas hold-up, but also on the relationship between these two hydrodynamic characteristics jointly. Different mechanisms introduced from the literature were analyzed leading to the following conclusions: surface interactions: the effect of solid particles on the bubble size distribution can be explained by coalescence through (1) the bridging effect of solid particles and/or (2) the adsorption of frother by hydrophobic surfaces; bubble weight and volume: the effect of hydrophobic particles on the gas hold-up is determined by a combination of two antagonistic mechanisms: (1) bubble loading, which reduces the rise velocity and (2) bubble coalescence, which increases it; resulting effect: increasing the bubble size will not lead to the reduction of the gas hold-up if the effect of the bubble loading outweighs that of the bubble size on the rise velocity. Characterizing the role of each one of these two mechanisms to determine the gas hold-up remains to be investigated. The authors acknowledge the financial support of 