The removal of manganese, cobalt and nickel from industrial ammoniacal wastewaters has been studied using natural Cuban clinoptilolite modified to ammonium form. Favorable conditions to obtain the ammonium-clinoptilolite form (NH4-CLI) were determined from detailed kinetic studies of NH4
                     + ion-exchange in the clinoptilolite (CLI). Obtained NH4-CLI was characterized by IR spectroscopy and X-ray diffraction. NH4-CLI was used to remove Mn2+, Co2+ and Ni2+ from mixed aqueous solutions. The thermodynamic study on ion-exchange equilibrium between NH4
                     + in solution and these metallic cations from metal-clinoptilolite forms was performed. Increasing the temperature promotes the NH4
                     + exchange, which is controlled by the intracrystalline diffusion of ions inside the clinoptilolite. However, the activation energy of this process is not very high. This provides a wide temperature interval for the NH4-CLI efficient production. NH4-CLI removes Co2+ and Mn2+ by ion-exchange selectively at room temperature, being poorly selective to Ni2+, producing a well ions separation. Increasing the temperature greatly enhances the NH4-CLI capacity to remove these metal cations, which is substantially higher to Ni2+. The obtained values for the free energy variation and equilibrium constant lead to outline that the selectivity order of the metal-clinoptilolite forms by NH4
                     + at room temperature is Mn-CLI > Co-CLI > Ni-CLI. Divergences in the behavior to these exchange processes are associated with difference in the interaction of cations with their ligands in solution as well as into zeolite framework, and accessibility at ion-exchange sites inside clinoptilolite.Zeolites are nanostructured materials with a crystalline structure negatively charged. This structure is formed by interconnected cavities and channels, which contain adsorbed molecules and cations with movement freedom. Ion-exchange is one of their most important properties, which has allowed the development of new materials and different applications such as the harmful heavy-metal removal from industrial wastewaters. This property allows removing and recovering the cations from very low concentration in solutions, which is very outstanding with respect to others used techniques such as the precipitation of low-soluble substances Generally, the treatment of residual industrial effluents has required great amounts of material. Natural zeolites are effective and low-cost materials with great availability and selectivity by cations, which make them the suitable materials for this purpose. To know the characteristics of the wastewaters to be treated and the behavior of the zeolite during this use are essential aspects to resolve before starting the applications. This has incidence on a possible zeolite modification to increase the treatment effectiveness. Then, the study on its modification (cationic, surface, etc.) should be performed to design an efficient treatment process. However, deep studies about the zeolite modification for this purpose are not usually shown or referred. Also, the reported studies on cations removal are commonly performed using single ion solutions. However, the cations are normally presented inside multi-component or mixed solutions for the real conditions. In addition, integrated studies about the cation removal from aqueous solution and later its elution (recuperation) from exchanger where they were retained are scarce. The majority of the studies have been carried out in a separated or nonintegrated mode, i.e., either as removal or elution studies. Studies on Ni In previous studies, we have reported the removal of nickel and other heavy metals from wastewater of nickel hydrometallurgy industry using natural Cuban clinoptilolite. The effect of the presence of metal amino-complexes, carbonate anions, temperature, ion concentration and formation of low-soluble phases during the ion-exchange with watery solutions of metal single salts (no mixed) has been the subject of such studies The present study was performed to acquire information on the modification of the clinoptilolite from Caimanes deposit, Cuba, to obtain its ammonium form, and to study their behavior in the removal of nickel, cobalt and manganese cations by ion exchange. The kinetic of NH Purified zeolite samples were obtained from the zeolitic rock of Caimanes deposit (Cuba) by application of a procedure similar to described elsewhere The modification of the clinoptilolite to its ammonium form (NH  X-ray diffraction (XRD) patterns and Infrared (IR) spectra of the samples, before and after the treatments, were obtained. XRD patterns were recorded in a Philips PW 1218 diffractometer equipped with a curved graphite monochromator, using Co Studies were performed in dynamic form into a tubular column with dimensions of 1 cm diameter and 20 cm high. Through this column with 1 g of NH Isotherms of the ion exchanges between NH The main thermodynamic parameters, such as thermodynamic constants and free energy, associated with these ion-exchange reactions were determined. Ni-CLI, Mn-CLI and Co-CLI forms were obtained by treatment of CLI with NiCl The results of NH The ion-exchange is a purely diffusive process of cations exchanged between both phases, which involve two steps: external diffusion and internal (intracrystalline) diffusion. The main kinetic parameters associated with these exchanges were determined using a similar procedure to that of references The diffusion rate (dQ/dt) and diffusion rate constant (R The diffusion rate constant (B) and diffusion coefficient (D) related to the internal diffusion were determined from normalized kinetic curves (see In the literature are available several reports The equation The NH To determine D was used the area (I In order to get more criterions about that the rate-limiting step of NH The relation 9 The activation energy (E It can be observed (see The ion-exchange is not defined only by the qualities of ion exchanged from solution; the ions from zeolite play an important role too. A considered general criterion is that both charge and size to the exchanged ions should be similar. However, difficulties exist to apply this criterion to the exchange between NH The obtained results permit to establish favorable conditions to prepare the NH Summarizing, NH IR spectra and XRD patterns of the obtained NH In coherence with IR spectra, XRD patterns ( The obtained results on removal of Ni The metal concentrations of the used mixed aqueous solutions are similar to the composition of ammoniacal wastewaters of the nickel hydrometallurgical industry Similarly to as was abovementioned for the ammonium, metal cations are into exchanged solution as hydrated ions. It is known that Ni From obtained results can be inferred that Ni In literature are scarce the studies that report information about the sites that Co The isotherms of exchange between NH The ion-exchange isotherms show the ionic composition changes for the zeolite (M-CLI) as a function of the experimental conditions at 25 °C and atmospheric pressure, presenting the NH It is observed that Co A common behavior can be observed to all isotherms, i.e. the zeolite selectivity to the exchanged ions changes when the NH Standard free energy variation (ΔG To determine these thermodynamic parameters, the graphs known as Kielland plots were obtained ( The The values of the input data used to calculate the parameters of binary interaction are presented in the The values of the K The negative values obtained for ΔG This NH From studies of both NH The obtained results are important to design processes for the removal and recuperation of cations of these metals from mixed watery solutions and ammoniacal wastewaters where NH Extensive studies were performed on modification of the clinoptilolite from Caimanes deposit, Cuba, by NH The authors want to acknowledge technical assistance from E. Aparicio, I. Gradilla, E. Flores and F. Ruiz of CNyN - UNAM. This research was supported by