For the recovery of rare earth elements, we previously synthesized an adsorbent consisting of silica gel particles modified with diglycol amic acid groups. In the present study, we optimized the amount of diglycolic anhydride used for the synthesis of the adsorbent and evaluated the utility of the adsorbent in terms of its selectivity for rare earth metal ions, the rate of metal ion adsorption, and the desorption behavior of the ions. We also analyzed the adsorption isotherms of the metal ions. The optimum amount of diglycolic anhydride was 4.0mmol/gram of amino silica gel, and this amount resulted in the introduction of 1.04mmol of diglycol amic acid groups per gram of adsorbent. The introduction of the diglycol amic acid groups had little effect on the specific surface area and average pore size of the silica gel particles, and we attributed the high adsorption rate to the large pore size. Acid concentration strongly influenced the adsorbability of rare earth metal ions, which were readily desorbed by 1mol/L mineral acid. The adsorption isotherms for the lanthanoids at an initial pH of 1.0 were determined with the Langmuir equation. The adsorption capacities of the adsorbent for the heavy rare earth metal ions were higher than those for the light ones.The rare earth elements—a group of seventeen elements consisting of scandium, yttrium, and the lanthanoids—are used in cutting-edge technologies such as electric cars, smart phones, and wind turbines. In 2013, about 90% of the global production of rare earth elements occurred in China ( The recovery of rare earth elements from ores and scraps requires selective separation of dilute rare earth metal ions from solutions that also contain high concentrations of base metal ions such as iron, copper, and zinc. Iron in particular is typically present in ores at high concentrations and often prevents the recovery of rare earth metal ions ( Precipitation and solvent extraction are established techniques for metal recovery and are especially useful for large-scale operations at high metal ion concentrations. In contrast, adsorption can be used to recover metal ions even from low-concentration sources by means of relatively simple processes. Many adsorbents for rare earth elements have been studied ( With the goal of designing a practical adsorbent, we considered ligands, supports, and methods for introducing ligands onto supports. In previous work ( In the present study, we determined the optimum amount of diglycolic anhydride for the synthesis of the adsorbent and evaluated the practicality of the adsorbent in terms of selectivity for rare earth metal ions, adsorption rate, and desorption behavior. We also obtained and analyzed the adsorption isotherms of the rare earth metal ions by using the Langmuir equation. Diglycolic anhydride and 3-(ethylenediamino)propyl silica gel (EDASi) were purchased from Tokyo Chemical Industry. Stock solutions of metal ions were prepared from the following reagents as received from the specified suppliers: lanthanum(III) chloride heptahydrate, cerium(III) chloride heptahydrate, neodymium(III) chloride hexahydrate, samarium(III) chloride hexahydrate, gadolinium(III) chloride hexahydrate, terbium(III) chloride hexahydrate, dysprosium(III) chloride hexahydrate, holmium(III) chloride hexahydrate, erbium(III) chloride hexahydrate, ytterbium(III) chloride hexahydrate, iron(III) chloride hexahydrate, copper(II) chloride dihydrate, zinc(II) chloride (Wako Pure Chemical Industries), praseodymium(III) chloride heptahydrate, thulium(III) chloride hydrate, lutetium(III) chloride hexahydrate (Strem Chemicals), and europium(III) chloride hexahydrate (Tokyo Chemical Industry). All chemicals and solvents used for the synthesis of the adsorbent were used without further purification. Deionized and distilled water was used in all the procedures. Silica gel particles modified with diglycol amic acid were prepared as described in our previous paper ( Adsorption and desorption experiments for all rare earth metal ions were carried out in a batch system. A typical adsorption experimental procedure was as follows: the adsorbent (0.05 To determine the optimum amount of diglycolic anhydride for adsorbent synthesis, we carried out the synthesis with various amounts of anhydride (3, 4, and 6 We conducted dysprosium adsorption tests in the initial pH range of 0.5 to 2.5 with adsorbents prepared with the diglycolic anhydride amounts listed in The specific surface areas, average pore sizes, and pore volumes of EDASi and EDASiDGA were obtained from the nitrogen sorption measurements ( The results of adsorption tests conducted with mixed solutions of rare earth and base metal ions and EDASiDGA at HCl concentrations ranging from 0.01 to 6 To investigate the effect of the concentration of a sodium salt (chloride, nitrate, or sulfate) on dysprosium adsorption, we carried out adsorption experiments at an initial dysprosium concentration of 1 We also investigated the time course of dysprosium adsorption on EDASiDGA and found that the adsorption equilibrium was reached after about 10 We carried out desorption tests of dysprosium from EDASiDGA using HCl and H The isotherms for adsorption of the lanthanoids (except promethium) onto EDASiDGA at 298 We fitted Eq. We optimized the amount of diglycolic anhydride for the synthesis of silica gel particles modified with diglycol amic acid groups and evaluated the selectivity of the modified adsorbent for rare earth metal ions, as well as the adsorption rate and desorption behavior of the metal ions. The major conclusions are as follows: The optimum amount of diglycol amic acid was 4.0 The introduction of the diglycol amic acid groups had little effect on the specific surface area and average pore size of the silica gel particles, and the pores of the modified silica gel particles were large enough to result in a high adsorption rate. The concentration of acid in the solution strongly affected the adsorbability of rare earth metal ions, and metal ions adsorbed on EDASiDGA were easily desorbed with 1 The presence of sodium chloride or sodium nitrate had no effect on the adsorption of rare earth metal ions. The adsorption capacities of EDASiDGA for the heavy rare earth metal ions were higher than those for the light metal ions. The results indicate that EDASiDGA is a promising adsorbent for the recovery of rare earth elements from low-grade ores and scrap; this adsorbent meets the requirements for a practical adsorbent, such as adsorbability at low pH, easy desorption, and high adsorption rate.