Highveld parent coal was crushed into three size fractions, namely: 5mm–75mm, 5mm–53mm, and 5–37.5mm. The crushed samples were subjected as feed coals to heating in a packed-bed reactor to investigate the influence of particle size reduction on char formation and reactivity. Coal petrography was utilized to assess the maceral and char formation distribution of the feed coal samples and their packed-bed combustion unit’s products. The maceral distribution of the feed coal fractions differed from the typical run-of-mine Highveld coal petrographic composition; the smallest size fractions (−53mm and −37.5mm) having the highest vitrinite content. Maceral distribution was further divided into total reactive maceral particles, total inert maceral particles, and total inertinite particles. The −53mm and −37.5mm feed coal samples had the highest total reactive maceral particle content. Inert char particles dominated in the packed-bed combustion unit samples due to high inertinite maceral group content of the Highveld coals. Unexpectedly, the −53mm feed coal sample had higher content of total reactive maceral particles and lower content of total inert maceral particles; whereas the −37.5mm feed coal sample had high content of reactive maceral particles and high content of total inert maceral particles. This variation in maceral group content lead to the −53mm feed coal sample being more reactive (producing more devolatilized and porous chars and thus reacting faster with reactant gases) than the −37.5mm feed coal sample. This was due to inert maceral particles restricting the −37.5mm feed coal sample from fully softening and reacting with reactant gas. This was also this was attributed to variation in volatile propagation of the three particle sizes. This confirms that a feed coal with smaller particle sizes results in different reactivity, char formation, and better heat transfer during combustion than the feed coal with large particle size range. Another important factor that plays a role in combustion is maceral association; it was observed that maceral distribution has a great influence on the char formation and its reactivity more than coal particle size.South African energy supply is dominated by coal which represents 65.7% of the primary energy supply followed by crude oil with 21.6%, renewable and waste at 7.6% and gas at 2.8%. Nuclear, hydro and geothermal and solar energy constitute the smallest portion with 1.9%, 0.4% and 0.1% respectively, currently; solar is due to expand significantly Burnout properties of coal depend on many factors such as rank, maceral content Physical properties of coal macerals have been extensively described by Stach et al. The Highveld parent coal was crushed into three size fractions namely: 5 Each feed coal sample was used in a fractional size of −75 The packed-bed combustion unit consists of a lined steel jacket with an outside diameter (OD) of 0.8 The required amount of coal was homogenized and loaded using buckets into the pipe reactor to minimize segregation of the packed coal bed. The packed coal bed was heated with a gas burner to get the coal to a temperature where it will burn in an air atmosphere. After an hour, the gas burner was turned off and the air flow was introduced to allow the coal to ignite. Upon reaching a bottom temperature of 600 The bed temperature was controlled by adjusting the air and nitrogen flow through the bed. The ash bed temperature was controlled at 1250 After cooling, the reactor was tilted onto its side and opened up like a coffin to allow visual inspection and sample taking of the bed profile (as illustrated in Proximate analysis was conducted to determine the volatile matter, fixed carbon, and ash in the lump coal samples and reactor generated samples. This analysis was conducted at the Sasol R&D Laboratories, following standard methods Routine preparation of petrography coal blocks was conducted following ISO 7404/2:1985 The petrographically determined carbon form analysis (as reported in Bunt et al. Proximate analysis data is reported in Maceral group analysis was performed on the Highveld parent coal sample. Since South African coals are known to be inertinite-rich, it was a necessity to further subdivide this maceral (inertinite) into different subgroups (as illustrated in The rank value in Maceral distribution of the Highveld run of mine coal sample differs from that of the three feed coal particle size fractions after crushing and sieving. This is evident in An increase of both inert and reactive semifusinite and inertodetrinite to the smaller particle size is observed. The reason to the variation of semifunite and inertodetrinite is that the latter occurs as discrete grains or fragments (2–50 On average, South African coals (southern hemisphere) are characterized by a high inertinite content (some semi-reactive), with vitrinite content averaging around 20 to 40%; liptinite ranges from 0 to 6%. When the semi-reactive inertinite particles are included as part of the total reactive maceral content, the total reactive maceral particle content can be as high as the northern hemisphere coals; even though the basic coal constituents may vary In Devolatilized coals are coal particles that are partially heated, and under the reflected light microscope, a color change (increase in gray-scale towards white), cracks, and pores are observed. These particles are still gray compared to white chars (as shown in  Char is a carbonaceous rich material that is produced during pyrolysis. The char particles can be divided into four subgroups depending on their physical appearance under the microscope. Chars are white in appearance compared to devolatilizing coal particles. Porous chars are comprised of pores moderately or largely distributed in the char particle. Some of the porous chars have thick walls or thin walls depending on the initial maceral. The porous with thin walls are believed to have formed from vitrinite since they soften and swell relative to inertodetrite. Porous char with thick walls appears to be formed from reactive semifusinite, or where there was a banded coal with vitrinite in the middle and inert semifusinite (as shown in South African coals are inertinite-rich with less vitrinite and liptinite and the inertinite maceral group can be divided into reactive and non-reactive inertinite sub-macerals. In this case, it is expected that porous char particles will evolve from vitrinite, liptinite and reactive inertinite macerals In the middle of pyrolysis zone, an increase in the formation of porous char particles is visible due to temperature rise. Thereafter, a decrease in porous char particles is observed throughout to the ash bed zone due to reaction of the char particles with reactant gas resulting in char consumption and ash formation. Again, the −53 These findings can be linked to the high content of total reactive macerals in the feed coal of the small particle size but the −53 It must also be taken to account that the volatile propagation of the three particle size ranges will vary because small particles will experience heat faster than the large particle size. Thus, the smaller particle size will appear to generate volatiles when compared to larger particle size (as illustrated in Furthermore, when the samples were taken out from the reactor, they were ground to −1 It was expected that the −37.5 Inert char particles are chars that appear white in color under the microscope; they do not have pores, or have less than 20 When looking at Formation of inert char samples is highly visible for the −53 As expected, inert char particles were dominant in all size fractions. This is due to the fact that the Highveld parent coal has high inertinite content. Reduction of the feed coal particle size from the normal −75 The authors thank Sasol Technology, Research & Development for project funding, and the people working at Coal Processing Technologies for their assistance in the preparation of chars. Special thanks to the Coal and Carbon Research Group at the University of Witwatersrand for their consistent support. This work supports work by the National Research Foundation (NRF). Any opinion, finding or conclusions or recommendations expressed in this material are those of the author(s) and therefore the NRF does not accept any liability in regard thereto.