Copper and Fe are redox-sensitive metals, and their isotopic compositions may potentially record changes of oxidation conditions in high-temperature magmatic Ni–Cu mineralization systems. High-precision Cu and Fe isotope data for sulfides (chalcopyrite) and whole-rock samples of the Tulaergen magmatic Ni–Cu system (NW China) were analyzed to evaluate redox-induced fractionation during segregation of sulfide melt from silicate melt and internal fractionation within segregated sulfide melt. Sulfide mineralization includes disseminated and massive types, with massive sulfides being further divided into Cu- and Fe-rich ores. Numerical modeling using mass-balance and Rayleigh equations indicate that disseminated sulfide mineralization was generated from a common parental magma, and massive sulfides were formed by monosulfide solid-solution (MSS)–residual sulfide liquid fractionation. During segregation of sulfide melt from silicate melt, crystallization of olivine and pyroxenes with sulfide segregation, in an Fe2+-dominated phase, led to the incorporation of lighter Fe isotopes in these minerals. The residual silicate melt became progressively more oxidized, with δ56Fewhole-rock values increasing as melts evolved. The disseminated chalcopyrite formed in early stages has lighter Cu and heavier Fe isotopic compositions than the disseminated sulfides formed in later stages due to charge-balance effects. Minor accumulated Ni–Cu sulfide melt was fractionated into an Fe-rich MSS cumulate and a Cu-rich sulfide liquid. MSS crystallization caused the oxygen fugacity of the evolved sulfide liquid to increase, which was accompanied by increasing δ65Cu and decreasing δ56Fe values in chalcopyrite. Iron isotopic compositions of the whole system were shifted towards heavier values from MSS cumulate to the evolved sulfide melt. Numerical modeling using the Rayleigh equation indicates that the fractionation factors α65Curesidual sulfide melt–MSS and α56Feresidual sulfide melt–MSS are ∼1.0011 and ∼1.0005, respectively, during internal fractionation within segregated sulfide melt. This study demonstrates that redox reactions play a key role in Cu and Fe isotope fractionation in high-temperature magmatic Ni–Cu mineralization systems. Furthermore, Cu and Fe isotopes can be used to trace concealed orebodies. Elevated δ65Cu and δ56Fewhole-rock values may indicate Cu-rich mineralization potential, while light Cu and Fe isotopic compositions imply favorable hosts for disseminated and Fe-rich orebodies in mafic–ultramafic intrusions.Redox reactions occur in various geological processes, with some being recorded by Cu and Fe isotopic compositions due to their redox-sensitive affinities. For example, Fe isotopes have been applied to tracing Archean and Paleoproterozoic ocean oxidation states ( Mantle melting and crystallization of basaltic magma cause no detectable Cu isotope fractionation ( The formation of magmatic Ni–Cu deposits commonly involves large volumes of magma in dynamic systems ( This study focuses on the Tulaergen magmatic Ni–Cu mineralization system, NW China. We present new platinum-group element (PGE) data for the Tulaergen intrusion to constrain mineralization processes. Redox-induced Cu and Fe isotope fractionation during segregation of sulfide melt from silicate melt and internal fractionation within segregated sulfide melt are also discussed. In addition, fractionation factors (α The Central Asian Orogenic Belt (CAOB) is one of the longest and largest accretionary orogenic belts on Earth, extending for more than 5000 km between the Siberian, North China and Tarim cratons ( The Tulaergen deposit contains 120,000 tonnes (t) of Ni and 100,000 t of Cu with average grades of 0.6 and 0.4 wt.%, respectively ( The samples for this study, including disseminated and massive sulfides, were collected from underground adits in the Tulaergen magmatic Ni–Cu mineralization system ( Whole-rock chalcophile element (PGE, Cu, and Ni) compositions and S contents of sulfide ores were determined at the National Research Center of Geoanalysis, Beijing, China. Copper and Ni contents were determined by digestion of samples in HF + HNO Sulfide ores were crushed to minus-80-mesh, from which chalcopyrite was separated using conventional heavy liquid techniques, and then hand-picked under a binocular microscope. Sample digestion, column chemistry, and instrumental analysis followed established methods ( About 1 mg of chalcopyrite separates and 25 mg of basalt standard BHVO-2 (US Geological Survey) were digested in double-distilled HF + HNO Copper isotopic ratios were determined using a Thermo Scientific Long-term external reproducibility for δ Whole-rock Fe isotope measurements were conducted at the China University of Geosciences, Beijing, China, and chalcopyrite Fe isotopic compositions were analyzed at Pennsylvania State University, USA. Procedures for sample dissolution, column chemistry, and mass spectrometry were as described by Fresh, unaltered, and mineralized rock and chalcopyrite samples were crushed and milled to produce a powder for Fe isotope analysis. Whole-rock sample (1–5 mg) and peridotite standard JP-1 (20 mg) powders were dissolved in double-distilled HF + HNO Whole-rock and chalcopyrite Fe isotopic compositions were determined using Thermo Scientific The Fe isotopic compositions are expressed in the usual per mil (δ) notation, relative to the reference material IRMM-014: The long-term external reproducibility of δ Whole-rock chalcophile element (PGE, Cu, and Ni) compositions and S contents, and chalcopyrite and whole-rock Cu and Fe isotopic compositions, are given in All disseminated samples have similar IPGE (Ir-group: Os, Ir, and Ru) and PPGE (Pt-group: Rh, Pt, and Pd) contents ( The Cu/Fe ratios of chalcopyrite samples in the Tulaergen deposit show a restricted range from 0.96 to 1.16, consistent with the Cu/Fe ratio of stochiometric chalcopyrite (∼1). The δ The formation of magmatic Ni–Cu mineralization systems commonly involves two processes: (1) immiscible segregation of sulfide melt from silicate melt; and (2) internal fractionation within segregated immiscible sulfide melts ( The mass-balance equation of Disseminated sulfides have not undergone hydrothermal overprinting or internal fractionation within sulfide melt ( The difference in redox sensitivity between Cu and Fe is indicated by the isotopic compositions of disseminated chalcopyrite ( The Fe isotopic composition of magmatic Ni–Cu mineralization systems is potentially affected by several mechanisms. Iron is found in both silicate (e.g., olivine and pyroxene) and sulfide minerals (e.g., pyrrhotite, pentlandite, and chalcopyrite), and whole-rock compositions appear to provide optimum estimates of its overall isotope signatures. Partial melting of mantle (δ In a closed magmatic system, Fe The influence of the Fe isotopic composition of chalcopyrite (Fe As discussed in Numerical modeling using mass-balance and Rayleigh equations indicates that Fe- and Cu-rich massive sulfides were generated by MSS–residual sulfide liquid fractionation ( Crystallization of MSS could increase the oxygen fugacity of the residual sulfide liquid (e.g., Fractionation factors of Cu and Fe isotopes between fractionated melts and MSS can be estimated on the basis of the data acquired in this study. As discussed in The choice of Cu and Fe isotopic compositions of the initial sulfide melt is vital in these numerical calculations. On the basis of modeling by mass-balance and Rayleigh equations ( The formation of magmatic Ni–Cu mineralization involves a series of stages: (1) mantle melting; (2) magma ascent; (3) segregation of sulfide melt from silicate melt and sulfide enrichment; and (4) silicate mineral crystallization and possible internal fractionation within segregated sulfide melt ( Significant segregation of sulfide melt from silicate melt happened in a shallow magma chamber ( Sulfide droplets segregated in early stages accumulated at the base of the magma chamber and were fractionated into an Fe-rich MSS cumulate and a Cu-rich sulfide liquid as oxygen fugacity increased. The ionic state of chalcopyrite underwent slight transformation from Cu This study indicates that redox reactions drive Cu and Fe isotope fractionation in high-temperature magmatic Ni–Cu mineralization systems. Furthermore, Cu and Fe isotopes may thus be useful in tracing concealed orebodies. Elevated δ The formation of the Tulaergen magmatic Ni–Cu mineralization system involved segregation of sulfide melt from silicate melt and internal fractionation within segregated sulfide melt, with significant changes of oxidation state occurring during these processes. During segregation of sulfide melt from silicate melt, crystallization of Fe Accumulated sulfide melt fractionated into an Fe-rich MSS cumulate and a Cu-rich sulfide liquid. MSS crystallization caused an increase in oxygen fugacity of the evolved sulfide liquid, which would slightly transform chalcopyrite ionic states from Cu This study demonstrates that redox reactions drive Cu and Fe isotope fractionation in high-temperature magmatic Ni–Cu mineralization systems. Furthermore, Cu and Fe isotopes can also be potentially used to trace concealed orebodies in magmatic Ni–Cu mineralization systems. This study was financially supported by the