An expression is derived for the plate height attributed to an analyte band transported with uniform flow through a narrow straight microchannel having arbitrary cross-section geometry. The derived expression represents the plate height as a function of the retention factor, parameters describing the adsorption dynamics, and bulk and interfacial diffusion coefficients of the analyte. Additionally, the plate height depends on a dimensionless geometrical factor, for which an expression is obtained to be valid for arbitrary cross-section geometry. Considering different examples (circle, parallel planes, annulus, arbitrary circumscribed polygon, rectangle and ellipse), it is shown that cross-section geometry strongly affects the band broadening. It is discussed how the plate height depends on the system parameters.In recent years, there have been a growing progress in developing high performance and fast analytical techniques, which employ microchannels for separation and transportation of substances, analytes ( In microchannels, a nearly uniform flow of an analyte is produced by applying an electric field to the channel ends. The latter gives rise to an electrically driven hydrodynamic (electro-osmosis) flow having a uniform velocity within the channel except for the thin double layer regions adjacent to the wall. Such an electro-osmotic flow provides nearly uniform convective flow of analyte. The charged analyte molecules are additionally involved in a migration motion—electrophoresis that, under certain conditions, has nearly uniform velocity as well. For many cases of great practical importance, the weak non-uniformities of the electroosmotic and electrophoretic flows do not lead to a noticeable band broadening. For such cases, the plug-flow model yields a good description of the behavior of an electrically driven band of an analyte ( Dealing with uniform flow of an analyte, the major mechanism of band broadening is associated with a violation of the thermodynamic equilibrium of the analyte adsorption at the channel walls ( The influence of adsorption kinetic on the band broadening was analyzed by many authors ( It should be noted that, very often, the channels employed in microfluidic techniques have cross- section geometries substantially different from the already analyzed examples, In this section, we will give some comments regarding the plate height approach and present three expressions derived in literature for the plate height attributed to the plug-flow channels with circular, plane parallel, For sufficiently long and narrow channels, mathematical modeling of the concentration band behavior is often conducted in terms of the plate height, For a given initial distribution, For any particular system, obtaining an expression for the plate height amounts to rearranging the analyte mass balance equations in order to reduce them to Eq. Now, we will present the earlier obtained expressions that describe the plate height, The plate heights obtained by According to First, we will consider transport of an analyte with uniform velocity through a homogeneous stationary medium. We will assume two possible states for the analyte molecules: (i) stationary state (molecules belong to the stationary medium where they can be involved in diffusion) and (ii) mobile state (molecules move with a uniform velocity, By using certain approximations, the set of Eqs. Considering Eq. Eq. Now, we will analyze behavior of an analyte band which is transported with a uniform velocity, For the analyte inside the channel, the mass balance equation can be written as In presence of the interfacial diffusion, the mass balance for the species in the adsorbed state is described by The set of Eqs. Now, we will show that, using the set of Eqs. Taking into account Thus, introducing the substitution given by Eqs. It can be shown that, for a sufficiently narrow channel ( It is remarkable that the geometrical factor Thus, for a sufficiently narrow plug-flow channel, the plate height is described by Eq. Finally, we will represent the plate height in the form which is convenient for analyzing the role of cross- section geometry In the present section, using Eqs. Prior to discussing the behavior of the function given by Eq. Let us, now, consider several straight channels having equal hydrodynamic radii, Assuming that Applying to Eq. For perfect retention ( For the case of zero interfacial diffusion ( According to Eq. The existence of a minimum for the curves of Finally, we will mention the possibility to observe the existence of a maximum for The paper has focused on the band broadening of analyte whose uniform flow is created through a long straight microchannel with arbitrary cross-section geometry. In terms of plate height, According to Eq.  The authors gratefully acknowledge the financial support from the Natural Sciences and Engineering Research Council of Canada.