This study investigated the phase transformation of the flaky shaped Ni–Mn–Ga powder particles with thickness around 1μm prepared by vibration ball milling and post-annealing. The SEM, XRD, DSC and ac magnetic susceptibility measurement techniques were used to characterize the Ni–Mn–Ga powders. The structural transition of Heusler→disordered fcc occurred in the powders prepared by vibration ball milling (high milling energy) for 4h, which was different from the structural transition of Heusler→disordered fct of the powders fabricated by planetary ball milling (low milling energy) for 4h. The two different structures after ball milling should be due to the larger lattice distortion occurred in the vibration ball milling process than in the planetary ball milling process. The structural transition of disordered fcc→disordered bcc took place at ∼320°C during heating the as-milled Ni–Mn–Ga powders, which was attributed to the elimination of lattice distortion caused by ball milling. The activation energy for this transition was 209±8kJ/mol. The Ni–Mn–Ga powder annealed at 800°C mainly contained Heusler austenite phase at room temperature and showed a low volume of martensitic transformation upon cooling. The inhibition of martensitic transformation might be attributed to the reduction of grain size in the annealed Ni–Mn–Ga particles.Ni–Mn–Ga ferromagnetic shape memory alloys (FSMA) have drawn much attention in the past decades because of their large magnetic field induced strain (MFIS) and high response frequency Recently, spark erosion A button-like polycrystalline Ni The microstructure of the powders was observed using a FEI Quanta200 scanning electron microscope (SEM) equipped with energy dispersive spectrometry (EDS) analyzer. X-ray diffraction (XRD) analysis was carried out at room temperature using a Panalytical X-pert PRO diffractometer with Cu Kα radiation. A Perkin-Elmer Diamond differential scanning calorimeter (DSC) was used to investigate the annealing behavior and martensitic transformation. The temperature dependence of low-field ac magnetic susceptibility was also measured to determine the martensitic transformation and magnetic transition.   Different from the disordered fcc structure obtained in the present ball milling process, a disordered fct structure was observed in the Ni–Mn–Ga powders prepared by planetary ball milling, the lattice parameters of the fct structure phase are For the process with low milling energy (planetary ball milling), the fct structure as circled by black line in the upper part of For the process with high milling energy (vibration ball milling), the analysis is similar to the above description, the fcc structure as circled by red line in the lower part of Based on the above analysis, the disordered fct and disordered fcc phases are expected to form from the Heusler phase after the ball milling with low and high milling energy, respectively. It is also noted that the structural transition from disordered fct to disordered fcc is possible to occur in the ball milling process when a suitable milling energy is performed, as shown in the right part of     For the Ni–Mn–Ga powder annealed at 600 The Ni–Mn–Ga powder particles in flaky shape with disordered fcc structure are prepared by vibration ball milling. The atomic disorder and large lattice distortion introduced in the Ni–Mn–Ga alloy during the ball milling process makes the alloy transform from Heusler phase to the disordered fcc phase. Upon heating, the disordered fcc phase transforms to the disordered bcc phase at ∼320 The work was supported by the Fundamental Research Funds for the Central Universities (HEUCF101013).