The photolysis of chlorine by UV light leads to the formation of the hydroxyl radicals (OH) as well as reactive chlorine species (RCS) that can be effective as advanced oxidation processes (AOPs) for water treatment. Much of the research to date has been done at laboratory- or bench-scale. This study reports results from a model that demonstrates that the relative effectiveness of the UV/Cl2 AOP compared to the more traditional UV/H2O2 AOP is a function of optical path length. As such, the relative effectiveness of the two treatment options evaluated at small scale may not reflect the relative performance at full-scale, making results previously obtained at small-scale potentially less scalable. This study therefore compares the performance of UV/Cl2 to UV/H2O2 at a full-scale water treatment plant, using sucralose and caffeine as spiked surrogates for contaminants that are reactive solely to OH radicals, and to both OH and RCS, respectively. pH was varied between 6.5 and 8.0. The results demonstrated that when using a medium pressure UV lamp, UV/Cl2 might lead to approximately twice the production of OH radicals as UV/H2O2 at pH 6.5 when using the same molar oxidant concentration, but adding chlorine to the UV reactor at pH 8.0 had a negligible impact on OH radical concentration in comparison to UV alone. The study also confirmed previous small-scale results that RCS can be a major contributor to UV/Cl2 treatment for compounds such as caffeine that are susceptible to RCS, with UV/Cl2 effective at both pH 6.5 and 8.0 for such compounds. Disinfection byproducts were monitored, with adsorbable organohalide (AOX) formation increasing by approximately 10 μg-Cl/L due to chlorine photolysis, but only at pH 6.5 and not at pH 8.0. This implies that UV/Cl2 might increase AOX mostly due to reaction between OH and organic precursors to make them more reactive with chlorine, and not due to RCS. The formation of specific DBPs of current or emerging regulatory interest was minimal under all conditions, except for chlorate. Chlorate yields were in the order of 6–18% of the photolysed chlorine.There is increasing interest in the UV/Cl A comparison of the effectiveness of the UV/H Another concern with UV/Cl A full-scale test to compare the effectiveness of UV/H The chemicals used in this study were either food grade or NSF-60 certified. 35% Food Chemical Codex (FCC) grade hydrogen peroxide and FCC grade sodium nitrate (assay: 99.6%) were purchased from Alphachem Limited. 2% NSF-60 certified sodium hypochlorite was provided by Flochem. 99% FCC grade caffeine was purchased from Sigma-Aldrich (assay: 99%). FCC grade sucralose was provided by H&A Canada Inc. (assay: 99.3%). Sulfuric acid (assay: 90-98%) was used to lower the pH of the water. All the other chemicals used in the sample preservation and sample analyses were of analytical grade or higher, unless specified otherwise. The tests were conducted at the Lorne Park Water Treatment Plant ( The tests were conducted on three consecutive days. Three raw postfiltration water samples were collected each day to monitor the raw water quality variation, and the results are summarized in The influent and the effluent of the UV reactor was sampled for caffeine, sucralose, and DBP concentrations. A complete list of the DBPs monitored is provided in pH was measured using an Orion Star A111 pH meter (Thermo Scientific). Free chlorine was measured using the DPD method with a HACH DR/2500 spectrophotometer and Permachem reagent (HACH, Toronto, Canada). Hydrogen peroxide concentration was quantified on-site using a CHEMetrics Peroxide Vacu-vial kit (K-5543) (CHEMetrics Inc., Midland, VA). UV absorbance was measured using an Agilent 8453 UV–vis spectrophotometer. TOC was measured using an Aurora 1030 TOC Analyzer. The OH radical scavenging capacity was measured using the method described by For caffeine analysis, 500 mL samples spiked with 1 μg/L d Regression analysis correlating caffeine and sucralose degradation to the levels of pH, UV power, and chemical dose was carried out using Microsoft Excel. To determine whether there was a statistically significant difference in micropollutant degradation and DBP formation among various test conditions, independent t-tests, unless specified as paired t-tests in the text, were conducted using SigmaStat and the p values were reported in the text. p < 0.05 indicates a significant difference while p ≥ 0.05 indicates otherwise. The performance of UV/Cl At pH 8.0, UV/Cl For caffeine, which is reactive towards both OH radical and RCS ( The sucralose degradation implies that UV/Cl In a perfect UV reaction, assuming that the overall quantum yield of radical formation and UV fluence is constant, doubling the H A general positive effect of UV dose on AOP performance was observed ( pH significantly affects UV/Cl In comparison, pH had only a minor impact on the degradation of both sucralose and caffeine when applying UV/H Previous studies showed that the pH at which the UV/Cl Previous research at bench-scale has shown that both RCS and OH radicals can cause contaminant degradation, but the relative importance of each pathway has not been demonstrated at full-scale. In this work, the relative contribution of UV exposure alone and the different radical species to the total degradation of sucralose and caffeine was estimated. In UV/Cl The overall first-order decay of sucralose consists of the contribution from UV exposure alone and OH radical oxidation, as given by: In Eq Combining Eq Rearranging Eq Using Eq Similarly, the first-order rate constant of the caffeine decay by OH radical, As caffeine is reactive towards both OH radical and RCS ( In Eq Combining Eq As sucralose and caffeine were spiked at the same time, the [OH] Eq The contribution of the RCS to the caffeine decay can be estimated by Eq Dividing Eq Eq With the ratio of the two rate constants estimated (i.e. 3.1), the contribution of the RCS to the caffeine decay can then be solved using Eq As shown in This full-scale research therefore agrees with recent bench-scale results that indicate that RCS reaction pathways can be a significant factor in the destruction of certain contaminants that are susceptible to RCS reaction ( The maximum H Chlorine was applied in a weir box upstream of the UV reactor with an estimated chlorine contact time of approximately 5 min before entering the reactor. The residence time in the UV reactor itself was about 5 s. A set of dark control experiments was conducted whereby DBP formation was measured across the system with the UV lamps turned off, to differentiate DBP formation due to the AOP process from formation due to simple chlorine reaction. A paired Lake Ontario water contained a background AOX concentration of approximately 20 μg-Cl/L, as shown in There were no observed THMs in the influent water to the AOP system. Upon applying chlorine under dark chlorination conditions, total THM formation was in the order of 4–6 μg/L across the system ( Haloacetic acids were observed to approximately double or triple when applying UV/Cl Of the organic DBPs monitored, haloacetonitriles, particularly BCAN, appeared to be the most affected by UV/Cl Of the remaining organic DBPs monitored (HKs and HNMs), concentrations always remained below the detection limits, which were generally in the order of 1 μg/L. It is known that the photolysis of chlorine leads to chlorate, through the dimerization of ClO· and the subsequent reactions of the products ( Chlorate concentration as high as 1.1 mg/L was observed when 10 mg/L of Cl The influent water contained approximately 0.5 mg/L NO The nitrate impact on the AOP performance is summarized in The additional 1.1 mg/L NO Much of the previous work that has compared UV/Cl A concern associated with UV/Cl This work was funded by the The following is the Supplementary data to this article: Supplementary data to this article can be found online at