Tendon calcification has been widely regarded by researchers to result from the osteogenic differentiation of Tendon-Derived Stem Cells (TDSCs) and ectopic mineralization caused by the calcification of cellular matrix. Recent studies have revealed a correlation between the Mg2+/Ca2+ balance and the degeneration or calcification of tendon tissues. Furthermore, the ATP–P2X/P2Y receptor pathway has been shown to play a decisive role in the process of calcification, with calcium exportation from mitochondria and calcium oscillations potentially representing the cohesive signal produced by this pathway. Our previous study demonstrated that matrix calcification is inhibited by magnesium. In this study, we examined the effects of extracellular Mg2+ on the deposition of calcium phosphate matrix and cellular pathways in TDSCs. The suppression of the export of calcium from mitochondria has also been detected. We found that a high concentration of extracellular Mg2+ ([Mg2+]e) inhibited the mineralization of the extracellular matrix in TDSCs and that 100 μM ATP reversed this inhibitory effect in vitro. In addition, the spontaneous release of ATP was inhibited by high [Mg2+]e levels. A high [Mg2+]e suppressed the expression of P2X4, P2X5 and P2X7 and activated the expression of P2Y1, P2Y2, P2Y4 and P2Y14. The interaction between Mg2+ and Ca2+ is therefore contradictory, Mg2+ inhibits mitochondrial calcium concentrations, meanwhile it reverses the opening of mPTP that is induced by Ca2+. JC-1 staining verified the protective effect of Mg2+ on mitochondrial membrane potential and the decrease induced by Ca2+. Taken together, these results indicate that high [Mg2+]e interferes with the expression of P2 receptors, resulting in decreased extracellular mineralization. The balance between Mg2+ and Ca2+ influences mitochondrial calcium exportation and provides another explanation for the mechanism underlying matrix calcification in TDSCs.Calcifying tendinopathy (CT) is a prevalent, debilitating and often painful clinical problem that accounts for a substantial portion of musculoskeletal disorders. The key histological evidence is that small calcium deposits are observed with high incidence in tendinopathic tendons, and that this is the dominant cause of tendon swelling, pain and rupture. Most current treatment modalities are neither effective nor evidence-based because of our poor understanding of the etiopathogenesis of CT, and especially the pathogenesis by which calcium deposit occur in tendons. Because it is the second most abundant divalent cation after calcium, a large amount of attention has been paid to magnesium, its interactions with calcium, and the fact that changes in the balance between calcium and magnesium have an enormous impact on the formation and absorption of calcium deposits. Maintaining the homeostasis of magnesium levels is vital for intact tendons and ligaments. Tissue calcification is a process that occurs widely throughout the human body. It includes both the physiological formation of bone tissues and pathological heterotopic ossification. However, the key regulatory mechanisms underlying this process are unknown At the cellular level, many studies continue to demonstrate that Mg Extracellular matrix calcification is regulated by a variety of factors, and P2 receptors, the release of ATP and the export of mitochondrial calcium are all key processes that dominate the process of matrix calcification. As an agonist of members of the P2 receptor family, extracellular adenine nucleotides activate G protein-coupled pathways, such as the Erk/P38 MAPK pathway, by triggering P2X7 receptors and modulate hMSC osteogenic differentiation by inducing c-Fos and c-Jun expression The cells we used in this study are multipotential stem cells that have been observed in tendons and ligaments that are called tendon-derived stem cells (TDSCs) The Animal Research Ethics Committee of Tongji University approved all of the experiments performed in this study. Male Sprague-Dawley rats aged approximately 6–8 weeks old were used to isolate cells. TDSCs were isolated according to an established procedure Regular medium was supplemented with a cocktail of 100 nM dexamethasone, 10 mM β-glycerophosphate and 50 μM ascorbic acid-2-phosphate (Sigma-Aldrich, St Louis, MO, USA) to prepare the osteogenic medium (OM). TDSCs were grown in 24-well plates (four wells per group) in regular medium containing 0.8 mM/L Mg TDSCs were cultivated in regular medium, OM or OM containing 1.3 or 1.8 mM Mg The concentration of ATP in the extracellular medium was measured using a luciferase-based ATP lite-M kit (Perkin–Elmer) as previously reported TDSCs grown in regular medium or OM (with or without extra Mg The opening of MPTPs causes mitochondrial swelling and a change in mitochondrial volume as a result of the colloidal osmotic effects of solute flux into and out of the mitochondrial matrix, and this process was measured by monitoring absorbance at 520 nm (A The mitochondrial transmembrane potential analysis of the effect of high concentrations on Mg The data are shown as histograms, and all data analyses were performed using SPSS (SPSS Inc, Chicago, IL, version 16.0). The statistical significance of treatment outcomes was assessed using Student’s t-test (two-tailed) and variance analysis, and p < 0.05 was considered to indicate statistical significance in all analyses (95% confidence level). Mineralization was significantly more inhibited when cells were cultured in OM containing 1.3 mM [Mg Spontaneous ATP release has been shown to be responsible for matrix mineralization TDSCs were found to express high levels of the mRNAs for the P2X4, P2X5, P2Y1, P2Y2, P2Y4, P2Y10, P2Y12 and P2Y13 receptors, while P2X7, P2Y6 and P2Y14 were expressed at lower levels, and the mRNAs of P2X1, P2X2, P2X3 and P2X6 were not detected ( An association between mitochondria and mineralization processes has been verified to involve mitochondrial phosphate-containing granules. Isolated mitochondria were observed using confocal microscopy scanning ( Mitochondrial swelling is an indicator of MPTP opening. After different concentration of [Ca Mitochondrial membrane potential (DeltaPsi(m)) is an indicator of mitochondrial membrane permeability, which is associated with calcium exportation. TDSCs were incubated for 1 h in complete medium containing 1.8 mM/L [Mg Two of the key histopathological features of calcifying tendinopathy are the presence of calcific deposits in the extracellular matrix and tendon-derived stem cells in the tissue, both of which suggest that the formation of calcific deposits is cell-mediated. Although the precise mechanism by which TDSCs participate in the formation of ossification remains unknown, many studies have suggested that the differentiation of tendon stem cells into osteoblasts is involved in the process because they cause calcium to be deposited in the matrix. In this study, we suggest that magnesium inhibits calcium deposition in the matrix, and our results are support those described in previous reports. Hyper-physiological concentrations of [Mg Extracellular adenine nucleotides are constitutively released into the bone microenvironment, and their levels can be significantly increased by bone injury. They act as autocrine or paracrine regulators of osteoblasts and osteoblast functions Magnesium inhibits recombinant P2XRs at millimolar concentrations Although there is solid evidence showing that high [Mg P2Y receptors are seven-transmembrane-spanning G protein-coupled receptors (GPCRs) The association between cell-derived extracellular vesicles and the earliest sites of mineral formation during bone and cartilage mineralization was discovered when transmission electron microscopy was introduced as a technique in the mid-20th century. Recent observations has demonstrated that calcium phosphate or calcium exist in both mitochondria and intracellular vesicles, and this finding reveals that there may be a mechanism whereby osteogenic cells and ionic calcium (and perhaps phosphate) are transferred from mitochondria to intracellular vesicles Because mitochondrial permeability transition pores (mPTPs) are permeable to protons and other small ions, the induction of mPTPs leads to the depolarization of the inner mitochondrial membrane, which consequently affects ATP production and cell viability In this study, we investigated the effect of Mg The author’s work was supported by Grants from the  Transparency document related to this article can be found online at The following is the supplementary data related to this article: Supplementary data related to this article can be found at