This paper presents a novel approach for recovering valuable metal from spent Li-ion batteries by separating Li and Co by using selective sulfating roasting with NaHSO4·H2O. This study focuses on the effects of the additive ratio of NaHSO4·H2O on the roasting mechanism. The occurrence evolution of the Li and Co elements during sulfating roasting and water leaching is studied by thermogravimetry–differential scanning calorimetry, X-ray diffraction, scanning electron microscopy, and inductively coupled plasma. The mixtures of spent LiCoO2 and NaHSO4·H2O possesses two obvious weightlessness platforms with corresponding endothermic peaks at 25–600 °C. As the proportion of NaHSO4·H2O in mixtures increases, the occurrence of the Li and Co elements evolves as follows: LiCoO2 → LiNa(SO4) and LiCoO2 → Co3O4. After being washed with deionized water, the concentrations of the Co and Li elements from the washed products in a mass ratio of 1:1.40 are 72.56% and 0.53%, respectively. The different occurrence forms of the Li and Co elements lead to their separation during sulfating roasting.The improvement in infrastructure and people’s living standards has increased the consumption of electronic products. Therefore, the consumption of Li-ion batteries (LIBs) as electrochemical power sources is rapidly increasing. The main positive electrode materials that are pivotal for LIBs include LiCoO At present, most works report the recovery of major valuable metals of Co and Li from spent cathode active materials mainly by traditional pyrometallurgy, hydrometallurgy and biometallurgy and a combination of two of them. Traditional pyrometallurgical processes exhibit advantages of high efficiency and high productivity in the industry, but they involve high energy consumption, high cost, loss of materials, and emission of hazardous gases and dust ( The heat decomposition of sodium bisulfate (NaHSO This paper presents a novel process of recovering Li and Co by separating Li and Co from the active mass of spent LIBs through the selective sulfating roasting of LiCoO The spent LIBs were collected from a local e-waste collection center in Lanzhou, China. The cathode active material substance used in this work was separated from the spent LIBs. All other chemical reagents used were of analytical grade, and all solutions were prepared with deionized water during the experiments. The overall flow of the separation process is shown in Three parallel experiments were repeated during roasting and water leaching to ascertain the repeatability of results, and the mean values were taken as the final results of the concentrations of Co and Li. TG-DSC was used to identify the appropriate temperature interval of the roasting process, and the mixtures were heated from 20 °C to 600 °C at a heating rate 10 °C·min The TG-DSC curves of the spent LiCoO The XRD patterns of the spent LiCoO  The concentrations of the Co and Li elements from the samples of washed products in mass ratios of spent LiCoO  The possible reactions of LiCoO The thermodynamic analysis chart of the roasting process with LiCoO The relationship between lgPso  The mixtures of spent LiCoO As the proportion of NaHSO During the roasting process, the partial pressure of SO This study was financially supported by the