The interaction between hydrogen sulfide ions (HS−) and the cerussite surface was simulated using density functional theory (DFT) calculations. The calculated results show that Pb atoms are the dominating active sites for the subsequent reaction on the cerussite (110) surface. The S atom in HS− ions can readily interact with the Pb atoms at the cerussite surface layers with the interaction energy of −5.19eV, resulting in the formation of lead sulfide species. An obvious difference occurs when HS− ions interact with the various Pb atoms on the cerussite surface. The density of state analysis reveals that the Pb 6p orbital at the mineral surface layers and S 3p orbital from HS− ions are overlapped between −1.5 and 0.5eV near the Fermi level, indicating a stable chemical adsorption. The Mulliken population result suggests that the electron transfer exists between the bonding atoms and the oxidation of the HS− ions is involved in the adsorption process. This study provides an insight into the sulfidization mechanism at an atomic level, and further confirms the experimental phenomenon proposed in our previous work.Cerussite is the most abundant lead oxide mineral and frequently considered to be a study target to disclose the flotation performance of lead-bearing oxide ores Numerous experimental studies on the sulfidization of lead oxide minerals have been conducted. Marabini and Cozza Despite these studies have provided a macroscopical reference for the sulfidization of lead oxide minerals, the mechanism of sulfide ion species interacting with cerussite surfaces at an atomic level was not reported. Besides, the majority of experimental studies were involved in the effect of external conditions on the actual sulfidization, thereby affecting the adsorption mechanism of sulfide ion species on the mineral surface. In recent years, DFT has been introduced into the beneficiation fields to simulate the interaction, adsorption and reaction of flotation reagents with the mineral surface In our current study, the electronic structures of cerussite surfaces, and the adsorption of sulfide ion species on cerussite surfaces were comprehensively simulated using DFT methods. These results may give an insight into the interfacial reactions for cerussite sulfidization, and provide a deeper understanding of its micro-mechanism. All computations are carried out by first–principle calculations on the basis of DFT in the framework of Cambridge Serial Total Energy Package (CASTEP) raised by Payne et al. All computations are on the basis of the cerussite crystal structure presented by Antao and Hassan, whose cell parameters are a The adsorption energy of adsorbates on the mineral surface is shown as follows: The interaction between flotation reagents and cerussite particles occurs at the mineral surfaces in the flotation process, so it is necessary to investigate the electronic structures and properties of cerussite (110) surface. The slab model of cerussite (110) surface after an initial optimized geometric structure and the corresponding serial numbers of different atoms located at the surface layers are illustrated in  In the valence band section, the s and p orbital of C and O atoms, such as the C 2s and O 2s orbital, C 2p and O 2s orbital, C 2p and O 2p orbital, presents an obvious overlapped phenomenon, implying a forceful bonding between them. Nevertheless, the level of valence band is located between −25 and −5.5 The density of state of four Pb atoms numbered in Na The adsorption of HS As shown in In order to further investigate the interaction between HS As shown in The foregoing result the strongest interaction between Pb atoms of the cerussite surface and S atom from HS It is observed from A Mulliken population analysis is commonly used to illustrate the transfer and distribution of charges from different atoms. In this study, Herein, we only considered the Mulliken charge populations of S, H and Pb atoms before and after HS As shown in The current study demonstrates the interaction between HS The active sites on the cerussite surface are Pb atoms whose reaction activity is mainly dominated by the Pb 6p orbital, and a distinct difference is exerted in the reaction activity of various Pb atoms at the cerussite surface layers. HS The adsorption of HS The authors would like to sincerely thank the