Small angle X-ray scattering (SAXS) has been widely employed to characterize the pore structure of coal and other geomaterials. However, in the many previous experimental investigations by SAXS, the probed samples were not standardized in terms of shape and particle size, even for the same geomaterial. The influence of pulverization on the pore structure of coal is generally ignored by the researchers using SAXS for structure characterization. In this study, SAXS is used to investigate the effect of pulverizing on pore modification of virgin coal. Two kinds of coal with different ranks were selected and pulverized for SAXS measurements. Both powder samples (five particle size fractions) obtained by grinding and slice samples were investigated. The results show that the nano-pore structure of coal has been significantly modified due to pulverization. The sample pore volume per unit mass increases with the decrease of sample particle size. Pulverizing the slice sample into the minimum particle sample particle size of 0.075–0.125 mm leads to an increase in the pore volume per unit mass of coal by 39.53% and 18.29% for tested medium volatile bituminous coal and anthracite, respectively. Pulverization can reduce the volume of smaller pores (<20 nm) and increase the volume of larger pores (>20 nm). After grinding the original sample into the minimum particle size of 0.075–0.125 mm, the fractal dimension of the tested medium volatile bituminous coal and anthracite decreased by 0.266 and 0.179, respectively. Surface fractal dimension of pore decreases with the reduction in coal particle size. In the case of the powder coal sample, the increase in pore volume (especially for pore greater than 20 nm) and the reduction of fractal dimension are beneficial to the diffusion of gas in coal and promoting the desorption of residual gas. This study may provide a quantitative insight into the effect of pulverization on pore structure of coal sample. Moreover, it is of great significance for understanding the mechanism of coalbed methane storage and migration and is helpful for the selection of the sample size in SAXS experiments.Yixin Zhao, Conceptualization, Methodology, Writing- Reviewing and Editing. Tong Liu, Testing, Data curation, Writing - original draft. Nima Noraei Danesh, Formal analysis, Investigation. Yingfeng Sun, Validation. Shimin Liu, Writing- Reviewing and Editing. Yi Wang, Editing In recent years, coalbed methane (CBM) as an unconventional gas resource has attracted extensive attention all over the world ( Many techniques have been applied to investigate the pore structure in coal, but each technique has its own advantages and limitations ( However, there is no uniform standard in place for coal sample morphology in the previous experiments conducted using small angle scattering technique on coals. Some researchers used sandpaper to grind coal into slice samples for their experiments ( Although some scholars have selected pulverized coal samples with different particle sizes to study pore characteristics, most of them have used low pressure gas adsorption (LPGA) technique to quantify pore structure ( In addition, the total gas content of a coal sample is composed of lost gas, desorbed gas and residual gas ( In this study, two different ranks of coals were selected and pulverized by a mechanical mill. The powder samples were sorted into five particle size fractions by sifting them through sieves with 18–35 mesh (0.5–1 mm), 35–60 mesh (0.25–0.5 mm), 60–80 mesh (0.18–0.25 mm), 80–120 mesh (0.18–0.125 mm), and 120–200 mesh (0.125–0.075 mm). Meanwhile, the block sample of each coal was polished with sandpaper into a circular slice sample with the diameter of ~10 mm and the thickness of 1 mm. The results of this study can provide a close to in situ characterization of modified open and isolated pores. When X-rays irradiate onto a sample in which there are inhomogeneous areas in nano-scale electronic density, the scattering X-ray can emerge in a range of The scattering vector has a relationship with the scattering angle as follows: Small angle scattering technique can also evaluate the fractal characteristics of scatterers. The SAXS intensity from fractal objects has a simple power-law form ( Eq. In SAXS experiments, the relative scattering intensity of the tested sample was measured by the signal detector. Some structural parameters of the sample can be derived from the measured relative intensity, such as fractal characteristics and size distribution. However, the absolute scattering intensity is necessary for calculating some structural parameters including molecular weight and volume fraction such as porosity ( The porosity of porous materials can be determined by Eq. In SAXS, the real space dimension of a scattering object is proposed as Eq. The coal samples used in the experiments were obtained from two active underground coal mines. One sample was cored from No.9 coal seam (medium volatile bituminous coal) of Zhaogezhuang mine (also named ZGZ) in Hebei Province, China. The other sample was cored from No.3 coal seam (anthracite) of Changzhen mine (also named CZ) in Shanxi Province, China. The coal samples were obtained directly from an active underground working face. Then, they were carefully sealed and instantly transported to the laboratory for testing. In the laboratory, block coal samples were broken by a hammer manually into smaller subsample pieces firstly. Then, some of the small subsamples (5–10 mm) were collected and crushed into small particles using a pulverization machine with stainless steel blades. Generally, a longer time of pulverization is needed to obtain finer samples. Finally, the pulverized coal samples were sieved into five particle sizes (18–35 mesh, 35–60 mesh, 60–80 mesh, 80–120 mesh and 120–200 mesh) using a standard sieve set. In order to obtain a slice sample of coal with a standard size of ~1 cm diameter and ~1 mm thickness, a sample with a dimension of several centimeters in diameter and several millimeters in thickness that was previously broken by a hammer was selected. The sample was first sanded with a coarse sandpaper (80 mesh) until its diameter and thickness are slightly larger than 1 cm and 1 mm, respectively. Then, a fine sandpaper (600 mesh) was used to polish the sample carefully. Finally, the coal sample was polished into a circular slice with diameter of ~1 cm and thickness of ~1 mm. During the polishing process, the sample was continually measured by a vernier caliper to ensure achieving an accurate size. The coal samples with various sizes (five sizes of particles and one slice sample for each type of coal) were stored in sealed bags to avoid oxidation before conducting SAXS experiments. The proximate analysis and ultimate analysis of coal samples were measured with the automatic coal proximate analyzer and the elemental analyzer (Vario MACRO cube) according to Chinese national standards GB/T 30,732–2014 and GB/T 31,391–2015. The result of proximate and ultimate analysis of two coal samples are listed in All experiments were conducted at 1W2A SAXS station ( The sample holder used in the experiments was an aluminum sheet with a cavity in the middle where the sample was placed. The sample holder is 10 mm in diameter and 1 mm in thickness. As shown in Although the cavity portion volume of the sample holder is identical for all tests, the sample mass varies depending on the particle size of the loaded sample. For the sake of comparing the differences of pore structure under the same mass standard, the mass of samples in each cell was weighed before the actual beam experiment. The mass of each sample is listed in In this study, a standard sample of glassy carbon SRM 3600 was used for SAXS absolute intensity calibration ( The measurement of each sample took 5–10s depending on the scattering intensity. The two-dimensional SAXS image of each sample was recorded. Then, FIT2D software was used to process the SAXS images and quantitatively transform them into one-dimensional data ( All theories in SAXS are discussed and analyzed based on the scattering vector and scattering intensity data. The scattering curve of scattering intensity I versus scattering vector q was obtained by processing data using FIT2D and S software. According to Porod's theory ( Several methods have been developed to quantify the pore size distribution, such as the maximum-entropy method ( The measured data of the two types of coal specimens with different sizes basically coincide with the Monte Carlo fitting data. The overall trend of the pore size distribution of the same type of coal sample with different sizes were found to be similar in their trends (see Using the corrected absolute scattering intensity, the porosity of each sample was quantified. Combined with the sample volume and mass in the beam testing area, the porosity was then normalized to mass-weighted pore volume as shown in Pulverizing the slice sample to the minimum sample particle size of 0.075–0.125 mm resulted in an increase in the pore volume for each unit mass of coal by 39.53% and 18.29% for ZGZ and CZ, respectively. The results demonstrate that the pore volume per unit mass keeps growing as the particle size reduces from the slice to the smaller particles. The pore size distributions for ZGZ and CZ slices are shown in Combining the sample porosity measured by the absolute intensity and the relative pore percentage determined by the McSAS fitting, the actual pore size distribution of each sample can be established. In order for analysis of the particle size effects on the pore size distribution, the pore size was separated into seven segments of 2–10 nm, 10–20 nm, 20–30 nm, 30–40 nm, 40–50 nm, 50–60 nm and 60–68 nm. The pore size distribution in the seven segments within 2–68 nm for different sized samples is shown in Some scholars ( From the viewpoint of total pores, according to the experimental results (see (The cavities with red outline denote the pores <20 nm, the cavities with black outline denote the pores >20 nm)  Pulverizing the virgin coal into fine powder coal results in significant modification of pore structure. The sample pore volume obviously increases, especially for the pores greater than 20 nm. Previous studies have shown that 10–100 nm pores mainly constitute the space for gas diffusion, and the increase in pore volume favors gas diffusion and desorption ( Fractal dimension is a key parameter to quantitatively characterize pore structure. SAXS is a beneficial technique to investigate pore fractal characteristics. The values of fractal dimension can be calculated by the slope of linear parts of ln  During coal pulverization, under the mechanical force, the coal particles collide with the high-speed rotating gear in the grinding machine and the friction occurs between the particles. Because of the strong mechanical and frictional force, the coal particles were expected to be deformed, which may result in pore surface structure modification ( Previous studies have shown that the larger pore surface fractal dimension of coal represents the rougher pore surface. The rougher pore surface in coal can offer more gas adsorption sites, which can lead to a higher adsorption capacity of the sample ( The two virgin coal slice samples have different fractal dimension of pore surface, which may be attributed to dissimilarity of metamorphic degrees of the two coals ( Hardgrove Grindability Index (HGI) is a parameter to predict the degree of difficulty in coal grinding ( In order to quantitatively analyze the impact of pulverization on pore structure modification of coal sample, SAXS is used to investigate the structure of total pores (open and isolated pores) modified by pulverizing virgin coal samples into powder in different sizes. The comparisons were made between the virgin coal sample and the different sized pulverized coal powder. Two different ranks of coals were pulverized into five particle sizes (0.5–1 mm, 0.25–0.5 mm, 0.18–0.25 mm, 0.18–0.125 mm, 0.125–0.075 mm). The subsequent conclusions are drawn according to the experimental results: During the grinding process, the nano-pore structure of coal has been modified significantly, suggesting that the mechanical force has an evident effect on changing the original pore structure of coal. As the particle size reduces, the sample pore volume per unit mass increases. Pulverizing the slice sample into the minimum sample particle size of 0.075–0.125 mm, the pore volume of coal increases 39.53% and 18.29% for tested medium volatile bituminous coal and anthracite, respectively. Moreover, pulverization can reduce the volume of smaller pores (<20 nm) and increase the volume of larger pores (>20 nm). The increase in pore volume, especially the increase of larger pores (>20 nm), is beneficial to the diffusion of gas in coal and promoting the desorption of residual gas. Surface fractal dimension of pore decreases with the reduction in coal particle size. Grinding the original sample into the minimum particle size of 0.075–0.125 mm, the fractal dimension of the tested medium volatile bituminous coal and anthracite decreased by 0.266 and 0.179, respectively. This demonstrates that pore surface of coal becomes smoother due to pulverization. The reduction of fractal dimension is conducive to the desorption of gas, which may also be a reason to favor the release of residual gas when coal is crushed. The authors declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this paper. This research is financially supported by the