The kinetics of the cementation of silver ions onto copper from acidic sulphate solutions were investigated in a rotating cylinder system. The influence of several parameters on the course of the reaction, such as cylinder rotation speed, initial concentration of silver ions, temperature, concentration of sulphuric acid and the presence or absence of oxygen in the system, was investigated, and the reaction was found to follow first-order kinetics. The initial rate of the reaction is limited by diffusion through the mass transfer boundary layer. The experimental values of the initial rate constant calculated from both methods used for recording the changes of the silver ions concentration in the solutions corresponded ideally to the values predicted by semi-theoretical equations describing the turbulent flow in the rotating cylinder system. After the initial period of cementation, an enhancement of the rate was observed. In oxygenated solutions, rate enhancement is associated mainly with changes in the structure of the deposit involving an increase in the effective surface area during the process. However, the rate enhancement phenomenon in the absence of oxygen is attributed not only to an increase in the effective surface area but also to the chemical reaction between the Cu+ and Ag+ ions.Cementation is one of the most effective and economical techniques used for recovering toxic and valuable metals from industrial waste streams. It is also considered an important reaction in hydrometallurgical processing and in winning metals. The displacement of silver by metallic copper as a one-step process can be applied to the recovery of silver from industrial baths used for electrowinning or electrorefining copper A number of basic studies on silver cementation onto copper have been published In almost all investigations, silver cementation on copper has been found to follow first-order kinetics. However, both positive and negative deviations from the first order rate have been observed. Rate enhancement can result either from changes in the structure of the deposit, involving increases in the effective surface area Many different experimental techniques have been applied to investigate the cementation of silver ions on metallic copper. The rotating disc electrode (RDE) system has been widely used in a number of different studies on the kinetics of this process  Convenient techniques have been used to study cementation reaction kinetics which involve plotting the current–potential curves for the respective half-cells involved in the process To our knowledge, there are only a few publications in literature concerning the cementation of silver on copper in acidic sulphate solutions. This paper describes the kinetics of silver ion cementation with copper studied with a rotating cylinder. In the case of a rotating cylinder system, the flow regime is already turbulent, and therefore independent of turbulence associated with the increasing roughness of the precipitant. The composition of the solutions was typically 0.5 M CuSO Before use, the laboratory glassware was purified from any possible traces of silver by immersing it for 24 h in an ammonia solution of 13 mM EDTA and pH 10, then washed and dried. All the chemicals and materials used in this study were of analytical grade. All the solutions were prepared using water distilled four times. The volume of the solution used in the cell was 200–220 mL. The temperature of the electrolyte was maintained with an ultrathermostat MLW U 15 °C. All the solutions were de-aerated with high purity argon or saturated with oxygen before the experiment for 20 min and these atmospheres were maintained for the duration of the experiment. The experiments conducted in the absence or in the presence of oxygen are marked in this paper as deoxy and oxy, respectively. A schematic diagram of the equipment set-up for the study of cementation kinetics using a rotating cylinder is shown in The general measuring procedure consisted of two stages: pre-treatment of the steel cylinder before cementation and measurement of the cementation kinetics. Before each experiment the rotating steel cylinder was immersed in HNO The changes in concentration of Ag Immediately prior to each experiment, the potential of the ion-selective electrode was measured in the system under study where the rotating copper cylinder was replaced by a rotating Teflon cylinder. This potential of the ion-selective electrode, called potential with a Teflon cylinder ( During the actual cementation experiment the potential of the ion-selective electrode in the system with the rotating copper cylinder was recorded for 60 min and the electrolyte was also sampled for silver removal. After each run, the copper cylinder with the deposited silver was rinsed thoroughly and dried. Then the copper layer with the silver was cut and removed from the cylinder. Two samples of the copper sheet with the cemented silver were taken, dissolved in hot HNO In most systems, cementation reactions have been found to be controlled by boundary layer diffusion, and the reaction is first order with respect to the cementation of noble metal ions, which in the case of silver cementation could be expressed by the following equation The integrated form of the first-order equation can be described as The Nernst equation for the silver ion-selective electrode is written as According to   The influence of the following parameters on the course of the reaction was investigated: initial silver ion concentration ( The empirical equations describing the hydrodynamics in the rotating cylinder system were obtained and compared with literature data. The mass transfer correlation for turbulent range of the transport in the rotating cylinder system can be described as The results obtained in our rotating cylinder system are collected and compared with literature data in The Pang–Ritchie equation The effect of cylinder rotation speed on the initial rate of cementation is presented in The AAS and EMF kinetics plots of Ag The data obtained prove that the two methods used for recording the changes of silver ion concentration lead to the same results only at the initial stage of cementation. After several minutes, differences arise in the deoxygenated solutions. These can be attributed to the characteristic features of both analytical methods and to the composition of the solution (a possibility of the existence of different types of copper ions in the solution), or the presence of oxygen in the solution (influences the Cu It should be pointed out that the AAS method can determine silver as the sum of silver ions and solid silver particles or colloidal silver present in the solution. The solid silver particles can appear in the studied solution as a result of deposited silver dropping off the rotating cylinder during the cementation experiment, whereas the silver colloid can appear in deoxygenated solutions as a result of the chemical reaction between Ag The particular experiments that proved the possibility of this reaction occurring in the deoxygenated solutions used for silver cementation with copper were performed and the results will be presented in a further paper It follows from The relatively good agreement between the experimental data and the values predicted by the Pang–Ritchie equation also indicates that the cementation of silver ions with copper at the initial stage of the reaction is controlled by the diffusion of silver ions. The enhancement of the reaction, which was observed in almost all cases after the initial period of cementation (usually the first few minutes of the process), is discussed in Typical plots of the kinetics of silver ion concentration against time recorded in oxygenated and deoxygenated solutions at temperatures of 15 and 55 °C for concentrations of silver ions of 20 and 100 mg/L are presented in It can be seen from these graphs and also from The activation energy values, The main reason for this investigation was to study the influence of H  The absence of oxygen in the solution can significantly modify kinetic curves recorded in the same conditions. The kinetic curves for both analytical methods and various initial concentrations of Ag The rate constant for the initial period of cementation is independent of the absence or presence of oxygen. This was proved by verification of statistical hypotheses on the equality of values of the rate constants for the confidence level of 0.95. In these experiments, the process was broken off after various precisely defined periods of duration. The conditions in which the measurements were conducted were as follows: For experiments conducted in this way, we can define the degree of silver cemented onto the copper in two ways The discrepancy between the values of silver mass balance in the whole system was defined as  It is worth noticing that in oxygenated solutions, the As can be seen from The coincidence of the The fact that The reduced cementation rate constants for various ranges of cementation time obtained from the slopes of From the data collected in In deoxygenated solutions with the higher concentration of silver ions, the rate enhancement is appreciable, but it is worth pointing out that To further illustrate the rate enhancement occurring during the cementation of silver on copper, the factor of enhancement was defined as follows As can be seen from the data presented in Analysis of the increase in the enhancement factor for deoxygenated solutions does not give such clear results as in oxygenated solutions. For the lower initial concentration of silver ions in deoxygenated solutions for the first 30 min only values of The following conclusions may be drawn from the experimental results of this study. (1) The cementation of silver onto copper from acidic sulphate solutions follows a first-order process with respect to the concentration of silver ions. The initial rate is followed by the second stage with an enhanced rate. (2) Both methods of recording the concentration of silver ions in the solutions, the AAS method and the continuous method with the use of an ion-selective electrode, give the same value of the rate constant for the initial period of cementation. (3) For the initial period of cementation the rate constant of the process is: found to follow closely the predicted theoretical value, independent of the initial concentration of silver ions, independent of the presence of H independent of the presence or absence of oxygen in solutions. (4) The rate enhancement of the reaction after the initial period of cementation in oxygenated solutions is connected with an increase in the effective surface area when the reaction takes place in 0.5 M CuSO (5) The cementation rate enhancement in the absence of oxygen in the solution after the initial period of the process is associated with an increase in the effective surface area, and also with the The authors would like to thank Dr. J. Hotloś and Dr. Z. Görlich for constructive discussions.