Stability of tunnels in stratified rock masses under low stress conditions is governed by the rock mass structure (blocks) and excavation geometry and dimension. A physical model was built and the effects of bedding dip, discontinuity spacing, and tunnel dimensions on tunnel failure mechanisms were examined. Based on the image analysis, three zones were recognized around the excavation consisting: stationary, collapsed and buckling zones. The buckling zone was more affected by layer dip angle. The collapsed zone occurred in three modes of block falls and sliding, and toppling. Also, numerical simulation using distinct element method was performed and verified. After model calibration, numerical simulations were extended to a wide range of block size and discontinuity gradients. Finally, considering physical test results, image analysis, and numerical simulation results, failure mechanisms in stratified rocks were classified using “bedding dip” and so called “dimensional ratio”. Results lead us to a deep insight of ground behavior around the shallow underground excavations in stratified blocky rock masses under low stress condition. Additionally the deformation mechanisms of blocks such as buckling, shearing, sliding are discussed in detail.Preparing and curing of mixture is time consuming process It is made from natural material, Various type of mixture with different strength can be built, It is inexpensive. Mechanical properties of block surfaces are not necessarily same (property anisotropy) The properties in the prepared blocks are not reproducible Cutting of the blocks with similar and equal dimensions are difficult and time-consuming The properties in the prepared blocks are reproducible Aluminum is expensive The cutting of rocks to small blocks is difficult. So model size should be big enough to represent the real condition It is made from natural material, The properties in the prepared blocks are reproducible Cutting and finishing of rock is expensive and time-consuming Shallow tunnels in rock masses are mostly excavated through geologically stratified and blocky structures with low in-situ stresses. Sedimentation, layering, tectonic activities, tensile jointing, and structures formed as a result of metamorphic or igneous rock flow are the main origins of such geologically stratified and blocky grounds. Generally, stratified structures are continuously extended and they have a planar geometry. Moreover, these structures do not sustain tensile stress in the direction perpendicular to the bedding plane, and shear strength of the bedding surface is remarkably lower than the intact rock ( Due to the various tectonic forces in a geological lifetime, a stratified structure could possibly experience various conditions of fracturing such as masonry structures. In this case, two discontinuity sets cut perpendicularly through layers with particular spacing. Physical, numerical and analytical methods are often engaged to evaluate the behavior of excavation in such ground. Several assumptions have been involved in numerical and analytical methods which reduces the reliability of results.  The material properties used in physical modeling must be representative of the real material, which makes it possible to study the failure mechanism around underground excavations in stratified structures. Various materials such as concrete, aluminum blocks and rock blocks were used so far in the construction of physical models. There were many objections to using these materials because of a lack of representative properties. The main shortcomings of often used materials for physical modelling are listed in To overcome the shortcomings of the materials illustrated in MDF is relatively inexpensive and low-priced compared to alternative materials. It is easy to cut down to a specified block size. It is easy to reproduce several blocks with similar properties (All used blocks were cut from one sheet with same saw). Strength parameters are not the same at cut surfaces (representative of joint surfaces) and smooth surfaces (representative of bedding surfaces). MDF itself has a stratified structure. Therefore, its appearance is like the real stratified rock structures. MDF is easily accessible and available with reasonable quality and price. Therefore, MDF was selected and then mechanical uniaxial and compressive tests were carried out in a laboratory to determine the blocks’ properties under normal stress and shear condition. To determine the mechanical properties of MDF, uniaxial compressive and direct shear tests were performed on blocks. The tests on MDF samples were performed according to ISRM Suggested Methods ( Purpose of the uniaxial test is to assure that, the block remains rigid under the applied tresses during the physical tests. The normal stress must be equal to the in-situ stress in direct-shear test. However, lateral stress only generated based on confinement and there is low stress between block due to the gravity force. Thus, the direct shear test was carried out applying probable ranges of normal stresses (normal force is below 1.5 kN), which gives a reliable shear strength parameter. Based on the direct shear test, mechanical properties of the bedding (layer) surfaces are relatively weaker than the joint surfaces. This property is appropriate representative of the joint and bedding surfaces in rock masses. This is expected for the stratified structure and it could reasonably represent the rock behavior ( A tunnel excavated in stratified sandstone was scaled down to study in this research as detailed in Stainless steel was used for the test apparatus frame with the dimensions of 1000 mm × 1100 mm. Three loading jaws were placed in the framework; these jaws were used to provide zero displacement at the boundaries. Internal dimensions of framework, including the jaws, are 850 mm in height by 650 mm in width. The details of the framework are shown in Blocks with various shapes and dimensions such as cubes and prisms were used to construct the stratified structure models with different bedding inclinations. Small blocks are used to fill the outer and inner boundaries in the model as shown in Tunnel shape was considered as rectangular and full face excavation was adapted in the model. The tunnel axis alignment and strike of the bedding plane were considered as parallel. Tunnel excavation process was simulated using three distinct plastic beams as shown in The test preparation procedure for physical model tests was as follows: The blocks were arranged and placed next to each other to build a stratified model, the tunnel was left empty and blocks around the tunnel were supported by the plastic beam frame. The back glass was placed in the model framework (front glass was fixed on the outer frame). The camera was set to record during testing. The tunnel frame was removed from behind the model to simulate full face excavation. Visual recordings were carried out during the test and observations filled in predesigned forms. The camera recording was stopped after the test. All recorded images were processed to calculate total displacement fields in model building blocks. The discontinuity dip and spacing, and tunnel height and span are considered as main variables and the experiments were designed to capture a reasonable range of these variables. The inclination of the bedding was considered from horizontal to vertical (0, 30, 60 and 90 degrees with thickness of 16 mm). The discontinuities’ spacing was determined based on layer thickness from 1 and 2 times bedding thickness. The continuity factor (the ratio of tunnel diameter to block diameter) is between 6 and 15 for discontinuous area; because in this case tunnel and block weren’t circular, the authors introduced so called “dimension ratio” as the ratio of tunnel to block hydraulic radius. Therefore, tunnel dimensions are considered as 160, 192, and 224 mm so that the value of continuity factor remained between 6 and 15. According to variance range of several effective factors, 72 physical test models were designed to study the failure mechanisms at different tunnel sizes and structural conditions. Each test condition was carried out at least twice to assure its consistency of results and reproducibility. Therefore, huge number of tests were needed, which would be time-consuming and expensive. To overcome such a situation, experiment design methods were engaged to optimize test numbers. Based on Taguchi’s experimental design method ( There is a broad failure zone and blocks’ movement due to tunnel excavation in discontinuous structures during physical tests. A photogrammetric technique is used to capture the displacement of blocks in failure zones. Photogrammetric techniques were developed in recent years, and used both in some physical models and practical geotechnical engineering investigations ( To capture block displacement, white colored spot marks were fixed on each block on the front side of block surfaces. Therefore, the displacement of each white spot represents the corresponding block displacement. Then, photographs were taken before and during test of the model by the high-speed camera. To achieve high accuracy, the camera was set perpendicular to the physical model. The particle image velocity (PIV) computer code (acronym MatPIV v.1.6.1, and developed by In deep underground excavations, stability depends on stresses concentration level and stress orientation with respect to the excavation profile, but in shallow and low stress conditions, the stability is governed by discontinuities’ structures and geometrical settings. To evaluate the failure mechanisms in shallow tunnels in such conditions, a two-dimensional physical model were built. In these models, the lower and lateral boundaries are fixed and the upper boundary is left free ( More tests were carried out utilizing numerical modeling using the universal distinct element code (UDEC) were carried out ( The physical and mechanical properties of materials are considered according to test results, as illustrated in Each physical model given in Physical tests were carried out according to the designed test schedule, as illustrated in Based on the test results main types of failures were categorized as stationary, buckling and collapsed zones. The Buckling failure, lateral compressive failure at mid-span and abutments, abutment slip and diagonal fracturing are general modes of roof beam failure ( In the model tests, when the tunnel span was 10 times larger than the bedding thickness, only two stationary and buckling zones occurred in horizontal bedding. However, by increasing the tunnel span up to 14 times the thickness of bedding, buckling failure occurred. Based on the stable beam above collapsed beams at tunnel roof as shown in test number 12 ( Beam deflection decreases with an increase of its dip up to 30 degrees because the effective unit weight is reduced in this way. Additionally, in the inclined beam, an external force will contribute to the beam stability. If inclined bedding around tunnel is divide into three distinct parts as shown in In steeper layers, such as for 60 and 90 degrees bedding, no deflection was observed in model tests because layer dip is bigger than that critical dip and the stress arching doesn’t occur, so buckling won’t be expected in this condition ( In steeper bedding (60 and 90 degree bedding), joint spacing and tunnel dimensions are not dominant factors for buckling failure occurrence. Collapsed zone itself consists of three failure modes: falling, sliding and toppling. Bedding dip has major impact than other factors on the type of the collapsed zone. Tunnel span and discontinuity spacing control the extent of the collapsed zone in horizontal bedding. In this condition, collapsed zone occurs as falling roof beam ( When layers’ dip is 30 degrees, all three modes of collapsed zone happened. Tunnel dimensions, as well as the bedding dip, affect the collapsed zone development. From comparison of all model tests when bedding was 30 degrees, it is obvious that joint spacing significantly limited the collapsed zone. Also, when joint spacing to layer thickness ratio is 1, increasing the tunnel dimensions expanded the collapsed zone considerably, but when this ratio is equal to 2, the variation of the tunnel dimensions didn’t result in a significant change in the collapsed zone. This shows that the joint spacing is more dominant factor on collapsed zone extension than tunnel dimensions ( When bedding dip is 60 or 90 degrees, occurrence of different collapse modes was observed, but sliding is the principal event. As mentioned earlier, these bedding dip values are bigger than the critical dip for development of stress arch, thus high normal stress between blocks will not be generated and the shear strength of the bedding surface will be low and leads to instability of the blocks. Tunnel dimensions also affects the collapsed zone because when the tunnel dimensions are at their smallest value (square tunnel which its height or its span is ten times as big as bedding thickness), there is partial instability as shown in test number 16 in Failure mechanisms were studied by many professionals such as A new quantitative category, in order to use by practitioners and engineers were introduced in this paper. Dimensional Ratio (DR) takes in to account the rock mass block size and tunnel dimensions and gives the combination factor represents the rock uniformity; which represents the ratio of tunnel to block size or degree of jointing (Eq. The physical and numerical test results were carried out over horizontal to vertical bedding inclinations, with various tunnel sizes and discontinuity spacing as summarized in Considering dimensional ratio (DR), three main classes of “Low”, “Medium”, and “High” fractured area were classified. This selection is well-suited to bedding reaction to the boring of the tunnel. Based on the results if DR is less than 7, the rock mass shows high strength resembled to intact rock and isn’t influenced by tunnel excavation, however random block fall probably happen from tunnel periphery. In field real conditions, this class is representative of massive ground with low tectonism. In the second category (Medium DR) where DR is in the range of 7–11, rock block is not very small versus tunnel dimensions and the ground experienced moderate tectonic intensity. In such condition, depends on discontinuity orientation, buckling, block fall, and collapse may occur. The third (high DR), where DR is greater than 11, high probability of instability expected due to tunnel excavation. This class is representative of the highly fractured ground which has been heavily jointed by tectonism. So, columns define rock mass conditions by considering rock block size with respect to the tunnel dimension. In other words, for smaller rock blocks, the ground loses its strength and extends the collapsed zone further. The rows in The proposed classification will allow more sensible decisions about time for support system installation and excavation method, because if stable buckling is possible, it’s not necessary to install a support system immediately. The time of support system installation, affect the efficiency of tunnel excavation procedure. Mechanisms of tunnels instability in shallow stratified rock masses as classified as The effect of discontinues strength parameter is not covered in this paper since the blocks are considered as rigid. Based on the model tests, when the angle of the bedding is more than (∅/2 + π/4) the only resistance force will mobilize at the upper and lower boundary of failure zone. During tunnel excavation in this condition, the vast group of blocks lost their underneath base, then, they start to sliding together ( It should be note that the effects of bedding dip, tunnel dimension and discontinuity spacing are considered in the presented classification ( The physical and numerical modeling of stratified jointed rock masses were investigated to evaluate the effects of discontinuity inclination and thickness represented by block size as well as opening size on the failure mechanisms around underground excavations. Based on physical modeling fundamentals so far, a physical modeling procedure was adopted and physical tests designed and carried out. An image processing technique with a new approach was introduced and employed to capture blocks’ displacements precisely during the tests. To verify the physical test results, numerical simulation were performed using the distinct element method, and then the models were extended for a wide range of ground conditions. Based on all the physical, numerical and image analysis results, the failure mechanisms around underground excavations were categorized using the so called “dimensional ratio” and “bedding dip”. In the newly defined dimensional ratio, the effect of the opening size as well as the joint spacing were considered. Based on the dimensional ratio, which defines the relationship between block size and excavation size, three classes of low, medium and high jointed conditions were presented. The bedding gradient was also divided into three categories: low, medium and steep dipping based on repose and failure plane angle. According to “dimensional ratio” and “bedding dip” classes, the failure mechanisms were divided into nine individual categories, ranging from roof layers’ deflection mechanism in low jointing and nearly flat bedding, to global collapse with mixed failure modes consisting of blocks sliding and falling in highly jointed and nearly vertical bedding. These results could efficiently have applied in practice for shallow underground space design in stratified rocks. Supplementary data to this article can be found online at The following are the Supplementary data to this article: