This paper presents the development of a complete simulation model for a mechanical in-line injection system feed with diesel, biodiesel, bioethanol fuel blends. The mathematical model is built by using the AVL Boost™ Hydsim software, while the required input data is carefully derived by making use of existing data as well as formulas and numerical procedures described in this work. This setup enables relatively efficient formulation and set-up of the mathematical model as well as consistent and reasonably accurate derivation of input data.
                  The derived model is used to simulate the injection processes of various bioethanol-biodiesel and bioethanol-diesel fuel blends. The simulation results are compared to experimental data obtained on a Friedman-Maier type 12H100_h test bed at ambient temperature and several operating regimes. The results show that the compared injection pressure and needle lift histories are generally in a good agreement with the experimental ones. Consequently, the simulation model presented is fast and accurate enough to be engaged in various numerical procedures, ranging from investigations of influences of bioethanol addition to injection system optimization.It is now widely accepted that the major driver of rising temperatures are anthropogenic greenhouse gas emissions (CO As the engines are becoming ever better and more sophisticated, further improvements are increasingly difficult to achieve. In this context, numerical process simulation in combination with systematic numerical optimization procedures are increasingly becoming an absolute necessity. Of course, simulation results can only be as good as the underlying numerical models. So, model accuracy is a very important attribute, which is unfortunately closely related to computational efficiency. At this point, it must be noted that optimization procedures are typically iterative ones and high computational efficiency is needed in order to ensure acceptable optimization times. In this context, it is generally desirable that: (a) the underlying models are at least reasonably accurate, (b) the computation times are acceptable, and (c) the model is developed as quickly as possible by engaging existing numerical simulation software. This paper addresses the development of such a model for a mechanically controlled in-line fuel injection system (FIS) engaged in a diesel engine and fueled by renewable or partially renewable fuel blends. When it comes to good engine performance, low fuel consumption, and low emissions, the FIS is one of the most important parts because it defines fuel injection characteristics; and fuel injection characteristics are the key to lower engine emissions and lower fuel consumption, while keeping other engine characteristics at an acceptable level. A mechanically controlled FIS is a rather sophisticated mechanical system consisting of deformable solid parts, either fixed or moving, and of a fluid, present in liquid and gaseous form. The understanding and implementation of the physical phenomena involved in its modeling is a rather sophisticated task. Despite of this, previous researches have managed to develop reasonably accurate and computationally efficient models of injection systems for diesel engines fueled by regular diesel fuel In this work, the FIS modeling was done by using the AVL Boost™ Hydsim software Besides of the injection system type, fuel injection characteristics depend significantly on fuel properties In contrast to usual mineral diesel, the properties of various biodiesels and their blends with bioethanol are not so good investigated and documented, although these fuels can be used in internal combustion engines. For example, biodiesel, which is made from vegetable oils, can substitute diesel fuel totally or partially in a compression ignition engine. Meanwhile, bioethanol, which is made from sugar, starch crops and cellulose, makes the same for spark ignition engines. In this work both, diesel and biodiesel fuels, blended with low concentrations of bioethanol are addressed. These blends can be used to run a diesel engine as well, although they come with their own advantages and disadvantages This paper presents the development of a complete simulation model, consisting of the underlying mathematical model and input data. The mathematical model for an in-line injection system is built by using a commercial software and presented in detail with all involved components. Furthermore, the input required for the computation, consisting of simple data and functions, is also carefully prepared and explained. The developed simulation model is validated by experimental data obtained for neat diesel fuel, neat biodiesel made from rapeseed oil, and blends of 15% (v/v) bioethanol in diesel fuel and in biodiesel. The experimental parameters used to validate the simulation model are: needle lift history ( The structure of the paper is as follows. Section In the present study, injection characteristics are obtained and analysed for the following fuels: neat mineral diesel fuel without flow improver additives (D100), neat biodiesel from rapeseed oil (B100), a blend of 15% concentration by volume of bioethanol in biodiesel (E15B85) and a blend of 15% concentration by volume of bioethanol in diesel fuel (E15D85). In this paper, bioethanol is considered as an additive; for this reason, the concentration of bioethanol is set in no more than 15% by volume. According to the manufacturer specifications, the tested bioethanol is produced from fermentation of sugars and satisfies the ISO 9001 specifications. The tested biodiesel is conforming to European standard EN14214; its purity is assured by its ester content being higher than the minimum value prescribed by the biodiesel standard. The tested diesel fuel is conforming to the standard EN590. In order to be able to simulate the injection characteristics, the physical and chemical properties of each fuel must be defined. Some of those properties of D100, B100, bioethanol-biodiesel blends, and bioethanol-diesel fuel blends, were obtained experimentally and published in previous work of the authors: the properties of pure diesel fuel and bioethanol-diesel fuel blends are described in In order to validate the simulation model, first of all the experimentally obtained injection characteristics of neat biodiesel and diesel fuel, as well as E15B85, and E15D85 blends are needed. The corresponding tests were performed on a fuel injection system and test bed as specified in All details of the performed tests and the results are shown in a previous study  In addition to the injection histories, the sound velocity of all tested fuels was also obtained experimentally at various pressures up to 700 bars. These measurements were based on the principle of pressure wave propagation. Essentially, the testing device consists of a specified length of the high-pressure (HP) tube, two piezoelectric-based pressure transducers located at both ends of the tube, and a small plunger-type pump. The pump was used to induce a pressure wave, which was registered by both transducers and simultaneously acquired by an adequate measuring system The system under consideration is a mechanically controlled fuel injection system. It basically consists of a jerk pump, a constant pressure valve, a high-pressure (HP) tube, and an injector. This assembly was modeled by using the AVL Boost™ Hydsim software, where individual components of the assembly are tied together by engaging mechanical, hydraulic, or special connectors. The flow of the fuel through a single assembly to one cylinder can be simulated as a one-dimensional flow and the components can be considered rigid parts with the exception of special components like a spring. Based on these assumptions, the components of the FIS assembly were modeled as described in With appropriate input data, this model can be used to simulate injection characteristics of various fuels. It should be noted, however, that the usability and correctness of the model heavily depends on adequate input data that is typically not easily available. The input data needed for the mathematical model are related to fuel properties as well as to geometrical and mechanical parameters of the system. These data were mostly obtained either by measurements or from the literature. The remaining unknown parameters were estimated by adjusting the simulated injection pressure The basic input data related to fuel properties are summarized in The density ρ The bulk modulus of elasticity is given by (Eq. Neither kinematic viscosity ν nor surface tension σ were available experimentally for the studied blends. Therefore, these parameters were computed by linear interpolation (Eq. The main mechanical, geometrical, and cavitation parameters of the injection system were either measured or estimated in order to adequately simulate each component shown in In order to take into account for the cavitation phenomena, AVL Boost™ Hydsim calculates the void fraction (gas fraction inside the fuel) according to the pressure. The cavitation model used is based on the Rayleigh-Plesset theory of bubble dynamics Note that the 3 tested pump speeds were chosen so that they cover the range of all characteristic engine speeds of the ESC (European Stationary Cycle) test for this particular engine. Based on this, one can assume that a linear interpolation can be used to calculate the initial void fractions at most practically interesting speeds. The loads (100% and 75%), however, were chosen as to provide data for the regimes considered in this paper. So, linear interpolation can probably be used only within some reasonable corresponding range. According to The described procedure for computing the initial void fraction combines numerical and experimental data. Theoretically, the experimental work could be avoided by using an adequate numerical procedure, for example, by changing the initial conditions (vapour volume, pressure, …) and running sequentially simulations until the initial conditions match with the final ones at the end of injection. Such procedures, however, typically tend to exhibit poor numerical stability and might be quite problematic. AVL software estimates many parameters for each injection system component, for example, for nozzle elements it provides various output parameters related to: flow rate, cumulative flow, effective cross-sectional nozzle flow area, spray characteristics, injection power, injection duration, cavitation, etc. In order to verify the mathematical model, the numerically obtained injection characteristics have been compared to the experimental data given by our equipment. To simplify this comparison, the calculated response was used to compute the injection pressure  The injection pressure and needle lift histories presented in Based on these results, one may assume that the influence of different fuels on the injection characteristics at various operating regimes can be determined with reasonable accuracy by using the present simulation model. This model is capable of delivering results similar to the previously published model Finally, an example of an output parameter (mass injection rate history) obtained by simulation for a single operating regime and for all tested fuels is shown in According to the obtained results, it might be worth commenting briefly on the usability of tested fuels in a diesel engine. Our previous investigations In the present study, a complete simulation model for an in-line injection system was developed. The mathematical model was built by using the AVL Boost™ Hydsim software, while the required input data were carefully derived by using the results of previous work, existing data, experimental measurements, and numerical simulation. The model was tested for accuracy and validated by comparing experimental and numerically obtained injection pressure and needle lift histories. The comparison was done at full load and 75% partial load for various pump speeds (600, 800 and 1100 rpm) by considering a single injection assembly. According to the results, the following conclusions can be made: The underlying mathematical model is capable to deliver satisfactory results at acceptable computational effort. It allows for simulation of many injection characteristics such as fuelling, injection timing, injection duration, mean injection rate, and maximum injection pressure. The model can be built or modified relatively easily and can be used also to produce input data needed for simulating subsequent processes, such as spray formation, combustion process, and the estimation of exhaust emissions. Careful determination of model input data is of vital importance. Especially problematic are the properties of various biofuel blends, which are typically not known well enough. However, by making use of existing data, formulas and procedures described in this work, the presented model enables satisfactory simulations of injection processes at least for B100, D100, E15D85 and E15D85. Furthermore, the resulting model allows analysing the influence of bioethanol addition to biodiesel and diesel fuel on the injection process in view of harmful emission reduction. According to the results, it might be also worth to comment on the performance of tested fuels. In general, one may say that adding bioethanol to biodiesel has a beneficial effect, because this brings biodiesel injection characteristics close to those of neat diesel. This might indicate an interesting potential to substitute diesel fuel in a renewable way without heavy engine modifications. This research was supported by the