In this study, the influence of clay particles on bioleaching process of Sarcheshmeh Copper Mine in the south of Iran was investigated. Shake flasks experiment was carried out in a completely randomized design with six treatments including washed (T1), sieved (T2), and untreated (T3) of low-grade ore particles <2 mm, all inoculated with a mixture of sulfur and iron oxidizing bacteria and non-inoculated treatments (T4, T5 and T6) with the same ore particle sizes and three replications. The results showed that bacteria number in T3 treatment decreased significantly compared to T1 and T2 treatments. oxidation–reduction potential (ORP) decreased in T3 and T6 treatments due to the presence of clay particles. The highest concentration of extracted copper (50 mg/L) was obtained in the inoculated washed and sieved treatments (T1 and T2) and the least copper concentrations was measured in those treatments with high level of clay particles (T3 and T6). It was concluded that copper extraction was increased significantly by removing the clay particles from low-grade ore and this was pronounced when clay particles were washed by water.Sarcheshmeh mine is one of the largest copper mines in Iran, located in Kerman province. It is an open-pit mining using 20 million tons of copper ore (containing 0.8% grade) per year for conventional extraction of copper (Pyrometallurgical methods). The by-product of Sarcheshmeh mine is about 1 million tons of low-grade copper ore per year. In addition, 83 million tons of a sulphide resource with a low-grade of copper (about 0.5%) has been estimated in Darrehzar area located in the southeast of Sarcheshmeh Copper Complex. These low-grade copper ores not only create environmental problems but also huge amounts of copper become unusable. While the Sarcheshmeh's high-grade copper diminishes, the recovery costs of copper from low-grade ores becomes a serious challenge. It is an economical idea to find low cost processing methods to extract copper from low-grade ores. Heap bioleaching of low-grade copper sulphides is a developing technology that has been applied successfully to extract copper from secondary sulphide minerals such as chalcocite ( Primary observations on Darrehzar (with low-grade ore samples) showed that low-grade copper ore has lots of clay particles. Therefore, this study was designed to investigate the role of clay particles on bacterial activity during bioleaching process in Sarcheshmeh Copper Complex. The low-grade copper ore originally collected from Darrehzar was supplied by Sarcheshmeh Copper Complex. Darrehzar's ore sample was crushed and passed through a 2-mm sieve (10 meshes) for this study. Some of the low-grade copper ore < A mixed culture of Shake flasks experiment was carried out in a completely randomized design with six different treatments and three replications ( The pH and oxidation–reduction potential (ORP) of the samples were monitored periodically (as an index of bacterial activity) by a pH/Eh meter (Metrohm model 826). The population of free bacteria in solution was determined by direct microscopic counting. Solution evaporation was compensated by addition of distilled water. Copper concentration was determined in the leached solutions by atomic absorption spectrometer (Varian 220 FS). The results were analyzed by using Minitab and Excel softwares. Five milliliter of a previous isolated adapted strain of The chemical composition of sulfide copper ore collected from Darrehzar is shown in    The rate of copper extraction during 23 days of shake flask experiment was higher in T1 and T2 treatments while T6 and T3 had the minimum rate of extraction (  Ferrous iron concentration in both treatments (with and without clay particles) after 24 h of incubation was almost constant (8800 mg/L) and then biological oxidation process started with different rate in flask A (with clay particles) and flask B (without clay) ( A higher recovery of copper in bioleaching process was achieved by removing clay particles from low-grade copper ore originated from Darrehzar. The results also discovered that washing by water was more effective than sieving process in removing the clay particles in bioleaching process. The authors would like to express their sincere thanks and appreciation to the Ferdowsi University of Mashhad and Sarcheshmeh Copper Complex for financial support during this research.