Zinc orthotitanate (Zn1−x
                     Cu
                        x
                     )2TiO4, 0≤
                     x
                     ≤0.20, spinel samples were prepared by solid state reaction and sintering. 1060°C was the optimal sintering temperature for all the Cu-substituted samples which showed sintered density ≥94%, and maximum unloaded quality factor (Quf). SEM microphotographs revealed fairly uniform grains between 2 and 20μm depending upon the composition. Microwave measurements at ∼7.1–7.5GHz on these samples (as dielectric resonators) showed with Cu-substitution a steep increase in Quf value from 2100GHz (for Zn2TiO4, x
                     =0) to 15,200GHz (for x
                     =0.10), a significant jump of over 7 times, while 
                        
                           
                              
                                 ε
                                 ′
                              
                              r
                           
                        
                      was ∼20 (for x
                     =0) and ∼18 (x
                     =0.10). The jump in Quf in Cu-substituted samples was attributed partly to improved sintered density and partly to absence of paramagnetic Ti3+, as revealed by electron spin resonance spectra at 9.1GHz.In recent past, radio frequency (RF) multilayer device structures have been developed to reduce the device size and weight, in which cost effective low temperature co-fired ceramic (LTCC) dielectrics in combination with high conductivity internal-electrode metals are often employed Compounds from Zn–Ti–O system have been conventionally used as catalysts and pigments, and recently as dielectric ceramics Here, an attempt has been made to synthesize (Zn CuO is often used in many electronic ceramics as a sintering aid Polycrystalline (Zn High-purity (>99%, AR grade) powders of ZnO, TiO The different orthotitanate phase powders were uniaxially compacted at ∼100 The XRD patterns for the sintered pellets of different compositions were recorded (scan rate 0.04°/min) and lattice parameters computed. Powder XRD patterns were also recorded at a very slow scan speed (0.017°/min) for these ( Dielectric post (DP) resonator technique was employed for the microwave characterization of the ceramic samples. The sample under test was placed over a low loss support material and was enclosed in a microwave cylindrical cavity, which acted as a resonating structure. The TE The XRD patterns recorded on the surface of ( The density data (%TD) for the (Zn SEM photo-micrographs of a few thermally etched (Zn The values of The plausible explanation for a relatively lower Q For (Zn Temperature coefficient of resonant frequency ( Polycrystalline (Zn The authors wish to thank Dr. Subray L. Kamath and Mr. Dilip Agrahari (MEMS, IIT Bombay) for their help in SEM–EDS and measurements on Solartron impedance gain phase analyzer.