Scheelite is a calcium tungstate mineral that is an important ore of tungsten. It also contains small amounts of rare-earth metals, that enter the leaching liquor along with tungsten (W) after decomposition of the ore with H2SO4–H3PO4 mixed acid. In this study, a novel process was developed to effectively extract and separate tungsten and light rare earth (LRE) from this leaching liquor. La will represent LREs including La, Ce and Nd to be extracted in this research. First, W and La were extracted from the leaching liquor using a tertiary amine (N235). The results showed that 99.8% of W and 99.5% of La were extracted in the form of La-phosphotungstic acid complex anions under the conditions of N235 10% v/v, isooctanol 4% v/v, organic/aqueous (O/A) ratio of 1:1, pH of 2.6, temperature of 30 °C, and contact time of 10 min. Then, W and La were separated using a stripping process with H2SO4 solution. Nearly 99% of the La was recovered after single-stage stripping under the optimum stripping conditions of 1.5 mol/L H2SO4 solution, 10 min stripping time and O/A 1:1 at 45 °C, while almost no tungsten was stripped. After stripping with two cross-current extraction stages, the total La stripping reached 99.5%. Finally, the tungsten loaded on the organic phase was stripped with ammonia solution. Under the same optimum conditions, W stripping exceeded 99%. Extraction and two-stage stripping enabled effective recovery and separation of W and La from the leaching liquor. Based on above results, the process flowchart for extracting tungsten and light rare earth from scheelite was proposed. The proposed method is expected to promote further exploitation of valuable tungsten and rare-earth metals from scheelite ores.Rare-earth (RE) metals are considered strategically important due to their unique physical and chemical properties ( Recently, our research team developed a novel method for the decomposition of scheelite using H In current metallurgical processes for extracting tungsten, many methods extract tungsten in the form of hexatungstate anions ( Based on this background, a solvent extraction method with N235 was developed for extracting tungsten and LREs from the H In general, the content of associated LREs in scheelite ore is about 0.1 wt%. After decomposition, the concentration is still low in the leaching liquor. To efficiently recover the LREs, its concentration in the leaching liquor need to be increased. Therefore, after extracting tungsten, the leaching liquor needs be recycled to decompose the scheelite. After multiple leaching cycles, the LREs concentration can reach around 1 g/L. Hence, in this study, a synthetic leaching liquor was prepared by dissolving lanthanum oxide (analytical reagent (AR); Xilong Chemical Co., Ltd.) and phosphotungstic acid (H Tri(octyl–decyl) After acidification, the organic phase was used for extraction. H In the extraction experiment, the synthetic leaching liquor and organic phase were first poured into a 125-mL separating funnel according to the required organic/aqueous ratio (O/A). Then, the funnel was placed in a water bath oscillator at the reaction temperature for a specified time. The reaction temperature and time were varied. After phase separation, 1 mL of the raffinate was sampled for analysis. For the stripping experiments, the loaded organic phase and H The concentration of W and La in the raffinate and stripping liquor was analyzed by ICP-OES (iCAP 7200 Radial, Thermo Fisher Scientific, USA). The concentrations of W and La in the loaded organic phase were obtained by mass balance calculations. The extraction efficiency ( First, the organic phase with different N235 fractions was used to extract W and La, and the experimental results are shown in Increasing the N235 fraction above 10% v/v resulted in no obvious change in W extraction, which remained above 99%. However, for an N235 fraction above 20% v/v, the La extraction decreased slightly as the organic phase contained HSO Different fractions of isooctanol were used to prepare the organic phase, which was used to extract W and La. The extraction results are listed in   The effect of O/A on the extraction efficiency of W and La is shown in According to Eq. After washing, the loaded organic phase was mixed with different concentrations of H  The effect of temperature on the stripping efficiency of W and La is shown in  The experimental results showed that the La stripping efficiency exceeded 98%, and almost no tungsten was stripped at the optimal conditions after single-stage stripping. To improve the separation of W and La and prepare pure tungsten products, the La stripping efficiency needed to be increased further. In addition, any remaining La in the organic phase will produce precipitates during the tungsten stripping process using ammonia. Therefore, the La in the organic phase should be stripped as completely as possible. Based on this, two-stage cross-current stripping was used to improve La stripping, and the results are shown in After two-stage cross-current stripping with H The effect of temperature on W stripping is also shown in The effect of contact time on the W stripping efficiency is shown in  Based on the research above, a process flowchart to extract tungsten and LREs from scheelite is proposed in The experimental results showed that tungsten and LREs were successfully extracted and separated from H We have approved the final version to be published. We agree to be accountable for all aspects of the work in ensuring that questions related to the accuracy or integrity of any part of the work are appropriately investigated and resolved. The authors declared that they have no conflicts of interest to this work. We declare that we do not have any commercial or associative interest that represents a conflict of interest in connection with the work submitted. This research was financially supported by