Many rock types have naturally occurring inherent anisotropic planes, such as bedding planes, foliation, or flow structures. Such characteristic induces directional features and anisotropy in rocks' strength and deformational properties. The Hoek–Brown (H–B) failure criterion is an empirical strength criterion widely applied to rock mechanics and engineering. A direct modification to H–B failure criterion to account for rock anisotropy is considered as the base of the research. Such modification introduced a new definition of the anisotropy as direct parameter named the anisotropic parameter (K
                     
                        β
                     ). However, the computation of this parameter takes much experimental work and cannot be calculated in a simple way. The aim of this paper is to study the trend of the relation between the degree of anisotropy (R
                     c) and the minimum value of anisotropic parameter (K
                     min), and to predict the K
                     min directly from the uniaxial compression tests instead of triaxial tests, and also to decrease the amount of experimental work.The study of both intact rock and rock mass behaviors is a hot issue in the design of engineering applications on/in rocks. Rock mass behavior is usually assumed to be isotropic. According to Hence, the concept of design on/in rocks is that most of rock masses are under stresses and forces – regardless of the source of stresses – which influence the stability of the rock materials. These stresses and forces affect the rocks by inducing changes in the rock structures and forming discontinuities in rock masses. Discontinuity is a collective term used to include joints, fractures, bedding planes, rock cleavage, foliation, shear zones, faults, etc. The planes of anisotropy are also classified as discontinuities and fractures. These planes of anisotropy are known as inherent planes in rock material, e.g. pre-existing planes of weakness, bedding planes, or planes induced by the loading associated with construction or operation of the project, e.g. initiation and propagation of cracks ( Inherent anisotropy is considered as the nature of rocks which affects the behavior and properties of rocks in particular for the metamorphic and sedimentary rocks. From rock mechanics point of view, anisotropic nature of rocks causes the difference of the rock strength with respect to the orientation of loading and inherent planes ( Hoek–Brown (H–B) failure criterion is one of the main criteria of rock failure mechanism and is used widely for design purposes in/on rock masses. This criterion is used to predict the rock strength with respect to the principal stresses ( On the other hand, a reported modification to H–B failure criterion by The main problem is how to define the trend and find out the relationship between the direct anisotropic parameter and rock strength classification proposed by In order to compute the value of anisotropic parameter ( An anisotropic rock has different properties in different directions. This nature is governed by the special structure characteristics of rocks which are the uncontrollable nature of rocks: the minerals forming the rocks, the orientations of the minerals' crystals, and the interaction between different grains. This anisotropic nature of rocks can be stated, according to Most foliated metamorphic rocks, such as schist, slates, gneisses and phyllites, contain a natural orientation in their flat/long minerals or a banding phenomenon which results in anisotropy in their mechanical properties. Stratified sedimentary rocks like sandstone, shale or sandstone–shale alteration often display anisotropic behaviors due to presence of bedding planes. Anisotropy can also be exhibited by igneous rocks having flow structures as may be observed in rhyolites ( These anisotropies are often referred to as inherent anisotropy, and the corresponding rocks are sometimes categorized as intact anisotropic rock. The strength anisotropy definition means that the directional characteristics of rocks, such as deformability modulus, strength, brittleness, permeability and discontinuity frequency, are the function of angle between load orientation and inherent planes of anisotropy, Previous studies tried to solve the problem of representation of anisotropy in rock strength criterion. Attempts of classification of the rocks were made based on the anisotropic properties ( The H–B failure criterion ( The original criterion depends on the compressive strength The determined values of the H–B criterion parameters for intact rock (  Consequently, in order to predict the strength of intact anisotropic rock, The variation of the values  The modification to H–B failure criterion has been carried out by incorporation of a new parameter, called “anisotropic parameter” The minimum value of The function of the reported anisotropic parameter is not only to decrease the anisotropic behavior of the intact rock in the H–B criterion but also to describe the degree of anisotropy of the tested intact rock. Although this modification is introduced in the failure criterion, there still need a large number of experiments for calculation of  It is evident that the ratio Both the anisotropic parameter The methodology would be arranged the same as that referred by According to The results would be the values of the anisotropic parameter for each orientation; these results are extracted from the tested rock samples. There would be a linear relation between the anisotropic strength The limitations of the proposed relation are described as follows: The relationship shows continuity within the ranges of the anisotropic strength classification proposed by For the isotropic rock ( The value of The anisotropic strength ( The minimum value of The gathered data can be listed in The notes of the gathered data are described as follows: The minimum value of the UCS is usually obtained at The minimum value of the anisotropic parameter ( The maximum value of the UCS is mostly obtained at The studied samples of anisotropic rocks include 5 low anisotropic rocks, 4 medium anisotropic rocks, 4 high anisotropic rocks, and 2 very high anisotropic rocks, according to the anisotropic strength classification ( The linear formulation resulting from the output data in The coefficient of determination Accordingly, the practical maximum value of ratio Also a linear regression is carried out in order to evaluate the best fit of the proposed relation between The coefficient of determination of Finally, it shows that the maximum value of Thus, a modification to the anisotropic strength classification can be conducted using this relation to obtain the range of On the other hand, it is depicted from Furthermore, there is a close relation between the computed and the expected values of It is obvious that the anisotropy characteristics of rocks have effects on their mechanical properties, which depend on the load orientation relative to the inherent anisotropic planes. While the main role of the anisotropy, from rock mechanics point of view, is represented in the differentiation of the rock strength associated with the orientation of loading and inherent planes. Also, the strength anisotropy definition means that the directional characteristics of the rocks, such as deformability modulus, strength, brittleness, permeability and discontinuity frequency, are functions of the angle between load orientation and inherent planes of anisotropy, The indirect modification to H–B failure criterion aims at altering the values of the rock parameters, depending on a large number of experiments which may be not provided for each case. On the other hand, the direct modification to H–B failure criterion to account for the anisotropy is the insertion of the anisotropic parameter into the criterion. The authors use the terminology, the anisotropic strength parameter The proposed relation between the minimum value of the anisotropic parameter The authors wish to confirm that there are no known conflicts of interest associated with this publication and there has been no significant financial support for this work that could have influenced its outcome. We are grateful for the helpful discussions with Prof. Hany M. Helal (Former Higher Education Minister, Egypt) and also for his useful comments.