The infrared thermography has been tested herein for the study of the thermal radiation characteristics of stress evolution induced by a circular tunnel excavation during the biaxial compression tests of the similar material, together with the uniaxial compression test for the cylindrical specimen of the same material. The results showed that the stress curve of the cylindrical specimen displayed some larger fluctuations while the average infrared radiation temperature (AIRT) curve decreased with time. The correlations between the axial stress of the cylindrical specimen and its surface thermal radiation temperature presented distinctly two stages, namely negative nonlinear correlation in the front-peak curve and linear correlation in the post-peak curve. The cylindrical specimen demonstrated a tensile failure mode and showed the cooling effect. Under biaxial uniform compression, the temperature field and the stress field of the surrounding rock displayed a homogeneous state after the circular tunnel excavation. Maintaining the horizontal load constant and continuing to increase the vertical load, the thermal radiation temperatures on the specimen surface demonstrated a significant change after the circular tunnel excavation, which verified the consistency of the dynamic evolution process of the temperature field and the stress field during the circular tunnel excavation. The results obtained in the study lay the foundations for future studies focusing on the utility of the infrared thermography in the similar engineering.It is often difficult to perform the stress measurement directly, so the non-destructive and noncontact scanning, namely the thermal infrared imaging technology has been widely applied to various aspects in the world. For example, In recent decades, to overcome the disadvantage that the strain gauges pasted on the specimen surface fail due to a greater deformation fracture for the brittle and quasi-brittle media such as rock, extensive researches have been conducted by applying the thermal infrared imaging technology to the rock and similar material in China. For example, based on the thermal infrared radiation (TIR) detection during uniaxial loading tests, To sum up the above mentioned literatures, we found that the thermal infrared imaging technology could be applied for detection of the failure process of concrete, coal, metal, and other materials. Although this technique had been widely used in several scientific fields, its direct application for rock mechanics purposes was still under development. Moreover, it was not perfect enough about the dynamic evolution process of the temperature field and the stress field after a tunnel excavation. So it is necessary to conduct the further study for observation of thermal radiation characteristics of stress evolution induced by a circular tunnel excavation and revealing the correlation curve of the loading stress and the thermal infrared temperature on the surface of the specimen using the infrared thermography. The thermal infrared imaging technology, as a method of observation surface temperature change of the test material, based on the correlation establishment between the radiation temperature and the stress variation, the temporal phases and the spatial evolution characteristics of the thermal radiation and the stress variation could be obtained in real time ( As shown in So the reliability of the infrared thermography results can be verified by the G. Kirsch’s solutions, and the results will provide the technical reference for the real-time detection of the stress field changes of the rock specimens by using the infrared radiation imaging technology. Based on G. Kirsch’s solutions, the biaxial compressive tests of similar material were conducted for observation of thermal radiation characteristics of stress evolution induced by a circular tunnel excavation using infrared thermography. Two different shape samples were selected to complete the tests in the paper. For obtaining the correlations between the axial stress of the specimen and its surface thermal radiation temperature, the cylindrical specimen of the similar material was conducted to the uniaxial compression test. Then, in order to establish the relationship between the rock stress and the infrared radiation temperature after the circular tunnel excavation under different confining pressures, the similar materials test of a circular tunnel loaded by biaxial compression was carried out by the infrared thermography technology. As shown in The loading device whose maximum load for 3000 kN was equipped with RLW-3000 servo control compression testing machine, as shown in A modern TIR imaging system, FLIR ThermaCAM SC3000 with temperature precision 0.02 °C was applied for the TIR radiation detection and image recording during the circular tunnel excavation. The infrared camera with 7.5–13 μm spectral response range was performed with the given calibration temperature within the range of −40 to +500 °C, and the IR image resolution was for 640 × 480 pixels. The laboratory tests were conducted according to the following procedures: Step 1: Turned on the computer, then started the devices, checked and debugged the mechanical testing system. Step 2: Placed the specimen just below the indenter, firstly, made the indenter close to the specimen with a coarse control, then approximated the test specimen and loaded in accordance with the designed loading rate. Step 3: Connected the infrared acquisition equipment of FLIR ThermaCAM SC3000 and debugged the corresponding devices. After aiming the camera onto the target and the focusing the camera, to get a good image from the camera, we should select and adjust an appropriate measurement range via Settings in the Image menu of the camera considering the object parameters, such as emissivity, reflected temperature, atmospheric temperature, relative humidity of the air, the distance and the external optics transmission and temperature. Step 4: The cylindrical specimens were loaded in the axial direction at a constant rate 0.0025 mm/s until the failure occured for the uniaxial compression test. The force and deformation of the specimens were monitored during the loading process. The uniaxial compressive strength of the similar material is 0.92 MPa. Step 5: The square plate specimen with a hole, which the cylindrical filler was inserted into before loading, was loaded to 5.0 kN in the biaxial direction at a constant rate of 0.0025 mm/s. Then the specimen was unloaded to simulate the tunnel excavation and maintained for 2.0 min after the cylindrical filler being withdrawn. Due to the small deformation of the model and it being in the elastic state, the cylindrical filler was inserted again, and then the specimen was loaded to 6.5 kN in the vertical direction at a constant rate of 0.0025 mm/s, the cylindrical filler was withdrawn again to simulate tunnel excavation under this conditions, and the specimen was unloaded and maintained for 2.0 min. The relevant data were collected and the loading process was completed. To maintain the horizontal stress constant and change the vertical stress was just to simulate the tunnel excavation under different stress conditions, which was of an important practical significance for the similar engineering. Step 6: When the experiments were completed, at first the loadings in the horizontal direction and then in the axial direction were unloaded, uplifting the indenter, deriving the experimental data, removing the test specimen, and finally the related experiment equipment was closed. The average infrared radiation temperature ( As seen from In order to reflect the infrared radiation characteristics of the sample under an uniaxial compression test, the relationship curves between By X-ray diffraction analysis for the white cement sample, the mineral types and contents of white cement samples were obtained as shown in In general, there was an endothermic effect for the solid material. When the specimen was under the compression stress state, the gas inside the pores escaped, leading to the temperature drop, so the endothermic effect was generated. If the specimen interior had many pores, a strong endothermic effect would be produced, and if the thermoelastic effect was less than the endothermic effect due to gas escaping, the final temperature would show a drop trend. Under the uniaxial compression test, the infrared radiation of the sample surface was mainly manifested as an endothermic effect. All these were due to the calcite in the white cement specimen with high heat capacity, low thermal conductivity, and the white cement particles with more cracks and voids, loose connection among the particles ( The infrared monitoring points and positions of the square sample with hole were shown in When the loading at a constant velocity in the horizontal direction and the vertical direction reached a relatively stable state (500 s), the temperatures of three monitoring points AR01, AR02 and AR03 showed little differences, the temperature value was about 12.7 °C. This phase indicated that the temperature field and the stress field of the surrounding rock of the circular tunnel were in a homogeneous state. When the specimen was evenly biaxial loaded to 5.0 kN, the tunnel was first excavated (660 s), the temperature curves showed the sharp downward trend. Although the stress concentration increased in the surrounding rock of the circular tunnel, the temperatures of three monitoring points were about 12.5 °C, indicating that the temperature field and the stress field of the surrounding rock of the circular tunnel were also in a homogeneous state. When the circular tunnel was conducted the second filling, the temperature curves of three monitoring points appeared suddenly on the rise (770–830 s). Then maintaining the horizontal load of 5.0 kN, and continuing increased the vertical load to 6.5 kN, the temperature curves of three monitoring points decreased at different velocity rates, indicating that there was a complicated stress redistribution in the surrounding rock of the circular tunnel. When the tunnel was secondly excavated (1180 s), the temperatures of three monitoring points showed obvious differences, namely When As shown in When the specimen was evenly biaxial loaded to 5.0 kN, the tunnel was first excavated (660 s), the infrared radiation temperature of the specimen surface dropped, the temperatures of three monitoring points were about 12.5 °C, indicating that the temperature field and the stress field of the surrounding rock of the circular tunnel were also in a homogeneous state. Maintained the horizontal load of 5.0 kN, and continued to increase the vertical load to 6.5 kN, then the tunnel was secondly excavated (1180 s), the infrared temperature of the specimen surface continued to drop, the temperatures of three monitoring points were measured, From the above analysis, the following innovative results were obtained comparison with some existing works done elsewhere The uniaxial compression test of the cylinder model and biaxial compression test of the circle tunnel model were conducted by using the analogy material and infrared thermal imaging technique. The dynamic evolution of the stress field during the circle tunnel excavation was comprehensive analyzed from meso-structural property of the analogy material and macro-deformation of the surrounding rock. Moreover, the infrared characteristic of the analogy material and the consistency of infrared temperature and stress response were investigated. The main conclusions are as follows: The uniaxial stress-time curve experienced two phase changes composed of a rise till peak value and then decline with time, and the stress-time curve showed larger fluctuations. The thermal radiation temperature-time curve showed a monotonically decreasing trend, the cylindrical specimen displayed a tensile failure mode, showing the cooling effect. The relationships between the axial stress and the average infrared radiation temperature of the sample demonstrated a striking change with the load increasing, which was the negative nonlinear correlation displayed in the front-peak phase and the linear correlation displayed in the post-peak phase. When the specimen was under the evenly biaxial loading condition, the temperature curves showed the sharp downward trend after the circular tunnel excavation, and the temperature field and the stress field of the surrounding rock were also in a homogeneous state. Maintaining the horizontal load constant and continuing to increase the vertical load, the temperature curves of three monitoring points decreased at different velocity rates, there was a complicated stress redistribution in the surrounding rock of the circular tunnel. In this study, the surrounding rock of the deep tunnel was close to the soft rock. However, it was not clear whether there would be a large variability under the hard rock conditions. Moreover, since the time factor was not taking into consideration, the creep behavior would also be needed to further study in the next work. This work was financially supported by the