This paper investigates the relationship between the induced electric potential and the velocity distribution of the conductive continuous phase in two-phase flows in pipes to which an electromagnetic field is applied, with a view to measuring the continuous phase velocity profile. In order to investigate the characteristics of an electromagnetic flow meter in multiphase flow, an alternating current electromagnetic flow meter was modelled using FEMLAB software. Using the model, electrodes could be placed at any position on the insulating internal surface of the flow meter to satisfy the requirement of measuring the induced potentials at specific locations at the boundary of the flow. The induced electric potential or potential differences from the electrodes were analysed for various simulated flow conditions. The numerical simulation results suggest that electromagnetic flow metering may be an effective novel method for measuring the axial velocity profile of the conducting continuous phase. Furthermore, when combined with the local volume fraction distribution of the continuous phase (obtained, for example, using Electrical Resistance Tomography, also known as ERT), it is expected that the measured continuous phase velocity profile would enable the volumetric flow rate of the continuous phase to be obtained.There are many potential applications for an electromagnetic flow meter in industrially important multiphase flows in which the continuous phase has a relatively high electrical conductivity (e.g. water) whilst the dispersed phase or phases have a much lower conductivity or may even be insulators (e.g. oil). These include (i) ‘rock particle in water’ flows which occur during the hydraulic transportation of rock in mineral processing applications; (ii) ‘rock cuttings in water based drilling mud’ flows which occur during oil well drilling operations; (iii) oil-in-water flows which occur downhole in offshore oil wells at pressures which are too great to allow dissolved gases to come out of solution; (iv) oil and gas in water flows which can occur at the well-head in oil production operations and (v) solids-in-water flows which occur in wastewater treatment applications. In these, and many other, applications it is frequently important to be able to measure the volumetric flow rates of each of the flowing phases. In the past decade, significant progress has been made in measuring the volumetric flow rate Although significant progress has been made in measuring the properties of the dispersed phase, very little progress has been made in the development of techniques for measuring the volumetric flow rate of the high conductivity continuous phase (which in most cases is water). It is well known that electromagnetic flow meters are very useful for measuring the volumetric flow rate of single phase water. It has also been shown In the present study, an electromagnetic flow meter utilising an alternating current (AC) sinusoidal excitation source to excite the magnetic coils of the electromagnetic flow meter is modelled and analysed. The induced potentials and potential differences at various positions in the cross section of the flow meter, under different kinds of axial velocity distribution, are simulated and presented. The numerical simulation uses the following assumptions:  The investigation is carried out into the distribution of induced potentials on the insulating internal circumference of the flow meter. Different conductivity distributions, corresponding to different local volume fraction distributions of the non-conducting dispersed phase in the conducting continuous phase, are investigated; A single fluid model (i.e. no slip velocity between the continuous and dispersed phases) is assumed. Different axial velocity profiles are simulated which are similar to those likely to be encountered in horizontal and inclined multiphase flows Using (i)–(iii) above, the potential on the flow meter boundary is calculated and attempts are made to relate calculated potential differences to the axial velocity distribution of the flow. The model is a valid representation of an electromagnetic flow meter in two-phase flows because the velocity distribution of the discontinuous phase has no effect on the induced potentials. Thus, the induced potentials obtained are those that would be obtained from a two-phase flow in which the continuous phase velocity profile is the same as the ‘single-fluid’ velocity profile used in the model. The rest of the paper is organized as follows. Section Electromagnetic flow meters have been used for several decades, while the basic principle dates from the days of Faraday. The theory of electromagnetic flow meters belongs to the subject of magnetohydrodynamics, formed by the combination of the classical disciplines of fluid mechanics and electromagnetism. Fluid moving in a magnetic field experiences an electromotive force acting in a direction perpendicular both to the motion and to the magnetic field. The conventional form of an electromagnetic flow meter with a transverse magnetic field is shown in Bevir In the case of a uniform and isotropic suspension two-phase flow, Bernier and Brennen In order to calculate the induced potential of an electromagnetic flow meter a geometrical model was designed as shown in Since AC excitation of the coils is used, the magnetic potential vector Different velocity distributions in combination with different conductivity variations have been simulated. According to the geometrical model, physical model and the preconditions given in Section The next stage is to impose an axial flow velocity distribution on the system (note that in the context of this paper ‘axial flow’ refers to velocity in For the axial velocity distribution given by Eq. On the basis of the results described in Section     Combinations (i) and (ii) above correspond to a pipe Reynolds number of For each of conditions (i)–(iv) above,  It is clear from For the cases where the axial flow velocity To compensate for the effect of chord length on the induced potential differences, a plot of ‘calculated potential difference divided by chord length’ Numerical simulations on the use of electromagnetic flow meters to measure axial velocity profiles similar to those encountered in multiphase flows have been performed. The induced electric potentials and potential differences at various positions on the internal circumference of the flow pipe have been calculated for two kinds of axial velocity distribution and two kinds of fluid conductivity distribution. The important conclusion is that induced potential differences, measured using an array of boundary electrodes, could conceivably be used to infer the axial velocity distribution of the flow. The influence of the conductivity distribution of the fluid on the induced potential differences is relatively small, however the conductivity distribution has greater influence when there is spatial variation in the axial velocity. It is suggested that further work could be performed to investigate whether tomographic techniques could be used to reconstruct the axial flow velocity distribution from potential differences measured on the internal circumference of the flow pipe. The contribution of each fluid element or ‘pixel’ to induced potential differences between electrode pairs would be investigated. Numerical simulations would provide design parameters for such a tomographic instrument and would also assist in the development of inverse (reconstruction) algorithms to enable axial velocity distributions to be determined from boundary potential difference measurements. The authors would like to acknowledge the financial support of the Jiangsu Government Scholarship for Overseas Studies and the Natural Science Research Project of Jiangsu Education Department (Grant No. 06KJB510006). Dr. Jingzhuo Wang would also like to thank the University of Huddersfield, UK and Huaihai Institute of Technology for their support of his work in the UK.