Synergistic effects of Cyanex 272 mixed with D2EHPA and Cyanex 302 mixed with D2EHPA were investigated for the separation of cobalt and nickel from a dilute sulfate media with the aim of reducing the reagent cost. Selective extraction of cobalt over nickel improved with respect to D2EHPA, but worsened with respect to Cyanex 272. By the application of the slope analysis method, the stoichiometric coefficient of the extractant was found to be four for cobalt and five for nickel, in a mixture of D2EHPA with Cyanex 302. However, it was four for both cobalt and nickel in a mixture of D2EHPA with Cyanex 272. Fourier Transform Infrared Spectroscopy (FT-IR) was utilized to examine the organo-metallic complexes containing cobalt and nickel. Increasing the ratio of Cyanex 272 or Cyanex 302 to D2EHPA did not reveal a significant effect on the extraction curve of cobalt, but caused an increase in pH of the nickel extraction curve. Increasing the ratio of Cyanex 272 or Cyanex 302 to D2EHPA increased the pH50 difference (ΔpH50(Ni–Co)). Optimum separation was found with a Cyanex 302 to D2EHPA ratio of 0.3:0.3 when the pH50 difference (ΔpH50(Ni–Co)) was 0.9. Results showed that extraction of cobalt is more endothermic than that of nickel. Improved separation was hence achieved with a warm mixture.A review of the current research reveals that cobalt/nickel separation is a major hydrometallurgical problem when choosing a single component D2EHPA solution. Many researchers ( Alternative extractants have been proposed by previous authors to cope with this problem ( Investigations on cobalt/nickel separation by mixtures of different extractants have also been carried out. For example,  Fourier Transform Infrared Spectroscopy (FT-IR) is one of the few analytical techniques currently available for studying a reactive extraction system. Utilization of this technique leads to a better understanding of the interaction between organic solvent and the organo-metallic complex present in the system ( Although the Cyanex extractants offer good separation of cobalt and nickel, they are relatively expensive to be used commercially. While D2EHPA is much less expensive, its separation efficiency is unacceptable for this purpose. This paper therefore reports on the most recent results obtained from an extensive investigation of cobalt/nickel separation from sulfate media by mixed D2EHPA/(Cyanex 272 or Cyanex 302). The purpose is to investigate the synergistic effects of cobalt–nickel with D2EHPA/(Cyanex272 or Cyanex 302) mixtures in kerosene, and to explore the merits of these alternative organic solvents in providing desirable separation factors at reasonable prices. A further goal is to understand the thermodynamics and mechanism of the cobalt/nickel extraction with D2EHPA, Cyanex 272 and Cyanex 302 and their mixtures. Different stripping behaviors were observed with the different values of pH Commercial bis-2-ethylhexyl phosphoric acid (D2EHPA) was purchased from Sandong Chemical, Chengdu China, while di-2,4,4,-trimethylpentyl phosphinic (Cyanex 272) and di-2,4,4,-trimethylpentyl mono-thio-phosphinic acid (Cyanex 302) were obtained from Cytec Netherlands. Kerosene was purchased from Tehran Refinery Co. and was used as a diluent. Sulfuric acid and ammonium hydroxide (ammonia solution) from Baran Chemical Company of IRAN were employed for adjusting the pH of the system. Batch experiments were carried out in a flask containing equal volumes (20 mL) of aqueous and organic solutions. Initial concentrations of both cobalt and nickel in the aqueous phase were 5 g/L. The mixture was agitated at a constant temperature of 25, 40 or 60 °C with a mechanical shaker. Although equilibrium could be achieved in less than 10 min ( A survey shows that Cyanex 272 and Cyanex 302 are not capable of extracting nickel at pH The following experiments were carried out to determine the extraction mechanism of cobalt and nickel and how D2EHPA and Cyanex 272 or Cyanex 302 associate together during the extraction. However, the extraction curves of nickel plotted for different D2EHPA/Cyanex 272 or 302 mixtures shift to the right by increasing the Cyanex to D2EHPA ratio ( Extraction curves of nickel, using 0.3 M D2EHPA and a 1:1 mixture of 0.3 M D2EHPA and Cyanex 302 are shown in The extraction reaction of a divalent metal (M  A review of the previous work ( FT-IR measurements were carried out to assess the results obtained in the previous section. FT-IR analyses of the organic phases were carried out with a Unicam FT-IR Spectrometer (Mattson 1000 model) using NaCl Windows. Some references on the application of FT-IR to the solvent extraction system reveal that phosphonic, phosphinic and phosphoric acids can be identified from relevant vibrational characteristic bands. The FT-IR spectra of pure liquid D2EHPA, Cyanex 272 and Cyanex 302 have been analyzed and the results are quite similar to those found by other researchers ( FT-IR analysis of a nickel loaded mixture of D2EHPA and Cyanex 302 at the molar ratio of 0.3:0.3 is shown in FT-IR analysis of a nickel loaded mixture of 0.3 M D2EHPA and Cyanex 272 is shown in To assess the effect of temperature on the extraction of cobalt and nickel, experiments were carried out at three different temperatures (25, 40 and 60 °C). The results obtained are shown in The separation factor ( A lower nickel distribution factor gives a better separation of cobalt from nickel. This improves, of course, the selectivity of the solution. Increasing The values of cobalt–nickel separation factor It can be concluded that D2EHPA mixed in Cyanex 272 and D2EHPA mixed in Cyanex 302 have synergistic effects on the co-extraction of cobalt from nickel. These results are more prominent in the case of D2EHPA–Cyanex 302 than in the case of D2EHPA–Cyanex 272 mixtures. The value of Stoichiometric coefficients ( Cobalt and nickel extraction reactions were both endothermic; with cobalt extraction more endothermic than that of nickel. With increasing the concentration of Cyanex 302, values of the apparent enthalpies increased also. The apparent enthalpy values for the extraction of cobalt and nickel with a D2EHPA:Cyanex 302 mole ratio 0.3:0.3 are 59.5 and 47.9 kJ/mol, respectively. The apparent enthalpy values for the extraction of cobalt and nickel with a D2EHPA:Cyanex 272 mole ratio 0.3:0.3 are 61.1 and 34.1 kJ/mol, respectively. Therefore, improved cobalt and nickel separation could be favored by elevating the temperature for all mixtures. By addition of Cyanex 272 or Cyanex 302 to D2EHPA and raising the temperature, the difference ΔpH Further work on the extraction of other metals such as Zn, Cd and Mn by these mixtures is being carried out and will be reported later.