The exceptional properties of hardmetals have helped drive booming industries such as electronics and precision engineering. As grain sizes reduce, there will be no shortage of applications…A key session of the Plansee Seminar was devoted to manufacturing methods, properties and applications of so-called ultrafine and nanocrystalline hard materials, writes I would take issue with the authors over their historical research (see Different views of history, Some of the notable changes in physical and mechanical properties as grain size is reduced are listed in Although WC/Co hardmetal is a two-phase material, the finer the microstructure, the more closely it resembles a homogeneous material. This is especially important in very small tooling, when very uniform and sharp cutting edges are required ( The efficiency of commercial-scale milling reduces significantly for particle sizes of less than one micrometre. Very fine WC starting powders of 0.4μm crystallite size or less are usually agglomerated, so comminution to 1μm particle size means that much of the milled powder remains as polycrystalline aggregates. Tracking the change of particle size distribution within milled powders is difficult, laser diffractometry being probably the most practical current technique. Its use is demonstrated in  Two possibilities were then presented for the addition of binder and grain-growth inhibitors. The conventional method was to add cobalt metal powder and also the inhibitor, which caused problems if the mixture was not completely uniform. This was because much of the shrinkage of ultrafine hardmetal takes place before the formation of liquid phase, preserving any inhomogeneities. Very fine cobalt powders of 400nm were now available, but to reduce risks due to dust-inhalation or pyrophoricity, and to improve their flow properties, they were generally agglomerated and passivated by using organic additives. The organic additives were lost during the mixing and milling phase. Alternatively, binder additions could be made at this stage by adding a salt solution (for example, cobalt oxalate, acetate or chloride), followed by drying and hydrogen reduction in situ, leaving each carbide particle coated with a thin surface layer or nanoparticles of cobalt binder. Grain-growth inhibitor could be added as salts in similar fashion, or by pre-doping the W or WC starting powder. Compaction of ultrafine powders was generally conventional, covering uniaxial pressing, wet- or dry-bag cold isostatic pressing, extrusion and injection moulding. Free-flowing grade powders were preferred, with admixed organic powders and lubricants, spray-dried where possible. The high compaction pressures needed for these very fine powders leads to the use of lower pressed densities and/or higher shrinkages, with a consequential risk of under-compaction and sintering porosity. In the case of extrusion, the situation was made worse by the possibility of inhomogeneously mixed lubricants and organic binders. Therefore, according to the authors, all of these grades required HIP-sintering (sinter-HIP) or subsequent HIP treatment to achieve the desired density.  Experience has shown that wear applications demanding durability at high working temperatures (as in high-removal-rate steel machining, rock cutting and hot forming), or those that require superior impact fracture resistance, remain better suited to hardmetals of coarser grain size. The presenter explained that the main focus in developing finer submicron hardmetal toward the nanometre range was to raise hardness and to maximise attrition wear resistance and bend strength, whilst as far as possible maintaining other attributes at useful levels. The trend of miniaturisation in many fields of technology, including electronics, bio-medical products, automotive fuel systems and transducers, has strengthened considerably over recent years, leading to general growth in hardmetal usage for micro-cutting tools. The biggest single application is the production of microdrills and routers for printed circuit board (PCB) manufacture. The forecast demand for PCB micro-tools in 2005 was for more than 500 million, representing more than 2000 tonnes of ultrafine tungsten carbide hardmetal. Micro-drill sizes of less than 0.1mm diameter are now commercially available for drilling ‘microvia’ holes in multi-layer PCB's. Average sintered grain size in carbides for this application has fallen from around 0.4μm in 2000 to approaching 0.2μm in 2005, I In technically advanced producers, even 50 years ago this would only have been true for grain sizes less than about 0.8μm - a substantial difference. Krupp-Widia was certainly aware of the grain-growth inhibiting action of vanadium carbide and employed it in at least one standard submicron grade made during the Second World War. Their technology was freely available in BIOS reports during the post-war years. But surely the company that I joined over 50 years ago could not have been so far ahead of everyone else in recognising the effectiveness of chromium carbide in this respect. When I joined this manufacturer in the early 1950s, its 6Co submicron grade was already its best-seller, notably (but by no means exclusively) for milling cutters - for steel as well as cast iron. Hardly a niche application: it was standardised (typically in Richard Lloyd's Galtona cutters) by many companies, even as far away as General Motors' Holden in Australia. And by the time I left the company some 10 years later, the range of micrograin WC/Co grades extended from 3 to 13 per cent Co, with 9Co giving what I regarded as the best combination of properties. A British government evaluation project recommended it as the best hardmetal grade of the time for machining difficult alloys like Nimonic 95, but it was also employed in all the applications listed in the paper under discussion, and for the same reasons. Those were the days of extreme secrecy in the industry, when we made all our own raw materials (including ultrafine cobalt) and the compositions and grain-size distributions of this class of hardmetal were not publicised. There was, however, an understandable reason why many manufacturers fought shy of even trying chromium carbide as a grain-growth inhibitor at that time. The then “bible” of the industry, Kieffer and Schwarzkopf's With improved compositions and production methods and close quality control, drill hardnesses over 2000 HV30 can be combined with transverse rupture stresses of well over 5000 MPa. Reliability against breakage and edge wear resistance are key requirements for the PCB manufacturers, and these demands could be efficiently met only by hardmetals of 0.4μm grain size or below. Allied to this success has been the development of PCB drilling machines equipped with spindles capable of 300,000 rpm. PCB micro-drills operate at temperatures below 200–250°C. Wear mechanisms are principally attrition by the soft copper layers in the board and abrasion from the reinforcing glass fibres and ceramic particles within the resin layers. Micro-chipping of the outside corner or the main edge can occur if the grade is too brittle or the drill geometry too weak. The extent of wear on a used micro-drill can be seen in Routers, typically 0.6-2.5mm diameter, are used to cut the fully machined PCB to its final shape. The high rotational speeds of PCB manufacturing machines give surface cutting speeds of more than 300m/min with such cutters, lifting operating temperatures to more than 300°C. At this temperature some brominated resins decompose locally, with outgassing of the bromine and chemical attack on the cobalt binder, accelerating attrition wear. Interestingly, substitution of 25 weight per cent of the cobalt binder by ruthenium completely inhibits bromine/binder interaction. Hardmetals used for high-speed routing therefore have reduced cobalt content, at most 0.4μm grain size, and a low carbon balance in order to increase W content within the binder. When routing with small-diameter cutters (<1mm) cutting temperature usually stays below the value at which the resin decomposes and bromine attack is mostly absent. For this reason, the more breakage-resistant, higher-cobalt microdrilling grades can be effective. The remarkable growth in sales of solid carbide cutting tools during the last 10 to 15 years resulted in this application taking the largest share of submicron hardmetal output. The reason for this sales development was the maturing of three technologies at around the same time: commercially available, good-quality PVD coating, volume availability of good quality submicron hardmetal, and CNC technology for machine tools. The capital cost of CNC machining centres demanded full utilisation of their higher spindle speeds, as well as flexibility and automated operation to achieve rapid payback. The increasing popularity of such machines from the mid-1980s set the scene for the replacement of HSS endmills and drills by highly productive PVD-coated carbide tools during the 1990s. Improvements in CNC grinding machines helped carbide toolmaking meet this demand. Drills take more than 50 per cent by tonnage of the submicron carbide market for metalcutting. Their complex combination of tool wear processes includes intense shear and deformation of the work material around the drill centre point. The cutting speed on the main cutting edges increases steeply with radial position, and the outer corners are exposed to a variety of wear mechanisms. Modern drills using latest PVD coatings, efficient point geometries and high quality submicron hardmetal substrates are well able to control wear at the centre and on the main cutting edges. The most usual failure pattern is excessive wear of the outer drill corners where it is possible to observe complex combinations of micro-chipping, attrition, diffusion, oxidation, plastic deformation and abrasion. The substrates of most coated carbide drills used today are WC/10Co 0.8μm, which have a good combination of hardness, fracture toughness and attrition wear resistance. PVD coating plays a critical role, not only in reducing diffusion and oxidation wear but also in controlling built-up-edge adhesive wear. According to the authors, the advantage in moving to a finer substrate grain size for drills is mainly seen when corner attrition is the dominant wear process, in which case more cobalt should be added to restore fracture toughness levels. PVD coating performance is not adversely affected by the substrate change, but the risk of corner deformation at high cutting temperature is increased. Under certain conditions, drilling with substrates of 0.5μm grain size offers an attrition wear advantage that can improve tool life by up to 50 per cent, but little change is seen where conditions are dominated by micro-chipping or plastic deformation. Breakage strength is very important for drills below 3mm diameter, especially if they contain internal coolant channels. Hardmetals with grain size below 0.5μm are now available but have a modest share of this market sector. Edge toughness is equally important in endmilling operations, interrupted cutting that risks unwanted instability or vibration. Endmilling may also benefit from substrate grain size smaller than the 0.8μm normally used. Marked increases in cutter life can also be achieved with harder substrate grades of less than 0.5μm grain size when finishing and semifinishing fully hardened die steels ( At the other end of the scale, roughing end mills for high stock removal operations on soft steel and stainless steel often use special chip splitting geometries to reduce chip widths and make chip evacuation easier. The weaker corners or crests of such gashed or wavy cutting edges may thus be exposed to heavier cutting load, increasing the risk of localised edge fracture. In general, substrates of finer carbide grain size and higher cobalt content are better suited to such applications ( The volume of submicron hardmetal used for PVD coated and uncoated indexable inserts continues to grow but represents only a minor part of the total used in metalcutting. Submicron substrates are employed when sharper edges and more positive rake angles are required, for example in threading inserts, parting-off and fine grooving inserts, inserts for various drilling and milling tools, and special geometries for more demanding work materials such as aerospace alloys. Gear hobbing and reaming are further significant application areas. Although performance might be better, grain sizes significantly finer than 0.8microns have not yet been widely adopted for inserts. The compaction pressure required to give the desired green density rises substantially as WC grain size falls below 1 μm. In production, lower green densities would have to be accepted in order to keep compaction pressures to practical levels, leading to greater sintering shrinkages. New dies would be required, with dedicated press tools to produce inserts to the same tolerances and dimensions as current 0.8 μm hardmetals. If this problem could be solved, a major barrier to the wider testing of ultrafine hardmetals as indexable inserts would be removed. The industrial sawing and machining of wood and wood-based materials is dominated by submicron hardmetal. The latest woodcutting hardmetals, with grain sizes of less than 0.5μm and little more than 2 per cent binder, have hardnesses of more than 2300HV. In addition, since wood saps and some resins used in fibreboard manufacture attack cobalt, corrosion-resistant binders are often used. Ultrafine grained hardmetal has proved to be very effective in wire drawing, particularly at the finishing end of the production line where size control (typically 5μm diameter tolerance) and wire surface finish are critical, and where drawing speeds are greatest. The final part of this interesting presentation dealt directly with the subject in its title. As the author explained, WC powders of 0.1μm or less emerged from the laboratory into commercial production during the 1990s. The first ultrafine cobalt powders of 0.5μm or less became available around the same time. When these input materials were used in combination with “best practice” conventional hardmetal processing, a sintered grain size of between 0.1 and 0.2μm was achievable and appeared to be a recognised practical limit for current production technology. The greatest technical challenge to the successful production of truly “nanofine” WC/Co alloys was how to achieve full densification of the very fine starting powder with minimal grain growth. Deeper understanding of the densification process than we have at present is required for thermal processes such as sintering to be utilised. Meaningful studies in at least four key areas were said to be preconditional to major progress along this route, said the presenter: Mechanisms and kinetics of grain growth in both the solid and liquid binder regimes; Grain growth inhibition mechanisms; Thermodynamic equilibrium of phases in W-C-Co-inhibitor systems to provide basic data for computer modelling and possible alloy design; and Influence of WC starting powder morphology upon local and general grain growth. Production of nanofine WC starting powders had proved less problematic than expected. At first, hydrometallurgical routes involving reduction of tungsten complexes were thought necessary, but their awkwardness gave way to direct carbothermal treatment of WO3 in inert atmosphere, followed by a finishing carburisation to reach stoichiometry. WC powders with crystallite sizes of less than 0.1μm could be produced in commercial quantities by this means. As important as being able to produce these fine starting powders was the ability to characterise them in more detail. Such needs covered effective crystallite size, the level and size distribution of agglomeration, and the frequency and types of internal defects. Such factors influenced sinterability, grain growth and microstructurally dependent sintered properties like limiting strength, fracture toughness and fatigue resistance. In order to match properties to wear demands, the presenter envisaged the possibility of producing “grain-size gradients”, presumably not knowing that there would be another paper on just that subject at the same conference. But another intriguing possibility was also offered. If a fully amorphous W-C-Co composite were given a closely controlled recrystallisation thermal treatment, it might be possible to induce nano-precipitation of WC in the cobalt matrix. This technique had already been demonstrated at Cambridge University using amorphous Ta-C-Ni PVD monoliths, in which slightly less than 50 volume per cent of 5nm TaC precipitate achieved an alloy hardness of typically 2000HV. How interesting this would be, said Tillman, if a similar result could be achieved with WC/Co.