Due to numerous co-properties in chemistry of molybdenum and vanadium, it is relatively more difficult to remove vanadium from molybdate solution. To produce high-quality ammonium molybdate with the molybdenum materials containing vanadium, the separation of vanadium from the molybdate solution under batch and column mode using ion exchange technique with the strong base resin D296 was studied. In the solution, the pH value was about 7.2, the molybdenum concentration was in the range of 60–80 g/L, vanadium concentration was near 0.6 g/L, chloride ions 20 g/L. The concentration of vanadium (V2O5) was not more than 0.01 g/l in the effluent until effluent/resin volume ratio over 20 at 25±0.5 °C for contact time 60 min and, the average concentration of vanadium (V2O5) was less 0.008 g/L in the effluent collected till the breakthrough point 0.02 g/L V2O5. It was found that the separation can be only performed in the pH range of 6.5–8.5 and, chloride ions have an important influence on the separation as well. When Cl− concentration is increased near 70 g/L, it is impossible to remove vanadium from the solution with the resin. The loaded resin was stripped and regenerated using HCl 6 mol/L, the desorption ratio of vanadium was over 98.5%.The molybdate solution which contained vanadium, commonly referred to the leaching solutions of dead catalyst from petroleum-refining industries for hydrogenation processes, Ni–Mo ore, high impurity Ni–Mo–Fe alloy and so on, has become one of the principal raw materials for the production of ammonium molybdate in China ( Many methods, such as precipitate vanadium with ammoniate ( The motivation for this study was the need to separate vanadium from the molybdate solution in order to produce high-quality ammonium molybdate and recover the resource of vanadium. The present work investigated the sorption affinity, selectivity and adsorption capacity of the strong base resin D296 for the vanadium in the molybdate solution. The experimental sample was the industrial ammonium molybdate solution which was obtained by stripping the weak base resin synchronously loaded molybdenum and vanadium with ammonia liquor. In addition, the study was carried out to investigate the effect of chloride ion on the vanadium adsorption process. The strong-base anion exchange resin D296 was obtained from Hangzhou Zhengguang Chemical Company. The resin was first soaked in distilled water for 24 h, and then alternately soaked in NaOH 2 mol/L and HCl 2 mol/L for 2 h, repeated three times as this way, at last activated with HCl 2 mol/L and rinsed with distilled water before use. The loaded resin was stripped and regenerated with HCl 6 mol/L. The ammonium molybdate solution was obtained from Zhuzhou Ronghong Chemical Plant. The molybdate solution was first purified with magnesium chloride then chemically characterized because there were the impurities of P, As, Si and V in it. The composition of the purified solution was shown in The experiments were carried out by varying the adsorption conditions, such as contact time and pH value, the volumes of the solution and the wet resin were fixed in 320 ml and 5 ml respectively in the conical flask (500 ml) on the magnetic stirring apparatus agitating at 150 rpm, at room temperature (25 Trials were carried out in a glass column Molybdenum was determined with ammonium thiocyanate colorimetry by spectrophotometer, vanadium was titrated with ammonium ferrous sulfate, chloride ion was titrated with silver nitrate solution ( It was reported that the forms of vanadium existing in aqueous solution depends on not only its valence but also its concentration and the pH value (   The experiment of the influence of chloride ion on the adsorption capacity of vanadium was carried out with the synthetic ammonium molybdate solutions, and the experimental results were showed in  The loaded resin was stripped and regenerated using HCl 6 mol/L under the contact time for 60 min at room temperature, and the results are showed in The strong base anion ion exchange resin D296 can effectively adsorb vanadium from the molybdate solution; the adsorption ratio of vanadium is above 99.5%, which can be used to produce pure ammonium molybdate with the molybdate solution containing vanadium. Chloride ion has remarkable influence on vanadium adsorption; the adsorption capacity of the resin for vanadium decreases with chloride ion increase. The adsorption capacity of the resin can maintain at above 10 g/l for vanadium when the concentration of Cl The vanadium loaded on the resin can be stripped with the hydrochloric acid that its concentration is more than 3 mol/l. The hydrochloric acid is not only a strippant but also a regenerator for the resin. The technique is very convenient.