Electronic structures of 8-hydroxyquinoline lithium (Liq) and its derivatives substituted by cyano-group (CN) are studied by the quantum mechanics program, which is based on density functional theory (DFT). The electron properties of system after introducing CN are analyzed, which includes geometry structure, system energy, electron distribution, frontier molecular orbital, band structure and density of states (DOS). The results indicate that CN attached to 5-position of 8-hydroxyquinoline ligand, takes part in the whole π-conjugated system well, and that 5-CNLiq is the most stable. The substitution group CN weakens the conjugation effect of C(5)C(10) and C(5)C(6), the contravalency effect of Li and N, and electrostatic effect of Li and O. There is strong interaction between frontier molecular orbital and CN, and therefore the electronic properties of (5-CN8-hydroxyquinoline)lithium(5-CNLiq) are changed compared with Liq. The LUMO energy level decreases and the energy gap enlarge. The electron cloud density of phenol ring and pyridine ring reduces. The degeneracy of molecular orbital energy level is changed and the energy band is broadened. In result, the electronic spectra blue-shift and electron can easily inject and transmit for 5-CNLiq. It can be concluded that 5-CNLiq is better blue emitting material than Liq for organic electroluminescent devices (OLEDs) in theory.Since tris(8-hydroxyquinoline)aluminum(Alq All the calculation results in this work were obtained by means of Material Studio Program. In localized-orbital method, the selection of basic set and exchange correlating function can influence on the calculation results in some extent, while the Dmol3 The molecular structures optimized (as calculation models) are shown in As shown in It can be found from The parameters of geometric structures optimized are listed in The changes of molecular geometric structure must seriously impact on its electronic structures and properties. The electron distribution on atoms of Liq and 5-CN It can be seen from After introduction of CN to Liq, the electron cloud distribution of frontier molecular orbital is changed and the density of electron cloud of phenol ring and priding ring is decreased, which makes it difficult to lose electrons for the O atom of phenol ring and makes it easy to accept electrons for the N atom of pyridine ring. The more lacking electron character of the 5-CN After introduction of CN, changes of the orbital energy of molecular has taken place. The energy eigenvalue and their difference between HOMO and LUMO of Liq and 5-CN In fact, the conjugative effect and the steric hindrance effect beside the induction effect of substitution group have an effect on energy level structure. The synergism of the induction effect, the conjugative effect and the steric hindrance effect of substitution group determines the change of energy level structure, but the induction effect plays a dominant role for 5-CN The above analysis results indicate that the electron-withdrawing group CN has an effect on the electron cloud distribution of the frontier molecular orbital to some extent, and that makes the electron spectrum blue shift by reducing the orbital energy of HOMO and LUMO and enlarging the energy gap. It can be concluded that the introduction of substitution group CN can adjust the light emitting band and improved electron injection and transport properties of Liq in theory. The total density of states (TDOS) of phenol ring, pyridine ring and OLiN chelate ring and the partial density of states (PDOS) of s and p orbital of each atom are shown in The band structure of Liq and 5-CN In general, the introduction of CN has great effects on the photo-electric behaviors of Liq. 5-CN This research work was financially supported by National Basic Research Program of China (2004CB217808), National Natural Scientific Foundation of China (20471041, 20671068), Key Project of National Natural Science Foundation of China (90306014), Key Program of Science and Technology of Ministry of Education (207015), Shanxi Scientific Research Foundation for Returned Scholars (200523), Scientific and Technological Key Project of Shanxi (2006031121), and City and Scientific and Technological Research Program of Taiyuan City (07020401).