In this paper, we report a dimethyl methylphosphonate (DMMP) gas sensor using synthesized Al-doped ZnO nanoparticles (NPs) via a hydrothermal method. The average particle size of the Al-doped ZnO NPs is ∼25nm. The single crystalline phase was observed by scanning electron microscopy (SEM) and transmission electron microscopy (TEM) analyses. The variation in the response of the Al-doped ZnO NP sensors within operating temperatures showed the highest response and recovery at 2 and 96s, respectively, at 10ppm in DMMP at 350°C compared with undoped ZnO NP sensors. Our results showed remarkable sensitivity and selectivity of the Al-doped ZnO NPs sensor toward DMMP. Such increased O2 vacancies and surface reactions with small nanocrystals in the Al-doped ZnO NP sensors offer outstanding sensing performance for DMMP detection.Chemical warfare agents (CWA) are lethal chemicals used in warfare and terrorist attacks and are classified as blood, blister, nerve, nettle, and pulmonary agents. Among the nerve agents, sarin gas is an organophosphorus compound in a colorless and odorless liquid that can cause death within 1–10 Recently, some groups have developed gas sensors based on various metal-oxides for on-site monitoring of DMMP vapor Appropriate doping, an important and effective method used to increase conductivity, enhances the sensing properties of metal-oxide semiconductors by changing the energy-band structure and morphology because dopants can provide electronic defects. This process increases the surface-to-volume ratio and creates more centers on the surface of the metal-oxide semiconductor for gas interaction In this study, we report the fabrication of an Al-doped ZnO nanoparticle (NP)-based gas sensor for DMMP detection. The Al-doped ZnO NPs are synthesized by a hydrothermal process, and their sensing properties are investigated. The Al-doped ZnO NP sensor with small nanocrystals is shown to introduce further O Al-doped ZnO NPs were synthesized by using a hydrothermal method Prior to fabrication of the Al-doped ZnO-based sensor, Ti and Pt layers 5 and 150 The morphology of the Al-doped ZnO NPs was observed by field-emission–scanning electron microscopy (FE–SEM; Hitachi S-4200, Japan). Their chemical compositions were analyzed by energy dispersive spectroscopy (EDS; Hitachi S-4200, Japan). Further, the phase and crystal structures as well as the doping properties were identified by X-ray diffraction (XRD; Rigaku, Ultima IV/ME 200DX, Japan) and Raman spectroscopy (Horriba Jovin Yvon LabRam Aramis, Japan). In order to determine the sensitivity of the sensor to DMMP gas, the sensor's electrical properties were measured by using a gas-sensing system consisting of a furnace (Korea Vacuum Tech., Korea), mass flow controllers (MFCs), cylinders of the target gas and the balance gas, a current source (Keithley 6220), a nanovoltmeter (Keithley 2182), and a personal computer (PC). The sample was placed on a quartz cylinder in the furnace, and its signals were obtained from two Pt probes connected to the current source and the voltmeter, respectively. The DMMP gas concentration in the synthetic air was achieved by controlling its partial pressure by using MFCs. All of the gas-sensing measurements were conducted at an operating temperature of 300–400 The Al-doped ZnO NPs were synthesized by using a hydrothermal method; the formation mechanism is explained by Eqs.       More detailed sensing properties of the un-doped and the Al-doped ZnO NPs sensors investigated with the best temperature of 350 For the enhanced DMMP sensing properties, the reactions and response mechanism of the Al-doped ZnO NPs sensor may be explained by the following process. First, O was adsorbed onto surface of the ZnO upon exposure to air. During chemisorption, atmospheric O formed ionosorption of molecular (O To evaluate the selectivity of the Al-doped ZnO NPs sensor with various gases, the selectivity was tested by using NH As shown in In this work, we fabricated a DMMP gas sensor using synthesized Al-doped ZnO NPs via a hydrothermal method. The average particle size of the Al-doped ZnO NPs was ∼25 This work was supported by the