SiC ceramics incorporating sintering additives from the system AlN–Y2O3 and having variable α-SiC/β-SiC, AlN/Y2O3 ratios and additive contents were gas-pressure sintered to theoretical density. Post-sintering heat treatments were performed in order to induce phase transformations from β-SiC to α-SiC and anisotropic grain growth, leading to platelet-strengthened microstructures. The indentation fracture toughness of the platelet materials reaches values in excess of 6
                        MPam
                        1/2
                      after annealing at 1950°C. Four-point bending strengths were measured at room temperature and at high temperatures, and were correlated with microstructural data obtained by scanning electron microscopy and X-ray powder diffraction. Both the kinetics of the phase transformation/platelet formation and the strength retention at high temperature were found to exhibit maxima as a function of the AlN/Y2O3 ratio in the sintering additive.Silicon carbide has been recognised as an important structural ceramic because of its unique combination of properties such as high-temperature strength, resistance to wear and corrosion, and thermal shock resistance. The innovative approach of sintering of SiC in the presence of a liquid phase was initiated in the early 1980s Lee and Wei The microstructure of LPS-SiC materials can be changed radically by varying the ratio of α-SiC to β-SiC in the starting powder and applying suitable post-sintering heat treatments. It was shown The starting materials for this study were commercially available α-SiC, β-SiC, AlN, and Y Sintering was conducted in a gas-pressure furnace with graphite-heating elements (KCE, Germany) under nitrogen pressures between 0.1 and 10 X-ray powder diffractometry (D5000, Siemens, Germany) was performed using monochromatised Cu Kα radiation and a position sensitive detector with a collection angle of 8°. For quantitative phase analysis by XRD, the sintered bodies were pulverised by hammer milling to exclude texture effects. Single peak fitting with pseudo-Voigtian line profiles was used to deconvolute relative line intensities. Specimen preparation to reveal the grain boundary phase in scanning electron microscopy images included a final polishing step with 1 Fracture toughness was determined by using the indentation method. After polishing to a 1  According to the TGA scan of For isothermal sintering, a two-stage scheme with two holding times of 30 For the materials 100α-80AlN and 100α-40AlN, it was possible to obtain fully dense samples by pressureless sintering. However, an increased base pressure of 0.2 As shown in At the smallest nitrogen content (90β-20AlN), it was not possible to achieve full densification by gas-pressure sintering. Therefore, post-HIP at 2000°C and 200 Free carbon as well as silicon nitride are clearly visible in XRD patterns of the HIPed 90β-20AlN material, as shown in The starting powders used in this study contain exclusively the silicon carbide polytypes 6H (α-SiC) and 3C (β-SiC). By XRD, these polytypes were found to be predominant in as-sintered samples as well, with trace amounts of 4H, 15R and 33R being present in materials derived from pure α-SiC ( In the present LPS-SiC materials, the intergranular phase is partly crystalline after sintering. The crystallisation, which is thought to occur at multigrain junctions, leads to a variety of oxide and oxynitride phases. Qualitative analysis of the secondary phases by XRD was done by comparison with JCPDS standards During LPS, dissolution of SiC in the melt takes place, enabling the solution/precipitation sintering mechanism as discussed in the In samples that are rich in β-SiC, the solution/precipitation process is accompanied by the phase transformation from β-SiC to α-SiC, as discussed above. The newly formed α-SiC crystallites exhibit anisotropic grain growth, the preferred growth direction being perpendicular to the stacking planes of SiC  For the 90β materials, the as-sintered fracture toughness is highest at the additive composition 60AlN, corresponding to the fastest α→β transformation (  Selected results from high-temperature strength measurements are plotted in  Fully dense SiC ceramics were obtained by LPS with AlN–Y The materials obtained were fine-grained and homogeneous and have a good potential for microstructure design by the in situ growth of α-SiC platelets. The phase transformation from β-SiC to α-SiC, the anisotropic grain growth, and the evolution of high fracture toughness are all strongly correlated. Materials with 60 Room temperature bending strengths are higher (550–600 High-temperature strength is characterised by the occurrence of a maximum around 1200°C. Again, the most favourable strength behaviour up to 1400°C is obtained with the 60 KB gratefully acknowledges a scholarship within the DAAD/IIT sandwich programme. The authors are thankful to the technical staff of PML Stuttgart for assisting with the experimental work and to Dr. J.A. Schneider for carefully reading the manuscript.  