In this study, solvent extraction and precipitation stripping were used to produce rare earth elements (REEs). Tributyl phosphate (TBP) was used to extract yttrium, lanthanum, cerium, and neodymium from an aqueous solution produced by nitric acid leaching of apatite concentrate. In the extraction stage, the effects of TBP concentration, pH, contact time, temperature, and phase ratio were investigated. The results show that about 95%, 90%, 87% and 80% of neodymium, cerium, lanthanum, and yttrium, respectively, can be extracted in optimum conditions of extraction. Hot, deionized water was used to scrub the impurities from the loaded organic phase. The results showed that three stages of scrubbing with a phase ratio (Va/Vo) of five removed about 80%, 30%, 27%, and 15% of Ca, Mg, Fe, and P, respectively, from loaded TBP, while less than 9% of total REEs was lost. The effects on precipitation stripping of oxalic acid concentration, contact time, and phase ratio were investigated. The results showed that precipitation stripping is a viable alternative to traditional acid stripping in the REEs production process. Mixed REEs oxide with an assay of about 90% can be achieved as a final product.The rare earth elements (REEs) are the group of 17 chemical elements, including scandium and yttrium with atomic numbers of 21 and 39, respectively, and the lanthanides with atomic numbers 57–71 ( The REEs are typically soft, malleable, ductile, and usually reactive. They have an ever-increasing variety of applications in modern technology. These applications range from mundane applications (lighter flints, glass polishing) to high-technology applications (phosphors, lasers, magnets, batteries, magnetic refrigeration) and futuristic applications (high-temperature superconductivity, safe storage, and transport of hydrogen in the post-hydrocarbon economy) ( Some of the most common minerals that contain REEs are apatite, monazite, and xenotime. The general formula for apatite is Ca Nitric, sulfuric, and hydrochloric acids have been used as leaching agents for the extraction of rare earth elements from apatite. When apatite is leached with HNO Usually, the rare earths are recovered from leach liquor by solvent extraction and finally precipitated from the strip solution as rare earth oxalates. The oxalates are calcined in a furnace to yield a mixture of rare earth oxides. Also, fractional crystallization, fractional precipitation, ion exchange, and selective oxidation or reduction are used for separating individual rare earths ( Different solvents, such as di(2-ethylhexyl)phosphoric acid (D2EHPA) ( Solvents are used to extract the rare earth ions, which are usually stripped by mixing the solutions with aqueous mineral acids (typically, hydrochloric acid or nitric acid). This removes the rare earth ions from the organic phase, draws them into the aqueous acids, and, in turn, regenerates the extractant. Oxalic acid is added, and the rare earth elements are precipitated from the strip solution as oxalates. Then, the oxalates are calcined at high temperature to convert them into rare earth oxides ( In precipitation stripping, the stripping and precipitation steps are combined by mixing the organic phase, which is loaded with REEs, with an aqueous solution of a precipitating agent, usually oxalic acid. The rare earth elements are stripped from the organic phase directly as solid oxalate salts, as shown in Eq. Iran imports REEs. One of the by-products of the Chadormalu iron ore beneficiation plant in Iran is the apatite concentrate, which is rich in REEs ( The objectives of the present work are to: (1) optimize the TBP concentration, pH, contact time, temperature, and phase ratio to extract yttrium (Y), lanthanum (La), cerium (Ce), and neodymium (Nd) ions from the aqueous solution produced by nitric acid leaching of apatite concentrate; (2) optimize the type of scrubbing agent, the phase ratio, and the number of scrubbing stages; (3) optimize the oxalic acid concentration, contact time and phase ratio for precipitation stripping of the loaded organic phase and the preparation of oxalate salts of REEs. To our knowledge, no studies of the production of rare earth elements via precipitation stripping with TBP have been published. The sample used in this study was prepared from apatite concentrate obtained from the Chadormalu plant; the apatite concentrate is a byproduct of iron-ore production in the Chadormalu iron-ore beneficiation plant. A representative sample, for which 80 TBP supplied by Merck was used as the extracting agent. As an organophosphorus ester, TBP can extract rare earth ions (RE Ammonium nitrate solution and deionized hot water were used to purify the loaded TBP and to remove undesirable loaded elements, such as calcium, iron, magnesium, and phosphorus. The rare earth-loaded organic solution was scrubbed and then mixed with oxalic acid solution. The mixtures were allowed to settle until three distinct phases were noticeable (solid rare earth oxalate, aqueous precipitating solution, and stripped organic solution). The rare earth oxalate precipitates were separated from the two other phases and stirred in 10 Y, La, Ce, and Nd were extracted by varying the concentrations of TBP from 0.73 to 3.65 The extractions of REEs were conducted with [H In this stage, the extraction of REEs was performed by mechanical stirring of two phases for various times, ranging from 1 to 9 The extraction of REEs is usually a rapid, exothermic reaction at ambient temperature ( The volume ratio of the two phases plays an important role in the extraction process. The ratio of organic to aqueous phase (Vo/Va) was changed from 1:4 to 3:1. The results are shown in  Ammonium nitrate solution (3 The effect of phase ratio (deionized water: loaded organic phase) on the removal of undesirable elements was studied with various phase ratios from 2 to 10. The results are presented in With one stage scrubbing, the removal of impurities was inadequate. Therefore, in order to increase the removal of impurities, scrubbing was repeated from one to four times. The results are listed in The effects of oxalic acid concentration, precipitation time, and phase ratio were evaluated, and the results are shown in In order to determine the appropriate time to allow for precipitation to occur, the loaded organic phase was mixed with an equal volume of 10% oxalic acid solution for 10, 15, 30, and 60 To evaluate the effect of organic-to-oxalic acid solution phase ratio, the experiments were performed using a 10% oxalic acid solution and phase ratios of 0.5, 1, and 2 with a contact time of 30  The extraction of four rare earth elements, i.e., Y, La, Ce, and Nd, by TBP from pregnant liquor prepared from apatite acid leaching was studied. Under optimum conditions of TBP concentration of 3.65 Scrubbing of the organic phase to remove impurities was performed three times using hot, deionized water (70 Precipitation stripping with 10% oxalic acid with a phase ratio (Vo/Va) of 1:1 and a contact time of 30 The authors gratefully acknowledge the financial support provided by the Science and Research Branch of Islamic Azad University.