In soil ecology, many investigations of faunal influence on, e.g. soil carbon flows have been performed. However, analysis of long-term effects of faunal activity on, e.g. long-term soil carbon pool changes are uncommon.
                  We analyse possible effects on long-term soil carbon balances of soil fauna activity on humus and litter decomposition rates as well as litter humification ratio (the fraction of litter that eventually becomes humus). Results from published soil fauna experiments (measurements made in presence versus absence of organisms) are re-interpreted as parameter changes for a soil carbon model (ICBM, see http://www.mv.slu.se/vaxtnaring/olle/ICBM.html), which is used for projections of soil C pools and fluxes during a 30-year period.
                  Model outputs indicate that changes in humification ratio and old material (“humus”) decomposition rates have much greater influence than changes in young material (“litter”) decomposition rate on total soil carbon dynamics. We point out the risk of putting too much faith in model projections, and underline the need for long-term research data as a base for long-term model projections.There has been a gap between soil ecology focused on organisms, and long-term ecosystem processes, such as soil carbon loss or gain ( The interest in investigations of long-term balances of soil carbon has grown recently due to the connection between carbon fluxes to and from the soil and atmospheric CO Simple models describing the dynamics of soil carbon have been fairly successful in describing the carbon dynamics as well as providing a good base for predictions of what will happen when land use and/or climate changes. These models usually assume that the soil organisms always are there and do their work, controlled only by substrate quality, soil temperature, moisture and texture ( In this paper, we use the introductory carbon balance model (ICBM) ( to make long-term mathematical extrapolations based on results from animal exclusion experiments; to show how the extrapolations depend on the results of the exclusion experiments, and also that they depend on how we interpret these results. Soil carbon models are usually based on first-order kinetics; organic soil carbon is mineralised (respired as CO The heterogeneity of organic soil carbon is usually managed by using two or more different pools, each with a specific External, mainly climatic, factors influencing decomposition rates are usually represented as a multiplier to the ICBM is an analytically solved model with only two pools (young: Annual carbon input to the soil from roots and shoots ( SOM is divided into two pools, one ‘young’ ( Respiration from these pools is determined by pool size multiplied by the first-order rate constants The fraction of the annual outflux from This two-pool five-parameter model is analytically solved, i.e. simulation techniques are not necessary and solutions can be directly calculated for any given time. Parameters for ICBM have been estimated using data from a Swedish long-term agricultural experiment with various organic amendments and N fertiliser dosage ( The steady-state equation for carbon in the In the present application, the measured effects of presence/absence of organisms on soil carbon balances were taken from the literature and expressed as changes in parameters in ICBM according to the following rules (see If litter mass loss or CO If humus (assumed to be equivalent to the Similarly, the humification quotient, If the general conditions for primary production (or more precisely soil carbon input) changes, Finally, if the general conditions (temperature, moisture, soil cultivation, etc.) for SOM decomposition change, In the following, we shortly review results obtained in organism exclusion experiments, indicate how we transformed these to parameter and/or pool changes in ICBM, and present the model projections.  We assumed that these changes affected parameter No plants present, but bacterial grazers present. This is the non-glucose treatment with nematodes and bacteria present. Here we set the input, No plants present as in 1, but here we assumed that no bacterial grazers were present by reducing We can instead assume that plants were present (glucose added) giving an annual input enough to maintain steady state, and then remove the bacterial grazers. Starting from the steady-state conditions, we reduced  The initial mass of litter was 3.00 We parameterised the model for the following conditions, no input, total initial C mass=3 Since the exclusion of fauna resulted in 2.71 One can instead assume that the animals only affect the humification ratio, e.g. the comminution and consumption of litter increases the chances of litter carbon being directly respired instead of humified. Although not very likely, we also assumed that the mesofaunal community only affects the early parts of decomposition, i.e. affects only  We used data from plots with/without earthworms receiving 188 Assuming that the plots with earthworms were in steady state, and that the climate factor We can separately model the accumulation of the litter layer in the earthworm-free plots during 20 years. Assuming no surface litter layer when the grassland was sown, we can calculate the annual input (0.478 To examine the long-term effects of only 13 A major advantage of modelling is the ability to make ‘what-if’ experiments. We plough the earthworm-free topsoil, including the litter layer that has accumulated during 20 years. We assume that after the ploughing, the grass is rapidly re-established, earthworms return and We have to calculate the initial values, i.e.  Without plant input, the ‘young’ or litter fraction would disappear within a few years, but only 16% of the humus would disappear during the 30-year period ( Clearly, removing the bacterial grazers did not have a major influence in this case, but initially there were some differences, e.g. after 2 years, there was a slightly higher With plants present and bacterial grazers removed, the  When we optimised Assuming that the fauna affected only Assuming that the fauna affected only If we assume that the mesofauna only affects  Assuming that the earthworm plots were in steady state, the steady-state value for the Optimisation of the input results in an The lack of earthworm activity results in 5.73 Ploughing the earthworm-free plots results in a fairly rapid loss of about half the The most important insight of this analysis is that an effect of soil fauna on soil C, measured as mass loss or respiration rate, observed in short-term studies can result in quite different soil C dynamics in the long-term, depending on where in the decomposition cascade the soil fauna is assumed to have an influence. If soil fauna is assumed to mainly affect the fresh litter of comparatively high quality (i.e. To improve the long-term predictions on effects of soil fauna on soil C dynamics, we thus need long-term experiments to generate values of parameters There are a number of possible faunal features and effects on soil carbon balances not discussed here, e.g. succession, improving soil conditions creating increased plant input, acting as pests or pest competitors, etc. However, we cannot think of any possible faunal effect that could not at least tentatively be described by the model by modifying a parameter or two. The approach used here, to use a simple model for testing consequences of assumptions by changing parameters in a spreadsheet, does not require advanced modelling skills, only a PC with an electronic spreadsheet and a few equations. We see the model as an instrument for examining the logical consequences of certain assumptions. Linear extrapolations and interpolations made without a mathematical model often lead to incorrect conclusions, in spite of the apparent simplicity of the calculations, and we strongly recommend the use of models of the kind described here as logical support tools. In the original version of the ICBM model (