A numerical study was conducted for investigating the size segregation of binary mixtures in the presence of fines in bubbling gas–solid fluidized beds. The gas flow was modeled using the continuum theory and the solid phase was modeled by the discrete element method. The experimental data on the extent of segregation from literature were used to validate the simulation results of this pseudo-2D model. The effect of adding fines at different concentrations and various sizes was investigated. The results were analyzed in terms of inter-particle and fluid-particle forces as well as the coordination number of particles to comprehend the effect of fines on changing these parameters. The results suggested that adding fines increases segregation of small and large particles by lowering inter-particle interactions which results in enhanced mobility of larger particles. Furthermore, reducing the size of fines from 900μm to 500μm enhances the final extent of segregation while further decrease in size of fines diminishes the segregation. Full separation of fines from large and small particles was not achievable during the segregation process and a portion of fines remained in lower layers rather than being collected at the bed surface.Segregation of particles by size and/or density differences is a well-known phenomenon in gas–solid fluidized beds. In many processes, involving chemical reaction or physical separation, there are two or more types of particles differing in size or density. When such a system is fluidized, segregation of particles may occur. Segregation is beneficial for solid separation in columns and stage-wise physical processes In many industrial applications of fluidized beds, such as ore and mineral processing and coal combustion, particles with a wide size distribution, i.e., ranging from 300 Two basic approaches have been used for modeling and simulation of gas–solid systems: continuum–continuum approach and continuum–discrete approach. The former approach includes two fluid model (TFM) Many researchers have used this model to study mixing/segregation phenomena in fluidized beds. Hoomans et al. used a 2D hard sphere contact model for studying particles with and without friction It is known that the presence of fine particles changes the particle–particle and gas–particle interactions in fluidized beds In the soft sphere CFD–DEM model, the gas phase is treated as continuum phase and the solid particles as discrete elements. Each particle is tracked individually by applying Newton's second law of motion The binary inter-particle contact forces were calculated based on the soft sphere model in which the normal and tangential forces are evaluated by the linear spring–dashpot model As mentioned above, the fluid motion is obtained by solving the local averaged Navier–Stokes equations in the CFD–DEM model. In each computational cell (fluid cell) the motion of fluid is characterized in the meso-scale and the motion of particles in the micro-scale. The coupling between solid and fluid phases is performed through the local porosity and the inter-phase interaction forces. The particle–fluid interaction for the fluid phase is based on the total interaction forces per unit volume in each computational cell (transformation from micro- to meso-scale), while the fluid-particle force for the solid phase is based on the forces acting on each individual particle (transformation from meso- to micro-scale). This difference in the scale of modeling leads to different forms of CFD–DEM models. The differences between the implemented models in literature can be categorized according to two aspects: the formulation of governing equation for both phases and the coupling scheme between the two phases used in the programming. Tsuji et al. coupled the governing equations of motions of the solid and gas phases for the first time and studied the gas-particle flow in a horizontal pipe Based on the Model B formulation, the equations of continuity and momentum balance for each computational cell are as follows: Equations of gas and solid phases are coupled together through porosity and particle–fluid interaction force, The major drawback of the DEM simulation is the limited number of particles as a consequence of limited computational resources. It is expensive and very time consuming to apply this technique to the case of fine particles or large beds. This problem can be remedied by using 2D simulation instead of 3D simulations. In each fluid cell, porosity was calculated on the basis of the area occupied by the particles in the cell. The 2D porosity in each cell was calculated by the following equation: The SIMPLE (semi-implicit method for pressure-linked equations) algorithm, introduced by Patankar The experimental data on the segregation of binary mixtures differing in size were taken from Goldschmidt et al. In order to validate the model and investigate the model capability to capture the segregation dynamics, the numerical results (in terms of the extent of segregation) were compared with the experimental data at different compositions and various superficial gas velocities. According to Goldschmidt et al., the extent of segregation is defined as: A rectangular bed with 15 In the next step, effect of adding fines on the segregation dynamics and final segregation was investigated. The mass fraction and size of fines were changed independently in the simulations to investigate the effect of fines on the segregation dynamics. In the first set of simulations, in which the mass fraction of fines was varied, the size of fine was 500 In the simulations, the initial well mixed condition of the bed was achieved by randomly positioning the particles in the bed and then allowing them to settle by gravity for 1 Before studying the effect of fine particles on the segregation of small and large particles, it is necessary to demonstrate that the implemented model can reproduce the very basic properties of gas–solid fluidized beds. It was tried to choose the properties that are very important to the segregation of particles. Minimum fluidization velocity, segregation dynamics and mean bed expansion were chosen for comparison. In order to estimate the minimum fluidization velocity by the model presented in this work, a simulation run was carried out for a bed consisting of 50  Effect of mass fraction of small particle on the segregation of particles is shown in Evolutions of time-averaged mean heights of small and large particles are illustrated in   Particle–particle interaction and gas–particle interaction affect the segregation of particles in gas–solid fluidized beds Interaction between the particles and mobility of particulate systems depend on particle size, roughness and slope angle of particles. According to Philips et al., adding small number of smaller particles to the larger particles produces a lubrication effect that increases the mobility of the system  Variation of frequency of the bed surface oscillation and mean bed porosity as a function of fine particle weight percent are shown in To fully understand the mechanism of segregation of particles when fines are added to the bed, using DEM capabilities, the forces at particle scale were analyzed. The segregation of particles is influenced by particle–particle and gas–particle interactions. The former is described by the contact force between particles and coordination number of particles and the latter by the drag force exerted on discrete particles. Instantaneous dimensionless vertical drag force exerted on each particle (large, small or fine) and instantaneous dimensionless vertical contact force between particles were calculated by:  Variation of the coordination number of particles in the aforementioned bed is shown in Mean dimensionless drag force exerted on particles in the bed, mean dimensionless contact forces of particles and mean coordination numbers of particles are shown in It should be noted that in Effect of size of fines on the final extent of segregation was studied for 3  Soft sphere CFD–DEM model was employed to investigate the size segregation of binary mixtures in the presence of fine particle in bubbling gas–solid fluidized beds. Results of the model were first compared to the experimental data of Goldschmidt et al. With progression of segregation of large, small and fine particles, fine particles were separated from two lower layers and become collected at the bed surface due to the high drag force exerted on them. This separation is not complete and they unequally remain in two lower layers after the completion of segregation. Studying the spatial distributions of particle velocities revealed that particles move together in the same direction with the same velocity in the dense regions, while they move almost individually with different velocities and in different directions in the loose regions. This lets particles rearrange their positions relative to each other, hence, the segregation occurs in the loose regions. Segregation is a result of competition between the driving agent (difference between drag forces exerted on segregating particles) and the restricting agent (difference between inter-particle contact forces and coordination number). In the presence of a driving agent, when the restricting agent is low, the segregation of particles enhances considerably while segregation is replaced by mixing as the restricting agent increases. Addition of fines to the binary mixture of small and large particles leads to the enhancement of segregation due to reduction of restricting agent. The final extent of segregation increases with increasing the concentration of fines up to 5 Reducing the size of fines in the bed does not change the driving agent of segregation considerably. However, it lowers the restricting agent of segregation. The final extent of segregation increases as the size of fines decreases from 900 to 500  area of computational cell, m area occupied by every disk, m contact force between particles damping force, N fluid–particle interaction force, N dimensionless fluid–particle interaction force, (−) volumetric fluid–particle interaction force, N mean dimensionless contact force (−) mean vertical dimensionless drag force (−) gravitational force, N gravitational acceleration, m average height of small particles, m average height of large particles, m time-averaged height of particles, m initial bed height, cm moment of inertia, kg number of particle in a computational cell number of contacting particles mass of particle, kg mass of particle of type P, kg total number of particles on type P fluid pressure, Pa relative segregation of small particles maximum degree of segregation torque, N time, s fluid velocity vector, m/s particle velocity, m/s cell volume, m mass fraction of small particle fractional area of particle deformation in the normal direction, m deformation in the tangential direction, m fluid porosity fluid density, kg/m normal linear dissipative constant, kg.s coefficient of sliding friction, (−) fluid viscose stress tensor, N angular velocity of particle, s