The El Valle-Boinás copper–gold deposit is located in the southern part of the Rio Narcea Gold Belt 65km west of Oviedo (NW Spain), within the Cantabrian Zone (Iberian Hercynian Massif). The deposit is related to the Boinás stock, which ranges from quartz-monzonite to monzogranite and intruded (303Ma) the carbonated Láncara Formation (early Cambrian) and the siliciclastic Oville Formation (middle-late Cambrian).
                  A copper–gold skarn was developed along the contact between the igneous rock and the carbonated sedimentary rocks. The skarn distribution and mineralogy reflects both structural and lithologic controls. Two types of skarn exists: a calcic skarn mainly developed in the upper calcic member of the Láncara Formation, and a magnesian skarn developed in the lower dolomitic and organic-rich member. The former mainly consists of garnet, pyroxene and wollastonite. Retrograde alteration consists of K-feldspar, epidote, quartz, calcite, magnetite, ferroactinolite, titanite, apatite, chlorite and sulfides. Magnesian skarn mainly consists of diopside with interbedded forsterite zones. Pyroxene skarn is mainly altered to tremolite, with minor phlogopite and serpentine. Olivine skarn is pervasively altered to serpentine and magnetite, and is commonly accompanied by high sulfide and gold concentrations. This altered skarn results in a very dark rock, referred to as “black skarn”, which has great importance in gold reserves. Sulfide mineralization mainly consists of chalcopyrite, bornite, arsenopyrite, pyrrhotite and pyrite, while wittichenite, sphalerite, digenite, bismuthinite, native bismuth and electrum occur as accessory minerals.
                  After extensive erosion, reactivation of the northeast-trending fracture zone provided conduits for the subsequent emplacement of porphyritic dikes (285±4Ma) and diabasic dikes (255±5Ma). Alteration, characterized by sericitization, silicification, carbonatization and hypogene oxidation took place, as did sulfide mineralization (pyrite, arsenopyrite, sphalerite, chalcopyrite, galena, bournonite, and Fe–Pb–Sb sulfosalts). Veins with quartz, carbonate, adularia and sulfide minerals crosscut all previous lithologies. Jasper and jasperoid breccias developed at the upper parts of the deposits.
                  The fluid inclusion and stable isotope studies suggest a predominantly magmatic prograde-skarn fluid characterized by high-salinity (26–28wt.% KCl and 32–36wt.% NaCl) and high temperature, above 580°C. This fluid evolved into two immiscible fluids: a CO2- and/or CH4-rich, high-salinity aqueous fluid. Temperatures for the first retrograde-stage are between 350 and 425°C. A second stage is related to a more diluted aqueous fluid (3–6.2wt.% NaCl eq.) and temperatures from 280 to 325°C. The fluid inclusion study performed on quartz from low-temperature mineralization indicates a very low salinity (0.2–6.2wt.% NaCl eq.), low-temperature aqueous fluid (from 150 to 250°C), and trapping pressure conditions less than 0.2kbar. In addition, the stable isotope study suggests that an influx of metamorphic waters derived from the country rocks produced these lower temperature fluids. The last control for the Au mineralization is the Alpine tectonism, which developed fault breccias (cataclasites to, locally, protomylonites) and gold remobilization from previous mineralization.The El Valle-Boinás copper–gold deposit is located in the southern part of the Rio Narcea Gold Belt, 40 The geometry of the mineralized zones demonstrates that the monzogranite, skarn, retrograde skarn and all lithologies have been affected and altered by at least two phases of later and low-temperature hydrothermal mineralization. These post-skarn alterations are related to the reactivation of a northeast-trending fracture zone that provided conduits for the subsequent emplacement of porphyritic and diabasic dikes. Quartz, calcite, adularia and sulfide veins are associated with this post-skarn mineralization, in addition to low-temperature hydrothermal gold mineralization. Jasper and jasperoid breccias developed at the upper part of the deposit. Alteration of sulfide minerals from skarn mineralization occurred, as did remobilization of gold, which is concentrated along the silicificed zones ( As of November 1997, total reserves in the El Valle-Boinás deposit were estimated to contain 2 The El Valle-Boinás deposit is located in the northern part of the Iberian Peninsula, within the Cantabrian Zone (CZ), which represents the westernmost exposure of the European Hercynides ( The El Valle-Boinás deposit is spatially related to the Boinás intrusion, which belongs to a suite of small intrusive bodies emplaced in a narrow, northeast trending zone named the Rio Narcea Gold Belt. This zone is up to 4 In the El Valle-Boinás area, the stratigraphic sequence starts with the carbonate Láncara Formation, early-middle Cambrian in age. This is overlain by the siliciclastic Oville Formation, late Cambrian in age. Both formations are unconformally overlain by conglomerate, sandstone and argillaceous tertiary sediments. The Láncara Formation, in which the skarns are developed, consists of two members ( The Boinás intrusion forms a laccolith. Petrographically, the intrusion can be classified as quartz monzonite to monzogranite, and three different facies are observed: one porphyritic in texture, one equigranular in texture, and another seriated porphyritic in texture ( The porphyritic monzogranite is located in the south part of the laccolith. The rock is made up of subhedral phenocrysts of zoned plagioclase and biotite, and globular quartz phenocrysts, in a fine-crystalline matrix consisting mainly of quartz and K-feldspar with minor plagioclase and biotite. Accessory minerals are apatite, rutile and zircon normally included in biotite. This facies is characterized by the presence of K-feldspar megacrysts, poikilitic in texture, which are 2–5  Several dikes, which are scarcely exposed at the surface, have been encountered during the exploration project and the mine-works. These dikes intruded after the skarn formation and crosscut the previously cited lithologies. Petrographically, there are two different sub-volcanic rocks: rhyodacites, which have a porphyritic texture, and andesites, which have a diabasic to sub-porphyritic texture (mapped as porphyry and diabase dikes, respectively, by RNGM staff). All these sub-volcanic rocks exhibit strong hydrothermal alteration ( The N20°E trending Courı́o anticline dominates the structure of the Paleozoic sedimentary section in the area. The anticline is overturned to the northwest, with the axial plane dipping 45–70° to the southeast, and affected by a dense fracturation. Two different types of fault are observed in the El Valle-Boinás zone, high-angle faults and low-angle and thrust faults. Most of them have had several phases of reactivation. The low-angle and thrust faults developed during the Hercynian orogeny and are parallel to the anticline axis. These faults produced strong brecciation and thickening of the Paleozoic sedimentary section in the area. Three different high-angle fault systems occur in the El Valle-Boinás zone trending approximately E–W, NW–SE and NE–SW, respectively. These fault systems formed during the late stage of the Hercynian orogeny and were reactivated several times as a result of tensional and compressional events. The NW–SE and NE–SW faults represent a conjugated strike–slip system, moving in a dextral and sinistral sense, respectively. Late fault reactivation as normal dip–slip movement took place as a result of younger extensional events, mainly during the early Permian. In the El Valle-Boinás area, these high-angle fault systems controlled the emplacement of the Boinás monzogranite and the late sub-volcanic dikes. During the Alpine orogeny, the NE–SW Hercynian thrust faults were reactivated as reverse faults, cutting the high-angle faults and producing brecciation along with mineral remobilization. As a result of this movement, Láncara sediments (early-middle Cambrian) thrusted over Tertiary age sediments ( The geometry of the intrusive body was strongly constrained by structural and stratigraphic factors. The structural factors include the intrusion of the Boinás laccolith along the NW–SE structure with a subsequent emplacement along the NE–SW fractures. The monzogranite has a NE–SW elongation, approximately 2 The most recent intrusions of sub-volcanic rocks took place mainly along the NE–SW fault system, and to a much lesser degree along the NW–SE and E–W fault systems. These dikes dip from 60° to near vertical, and have a variable thickness, ranging from few centimeters up to 3 In general, the skarn mineralization was developed along the contact between the Boinás monzogranite and the Láncara Formation. The skarn is principally an exoskarn, whose distribution depends on the zone, and it can be up to several tens of meters thick. However, locally intense metasomatic alteration also affects the igneous rock. The skarn alteration is controlled by faults, bedding planes, and receptive facies within the Láncara Formation. The different carbonate lithologies and variation in organic matter content within the Láncara Formation exerted a direct control on the type of skarn formation in the El Valle-Boinás deposit. On the scale of the deposit, two types of skarn developed: a calcic skarn preferentially formed in the upper limestone unit and a magnesian skarn formed in the dolomite-rich lower unit. Calcic skarn was broadly developed in Boinás West, whereas in Boinás East calcic skarn preferentially formed in the upper part and magnesian skarn formed in the lower part ( The monzogranite is also affected by hydrothermal alteration along the contact with the Láncara Formation and is favored by the presence of fractures. The endoskarn width is variable and ranges from a few millimeters up to several meters. The most intensely affected by the hydrothermal alteration are the smallest sills and dikes, in which the igneous texture locally is obliterated. Before the endoskarn formation, the monzogranite was affected by potassic alteration that produced a partial replacement of the whole rock by K-feldspar. In these cases, the rock, which is pinkish-white in color in hand samples, consists of muscovite and rutile replacing primary biotite, and K-feldspar replacing the original plagioclase. The formation of endoskarn began with the replacement of biotite phenocrysts by pyroxene, which forms a very fine-crystalline aggregate including biotite relicts, with titanite and rutile. Subsequent alteration resulted in a greenish rock made up of intermediate pyroxene (Hd A second generation of pyroxene, with major Mg contents (Hd In pyroxene endoskarn, retrograde alteration consists of amphibole (ferrohornblende, see The calcic skarn assemblage is characterized by relatively coarse-crystalline prograde garnet and pyroxene in the inner zone and wollastonite, with minor pyroxene and vesuvianite, in the outermost skarn zone. The garnet–pyroxene ratio also varies, decreasing toward the wollastonite zone. On the scale of the deposit, temporal and spatial zonation is observed in the composition of garnet and pyroxene, which reflects, in general, a progressive increase in iron content. This zonation has been recognized in copper skarns by several authors ( Garnets exhibit a wide range in color from dark red-brown near the igneous contact to intermediate brown and green in more distal locations. Also, electron microprobe analyses of garnets ( Garnet crystals show concentric zoning and sector twins. In general, under crossed nicols, more isotropic zones are more andraditic, whereas more birefringent zones are more grossularitic. There is a compositional zonation from core to rim, which is oscillatory in some cases. This zonation reflects a progressive increase in iron and decrease in aluminum content, so that garnet rims are more andraditic than the garnet core. Moreover, more grossularitic garnets show, as a whole, higher contents of Ti and Mn than the more andraditic. This could reflect the major element composition of the protolith and record a progressive reaction with infiltrating hydrothermal fluids ( In the same way as garnet, pyroxenes from the El Valle-Boinás skarn are also zoned in both space and time. Proximal and early formed pyroxene is generally pale and poor in iron, whereas distal and later formed pyroxene is darker green and richer in iron, up to Hd Locally abundant veins and microfractures affect the earlier formed skarn minerals and form two conjugate sets with an angle of approximately 120° between them. These veins and fractures, which commonly show several branches that coalesce surrounding relict early skarn patches, are filled by hedenbergite and quartz, and produce iron-rich pyroxene replacement close to the veins. Hedenbergite and quartz seem to be in equilibrium at least at the beginning of the quartz mineralization; hedenbergite crystals are replaced by amphibole at the end. In garnet skarn, hedenbergite crystals are located covering the walls of the fractures and cavities and replacing the garnet ( A later mineralization, which could be an intermediate stage between prograde and retrograde skarn, consists of quartz, K-feldspar and calcite. This mineralization filled veins and vugs and replaced earlier minerals, including hedenbergite. K-feldspar abundance decreases with the distance from the monzogranite. Epidote, amphibole and chlorite are the dominant retrograde skarn minerals, with apatite and titanite as accessory minerals. Garnet is replaced by K-feldspar, epidote, chlorite, quartz and calcite. Similarly, pyroxene is replaced by K-feldspar, amphibole, quartz, chlorite and calcite. Epidote occurs in two forms: as subhedral crystals by replacement of garnet, or as radiated aggregates growing towards the vug centers. All analyzed epidotes have a composition between Ep The massive garnet skarn is generally barren of sulfide mineralization, but locally contains patches of metallic minerals associated with retrograde minerals (quartz, calcite, amphibole, epidote and chlorite) within cavities and fractures. In pyroxene and wollastonite skarns, massive ore bodies and veins commonly occur. Metallic mineralization mainly consists of arsenopyrite (ApyI), pyrrhotite (PoI and II), pyrite, chalcopyrite, bornite and magnetite. Other minerals are sphalerite, wittichenite, chalcocite, digenite, electrum, native bismuth and bismuthinite (see Arsenopyrite (ApyI), pyrite and pyrrhotite are more abundant towards the igneous contact, whereas chalcopyrite and bornite tend to occur in the outer part of the skarn. The wollastonite zone is broadly mineralized by bornite and chalcopyrite, with minor chalcocite wittichenite, electrum and petzite. This mineralization is associated with the crosscutting ferroactinolite veins. Pyrrhotite occurs with textural differences and different assemblages. Microprobe analyses of both pyrrhotites (PoI and PoII) documented two ranges of iron content. These values and their implications in a possible The other pyrrhotite (PoII), is associated with arsenopyrite, chalcopyrite and minor sphalerite. This pyrrhotite is related to the retrograde alteration of pyroxene to ferroactinolite. Pyrrhotite appears as coarse-crystalline masses, whereas chalcopyrite and sphalerite occur towards the boundaries of grains, partially replacing the pyrrhotite. Arsenopyrite (ApyI) is present as subhedral grains isolated or partially enclosed by the pyrrhotite masses. The assemblages of chalcopyrite and bornite are similar to the ones found in the magnesian skarn and will be more extensively described in next section. Metasomatic alteration in the lower dolomitic member of the Láncara Formation produced a broadly developed magnesian skarn in the Boinás East zone. The bedding planes have an average strike of N35°E, dipping ≈45° to the east, and apophyses of the intrusion are developed along these planes, particularly close to the northeast boundary. Moreover, the high-angle pre-mineralization faults (the NW–SE fault system, which parallels the west igneous contact, and the NE–SW fault system, which parallels the cross-sections, see In general, the magnesian skarn consists of pyroxene with interbedded olivine zones. In the lower part ( Massive pyroxene skarn may appear in two different forms. In some instances, the skarn consists of a light green rock with a finely banded texture made up of coarse-crystalline subhedral pyroxene crystals separated by a very fine-crystalline zone. This banded texture could reflect the original sedimentary texture of the protolith (laminated dolomites of inorganic or organic origin; Retrograde alteration consists of tremolite ( The olivine skarn is made up of subhedral, interlocking forsterite crystals (Fo Quartz formed the early filling stage of vugs and veins, whereas calcite and sulfide minerals were deposited later. Sulfide mineralization may occur along the veinlets extending into the pyroxene skarn and always fills the interstices between amphibole and/or phlogopite crystals, or between prograde skarn minerals. Samples with massive mineralization forming a layered structure have been observed. These layered ores could correspond to the banded pyroxene skarn described above, with sulfide minerals filling the grain interstices. With regard to the olivine skarn, the availability of this mineral to be altered caused the pervasive alteration of the olivine skarn and the high sulfide concentration, also forming massive orebodies. On the scale of the deposit, two different sulfide assemblages have been observed: a pyrrhotite, chalcopyrite and magnetite assemblage and a chalcopyrite–bornite assemblage. The zoning of the sulfide minerals is so far unclear, but the former assemblage seems to be located in the outer zones of the deposit. Wittichenite, sphalerite, bismuthinite, native bismuth and electrum (up to 68 In the pyrrhotite, chalcopyrite and magnetite assemblage, the pyrrhotite present is the one described above as PoI, which is also altered along microfractures and grain boundaries to a fine-crystalline mixture of pyrite–marcasite–magnetite or to subhedral pyrite cubes and interstitial magnetite. Massive anhedral chalcopyrite surrounds the pyrrhotite crystals and partially replaces them. Also, on rare occasions, the chalcopyrite crystals contain star-shaped and skeletal exsolutions of sphalerite, and more rarely lamellar exsolutions of cubanite ( In the chalcopyrite-bornite assemblage, bornite occurs as irregular inclusions in chalcopyrite, and the reverse relationship is also common. The chalcopyrite/bornite ratio is variable. Close to the igneous rock, the ratio is commonly >1, whereas bornite is the main Cu-bearing sulfide in the outer zones of the skarn. Chalcopyrite is commonly associated with primary bornite as lamellar exsolutions in the shape of thin plates or lenses. Myrmekitic intergrowths of bornite and chalcopyrite have been observed in some samples. Spindle-shaped grains of chalcopyrite also occur as bornite replacement along grain boundaries and microfractures. Electrum appears as bleb-like or ribbon-like inclusions infilling the mutual contact between crystals of bornite and/or chalcopyrite ( Quartz, amphibole, calcite and sulfide mineral veins, around 1-cm thick, have been observed cutting the banded structure of the skarn. These veins seem to be perpendicular to the skarn–igneous rock contact and show several stages of mineralization. Sulfide minerals are mainly arsenopyrite (ApyI) and chalcopyrite with minor pyrrhotite±pyrite. Electrum was observed as inclusions in arsenopyrite crystals and filling fractures associated with chalcopyrite. The geochemistry of the magnesian skarns is characterized by strongly anomalous gold, silver and copper, with weakly anomalous bismuth and tellurium. Gold mineralization shows a consistent correlation with copper and silver. Arsenic anomalies are normally confined to the monzogranite and to the skarn located near the igneous rocks, whereas in the middle and outer parts of the skarn the arsenic content is erratic and mostly low. As was mentioned earlier, information from drill cores and open mine works shows that there are two types of dikes, rhyodacitic and diabasic, cross-cutting the Boinás intrusion, skarn, retrograde skarn and all existing lithologies. A low-temperature hydrothermal alteration and mineralization process, which was spatially and genetically related to this post-skarn igneous activity, obliterated the skarn-related mineralogy. Reactivation of the fracture pattern allowed the intrusion of the sub-volcanic dikes after extensive erosion of the overlying units, which resulted in a strong structural control of the mineralization. These later hydrothermal events mainly consist of silicification, sericitization, argillization and carbonatization, accompanied by quartz, adularia and carbonate veins and sulfide mineralization. K–Ar dating of sericite from the altered rhyodacitic and diabasic dikes shows that at least two magmatic/hydrothermal processes took place as much as 15 The first episode is represented by acid porphyritic dikes. These porphyritic rocks, which can be classified from a petrographic point of view as rhyodacites, always appear completely sericitized, and quartz is the only original component that is recognizable. Quartz appears as globular phenocrysts with embayments. The other phenocrysts are completely sericitized, and the groundmass is made up of sericite and quartz. These dikes have cut the hornfels, skarn and the Boinás intrusion, developing a strong and narrow silicification in the host rocks. Euhedral pyrite is frequently observed in the outer zones of the dikes. Intense sericitization of the monzogranite is also related to this post-skarn hydrothermal mineralization ( Close to the surface, the silicification and hematization became more intense, and jasper and jasperoid breccias were broadly developed. Breccias consist of angular to subangular silicificed clasts within a breccia matrix formed either by argillaceous material and/or quartz filling open spaces. Breccia clasts are light to dark red rocks, whereas quartz is milky or colorless and transparent. In jasperoid breccias, silicified porphyry clasts also occur. Native copper and cuprite appear in cavities. Quartz, carbonate, minor adularia and sulfides, filling veins and irregular vugs hosted by the skarn and monzogranite, are associated with this post-skarn hydrothermal activity. Quartz occurs as large euhedral crystals growing perpendicular to the vein edge, or as anhedral crystals with calcite, which is frequently replaced by dolomite, filling the holes. Fe–Mg chlorite and sericite also occur. A second generation of quartz and calcite (with appreciable amounts of Mn) veins is present, and these produced carbonatization along the contact. Sulfide mineralization consists of pyrite, arsenopyrite (ApyII) and sphalerite, with minor chalcopyrite, stannite, tetrahedrite, bournonite, galena and Fe–Pb–Sb sulfosalts (boulangerite, stibnite and jamesonite). Pyrite is the most abundant sulfide mineral related to the epithermal mineralization. Pyrite occurs as aggregates of euhedral to subhedral crystals. Sphalerite has low iron contents, ranging from 6.5 to 12.2 The other igneous event is represented by the diabase dikes. These rocks, in contrast to the porphyritic dikes, normally show minor alteration. In slightly altered cases, the rock consists of plagioclase and a ferromagnesian mineral (completely replaced by chlorite, muscovite, rutile and titanite), set in a groundmass made up of microlites of plagioclase whose interstices are occupied by chlorite, titanite and carbonate. This rock is slightly sericitized and carbonatized. Where the rock is more deeply altered, it shows major sericitization and especially carbonatization, and in some places silicification. In this case, the phenocrysts are replaced by carbonate and quartz, showing spherulitic and amygdaloidal shapes. Small and anhedral quartz crystals appear dispersed through the groundmass. K–Ar dating from sericite yields an age of 255±5 Microthermometric studies were performed on double-polished, 100–300 Seven inclusion types were established taking into account microscopic observation such as the number of phases present at room temperature, gas/liquid ratios and microthermometric measurements. Their characteristics and behavior during microthermometric measurements are described below. Results from microthermometry together with abbreviations used are summarized in These were found in garnet and pyroxene of the prograde skarn and their morphology, size and distribution vary depending on the host mineral. In garnet from calcic skarn, the inclusions are scarce, irregular in shape and frequently broken. Their size varies between 20 and 40 The type I inclusions contain a water vapor bubble occupying from 10 to 20%, and several daughter minerals. From the optical study of the daughter minerals present in the largest inclusions, and taking into account their shape and optical properties, the following characterize type I inclusions ( Freezing studies could not be done in this type of inclusion due to the lesser amount of liquid phase. By means of microthermometry, no other volatile could be detected. During heating studies, final dissolution of daughter crystals always preceded the final homogenization. Sylvite was the first crystal dissolved at temperatures ranging from 180 to 190°C. Upon further heating, halite dissolved at temperatures ranging from 410 to 420°C in garnet and from 400 and 405°C in pyroxene. Only two carbonate melting temperatures were measured in garnet and pyroxene at around 550 and 505°C, respectively. In garnet, one anhydrite melting temperature was also obtained at around 560°C. The inclusions were heated up to 575°C, the limit of the equipment, but the final homogenization temperatures were not reached. At this temperature the vapor phase of fluid inclusions in pyroxenes was very small in size and began to move quickly (Brownian movement), which suggests that the inclusions will homogenize at only slightly higher temperatures. The fluid inclusions in garnet did not show this behavior, suggesting higher homogenization temperatures than pyroxene. We consider 580°C as the minimum temperature of homogenization for type I inclusions. These inclusions were found in quartz of veins related to early retrograde magnesian skarn (QMAG-1). In morphology, they are polyhedral, square or prismatic in shape and their size varies between 5 and 18 The beginning of ice melting occurs between −70 and −75°C, indicating the presence of an aqueous fluid with a complex mix of salts such as CaCl These inclusions were also found in the QMAG-1 sample. In morphology, they are rounded, equidimensional or in negative crystal form, with a size varying from 8 to 30 During freezing, the CH These inclusions were found in the QMAG-1 sample, associated with type II and III inclusions. In morphology, they are rounded, elongated or in negative crystal form. Their size varies between 8 and 30 Type IV inclusions show only one phase at room temperature, made up of CH These inclusions were found in quartz from QASPY-1. They may be three-phase or two-phase at room temperature, depending upon the bulk density of the CO After cooling and on warming, melting of solid CO These inclusions were found in quartz and calcite of QMAG-2 and QCAL-1 samples. They are mainly distributed in the core of quartz crystals, isolated or in groups, and they have irregular to very irregular morphology, frequently showing necking. In calcite, they are more randomly distributed and are rounded, equidimensional or in negative crystal form. In both cases, the inclusions were characterized as primary according to the criteria of The inclusions range in size from 8 to 40 These inclusions are distributed along microfractures that are within or crosscut quartz crystals of most of the samples, frequently associated with type V and VI inclusions, and are therefore secondary in character ( Two subtypes, VIIa and VIIb, have been defined by their behavior during freezing and heating studies. During cooling no clathrate nucleation has been observed. In the first case, In the fluid inclusions of types I and II, the low eutectic temperatures measured (−70 and −75°C for type II) and the abundance of daughter minerals suggest a complex salt solution with NaCl, KCl, CaCl The diagram in Representative isochores of the inclusion types found were calculated and plotted in a In the case of type I inclusions, the high-salinity values in addition to the lack of homogenization temperatures did not allow the calculation of actual isochores. However, we plotted in the The intersection between type III isochores and high-density type IV isochores shows the initial conditions of unmixing, ranging from 350 to 425°C and from 0.7 to 1.27 kbars of pressure. The intersection between the lower Th type II isochores, the 40 Another group beside the one mentioned above is constituted by the Representative samples of the prograde skarn, the retrograde-stage veins and the post-skarn hydrothermal veins and alteration were collected from both drill cores and from hand specimens at the El Valle-Boinás deposit. Samples of carbonate from the unaltered limestones and dolostones were also collected from the Láncara Formation. This isotopic study was carried out on the carbon and oxygen of carbonates, the oxygen of silicates, the oxygen and deuterium of hydrous silicates and the sulfur of sulfide minerals. The analyses were performed at the Stable Isotopes Laboratory of Salamanca University. For the oxygen extraction for isotopic analysis the technique of Isotope analyses were performed on carbonated sedimentary rocks from the Láncara Formation, marble and veins associated with skarn mineralization, and veins associated with post-skarn hydrothermal mineralization. All measured data are plotted in Oxygen isotope analyses on silicates and oxygen and hydrogen isotope analyses on hydrous silicates were also performed on the igneous rock (biotite), on the skarn-type mineralization (garnet, pyroxene, amphibole, epidote, phlogopite and quartz), and on the post-skarn hydrothermal mineralization (quartz, sericite). The Sulfur isotope analyses were performed on arsenopyrite and chalcopyrite from mineralization related to skarn stages, as well as on pyrite, sphalerite and arsenopyrite from post-skarn hydrothermal stages. The A likely As was described above, two different generations of pyrrhotite were observed in the skarn mineralization, PoI and PoII. Both pyrrhotites correspond to two ranges of atomic percent iron. The first pyrrhotite (PoI) shows low iron content, with compositions ranging from 46 up to 46.7 The second pyrrhotite (PoII) is iron-rich and was observed in retrograded calcic skarn associated with ferroactinolite alteration of hedenbergite, postdating the formation of prograde skarn minerals. It is associated with arsenopyrite, chalcopyrite and minor sphalerite. The arsenopyrite (ApyI) appears as isolated crystals or partially enclosed by coarse-crystalline masses of phyrrhotite. Compositions of this arsenopyrite obtained by electron microprobe show arsenic contents ranging from 32.5 to 33.77 Similarly to pyrrhotite, all the arsenopyrites (Aspy I) analyzed in the skarn, which include those mentioned earlier, show a great variation in arsenic content ( The fluid inclusion study suggests a range of temperatures for the second retrograde stage of between 280 and 325°C. During this stage, deposition of chalcopyrite, bornite and pyrite took place, in addition to the most important gold deposition. Gold is mainly associated with wittichenite and bismuthinite, and appears filling microfractures and interstices between previously formed minerals. Moreover, bismuthinite and native bismuth also occur in association with chalcopyrite, suggesting that the mineralization took place along the bismuthinite–native bismuth line. In With regard to the later and low-temperature mineralization, data from microprobe analyses in sphalerite show compositions ranging from 6.5 to 12.2 The emplacement of the Boinás monzogranite at 303 The early high-temperature calc-silicate assemblages were Fe-poor, beginning with Mg- and Al-bearing calc-silicate minerals (grossularitic garnet, diopside and forsterite). Progressive enrichment of iron resulted in the formation of the Fe Exsolution of aqueous fluids continued as the Boinás intrusion crystallized and the magmatic fluid became more volatile-rich. The evolution of the system caused hydrofracturing of the marginal parts of the intrusive body and adjacent wallrocks. The fluid flowed towards fractures due to pressure gradients and unmixed into two different fluids (one H Two stages of sulfide deposition and rock alteration can be defined associated with the retroskarn formation. Initially, the high temperatures and high chloride concentration of the fluid suggest that gold is mainly transported as a chloride complex. Cooling and/or changes in the fluid composition will lead to the deposition of gold ( Reaction with host rocks rich in organic matter and/or ferrous iron-bearing minerals such as hedenbergitic pyroxene caused the precipitation of sulfide minerals from the metal–chloride complexes ( If fluid immiscibility occurs, such as was evidenced from the fluid inclusion study, sulfide deposition is also to be expected. During this process, the volatile species present in the fluid are selectively partitioned into the vapor phase, whereas gold as a chloride complex remains in the brine phase, especially if the fluid immiscibility occurs at high temperature ( During the sulfide deposition hydrous alteration products also formed. Skarn alteration to phlogopite, tremolite-actinolite, epidote, serpentine and magnetite took place, as did mineralization of quartz, calcite, titanite and apatite. Sulfides were deposited in fractures and vugs, mainly in the magnesian skarn where they formed massive ore bodies. Quartz-calcite veins developed in monzogranite with arsenopyrite, ±pyrite and molybdenite and sericite alteration. K–Ar dating of phlogopite from retrograde magnesian skarn and sericite from altered monzogranite indicated ages of 305±6 and 302±9 The main gold deposition, which appears as rims or filling interstices between previously formed minerals, occurred in the second retrograded stage where the ore-forming fluids became cooled and diluted. This stage was made up of quartz, chlorite, calcite, serpentine, magnetite and sulfide deposition (mainly pyrite and a second generation of bornite). Gold appears as electrum and is associated with Bi-minerals and tellurides. The fluid inclusion study performed on quartz and calcite from this stage shows a low-salinity aqueous fluid. Data from the microthermometric study and geothermometry based on the microprobe analyses of chlorite ( After extensive erosion, reactivation of the main northeast-trending fracture system produced widespread brecciation and favored the emplacement of porphyritic and andesite dikes, in relation to which low-temperature hydrothermal alteration and mineralization took place. K–Ar data of sericites from hydrothermal alteration of these sub-volcanic rocks and the monzogranite affected by this process document at least two post-skarn hydrothermal events, at minimum ages of 284±8 and 255±5 The abundance of primary and secondary fluid inclusions showing a low-salinity, low-temperature (between 150 and 250°C) and low-pressure (below 0.2 The second hydrothermal event related to the andesite dikes produced intense carbonatization, and minor silicification and sericitization. The final phase of alteration in the El Valle-Boinás deposit is evident as intense supergene oxidation of the upper mineralized section. We wish to express our appreciation to Rio Narcea Gold Mines for financial support and for data provided. We are particularly appreciative of the support provided by the RNGM staff geologists who generously shared their knowledge of local geology, especially to Mónica Barrero. We also thank Belén Fernández who drew the geological map and cross-section. This work has also been financed by the CICYT project number PB96/0555 (Educational Science Ministry of Spain). We thank the reviewers and editors for their encouraging suggestions, which have improved significantly the content and clarity of the paper. For the fluid inclusion study of skarn minerals, samples of garnet, pyroxene, quartz and calcite were selected. In these samples, primary and secondary fluid inclusions were analyzed. Appropriate fluid inclusions measured in garnet were only found in a sample of reddish brown garnet (Ad Retrograde hydrothermal processes in calcic and magnesian skarns have been examined in samples of quartz and calcite from different assemblages. Fluid inclusions in quartz are more abundant than in calcite, and several types were defined in quartz samples. Most of the calcite samples did not show fluid inclusions, or they were too small in size to study. The samples used in the fluid inclusions study are the following:     Quartz from post-skarn hydrothermal veins and jasperoid rocks were also studied in order to ascertain the fluid conditions of this event. All the inclusions analyzed in these samples belong to type VII (aqueous-rich) inclusions, although most of the samples did not contain fluid inclusions, or they did not have a workable size. The samples used in the fluid inclusion study are the following:   