The aim of this work was to study the mineralization of wastewater effluent from an integrated-gasification combined-cycle (IGCC) power station sited in Spain to meet the requirements of future environmental legislation. This study was done in a pilot plant using a homogeneous photo-Fenton oxidation process with continuous addition of H2O2 and air to the system.
                  The mineralization process was found to follow pseudo-first-order kinetics. Experimental kinetic constants were fitted using neural networks (NNs). The NNs model reproduced the experimental data to within a 90% confidence level and allowed the simulation of the process for any values of the parameters within the experimental range studied. At the optimum conditions (H2O2 flow rate=120mL/h, [Fe(II)]=7.6mg/L, pH=3.75 and air flow rate=1m3/h), a 90% mineralization was achieved in 150min.
                  Determination of the hydrogen peroxide consumed and remaining in the water revealed that 1.2mol of H2O2 was consumed per each mol of total organic carbon removed from solution. This result confirmed that an excess of dissolved H2O2 was needed to achieve high mineralization rates, so continuous addition of peroxide is recommended for industrial application of this process.
                  Air flow slightly improved the mineralization rate due to the formation of peroxo-organic radicals which enhanced the oxidation process.According to pending environmental legislation, wastewater from integrated-gasification combined-cycle (IGCC) thermoelectric power stations will require a more restrictive removal of pollutants in the future. Wastewater used during this investigation came from the alkaline stripper of the gasification unit at Elcogás S.A (Spain). The existing treatment for this wastewater stream consists of an acid stripping for H Advanced oxidation processes (AOPs) have emerged as an important class of technologies for the destruction of pollutants in aqueous suspensions. AOP generates a powerful oxidizing agent, hydroxyl radical, which completely destroys the pollutants in wastewater. In a previous study, we showed that the main pollutants in this wastewater (cyanides and formates) can be successfully degraded using homogeneous photocatalysis in a UV-irradiation pilot plant (UV/H a complete study of the overall mineralization process, not only the pollutants, thus obtaining the optimum operation conditions; continuous addition of hydrogen peroxide rather than only at the beginning of the tests; this made it possible to increase the concentration of dissolved hydrogen peroxide in the water, enhancing the mineralization process; and addition of air bubbling through the system to increase the mineralization rate. The experimental results were fitted using neural networks (NNs), which allowed the values of the mineralization constant to be estimated within the studied range as a function of the operating variables (H Analytical-grade ferrous sulfate (FeSO The UV pilot plant FLUORACADUS-08/2.2 (Ecosystem, Spain), shown in Wastewater coming from the gasification unit upstream of the on-site treatment unit was treated with CaCl Chemical Oxygen Demand (COD, mg/L O A typical analysis of this wastewater showed the following concentrations: [HCOO A central-composite experimental design was applied to investigate the effects of four variables, H a factorial design with 2 selection of the axial distance of the star points (codified values replicates of the central point (three experiments). The complete experimental design including variable ranges is shown in In all the experiments, the disappearance of TOC followed pseudo-first-order kinetics with respect to the pollutant concentration, as follows: NNs are formed by input data vectors, neurones and output functions. Input data to the neurone are transformed by means of a base function and leave by an activation function. Each connection between input and output data and neurones is made by weight factors The input variables in this study were the hydrogen-peroxide flow rate, initial concentration of Fe(II), pH and air flow rate; the response function was the mineralization-rate constant. Finally, a measure of the saliency of the input variables was made based on the connection weights of the neural networks ( Several experiments were performed in order to determine the effect of the radiation type on the mineralization process ( The experimental results obtained for the mineralization constant were fitted with NNs with an average error lower than 10%. The equation and fitting parameters are shown in The results of a saliency analysis on the input variables for each neural network (%) are also shown in As reported previously in the literature, wastewater treatment with a Fenton or photo-Fenton processes is highly pH dependent ( The equation shown in The results showed that the formation of Fe(III) complexes or hydroxides ( A decrease in the oxidation potential of Additionally, at low pH (<3) protonation of H To help to understand the effect of pH, a study of the H Even at the optimum pH (3.75) it was very important to maintain an excess of H It is remarkable that the optimum pH found for the mineralization process in this study (3.75) was far from the optimal value obtained in recent study of formate degradation in the same type of wastewater (pH  As expected, an increase in [Fe] produced the same effect as H  HO From these results we concluded that the optimum conditions for the mineralization process under the studied range of variables are as follows: H Under these conditions, a longer test was performed. The results in  The use of a homogeneous process with UV light can offer a practical alternative for the mineralization of environmental pollutants present in thermoelectric power stations effluents. Simulation from NN equations proved that pH was the main variable involved in the mineralization process. Thus, the total amount of H An excess of hydrogen peroxide in solution was needed for a higher mineralization rate, so continuous addition of H Under the optimum conditions (H Financial support from the Programa Ciencia y Tecnologías Medioambientales (Ministerio de Educación y Ciencia, Spain), CTM2007-61958/TECNO is gratefully acknowledged.