Introduction
                  Surgery is the gold-standard treatment of displaced olecranon fracture, but is associated with numerous complications, especially in the elderly. Functional results of non-operative treatment in this population have never been analyzed in a prospective study.
               
                  Study hypothesis
                  Non-operative treatment of isolated olecranon fracture with stable elbow-joint in over 75-year-olds gives functional results comparable to those of surgery as reported in the literature, with fewer complications.
               
                  Material and methods
                  A prospective study analyzed functional results of non-operative treatment of isolated closed Mayo I and II olecranon fracture with stable elbow, in patients aged ≥75 years. The principal assessment criterion was functional recovery on the Mayo Elbow Performance Score (MEPS) and QuickDASH at 6 months.
               
                  Results
                  Twenty-two fractures in 21 patients were included. Mean MEPS was 95.26/100 (range, 85–100), and mean QuickDASH 4.3 (range, 0–29.55). Eighteen fractures showed osteoarthritis of the olecranon. There were no cases of elbow instability. There were no complications.
               
                  Discussion
                  Non-operative treatment of olecranon fracture in patients aged ≥75 years provided excellent functional results at 6 months, without associated complications.
               
                  Type of study
                  Single-center prospective observation cohort study.
               
                  Level of evidence
                  4.Olecranon fracture accounts for 10% of upper-limb fractures Non-operative treatment is already used by some authors Non-operative treatment of isolated stable olecranon fracture in over 75-year-olds gives good functional results comparable to those of surgery as reported in the literature, with fewer complications. The main study objective was to assess the functional results of non-operative treatment in over 75-year-olds admitted to our department for olecranon fracture without severe displacement. The secondary objective was to assess functional sequelae of olecranon fracture in over 75-year-olds managed non-operatively. A single-center prospective continuous observational study was performed from January to October 2016. All patients aged ≥ Non-operative treatment was founded on 2 weeks’ elbow-to-body sling-and-swathe immobilization in a comfortable position (70–90° flexion and neutral pronation-supination), with associated analgesia. Immobilization was then removed definitively and rehabilitation was initiated: firstly analgesic physiotherapy associated to unrestricted below-threshold passive elbow mobilization, then work on all active ranges of motion at 6 weeks, associated to muscle reinforcement beginning at 8 weeks, and ending with proprioception exercises. The main endpoint was functional recovery at 6 months post-trauma on MEPS and QuickDASH The main assessment was performed at 6 months post-trauma, in consultation with a single investigator (VM). Follow-up was classical, with control consultations at 6 weeks and 3 months post-trauma, including MEPS and QuickDASH. Fractures were classified according to displacement and stability on the Mayo Clinic system: a double-entry table with 3 rows (I: non-displaced fracture; II: stable displaced fracture; III: unstable displaced fracture) and 2 columns (a: single fracture line; b: comminution) Any complications were also noted. Sample size: our department's recruitment of elderly patients with olecranon fracture averages 20 per year. For a single-center prospective observational pilot study, the recommended number of patients to treat was 20. By the end of the inclusion period, 22 fractures in 21 patients were included. There was female predominance: 18/21 (82%); mean age was 88.8 years (range: 77–95 years). Fracture types were: 6 Mayo I-a, 2 Mayo I-b, 10 Mayo II-a, and 4 Mayo II-b. Nine of the 22 fractures (41%) involved the dominant side. There was no loss to follow-up. Three patients were initially recruited but excluded due to severe cognitive disorder. Functional scores at 6 months were: mean MEPS, 95.26/100 (range: 85–100), with 16 excellent and 6 good results; mean QuickDASH, 4.3 points (range: 0–29.55) ( Mean pain score on a 0-10 visual analog scale (VAS) was 1 (range: 0–3). Eighteen of the 22 fractures (82%) showed non-union ( There were no local (cutaneous, functional impotence, etc.) or general complications (loss of autonomy, failure to thrive, etc.). Functional results for non-operative treatment of olecranon fracture in ≥ Extension deficit was systematic, but without impact on quality of life, as seen from the scores. This is in agreement with Morrey et al., who reported a functional range of elbow motion of 30–130° for everyday activity It was interesting to find that olecranon non-union, present in 18 cases, was always well tolerated. Thus, can be explained by the well-known biomechanical phenomenon of olecranal patellization, which restores active extension of the elbow There have been previous studies of non-operative management of olecranon fracture Compared to the literature on surgical treatment in the general population, the present results are comparable or better Surgical complications can occur: painful protrusion of fixation material under the skin (20–75% of fractures) Non-operative treatment is open to certain criticisms, particularly concerning extension deficit. However, it is interesting to note that surgical treatment gives similar results in the general population, with deficits ranging from –4° to –15° The present study had certain limitations. It would have been interesting to compare operative and non-operative treatment, but our recruitment is too small to implement such a design. It would also have been interesting to assess loss of triceps strength, although this is less functionally troublesome in this population. Non-operative treatment of olecranon fracture without severe displacement in patients aged ≥ The authors declare that they have no competing interest.