During the second-generation ethanol production, wastes from the hydrothermal pretreatment process are generated. Such rich organic matter residues should be treated. An alternative for that waste is methane production via the anaerobic digestion process. The characterization and the evaluation of the biochemical methane potential (BMP) and hydrolysis rates from the wasted hydrothermally pretreated wheat straw, corn straw, sugarcane, and agave bagasse was investigated. The liquid extracted lixiviates, and the solid fraction of each waste was evaluated. Diauxic methane production was observed for sugarcane and corn liquid fractions and for all the solids fractions. BMP varied from 369 mL CH4/g COD (sugarcane bagasse) to 178 mL CH4/g COD (agave bagasse). The biodegradability percentage was decreasing from sugarcane bagasse (100%), corn straw (65%), wheat straw (55%) and agave bagasse (51%). The liquid fraction produced higher BMP values than the BMP obtained for the solid fraction. The relatively low biodegradability of the hydrothermally pretreated wastes, considering the carbohydrate-rich nature of the substrate, was associated with an inhibitory effect. A double effect caused by the presence of furfural was observed. At lower concentrations, there was an inhibitory effect, while for the high concentration a stimulatory effect was detected.An alternative to first generation biofuels is to use agroindustry residues such as lignocellulosic wastes to produce bioethanol and produce biofuel by second generation ( The objective of the pretreatment step is to liberate carbohydrates, which are then fermented and transformed into ethanol ( Hydrothermal pretreatment, HPT, (autohydrolysis or liquid hot water) or steam explosion is an environmentally friendly process to solubilize and depolymerize the hemicellulose into the liquid phase to obtain high added value compounds, as oligomers from hemicellulose ( The increase in operating temperature of hydrothermal pretreatment causes higher saturated water vapor pressure, which results in faster hydrolysis of volatile matter contents. For instance, it has been observed that the percentage of xylan increased proportionally to the increase in the explosion temperature. The amount of xylan after the explosion at 220 °C could be associated with the presence of highly reactive hemicellulose fraction or the release of xylan due to the breaking of the fibers ( For the ethanol production process, some wastes of HPT are generated. Such rich organic matter residues should be treated. An alternative for that waste is methane production via the anaerobic digestion process. Methane production from a variety of biological wastes through anaerobic digestion technology is growing worldwide and is considered ideal in many ways because of its economic and environmental benefits. Nevertheless, unexpected low methane yields and process instability are frequently observed and could be attributed to the inhibitory compounds generated during biomass pretreatment such as furan and lignin derivatives (phenolic compounds) ( The biochemical methane potential (BMP) obtained for each lignocellulosic residue varied depending on the pretreatment method as well as the type of biomass evaluated ( The hydrothermally pretreated wastes (HTPW) used in this study came from a process used to produce ethanol. Four biomasses were considered: wheat straw (WS), corn straw (CS), sugarcane bagasse (SB) and agave bagasse (AB). The BMP was evaluated from the liquid lixiviated extracted and the solid fraction after extraction. The experiment was conducted at 37 °C using anaerobic granular sludge from brewery wastewater plant as inoculum (20 gVS/L). The total and the useful volume of the reactor were 0.5 L and 0.36 L, respectively. Mixing was fixed at 200 rpm. A substrate to inoculum ratio (So/Xo) of 0.5 (g VS of substrate/g VS of inoculum) was utilized. A mineral medium was added according to The hydrolysis rate for the wastes was evaluated. A modified Gompertz equation (1) was used as proposed by The effect of furfural was evaluated on the anaerobic sludge used for the BMP tests. For that batch, tests were implemented following the same procedure as described for the BMP tests and using the AMPTS II system (section The solid and liquid fractions were analyzed to evaluate the soluble chemical oxygen demand (COD), volatile and total solids (VS, TS) (  The high content in the organic matter makes these HTPW suitable for biogas production and suggesting that further treatment is needed before the discharge of these residues. All the HTPW presented furfural and hydroxymethyl furfural (HMF) ranging from 0.42 g furfural/L to 0.11 gHMF/L. There is not a clear effect for the presence of some by-products formed during the pretreatment on the anaerobic digestion process. For instance,  Concerning the extracted lixiviates the highest value was obtained for the sugarcane bagasse (358 ± 19 mL CH4 /g VS added), and the lowest one was for wheat straw (212 ± 2 mL CH4 /g VS added). Methane production curves can be differentiating in two different categories ( The BMP values were in a direct relationship with the content of soluble COD present in each residue. That indicates that each biomass was differently affected by the hydrothermal pretreatment. More soluble COD was obtained from the SC, followed from CS, WS, and AB. Hydrolysis rates were evaluated by fitting the modified Gompertz model ( On the contrary of what can be expected, the organic matter present in HPTW was not fully degraded. Particularly for the agave, corn, and wheat lignocellulosic residues. The degree of inhibition depends on the type of inhibitor present. During pretreatment processes, soluble carbohydrates are generated but other by-products such as furan and lignin derivatives (phenolic compounds) also are produced (Bolyard et al., 2109; Results demonstrate that there was a double effect because of the presence of furfural. At lower concentrations, there was an inhibitory effect of 63 and 39% for the initial concentrations of 100 and 500 mg furfural/L ( Other compounds that produce inhibition are humic substances (humic acids and fulvic acids). Humic acids (HA) can be formed from the phenolic compounds released during lignin decomposition ( The characterization, the biochemical methane potential and hydrolysis rates from the discharged hydrothermally pretreated wheat straw, corn straw, sugarcane, and agave bagasse was evaluated. The biodegradability percentage (considering a theoretical BMP value) was decreasing from sugarcane bagasse, corn straw, wheat straw, and agave bagasse. The highest content of organic matter per mass of biomass was obtained for the sugarcane bagasse explaining the elevated BMP and degradability obtained. Diauxic methane production was observed for sugarcane and corn liquid fractions indicating the wastes have an easier biodegradable fraction and a more complex fraction that requires a more extended period for hydrolysis. The liquid fraction produced higher BMP values than the BMP obtained for the solid fraction. All the solid fractions present diauxic behavior, and the high methane production started after 100 h, with lower hydrolysis rates than for the liquid fraction. The relatively low biodegradability of the hydrothermally pretreated wastes, considering the carbohydrate-rich nature of the substrate, was associated with an inhibitory effect. It was observed that there was a double effect caused by the presence of furfural. At lower concentrations, there was an inhibitory effect, while for the high concentration a stimulatory effect was observed. This study was financially supported by the