The high arsenic content of the flotation concentrate obtained from a gold-bearing enargite ore for pyrometallurgical processing strongly diminishes its market value. An investigation has been carried out for selectively leaching arsenic from enargite–luzonite minerals using alkaline Na2S solutions. By suitably adjusting the main reaction conditions almost 98% arsenic was leached, as well as part of the gold, particularly with high Na2S concentrations. Copper was not lost from the solid phase in which the enargite is converted into a new species with the chemical formula Cu1.5S.The deeper portions of the Serrenti–Furtei gold-bearing deposit in Southern Sardinia (Italy) are host chiefly to sulphide mineralisations composed for the most part of enargite–luzonite and pyrite. Gold and subordinate amounts of tennantite, covellite, chalcopyrite and arsenopyrite are associated with the pyrite ( The gold is refractory to direct cyanidation but potentially economic concentrations of enargite–luzonite are contained in the ores. Thus, the ores have been beneficiated by flotation, recovering the gold and copper in a collective concentrate destined for further processing via pyrometallurgy ( Unfortunately, the fact that enargite prevails among the copper bearing minerals combined with the high As content of the concentrates strongly undermine their economic value because of the environmental issues associated with pyrometallurgical processing. Thus for the leaner ores direct roasting may well prove uneconomical. For this reason the possibility of removing the arsenic contained in the concentrates prior to roasting has been explored by means of alkaline leaching with a mixture of sodium sulfide and sodium hydroxide ( In this work, the influence of the most significant process variables has been investigated, namely specific surface area of the solid, temperature, pH and reagent concentration of the leach solution. Tests were conducted on cores removed from exploration boreholes drilled into the deeper part of the mineral deposit. After grinding to below 0.15 mm the product was subjected to flotation with ethyl xanthate after pyrite depression with a mixture of lime and sodium cyanide. As the chemical ( To evaluate the influence of solid particle size on leaching results, samples of the untreated concentrate were ground to different degrees of fineness. The specific surface area of the ground products (0.050, 0.020 and 0.010 mm) and of the concentrate itself (− Arsenic removal tests were conducted on the flotation concentrate, using alkaline Na The influence of each variable was determined by keeping all the other variables constant. Leaching results were evaluated by means of chemical determinations on the leach products, diffractometric analysis (XRD) and electron probe micro-analysis (EPMA) of the solid residues. Tests were conducted on the solid material ground to below 0.020 mm (1.75 m The influence of temperature is shown in Tests were conducted at 115 °C again using 32.5 g/l (0.42 M) Na Tests were performed at 115 °C on the solid ground to below 0.020 mm (1.75 m Tests were performed under the most favourable temperature and fineness conditions found for arsenic solubilisation, namely 115 °C and specific surface area of 1.75 m The results obtained by varying the combination of Na As the pH is increased, the fraction of hydrolysing S Experimental results show favorable conditions for As leaching to be: fineness and specific surface area of the solid 0.020 mm and 1.75 m Analysis of the leach residue indicated a small reduction in the quantity of gold originally contained in the concentrate. Further work is currently underway to quantify the gold leached and to determine factors that affect the amount of gold leached. This will be the subject of a future paper. Gold dissolution may be attributed to the action of the thiosulphates and polysulphides formed in the basic conditions through reaction between OH Gold solubilisation: Polysulphides and sulphides 2Au Thiosulphates Au To identify the chemical–mineralogical changes brought about by leaching, the flotation concentrate and solid residue were analysed by means of XRD and EPMA and observed under the optical microscope. Diffractometric determinations ( For the crystal chemical characterisation of the new mineral phase, the leach residue was analysed by means of EPMA using an ARL SEMQ microprobe. The analyses were performed at different points of the polished sections, corresponding to the mineral phases of interest, in order to quantify S, As, St, Cu and Fe contents. By so doing it was possible to determine the average Cu, Fe, As, Sb and S assay of the enargite (Cu The results of electron microanalysis are also schematically shown in the triangular phase diagram in As can be observed from the triangular phase diagram, after leaching the crystal chemical formula of enargite changes from Cu Further leaching tests on pure enargite crystals from the same ore body confirmed the newly formed product to be unequivocally attributable to the transformation of enargite and not of the other species contained in the flotation concentrate. Analysis of the diffractograms for pure enargite ( The average crystal chemical formulae of the solid residue determined by means of electron microanalysis on the unattacked enargite and on the transformed phase confirm the conversion of enargite into a copper sulphide having stoichiometry There is practically complete solubilisation of arsenic and partial solubilisation of sulphur, while the copper is concentrated almost entirely in the solid residue. Leaching a gold and enargite concentrate obtained by bulk flotation with basic Na This study was financially supported by MIUR (Italian Ministry for Education, Universities and Research), by CNR (Italian National Research Council) and by CINIGEO (Interuniversity Consortium for Georesources Engineering).