Early stage process analysis to maximize economic feasibility and minimize environmental burden is critically important for process flow sheet selection and optimization. This is equally true for bioprocesses. For many systems, including bioprocess systems, the desired material and energy balance data are not available at an early stage of design. The CeBER Bioprocess Modeller (Centre for Bioprocess Engineering Research at the University of Cape Town, Department of Chemical Engineering) has been developed to provide estimates of these material and energy balance data, as well as calculate equipment volumes and utility needs.
                  The model allows for aerobic or anaerobic, intra- or extracellular product formation or biomass growth in a continuous or batch process for various bioproducts produced from a selection of microorganisms using a range of raw materials. Using simple inputs, and default values drawn, the model is suitable for engineers and scientists alike.
                  The model also incorporates the option to select for sterilization and to specify the downstream processing train. In the bioreactor, the model takes into account aeration, agitation, reaction, biomass maintenance, yield, post microbial growth cooling and growth rate calculations, amongst others. This paper presents the model framework for the microbial growth and product formation stages.Industrial bioprocesses (environmental biotechnology, biocatalysis, bioremediation or similar) are becoming increasingly important for the production of chemical and energy products over conventional chemical synthesis, owing to the emphasis on the use of renewable raw materials, the specificity and complexity of biologically catalysed reactions, or both ( To support claims of benefit, in terms of reduced environmental burden or increased process sustainability, rigorous process analysis is required using tools such as Life Cycle Assessment or carbon- and water footprinting. These approaches require availability of material and energy inventories, as do techno-economic assessments. Where these are available at an early stage of process design, they can be used to inform process selection. Further, such analysis can be used to target process improvements. In order to perform the environmental or economic studies required, a good knowledge of the process as well as the material and energy balance data are needed. This information is often found through physical data collection or from a detailed software modelling exercise (including, for example, AspenPlus or SuperPro Designer). Such an exercise typically requires a software package that is more complex than needed, may not be freely available, is unsuitable for biological processes or requires a specialist user to manipulate. Alternative, simplified tools are also available but concentrate on costing only, are limited to a single product, include pharmaceutical processes only and/or use modified results from the software mentioned earlier as inputs to a next step ( In order to obtain fast, accurate data estimates, the ‘CeBER Bioprocess Modeller’ has been developed to allow for the use of a limited set of inputs (using zero inputs will give a generic bioprocess flowsheet) to calculate the material and energy approximations. This data can then be used to perform environmental or economic assessments or aid in further process design. The approach to the generic flowsheet model is based on first principles, supplemented by data from advanced modelling studies and industrial practice. There are three main desirable features of the generic flowsheet model: It should act as a first estimate bioprocess simulation tool; It is required to calculate all relevant information required for a comprehensive environmental or economic assessment; and It should require minimal input data. The model should not be location specific. Hence, certain aspects of the model may not use the most appropriate options for different geographic regions The complete model allows for aerobic or anaerobic microbial growth with solid or liquid, intra- or extracellular product formation in a batch or continuous set-up. Sterilization, inoculation, microbial growth and product formation operations are followed by biomass recovery by solid–liquid separation, cell disruption (if required), product recovery, purification and formulation. Downstream processing is limited to six recovery, concentration or purification steps followed by a final formulation step ( The model requires the user to specify a flowsheet system, together with the associated parameters and constants. A database of constants is built into the model to provide common values as needed. This includes yield coefficients, densities and chemical compositions, based on chosen parameters. Additional default values close to typical operating norms are also provided for things such as standard operating temperatures and pressures. All database and default values can be over-ridden for a specific process if desired. This paper presents the detailed approach for sterilization and microbial growth/product formation, while the accompanying paper presents the approach for downstream processing ( The generic model (CeBER Bioprocess Modeller) has been developed to give either a defined amount of final product or the amount of product from a specified raw material feed, calculating associated raw materials, impurities, energy requirements and unit operation volumes, while also taking into account losses in downstream processing. The model has been developed in Microsoft Excel to be accessible to as many users as possible. All mathematical and logical functions within the MS-Excel software remain operational within the flowsheet model. The CeBER Bioprocess Modeller is presented such that the user follows selections in clearly marked cells from the top to bottom of a single MS-Excel sheet to define the desired flowsheet ( The CeBER Bioprocess Modeller is structured such that advanced users can extend the model capability. Possible additions include higher-level thermodynamic calculations ( In the model, sterilization is performed by filtration for contamination removal or addition of steam (heat) for contaminant destruction by thermal death. When filtering, constant pressure membrane filtration (with no cake build-up) is assumed. It is further assumed that energy requirements are provided by electricity and are calculated from first principles of the fluid flow, pressure drop, pumping efficiencies, filter dimensions and time to filter. Should sterilization be achieved by steam, this is assumed to be provided continuously at 140 °C (default conditions) pressurized isentropically. The energy required for this is assumed to be from electricity. This takes into account; amongst others, temperatures, heat capacities, masses, efficiencies, heat losses and pressures as well as the energy required for steam compression. Two basic options are included: to allow for feed at ambient temperature (20 °C) or partially pre-heated feed (60 °C) (partial heat integration from recycled steam). It is assumed there is a constant rate of heat loss of 0.003 kW/m Steam is also used included between campaigns (batch operation) or during maintenance (continuous operation) for cleaning. Values are based on industrial norms, factored to obtain the required reactor volume. Steam requirements for backing steam and space heating can also be included. A wide range of microbial products can be formed across a broad range of microbial systems. In The product can be defined as a primary product ( To determine the required raw materials for the specified amount of product, the calculation is split into microbial growth and product formation. From the amount of raw materials and waste calculated stoichiometrically in each, and a specific product yield, total flow rates can be obtained by a matrix algebra calculation. One of several microorganisms can be included from the built-in database. Various experimental data are associated with these to perform the mass balance. The elemental formulae for each microorganism forms part of the dataset included in the model. Where values are not available, an average value is used as a default ( The products formed have been divided into nine categories: antibiotics, amino acids, enzymes, alcohols, vitamins, carbohydrates, organic acids, alkanes and others; with the chemical formulae for specific products given in each category. Those that are unknown within a specific grouping are assumed as the average of that group. These are used in the mass balance to calculate raw materials required for a specific amount of product formed. The chemical compositions and densities are also included in order to allow inter-conversion of stream mass and volume throughout the model. The biomass growth and product formation calculations are based on chemical balances for carbon, oxygen, nitrogen, sulphur and phosphorus, as well as yield coefficients (Y For anaerobic growth, oxygen is excluded from the mass balance shown in Equation The water that evaporates during the aerobic process is not included in the energy balance. Yield coefficients, Y All microbial growth, and associated product formation, requires a source of carbon. In the database, the carbon source can be selected from five categories: carbohydrates, hydrocarbons, volatile fatty acids or organic acids, proteins and other. Each has various examples of possible carbon sources with the associated chemical formulae for stoichiometric balancing. The model allows one or two carbon sources to be chosen. Where the desired carbon source (or any other raw material) is not present, the chemical formula can be entered in the form: C The model assumes that the microbial growth and product formation is limited by the carbon source, with a 1 mol% excess added as default. When two carbon sources are added, a mass ratio for the two carbon sources must be specified. This is a simplification, as in biological systems, one source is often used in preference to the other. As with the carbon source, a maximum of two nitrogen sources, either organic or inorganic, can be specified as raw materials in the generic flow sheet model. Examples include ammonia gas, ammonium nitrate, ammonium sulphate and urea. Unless specified, a default of 5 mol% excess is assumed, with a mass ratio required when two sources are added. Under aerobic conditions, an oxygen source is required, either modelled as pure oxygen or air. Unless specified, the default aeration rate is set at ten times the minimum aeration rate calculated stoichiometrically. The volume of air or oxygen enriched air passing through the reactor is often much higher than the stoichiometric amount to ensure sufficient gas–liquid mass transfer and to aid in mixing. The energy to compress the gas used has been modelled as electricity. The gas compression can be performed by a one- or two-stage reciprocating, centrifugal or axial compressor with intercooling ( Sulphur, required for proteins and other sulphur containing products, is commonly provided by various sulfates. As a simplification, it has been assumed that only the sulphur from the specified sulphur source is used in microbial growth or product formation. It has been assumed that 5 mol% (default value) excess sulphur enters the system in the sulphur source. Phosphorus is required to meet the phosphorus content of nucleic acids and any phosphorus in the product. Potential phosphorus sources include phosphoric acid and various phosphates. A 5 mol% (default value) excess has been assumed. A portion of the energy source (typically also the carbon source) is metabolized to provide energy to maintain biomass functioning, even in the absence of growth. This is accounted for through a maintenance coefficient. Where glucose is the energy source, typical values for aerobic growth lie between 0.055 and 0.25 g glucose/g cell h ( The maintenance coefficient is selected based on the organism. If no data exists, an average is used, based on either aerobic or anaerobic metabolism. The amount of carbon needed to supply this energy is assumed to be supplied by the first carbon source and is calculated from this maintenance coefficient and a residence time. Under aerobic conditions, the carbon source required for maintenance is assumed to undergo complete oxidation to carbon dioxide, water vapour and reducing equivalents from which energy is generated. In the anaerobic process, the carbon source forms an additional anaerobic product such as ethanol or methane. The database of maintenance coefficients for roughly 20 organisms is given ( Growth rate data allows for the calculation of the reactor residence time, which, in turn, is used to calculate agitation energy, maintenance energy, aeration energy, cooling requirements Under aerobic conditions, microbial growth results in energy release at approximately 400 kJ heat/C-mol produced (or 500 kJ heat/mol O The energy generated during aerobic growth is linked to the degree of reductance ( Once the required microbial growth and product formation is achieved, cooling of the materials can take place. A default cooled temperature of 15 °C is assumed but can be set as desired for heat labile products. The refrigeration energy is calculated from first principles on the compression of the refrigerant and an energy balance of heat removal from the microbial stream to estimate the electrical energy requirement (including an assumed 30% efficiency of electrical energy conversion). Nienow has described agitation in microbial systems in various papers (including, Production of Penicillin V was modelled using the fungi Parameters used in the model were estimated from literature ( One of the key concepts of the model is that there is a database of constants as well as default processing values, which are used should the actual numbers not be available. These values, together with the values obtained from literature, are show in The inputs which may seem to be significantly different to the actual numbers used, The spreadsheet also provides certain values that are suitable (without being changed) for the production of Penicillin. A selected list of these is shown in This paper provided an introduction to the sterilization and microbial growth/product formation of a generic flowsheet model (CeBER Bioprocess Modeller) for fast, first estimate material and energy balance inventories of industrial bioprocesses. Presented in an MS-Excel format, the model uses a stoichiometric approach, together with first principles and rules of thumb. The model allows for batch or continuous production by aerobic or anaerobic and intra- or extracellular means. Typical information from bioprocess systems are stored in a database which include relevant constants and physical data. Downstream processing units allowing for accurate representation of typical downstream bioprocess setups are given in an accompanying paper ( The financial support of the The following is the supplementary data related to this article: Supplementary data related to this article can be found at