Introduction
                  Although volar locking plates (VLPs) have been exclusively used for unstable distal radius fractures (DRFs), the optimal management of distal ulna fractures (DUFs) remains controversial. Internal fixation using a plate for DUFs might be challenging because of the presence of osteoporotic bone and fragile bone fragments in elderly patients.
               
                  Hypothesis
                  We hypothesized that a strategy including VLP fixation for DRFs and non-intervention for DUFs with early wrist mobilization would provide encouraging results in elderly patients.
               
                  Materials and methods
                  Eighteen patients (17 women and one man, mean age 74.7 years) were included in the study. According to the Biyani classification, there were seven patients with type-1, three with type-2, five with type-3, and three with type-4 DUFs. Radiological results were analyzed in 18 patients and the clinical results could be evaluated in 10 patients who attended the necessary follow-up meetings. Ulnar angular deformity (UAD) and ulnar shortening amount (USA) were measured using anteroposterior radiographs. USA was defined as the difference in ulnar variance between just after surgery and at the final visit. Clinical results were assessed using the modified Gartland and Werley score, disability arm shoulder hand (DASH) score, range of motion, grip strength, pain, and distal radioulnar joint (DRUJ) instability.
               
                  Results
                  All ulna metaphyseal fractures united. The mean UAD just after surgery was 5.9° (range, 0–22). At the final visit, the mean UAD was 6.4° (range, 0–17). The mean USA was 0.35mm, and only one patient showed ulnar shortening of >2mm. The results were “excellent” in nine patients and “good” in one, according to the modified Gartland and Werley score. The mean DASH score was 4.2. Mean flexion and extension angles were 58° and 71°. One patient complained of ulnar-sided pain during exertion and no patients complained of DRUJ instability.
               
                  Discussion
                  All DUFs achieved good radiological results, including comminuted fractures. Functional outcomes were promising, including wide wrist ROM and no DRUJ instability. An approach including VLP fixation for DRFs and non-intervention for DUFs is a good option for elderly patients.
               
                  Level of evidence
                  IV retrospective study.Fracture of the distal ulnar metaphysis is occasionally associated with distal radius fractures (DRFs) Several reports have suggested that the DUF unites with conservative treatment if the DRF is anatomically and rigidly fixed using a VLP In this study, we aimed to retrospectively review the radiographic and functional results of non-intervention for DUFs and VLP fixation for associated ipsilateral DRFs to determine the feasibility of this approach in older patients. We hypothesized that a strategy of VLP fixation for DRFs and non-intervention for the unfixed DUFs with early wrist mobilization would provide encouraging results in elderly people. We defined a DUF as a fracture that occurred within 5 Thus, 18 patients (17 women and one man) with combined DUFs and DRFs were finally enrolled in the study. The mean age at surgery was 74.7 (range, 63–85) years. According to the classification of Biyani et al. Radiological assessments were performed in all patients based on standard anteroposterior and lateral radiographs. Ulnar angular deformity (UAD) and ulnar variance (UV) were measured using anteroposterior radiographs taken just after surgery and at the final visit. Ulnar shortening amount (USA) was defined as the difference in ulnar variance between just after surgery and at the final visit. Fracture union and USA were evaluated in each patient. Fracture union was defined as the presence of more than three regions of bone bridging on anteroposterior and lateral radiographs. Radiographic parameters were measured by the first author using a Synapse imaging system (Yokosawa Co., Ltd., Japan). No patients needed further surgery due to pain or disability. Unfortunately, no scoring system was used to evaluate the patients. Therefore, we asked the patients to visit our hospital and, as a result, were able to evaluate the clinical results of 10 patients. Of the remaining eight patients who did not return to our clinic for the follow-up visit, one died, three could not be contacted, and four were reluctant to move. The follow-up period of the 10 patients who were clinically evaluated was 19–63 months (mean, 34.5 months). Clinical results were assessed according to the system of Gartland and Werley as modified by Sarmiento et al. and Namba et al. and disability arm shoulder hand (DASH) score All ulna metaphyseal fractures united. Five of eight styloid fractures associated with metaphyseal fractures showed non-union. Four patients showed UAD of >10° just after surgery and mean UAD was 5.9 (±6.08)° (range, 0–22). At the final visit, mean UAD was 6.4 (±5.50)° (range, 0–17) ( Operative management for DUFs typically involves anatomical repositioning of the ulna to establish normal biomechanics in the DRUJ When using non-operative management for DUFs, surgeons are often cautious about the fracture healing rate or dysfunction attributable to DRUJ instability. In this study, all fractures achieved union and good radiological results, including comminuted fractures of Biyani type-4. Functional outcomes were promising, including wide wrist ROM and no DRUJ instability. A previous study assessed the treatment of DRFs in combination with DUFs in which DUFs were treated either surgically or conservatively In a cadaver study, Miyamura et al. investigated DRUJ instability using a model of distal ulnar fracture malunion A previous report revealed that isolated distal ulna shafts and metaphyseal fractures demonstrating displacement of <50% may be treated conservatively Richards mentioned that the operative indications for DUFs were >50% displacement and ≥10° angulation because these parameters imply disruption of the interosseous membrane and longitudinal instability This study had a number of limitations. First, it was retrospective in nature. Second, only a small number of patients were included and most of them were elderly women. Furthermore, the early outcomes were unclear. In patients in whom the ulnar fracture is left unfixed, pain during the several weeks after surgery affects satisfaction or activities of daily living. Thus, further study is needed to investigate early outcomes following treatment. In conclusion, the results of treating combined DRFs and DUFs in elderly people by VLP fixation for the DRF and leaving the DUF unfixed were encouraging. The authors declare that they have no competing interest. None. Kenya murakami, Yoshikuni Mimata, and Minoru Doita contributed to the conception and the design of the study. Norio Numata contributed to acquisition of data. Hideo Shiraishi contributed to analysis the data and drafting of the manuscript.