Self-assembled CuCoS nanosheets with hierarchical structure have been obtained by means of a gelation-solvothermal process without using any surfactant or template and utilized as anode materials in lithium-ion batteries. The CuCoS nanosheets display a reversible high specific capacity of 1045.1 mAh g−1 after 100 cycles at 200 mA g−1 and retaining a reversible specific charge capacity of 510.7 mAh g−1 after 500 cycles at 1 A g−1 with a retention of 94.5%. Combining the hierarchical structure with the unique chemical composition, synergetic merits are noticed. The improved electric conductivity, shortened Li+ diffusion length and increased electrolytes penetration areas are achieved synchronously, giving rise to significant high capability and extraordinary cycling stability.Recently, electrochemically active transition metal sulfides (TMSs) are regarded as promising electrode materials due to their better electric conductivity and higher electrochemical activity compared with their analogous oxides [ Aside from the gratifying chemical composition, the performance of transition metal sulfides in various electrochemical energy storages also highly results from the micro-nano structures of the materials [ For above reasons, combining gelation and solvothermal methods, we synthesize self-assembled Cu The CCS NSs were synthesized by combining gelation and solvothermal processes. Firstly, CuCl (1 mmol) and thiourea (Tu) (4 mmol) were mixed together to form a white gel by vigorous stirring in ethanol (20 mL). Meanwhile, CoCl For comparison, CCS NPs were synthesized by solvothermal processes. Firstly, CoCl X-ray diffraction (XRD) measurements were performed on a Rigaku D/max 2500 XRD with monochromatic Cu Kα radiation and the wave-length of 1.54178 Å. SEM (scanning electron microscope) and TEM (transmission electron microscope) images were taken using an FEI Helios Nanolab G3 UC and TEM JEOLJEM-2100 electron microscope, respectively. The elementary composition and valence state of samples were characterized by XPS (X-ray photoelectron spectroscope, Thermo ESCALAB 250Xi, monochromatic Al-Kα radiation). The electrochemical measurements were tested by assembly of CR 2016-type coin cells in a mBraum glove box filled with pure Ar atmosphere. The working electrode film prepared by coating the slurry on a copper foil, and the slurry was consisted with active materials, poly (acrylic acid) (PAA) binder, super P additive (70:15:15). Li foil was used as the counter electrode, and LiPF CuCl and thiourea (CSN Utilizing self-assembled CuCl Crystallographic structures of the CCS NSs, CCS NPs and CS MSs were studied by XRD analyses. The XRD pattern of the CCS NSs, CCS NPs and CS MSs are shown in To clarify the chemical composition and valence state of CCS NSs, XPS was performed as displayed in Morphology of CCS NSs, CCS NPs and CS MSs samples were examined by field emission (FE)SEM. It can be found that the as-synthesized CCS NSs ( The detailed morphology and crystal structure of CCS NSs were further characterized by analyzing individual large nanosheet utilizing TEM and high resolution (HR)TEM. TEM images shown in Time-dependent experiments were performed out to clarify the morphological evolution process of solvothermal precursors. FESEM images of self-assembled CuCl  The galvanostatic discharge-charge profiles of the CCS NSs are shown in The rate performances of the CCS NSs, CCS NPs and CS MSs were evaluated at progressively increased specific currents, as shown in The different electrochemistry performance of CCS NSs, CCS NPs and CS MSs electrodes can be explained as follows: (1) The hierarchical structure CCS NSs provide buffer space to relieve the volume expansion/contraction during Li The facile ion kinetics analysis was further undertaken to supplementary understand the lithium storage behavior. Generally, the current of CV obeys an empirical power-law relationship with the scan rate [   The electrochemical impedance spectra (EIS) is also carried out to understand the electrochemical performance of the CCS NSs, CCS NPs and CS MSs after 20 cycles ( In summary, utilizing the self-assembled CuCl The authors acknowledge the support of the  Supplementary data to this article can be found online at