This paper describes the application of a unifying ‘master curve’ model for single impact size reduction in an air jet mill. Based on a dimensional analysis and a modified fracture mechanical theory, it enables to relate the weight percentage of broken particles under sieve cut size to the mean sieve cut size of the studied material, the net kinetic energy provided to the material, the number of impacts and a global parameter f
                     
                        Mat.
                     . Altogether 11 sieve cuts of different materials are impacted in an experimental air jet mill. Minimum breakage energies are derived and are shown to vary with a power function of the sieve cut size. The simplifying model is then successfully applied and enables to derive the fMat. parameters. In our situation, the experimental data do not show a direct relationship between fMat. and the minimum breakage energy and sieve cut size for all the materials.Comminution is a very important unit operation in the industrial world, but so far it is still lacking of fundamental understanding of all the phenomena involved. Its complexity, linked to the size reduction process, to the material properties and the interactions between them ( The model used and developed by The basics are as follows. For a set of geometrically similar and physically identical particles, the breakage pattern should be similar if the elastically stored strain energy per unit volume multiplied by the initial particle size is constant. Relations are then derived including several material physical properties: Young's modulus, Poisson ratio, initial crack length or flaw size, and crack extension energy per unit of created surface energy. Then Weibull statistics and the Hertz theory for impacting elastic spheres are added. In this situation the Weibull coefficient is set to 4. Finally, theoretical justification and simplification provide a very simple relation to characterise the breakage after The interesting part in the theoretical development is that the initial formulation of the situation of single and repeated impacts can be considered with the help of the if one plots This model is for sure oversimplifying the improbable pure brittle failure reality, but is attractive because, it allows one to describe a very complex phenomenon with two parameters: one characterising the material and another characterising the supplied kinetic energy by the grinder to the particles. Mechanical properties are progressively introduced into the model, e.g. in The used apparatus (see The followed methodology allows one to derive the relationships between the particle size distributions and the impact velocity or the specific kinetic energy. The attrition threshold Three different materials have been tested: glass beads (cuts 70–110 The impact test results are shown in From the raw data from The mean value of The similarity of the breakage pattern implies the product To go further, it was also decided to test statistically our data with the Eq.   In the situation depicted in As previously said The proposed literature model developed by In this context, the attrition threshold has been found to be inversely proportional to the size of the impacted particle to a power between 1 and 2. This is to be related to the hypothesis from Finally, a comparison between