Separation of metal cations of different charges, Na+, Li+, Ca2+, Sr2+, Cu2+, Nd3+ and Eu3+ was investigated through ion foam flotation using a pH sensitive surfactant, nonaoxyethylene oleyl ether carboxylic acid. We propose here a method to evaluate ion selectivity coefficients using mass and volume balances. This method yields selectivity coefficients in agreement with those obtained with the classical slope method. The ion selectivity obtained by the flotation experiments was found to correlate well with the apparent charge of the surfactant micelles (zeta potential values) in the presence of different salts and is therefore not influenced by the surface curvature. Consequently the ion specificity order has been established according to the surfactant–ion affinity at the air–water and micelle–water interfaces as Na+
                     <Li+
                     <Sr2+
                     <Ca2+
                     <Cu2+
                     <Nd3+
                     <Eu3+. It has been noticed that the selectivity coefficients between the different metal ions, obtained by ion flotation, differ from the ones predicted by using metal ion complexation constants of acetate, which is considered here as the non-surface active complexing part of the surfactant. This discrepancy was attributed to the surface complexation effects at the air–water interface in flotation experiments and at the micelle–water interface. For the separation of lithium and neodymium, a depletion phenomenon of lithium ions from the interface, hence from the foam, has been observed, i.e. once the flotation experiment was finished, the lithium concentration in the remaining foaming solution was indeed higher compared to the initial one. This phenomenon was explained by the strong adsorption of Nd3+ that leads Li+ to be repelled from the foam.Ion flotation was first described by This surfactant was used in a previous work to generate foam under continuous bubbling during several hours The thermodynamics of ion exchange in the ion flotation process has been previously described by Morgan et al. For this ion-exchange equilibrium, the selectivity coefficient is expressed: It was shown that the selectivity coefficient can be obtained This method for the calculation of ion selectivity coefficients was used in many works previously In the present work we propose another method to calculate the selectivity coefficient of AKYPO AKYPO Different metal cations were examined in ion foam flotation and zeta potential experiments. For monocharged cations, sodium nitrate (Strem Chemicals, 99% purity), lithium nitrate (Sigma, 99% purity) and cesium nitrate (Aldrich, 99% purity) were used. For dicharged ions, calcium nitrate (Sigma–Aldrich, 99% purity), strontium nitrate (Sigma–Aldrich, 99% purity) and copper nitrate (Strem Chemicals, 99.5% purity) were used. For tricharged cations, neodymium nitrate (Sigma–Aldrich, 99.9% purity) and europium nitrate (Rectapur 99% purity) were used. The pH was adjusted by adding either sodium hydroxide solution prepared from sodium hydroxide (Strem Chemicals, >97% purity) or nitric acid solution (Fluka, >69% purity). Flotation solutions were prepared by dissolving the industrial surfactant AKYPO Flotation experiments were performed by pouring 80 Metal concentrations were determined by inductively coupled plasma optical emission spectrometry (ICP-OES iCAP 6000, Thermo Scientific with Thermo iTEVA – Analyste v.2.8.0.89 software). Samples were diluted in nitric acid (HNO Samples were prepared by mixing a stock solution A (surfactant at 0.5 For a semi-batch flotation experiment where foam is retrieved continuously until the solution stops foaming, the overall volume balance is given by The overall mass balance for a metallic cation is given by The quantity transferred from the solution to the foam ( The extraction of a metal cation Substituting Eq. Then, replacing By normalizing the Eq. By identification between Eq. Consequently the part of the extracted ions which is due to the ion adsorption at the interface during the flotation process can be simply determined by measuring ion concentration in the initial and final (called here residual) foaming solution. For a metal ion of the same charge number This definition of the apparent selectivity coefficient will be referred to hereafter as The equilibrium of two metal ions This equilibrium can be viewed as a charge exchange at an anionic interface between two charges of dissimilar ions. It is then possible for each charge This selectivity coefficient corresponds to the charge exchange equilibrium at the interface (Eq. The carboxylate function of the surfactant head group aims at forming surfactant–ion pairs at the water–air interface. In order to compare this behaviour, the complexation of selected ions is studied in solution. The complexation equilibrium in solution with acetate ligand can be written as follows: And is characterized by an equilibrium constant These When two cations in solution compete for complexation, the selectivity of acetate anion can be viewed as an ion exchange reaction in solution, the simplest case being that where Y is the proton of the acetate. This chemical reaction is given by: The equilibrium constant of this reaction corresponds to a selectivity coefficient in solution. It can be expressed from each complexation constant This selectivity coefficient To study the separation of two metal cations of the same charge by ion foam flotation, seven cation couples were used. One for monocharged cations, Li It can be seen in In order to estimate the impact of the type of cation on the cation/surfactant interaction, zeta potential measurements on micelles were carried out for all the selected ions at a surfactant concentration of 0.5 For Na It may be noted that this order follows the evolution of the charge density or hardness which is, in regards to the carboxylate function of the surfactant, in accordance with the Below we investigate the surface effect on ion selectivity by ion flotation at the water/air surface covered with surfactant molecules. An attempt is made to correlate the classification of the cations established from zeta potential measurements (Eq. The separations of couples of cations of the same charge number were carried out by ion flotation with the AKYPO Evans et al. The three selectivity orders, described above, follow the Moreover, in the case of dicharged ions, The following values were obtained: In order to study the effect of water/air surface charge on the selectivity coefficient In order to establish the general selectivity order of the surfactant for all selected ions, separation of metal cations of different charges was then studied. Separations of cations with different charges are summarized in The calculation of the selectivity coefficient is based on the charge exchange equilibrium at an anionic interface (part 3.4). In the case of competition between di- and tri-charged ions, neodymium is mostly extracted. In addition, applying the formal multiplicative identity (Eq. An overall selectivity order for all selected ions can then be established as: This selectivity order is in agreement with those obtained from the zeta potential measurements (Eq. Below we propose to compare the selectivity coefficients obtained from ion flotation experiments, to the selectivity coefficients calculated from the complexation constants of metal ions with acetate. Acetate ion was chosen as a model of the surfactant complexing part which is non-surface active and which does not form micelles in water. The selectivity coefficients, This series represents the selectivity order of the metal cations for the acetate ion. Therefore, only bulk interactions between metal cation and the carboxylate function are considered here. This series can be compared to the one obtained at the micelle surface and at the air/water interface from zeta potential measurements (Eq. It seems that surface effects lead to reinforce the effect of the charge number, expecting tricharged Furthermore, a reverse order for Eu Finally, the values of The present study proposes a new method to measure ion selectivity of a surfactant by ion flotation. By this method, the selectivity order of the industrial surfactant AKYPO This order was found to be in agreement with the series obtained from the evolution of the zeta potential of micelles in the presence of the different cations. Discrepancies between the selectivity series from acetate complex and the one obtained from the flotation results were ascribed to surface specific effects, the values for acetate correspond to bulk constants whereas the values obtained with the surfactant are interface constants. A remarkable effect was the depletion effect of Li All these specificities make the studied surfactant a suitable candidate for ion foam flotation process that can be used for the decontamination of aqueous solutions. Furthermore, it allows concentrating at the same time ions in the foam thanks to the adsorption at the interface, and in the residual solution due to the depletion phenomenon.