Recycling of precious metals from end-of-life electronics is a key factor for sustainable and efficient raw material usage. Simultaneously with the depletion of natural ore resources, the urban mines are storing increasing amounts of valuable and, more importantly, rare metals. To fulfill the targets of sustainability and move towards circular economy, the liberation of these valuables from wastes back to production and use needs to be improved. This study investigates the recoveries and behavior of gold, silver, palladium and platinum in copper smelting conditions at 1300 °C and pO2 = 10−5–10−7 atm. The investigated system includes a copper alloy with three different type of slags in silica saturation: pure iron silicate, iron silicate with 10 wt% alumina and iron silicate with 10 wt% alumina and 5 wt% lime, providing information on the influence of alumina and lime on precious metal recovery possibilities. A highly advanced equilibration-quenching technique, followed by EPMA and sensitive LA-ICP-MS analyses, has been adopted to execute the experiments. Results show that gold, platinum and palladium are recovered very efficiently in copper, as their distribution coefficients between copper and slag, LCu/s, were greater than 104 under every experimental condition studied and with all slag compositions. Silver distributed 30–60 times more in copper phase than was lost to slag. The addition of alumina into the slag somewhat decreased the distribution coefficient of silver, whereas gold and palladium distribution coefficients were increased. Lime addition improved the recovery of every precious metal (Pt unclear) into the copper phase. The concentrations of platinum in the slags were mainly below the detection limit of the used LA-ICP-MS, providing a minimum distribution coefficient of 106.Urban mining has arisen as a fundamental concept amongst environmentalists, industrialists, politicians and businesses ( As can be seen, both routes include similar steps: starting from the collection/mining of appropriate primary or secondary resources, followed by the beneficiation to a suitable feed mix for pyrometallurgical processing. The mineral processing of copper ore typically includes comminution and froth flotation steps, whereas the mechanical processing in secondary route includes different sorting, dismantling and mechanical separation processes. The smelting/refining processes vary, but typically primary pyrometallurgical processing starts with matte smelting followed by converting and hydrometallurgical refining. The secondary copper from WEEE can be fed into different process types or steps, depending on its composition and purity; some is fed into primary smelting/converting, some to ‘secondary’ matte smelting ( Although the flowcharts ( Metals in principle could be recycled infinitely, however, multiple factors make complete recycling impossible in practice. These type of limiting factors include product design, recycling technologies, social behavior, legislations and elemental thermodynamics. This study presents the recycling possibilities of gold, silver, platinum and palladium from the thermodynamic and industrial copper smelting perspectives. In general, the research concentrating on minor element behavior in WEEE smelting is a relatively new field of science, and very limited amount of literature and research is available. Some literature can be found on Ag, Au, Pd and Pt solubilities in metallurgical slags and their behavior in copper-slag systems, and these are reviewed next. The silver equilibria in copper-slag systems have been examined in a few experimental studies ( The solubility of gold in iron-silicate slags has been suggested to be ‘effectively zero’ in multiple previous studies (   This study employs an equilibration-quenching-EPMA/LA-ICP-MS method to investigate the distribution behavior of precious metals between copper and slags. This technique has been used previously to investigate the behavior of minor elements at spinel saturation ( The experiments were carried out in a vertical tube furnace manufactured by Nabertherm (RHTV 120–150/18) with MoSi The copper master alloy was prepared by melting and annealing copper cathode (Boliden Harjavalta, 99.999%) with approximately 1 wt% of each precious metal, silver, gold, platinum and palladium, in an alumina crucible at 1400 °C and under 99% Ar – 1% H This study follows the liquid-tridymite (OX_LIQ + TRI) phase boundary in Equal amounts of copper alloy and slag mixture, 0.08–0.1 g each, were pressed into pellets. The pellets were placed in silica crucibles (Heraeus, HSQ® 300) and the crucibles to platinum baskets. Each sample was equilibrated for 16 h, after which they were quenched in brine or ice water mixture. The crucible-sample combo was cut in half or crushed, to get suitable sample pieces for epoxy resin mounting. The mounted samples were prepared with wet metallographic methods and coated with carbon. SEM-EDS technique (LEO 1450 with Oxford X-Max EDS) was used for preliminary phase composition analyses and sample imaging. Comprehensive composition analyses for copper and slag phases were executed with Cameca SX 100 Electron Probe Micro-Analyzer (Cameca SAS, France). The acceleration voltage, beam current and beam diameter were 20 kV, 60nA and 100 µm for copper / 40 µm for slag, respectively, and the standards utilized were natural minerals (hematite for Fe and O, Al The concentrations of trace elements (Au, Ag, Pd and Pt) in the slags were mostly below the detection limits of EMPA, and therefore they were measured using a Laser Ablation Inductively Coupled Plasma Mass Spectrometer. The LA-ICP-MS setup consisted of a Photon Machines Analyte Excite 193 nm ArF Excimer LA device (Teledyne CETAC Technologies, USA) and a NuAttom SC-ICP-MS instrument (Nu Instruments Ltd, UK). The laser spot size was selected as 110 µm, and eight spots were ablated from the slag phase of each sample. The laser was operated at 10 Hz frequency with 4 ns pulses. Laser operation was performed following a sequence of 5 pre-ablation pulses, 20 s pause, 15 s of gas background analysis, and 400 ablation pulses. The laser energy was set to 20% of 5.0 mJ, corresponding to a fluence of 1.67 J/cm The equilibrated samples were comprised of three phases – copper alloy, slag and tridymite – as shown in Three types of silica saturated slags were employed in the experiments: pure iron silicate slag, iron silicate slag with ∼10 wt% Al As expected, the alumina and lime additions drastically increased the solubility of silica into the slags, thus lowering the Fe/SiO The slopes of copper concentration in alumina-containing and alumina-lime-containing slags are −0.24 and −0.23, which strongly support dissolution as CuO Precious metal concentrations in copper alloy as a function oxygen partial pressure, for each slag, are presented in In order to maximize the precious metal recoveries in the secondary copper smelting, their behavior must be characterized in the process conditions. Moreover, the influence of different process parameters, such as oxygen partial pressure, temperature and slag composition, should be investigated in the sense of the recoveries. A practical thermodynamic parameter and tool for describing the behavior of a minor element (M) between two phases – copper and slag in this case – is the distribution coefficient: It is independent of the scale of the system for minor elements (in dilute solutions), which means that experimentally determined distribution coefficients can be directly applied to large-scale industrial processes. Furthermore, as the analyses are executed with direct phase techniques, the results describe the distribution coefficients based on the real chemical solubility of each element in each phase, excluding the entrainments of other phases present in the sample. This provides valuable information for the industry; for example, if their industrially determined distribution coefficients are much lower than the ones presented here, it can be assumed that the most significant precious metals losses occur through mechanical copper droplet entrainment, instead of chemical dissolution. Thus, the following distribution coefficients will help to understand elemental behavior in different process conditions, and provide information for process development, e.g. how to improve the recoveries of elements into copper phase. Possible process developments for improved recoveries can include for example slag chemistry modification, increased sub-process times for obtaining better settling, or the addition of a slag cleaning step. The distribution coefficient can be calculated through thermodynamic approach ( The distribution coefficients of silver between copper and the three investigated slags are presented in The distribution coefficients of silver with the pure iron silicate slag at silica saturation and the lime-containing slags at silica and spinel saturation are in the same range, whereas the alumina-containing iron-silicate slags seem to have lower distribution coefficients. The silver distribution coefficient decreases gradually with increasing alumina concentration in slag. Some interaction between silver and alumina could explain this phenomenon, for example AgAlO The metal-slag distribution coefficients for gold and palladium as a function of oxygen partial pressure are presented in As can be seen from The slopes of the plot for gold are around 0.5, indicating to dissolution oxide form AuO (Au The minimum metal-slag distribution coefficients of platinum are presented in Although most of the data points for platinum concentration in slags were below the detection limit, the results for pure iron silicate slags show good repeatability. For the other slags, the results show more scatter. Nevertheless, alumina or alumina-lime additions into iron silicate slag seem to lower the distribution coefficient, as opposed to how they influence the gold and palladium distributions. Previous (minimum) distribution results at spinel saturation were between 10 The results show that in the oxiziding smelting conditions gold, platinum and palladium are distributed highly, i.e. extremely efficiently recovered, with L  This diagram supports the experimental results by showing that precious metals do not form oxides spontaneously under smelting conditions (1300 °C, 10 Today, WEEE is considered as a modern urban mine resource. WEEE and especially PCBs include higher concentrations of precious metals as their respective primary ores, making them highly valuable and economically viable for recycling. The main recovery path for precious metals is through metal smelting, where copper acts as the collector metal, as shown in the present study. This study was conducted to produce new precise data on the precious metals behavior in oxidizing copper smelting conditions at 1300 °C. Moreover, the influence of alumina and lime additions to iron-silicate slag and to the precious metal distribution coefficients were investigated. According to the results of this study, copper smelting is a powerful process for recovering precious metals into the copper phase, followed by further separation of these metals though electrolytic refining of copper cathodes and the subsequent anode slime treatments. We want to acknowledge Lassi Pakkanen for executing the EPMA analyses, as well as thank