Optimal treatment of pediatric both bone forearm fractures is determined by patient age, fracture pattern, and location. As compared to their adult counterparts, pediatric patients can generally tolerate more displacement and angulation because of their increased remodeling potential. The mainstay of treatment for these injuries continues to be closed reduction and casting. However, operative fixation has increased significantly over the past decade. Currently, both flexible intramedullary nailing and plate fixation are acceptable options in this population. Flexible intramedullary nailing has the advantage of decreased surgical dissection and preservation of local biology, as well as decreased operative times; however, this treatment option may necessitate a return to the operating room for hardware removal. Open reduction and internal fixation with plates and screws may more accurately restore bony anatomy, with the potential to retain the implants. However, the optimal method of fixation has not been established and outcomes with both techniques appear to produce satisfactory results in a majority of patients. The purpose of this review is to provide an overview of the treatment options for these common pediatric and adolescent injuries.Diaphyseal forearm fractures, commonly referred to as both bone forearm fractures (BBFF), are among the most commonly treated injuries in children and adolescents, representing 5% of all pediatric fractures. Despite a decrease in overall injury rate during childhood, incidence of BBFF in children has steadily increased over the past decade. Successful treatment of BBFF results in restoration of anatomic alignment and functional range of pronosupination In contrast to their adult counterparts, nonoperative treatment is used for the vast majority of pediatric diaphyseal forearm fractures and is still considered to be the gold standard of care. Closed reduction in the pediatric population is typically performed with adequate analgesia or sedation in either the emergency department or operating room. First, the deformity is exaggerated to relax any intact periosteum and disengage the fracture fragments. Then longitudinal traction is applied and the rotational and angular deformity is reversed. Alternatively, many BBFFs are pure rotational deformities and only require derotation to achieve adequate realignment. Fluoroscopy is most commonly used during the reduction process to assess alignment; however, a recent study found that ultrasound can successfully be used in resource-limited settings. Failure of nonoperative treatment of BBFF is rare, with 90% of these injuries being amenable to closed reduction and casting. Operative treatment is warranted in patients with unacceptable alignment/loss of reduction following closed methods of treatment, nonunion, most open fractures, displaced floating elbow injuries, or those associated with severe soft tissue injury and refracture. Especially in the adolescent population (ie, children older than 8-10 years old), the limits of acceptable displacement become more stringent and the likelihood of surgical intervention increases The use of FIN by Metaizeau from Nancy, France, changed the trend of addressing long bone fractures. Proponents of this surgical technique cite preservation of local biology at the fracture site due to less surgical dissection, thus promoting the robust and expedient bony healing often seen in children. Preoperative planning for FIN first involves appropriate selection of nail diameter. Commonly used flexible nail sizes range from 1.5 to 3 mm. Selection is dependent upon the diameter of the medullary canal, by measuring the narrowest canal diameter of the radius (usually midshaft) and ulna (usually distal third) on preoperative radiographs. This may then be confirmed and length is estimated by placing a nail overlying the skin of the affected forearm and using fluoroscopy to confirm appropriate size selection, with the understanding that there may be errors due to inaccuracies caused by X-ray magnification. Nails are then contoured with the maximum curvature at the level of the fracture such that it will restore appropriate radial bow. FIN is typically introduced into the radius in the distal metaphysis via 1 of 2 physeal-sparing approaches to the distal radius. The most widely used entry site is obtained via the floor of the first dorsal compartment of the wrist (ie, the radial approach). While this approach risks a sensory neurapraxia of the superficial radial nerve, most report the return of sensation after a few weeks to months. When inserting the nail, it is prudent to protect the nerve by using a mini-open approach. Alternatively, the radius may be entered at the base of Lister's tubercle in the interval between the second and third dorsal compartments (ie, the dorsal approach). However, this dorsal approach carries a risk of extensor pollicis longus rupture, which may occur during nail insertion or may be attributed to repetitive gliding of the tendon past the tip of the nail. FIN is passed to within 1 cm of the far physis to achieve maximal stability. Implants are then typically cut beneath the skin, being sure to leave them proud enough to facilitate later removal. In younger children, stout Steinman pins may be used for intramedullary fixation and they may be bent and cut outside the skin to allow for removal in the office after bony union. Although this second option obviates the need for a second surgical procedure to remove the nails, the theoretical risk of increased deep infection makes this a less appealing option to most surgeons. If implants are left beneath the skin, it is recommended that they be removed 6-12 months after the index procedure. The reported range of complications of FIN ranges from 12% to 21%. ORIF with plates and screws remains a commonly used surgical option in the pediatric population and may provide several advantages, including maximal ability to obtain an anatomic reduction and restore normal radial bow, which is thought to be critical for regaining forearm rotation. In addition, the mechanical stability of the construct may permit early range of motion, which may be important especially in an adolescent population who are more prone to elbow stiffness with prolonged immobilization. Disadvantages of this technique include more extensive dissection, slower rates of bony union, and cosmetically unappealing scars. Compression plating with 6 cortices on either side of the fracture remains the standard of care. Choice of fixation is based on the size of the bone, location, and pattern of the fracture. Commonly used implants include 3.5- and 2.7-mm dynamic compression plates, and the plate should not be wider than the bone. Separate approaches are used for the radius and the ulna to minimize the risk of synostosis. The anterior (volar) approach of Henry is commonly used for distal and middle third radial shaft fractures while the posterior (dorsal) approach of Thompson is advocated for proximal-third radius fractures, with care being taken to protect the posterior interosseous nerve. The ulna may be exposed through a subcutaneous approach and the plate may be fixed to the subcutaneous, volar, or dorsal surface of the bone. The order of fixation is variable; typically the less comminuted bone is fixed first so as to achieve the most precise restoration of length and rotation. The need for hardware removal after ORIF remains controversial. Some advocates for removal of plate and screws after bony healing cite risk of refracture at the stress riser created by the end of the plate bony overgrowth, inflammatory/immunologic reactions to metallic implants, Traditionally, all open BBFF were treated operatively with urgent irrigation debridement and surgical fixation. However, recent literature has challenged this dogma by calling into question the role of operative intervention in type I BBFF fractures. One treatment protocol involved irrigation and debridement in the emergency department followed by 24 hours of intravenous antibiotic administration in the inpatient hospital setting and reported a 2.5% infection rate. They treated a total of 40 open fractures, including 8 tibia fractures, 18 diaphyseal forearm fractures, and 14 distal radius and ulna fractures. Whether using FIN or ORIF with plate fixation, several authors have questioned whether dual bone fixation is necessary. Some advocate for dual bone fixation as there may be an increased risk of redisplacement As summarized by several systematic reviews, current literature has not established superiority of 1 surgical method over the other for operative treatment of BBFF. Nonoperative management with closed reduction and casting is still the gold standard of treatment for the majority of pediatric BBFF, especially in children less than 10 years old. However, in older children with less remodeling potential, the decision to surgically intervene is on the rise. Both flexible intramedullary nailing and ORIF with plate fixation are appropriate treatment options. FIN is advantageous because of less soft tissue disruption and decreased surgical times, but surgeons must be aware of the slightly increased rate of nonunion in older patients as well as the need for hardware removal after bony union. ORIF is an attractive option because of the ability for a more accurate anatomic reduction; however, this technique is associated with longer operative times, more soft tissue dissection and more controversy about whether or not to remove implants after healing. In general, surgeons should consider ORIF in cases of severe comminution or bone loss while FIN is usually preferred for younger patients in whom closed reduction is not satisfactory. While current literature shows generally favorable outcomes regardless of which surgical method is used, surgeons should be familiar with the subtleties of each technique, as well as possible complications, in order to best ensure optimal outcomes for individual patients.