The interactions of polymers (corn starch, dextrin from maize starch, humic acid sodium salt and sodium carboxymethyl cellulose) with iron oxides (hematite and magnetite) have been investigated by measuring adsorption isotherms and by electrophoresis. According to the electrophoresis measurements at pH 7 both iron oxides present negative surface charge and positive at pH 5. The equilibrium adsorption isotherms were then determined at pH 7 for all the adsorbates except for humic acid which was studied at pH 5, due to its anionic characteristics. The equilibrium data of both iron oxides were studied using Freundlich and Langmuir models and it was found to best fit to the Freundlich one. The values for Freundlich constants indicate that the mechanism that contributes most to the adsorption process in all experiments was the hydrogen bonding. However, the coexistence of more than one adsorption mechanism is what best explains the process itself, in addition to explaining the differences found amongst theories over the years.initial concentation of solution (mg L concentration at adsorption equilibrium (mg L Freundlich constant related to adsorption capacity (mg Langmuir constant (L mg Freundlich isotherm constant related to adsorption intensity equilibrium adsorption capacity of adsorbent (mg m equilibrium capacity obtained from model (mg m equilibrium capacity obtained from experiment (mg m monolayer adsorption capacity of adsorbent (mg m coefficient of determination dimensionless separation factor chi-square error function wavelenght In nature, iron occurs bound to more the 1200 different minerals but only from very few it can be economically extracted. Among all these minerals, hematite (α-Fe Among the techniques currently applied to process iron ores, magnetic separation is the most used one The aims of this study were to determine extents of adsorption of polymers onto iron oxides, and to investigate the mechanisms involved in each process. The experimental data were treated and modelled according to adsorption theories. Despite the Langmuir adsorption isotherms have been originally developed to describe gas-solid-phase adsorption, it have been widely used for other phase systems as well Hematite (α-Fe The chemical analyses show that FeO and Fe The reagents – corn starch Corn starch preparation was carried out with its gelatinisation by adding NaOH at a 5:1 ratio and deionised water while aqueous solutions of all other reagents were prepared with deionised water. A stock solution at 1000 mg L The specific surface area (area per unit mass or volume) of the minerals was determined by a multi-point BET method with N Measurements were performed with a Zetaphoremetre IV, model Z3000 apparatus. An electric field of 80 ± 1 V cm The adsorption determination was made by a TOC (Total Organic Carbon) analysis using a Shimadzu analyser TOC-VCSH and its value is the difference between the TC (Total Carbon) and IC (Inorganic Carbon). For the tests, 1 Two well-known adsorption isotherms models, namely Freundlich  Eq.  Eq. The best-fitting isotherm, when linearization is used, has been very often determined with the use of the coefficient of determination (  The IEP of both hematite and magnetite samples are quite well aligned with the reported values published by other authors as shown in The zeta potential values obtained are in total agreement with the theory of pH dependence, since The effect of pH in the range 5–11 on the adsorption of the reagents on the iron oxides surfaces was investigated ( Almost no adsorption was observed for CMC into hematite and magnetite surfaces. Humic acid and dextrin showed better affinity for these minerals, but corn starch is by far the best performer. According to the electrophoretic measurements ( Adsorption isotherms are a powerful tool to determine how adsorbates molecules interact with adsorbents surfaces. The understanding of the relationship between experimental data and proposed models can be extremely useful for these interpretations. The experimental data were fitted in two different models: the Freundlich one used to describe heterogeneous systems, assuming that sites of adsorption with different adsorption free energy occur in parallel, not restricting the formation of multiple layers Freundlich constant The Langmuir model in other hand is used most of the time to predict if an adsorption system is favourable or not under specific experimental conditions. Trying to classify the shape of the isotherms by groups, Langmuir, 1918, introduced the concept of a dimensionless equilibrium parameter From the values obtained by the Eq. All the obtained values of Freundlich and Langmuir model’s parameters are depicted in Both The experimental equilibrium adsorption isotherms of CMC, corn starch, dextrin and humic acid on hematite and magnetite are presented in The values of the Freundlich constant The mechanism of polysaccharides adsorption has been the object of study of several researchers over the years. Hydrogen bonding stands out between the others for being reported by several researchers In the present study, humic acid showed a slightly difference in the amount adsorbed when pH is variated.. The same behaviour was reported by several studies leading with humic substances It is also worth noting that the constant The observed variations in the adsorption mechanisms of polymers reported by several authors over the years can be explained by the differences in terms of heterogeneity of samples and in the intrinsic variations of the conditions of each experiment. From this study it was possible to prove by the modelling of experimental isotherms that Freundlich model fits better the adsorption of these polymers on the surface of hematite and magnetite. Freundlich model constant The equilibrium adsorption data were fitted to two isotherm models and the results showed that for all experiments the Freundlich model fits better the experimental data than the Langmuir one. It is proved here that the The adsorption mechanism that most contributes to the adsorption process in all experiments was likely hydrogen bonding, proved by the value of the constant