In this study, concentration of calcite particles was investigated using oil agglomeration. For this purpose, effects of operating parameters were investigated and also zeta potential measurements and Fourier transform infrared spectrophotometer (FTIR) analyses have been carried out. In the experiments, effects of operating parameters such as pH, stirring speed, amount of Na–oleate as a collector and kerosene as a bridging liquid, solid ratio, suspension conditioning time, collector stirring time and agglomeration time were investigated to obtain optimum conditions. Zeta potential measurements were carried out depending on pH values and amount of Na–oleate. FTIR analyses were investigated to determine the adsorption type of Na–oleate on calcite surface. By the evaluation of the experimental results, optimum oil agglomeration conditions of calcite were determined as follows: pH 10; stirring speed, 1600 rpm; amount of kerosene, 180 l t−1; amount of Na–oleate, 10 kg t−1; solid ratio, 5 wt.%; suspension conditioning time, 2 min; collector stirring time, 1 min and agglomeration time, 5 min. In the optimum conditions, calcite was concentrated with recovery of 94.13 wt.%.In mineral processing, fine and ultrafine particles are inevitable because of mechanized mining methods, comminution process and greater size reduction need to liberate the minerals From these methods, oil agglomeration having advantages due to the simplicity of the process and mineral beneficiation with high recovery gains importance gradually In the physicochemical point of view, the oil agglomeration is a kind of aggregation The principles of the application conditions of oil agglomeration have been investigated by various studies. Most of the oil agglomeration studies have been performed with naturally hydrophobic particles such as coal In this study, agglomeration behavior of calcite has been investigated by using classic flotation reagent (Na–oleate) and optimum agglomeration conditions were determined. In this study, the calcite sample taken from Nigde-Turkey was used. The sample was ground to −212 μm for oil agglomeration tests. The particle size distribution and the chemical analysis result of the ground sample are given in Na–oleate (C The experiments were performed in a 400-ml beaker having four baffles at the border to create turbulence using IKA-WERK RW 20-type mechanical stirrer. The agitation was provided by a centrally located flat blade turbine impeller (consisting of four blades) at a fixed distance from the bottom of the vessel. The experimental setup is shown schematically in Agglomeration recovery was calculated from In the experiments, amounts of bridging liquid and collector were determined from The zeta potential values of the calcite samples were measured depending on the pH value in the presence and absence of Na–oleate, and the amount of Na–oleate using Rank Brothers Electrophoresis Apparatus MKII. The Fourier transform infrared (FTIR) spectra of the calcite samples were obtained in the absence and presence of collector from Shimadzu 8300 Model Infrared Spectrophotometer. All spectra were recorded between 4000 and 400 cm As it is known, the extent of agglomeration or the agglomeration recovery depends on surface properties of particles and the nature of the agglomerant. The surface properties of the particles are controlled by the pH value of aqueous medium. Therefore, the control of the pH value of aqueous medium has primary importance. The effect of pH value on the oil agglomeration recovery of calcite is given in As can be seen in As seen in  It has been stated in the previous studies that oleic acid and their soaps are in ionized forms as R Under the light of the previous findings, the decrease of the agglomeration recovery at highly alkaline pH values (pH 11 and above) may be based on both oleate anions which are not adsorbed because of hydroxyl ions adsorption on the mineral surface and the high electrostatic repulsive forces between kerosene droplets and mineral particles. The effect of stirring speed on the agglomeration recovery of calcite is shown in As shown in The effect of amount of kerosene on calcite agglomeration is shown in As it is shown in The findings mentioned above are in good agreement with the results given in the literature The effect of amount of Na–oleate on agglomeration recovery and zeta potential of calcite are given in It can be shown in The decrease of recovery at lower amount of Na–oleate was based on insufficient hydrophobization of mineral surfaces. At higher amount of Na–oleate, the decrease of recovery was based on micelle formation. In addition, the graph of zeta potential change vs. amount of Na–oleate is given in The results of FTIR spectra of calcite are given in The IR bands at 854.4 and 875.6 cm From these results, it can be concluded that oleate anions are chemisorbed on the calcite surface. The obtained results are in good agreement with the results of Martinez and Uribe The effect of solid ratio on the agglomeration recovery of calcite is given in  The effect of suspension conditioning time on agglomeration recovery of calcite is given in As shown in The effect of collector stirring time is shown in  The effect of agglomeration time on the agglomeration recovery is shown in As it can be seen in The conclusions obtained from this study are as follows: It was stated that naturally hydrophilic calcite could be agglomerated with Na–oleate as an anionic-type collector and kerosene as a bridging liquid. It was found that pH and amount of Na–oleate are the most important parameters. The oleate adsorption on calcite surface increased the negative zeta potential value. The reaction between oleate anions and calcite is a chemical type. The optimum oil agglomeration conditions are as follows: pH 10; stirring speed, 1600 rpm; amount of kerosene, 180 l t Calcite was agglomerated with the recovery of 94.13 wt.% at the optimum conditions. The authors acknowledge the financial support provided by Cumhuriyet University Research Find Unit to this study.