The aim of the study was to investigate the potential of acoustic monitoring of a production scale fluidized bed coating process. The correlation between sensor signals and the estimated amount of film applied and percentage release, respectively, were investigated in coating potassium chloride (KCl) crystals with ethylcellulose (EC). Vibrations were measured with two different types of accelerometers. Different positions for placing the accelerometers and two different product containers were included in the study. Top spray coating of KCl was chosen as a ‘worst case’ scenario from a coating point perspective. The acoustic monitoring has the potential of summarising the commonly used means to monitor the coating process. The best partial least squares (PLS) regressions, obtained by the high frequency accelerometer, showed for the release a correlation coefficient of 0.92 and a root mean square error of prediction (RMSEP) of 5.84% (31–82.8%), and for the estimated amount of film applied a correlation coefficient of 0.95 and RMSEP of 0.52% (0.6–6%). The results of the preliminary investigation are considered promising. There is however a need for further investigations on sampling procedures and product characterisation before a final conclusion on the applicability of acoustic monitoring can be made.Cost-effectiveness of pharmaceutical manufacturing has become an important factor for the success of a drug product. While the costs in most other industries have been significantly reduced in recent years, there are strong indications that costs in pharmaceutical manufacturing have increased for a variety of reasons. FDA's PAT initiative and the new ICH guidelines Q8 and Q9 are associated with the design of robust manufacturing processes being built on a mechanistic understanding of the processes and aiming at real-time release. Such efforts are likely to contribute to an improved cost-effectiveness because of reduced waste and need for re-working. A range of process analytical techniques have been proposed for process monitoring. Spectroscopic methods such as NIR and Raman spectroscopy have in particular been implemented. A disadvantage of new monitoring techniques is that the resulting models for the correlation between sensor signals and quality parameters generally are case specific and must be developed for each application ( Acoustic emission (AE) monitoring techniques in the form of either active or passive acoustic emission (PAE) are used intensively by material scientists ( The sounds generated by the friction, collisions and fluid turbulence in powder processing include audible sounds detectable via air by a microphone as well as high frequency sounds in the non-audible range – elastic waves – detectable by AE sensors that incorporate piezoelectric transducers. Particle behaviour can be monitored and characterised by assessing the sounds, once the correlation between particular sounds and particle motion is established ( The advantage of acoustic monitoring techniques compared to other techniques is the non-invasive and non-destructive character. It is inexpensive, safe intrinsically and no window is required, which should give an advantage over NIR, which has been used for in-process and at-line monitoring of the film coating process ( The commonly used means to monitor and control pharmaceutical coating processes are records of liquid addition rate and atomizer air pressure as an indirect control of the air to liquid mass ratio, inlet air temperature and humidity and outlet air temperature and humidity. These variables are monitored by sensors placed outside the product container and may possibly form the basis for an automated control loop ( Of the different coating techniques available the top spray coating process is often considered as being the most difficult to control when the objective is the achievement of a modified release control ( The present study was conducted to assess the potential of PAE for additional control of a fluidized bed coating process to achieve a controlled release product. Potassium chloride crystals were coated in a top spray production scale coater with EC using an organic-based coating solution. Along with the establishment of an acoustic-based in-line process it was attempted to correlate the processed signals to the essential product attributes, the amount of film applied and its uniformity and barrier properties as mirrored by release of potassium chloride. The estimated amount of film applied and the 6 KCl crystals (Klinge Chemicals Ltd., UK) with a mean particle diameter less than 1000 The coating of potassium chloride crystals with EC was performed in a production scale fluidised bed coater, Glatt WSG 200 (Glatt GmbH, Germany), equipped with top spray. Batch size 300 Four batches were produced by use of two different product containers, A and B ( Two different types of accelerometers were used to measure the vibrations from the process equipment in this study: Endevco 7240C which is a high frequency accelerometer with sensitivity of 0.2647 Six samples each of 750 The amount of film applied was estimated by the loss of weight of the coating solution tank and the concentration of the coating solution. The signals from the accelerometers were preamplified by a Brüel and Kjaer 2647 charge to Deltatron converter, thereafter conditioned using a Brüel and Kjaer NEXUS Conditioning Amplifier before being digitised by an ADC (National Instruments DAQ Pad 6070E). Data from the accelerometers was converted from analogue to digital signal. The acceleration (arbitrary scale) was then converted from the time domain into the frequency domain by means of the fast Fourier transform (FFT) algorithm giving power spectrum density (PSD) spectra in the range from 50 Principal component analysis (PCA) was developed based on the PAE data for each sensor. Variables 6–512 (300 The PLS regressions, using multivariate PLS calibration, were established to describe the relationship between the PAE data and the physical reference data on applied coat and release. Pre-processing of data was performed according to the same conditions as used for conducting the PCA. For the A good model fit does not necessarily mean that the model will be optimal for the future predictions. To assure this, the model needs to be validated with new data from new batch processes and the model which gives the highest correlation coefficient and lowest RMSEP value is considered to have the best prediction capability. The optimal validation is an independent test set, but this is very difficult with limited number of data. The most used validation in that situation is segmented cross-validation. The data are split into a number of segments. Each segment is validated as an independent test set based on a calibration developed on the rest of the segments. The calibration is validated based on all the segments acting as independent test set. The general cross-validation used in the data analysis was 20 segments having all measurements referring to one sample in the same segment. Furthermore, all four batches were represented in each segment. The best calibrations were tested for stability in general and for batch-to-batch stability particularly with a cross-validation with only four segments, one for each batch.  The PLS regression method was chosen as a more appropriate technique for evaluation of the acquired raw PAE data than the principal component regression (PCR) method, to investigate the ability of variables to act as predictors of the responses given in  Raw PAE data from sensor 1 throughout the four microencapsulation processes are shown in The data in  Also the data generated by sensors 2 and 3 gave RMSEP of reasonable value, around 9% (31–82.8%), the correlation coefficient obtained was not of satisfactory level, only around 0.8, as may be seen from  Although the PCA indicated that signals from sensor 4 contain more noise, it resulted in the most stable cross-validated regression. PLS model 1 tested for batch to batch stability had a correlation coefficient of 0.89 and a cross-validated RMSEP of 6.83% (31–82.8%) (  The models were tested for batch to batch stability using the same cross-validation method as for PLS regressions on dissolution. The results showed the same tendency. Data from sensor 4 gave the most stable model with lowest values for batch to batch variation, 0.9, and highest prediction power, 0.77% (0.6–6%). Data from sensor 1 showed a high inter-batch variation. Cross-validated PLS models resulted in low predictive power for sensor 1, even though the calibrated models gave satisfactorily high correlation coefficient and acceptable RMSEP for sensors 1 and 4. A closer look at the PCA data revealed the most likely causes for that. PC1 was found to explain most of the variance inside the data for all sensors; data are not reported.  Sensor 4 generated weaker signals and the impact of noise was therefore higher. This was likely due to its placement on the expansion chamber where fewer crystals hit the chamber wall and it is separated from the product container by a silicone membrane. Still trends in development of AE data could be recognized.  Inter-batch variation is mainly explained by PC2, dealing with around 7–9% of variation inside the data. This variance may be due to the two different product containers used. Plots of PAE ( Despite the fact that the best PLS models achieved in the study do not fully suffice for a reliable prediction of the two reference product characteristics investigated, there are reasons to consider monitoring of passive acoustic emission as a promising technique for the control of the coating process. The experimental data sets given in The investigation gave information on sensor types and their positioning on the coater. The best regressions were derived from data generated by sensors 1 and 4, both of which where high frequency and sensitivity accelerometers, with an upper frequency of 50 Further development of using acoustics for process monitoring requires development in the sensor technology in the meaning of wireless sensors and better signal interpretation.