At present, Section integrity hypothesis is mostly used to analyze the mechanical properties and identify the damage of the cable. Based on the actual situation and considering the slip effect between the wires of the cable, two simplified calculation models of the cable are proposed based on the theory of share-splitting slip, and the model parameters are obtained through experiments. Finally, on the background of Lijiang Railway Suspension Bridge in Yunnan Province, the fatigue test of the suspension cable is carried out by using the self-developed testing device which can consider both tension and bending fatigue, and the broken steel wire is further analyzed by means of electron microscopy. The results show that two simplified calculation models of wire rope sling are proposed based on the theory of share-splitting slip, which are close to the results of the original model, but greatly improve the calculation efficiency. Comparing the results of three models, it is found that the three models can reflect the development of the slip and fatigue damage of the wire rope sling, but they have some errors with the test. The fracture morphology of the steel wire is shown by electron microscopy photographs.With the increasing span of bridge, the status of cable-supported bridges in long-span bridge has been continuously improved. Cables and slings are part of the core components of cable-supported bridges. Usually, they can be divided into parallel wire rope and steel wire rope. With the increase of service life, the wire rope may be damaged in Some scholars have also done research on wire ropes. Most of the early models were based on linear elasticity assumption, and semi-continuous method and discrete method were used. In recent years, with the development of computer technology and finite element theory, many scholars have used the finite element method to simulate the steel wire rope. Based on the geometrical characteristics of the wire strands and the corresponding boundary conditions, a simplified finite element model of the wire strands was established by Jiang [ However, fatigue damage is a dynamic process, and it is unreasonable to evaluate fatigue damage by static method. In this paper, based on damage dynamics and slip theory, a simplified calculation model of steel wire rope sling is presented and its failure mode is analyzed. The basic structure of the article is as follows: The relevant background knowledge was introduced in section 1. Data of wire rope material was obtained through experiments, which provide a basis for determining the parameters of the numerical model based on damage dynamics in section 2. A share-splitting slip model based on damage dynamics was established and the fatigue failure time was calculated in section 3. In order to verify the validity of the numerical model, the bending fatigue test of the steel wire rope was carried out by the designed bracket based on the actual project in section 4. Finally, a summary of the full text was given. Friction is a complex problem, which is affected by many factors, such as contact material, indicating roughness, temperature and relative velocity. So far, there is no definite conclusion about the friction mechanism [ The friction coefficient can be simplified as follows: The average value of Bending fatigue failure of cables has attracted the attention of many scholars and a lot of research has been done. The results show that the bending stress at the anchorage end is the primary factor causing cable bending fatigue. However, at present, the calculation of cable mechanical properties, cable force identification and damage identification are all based on the assumption that the cable section is a whole section. Numerous engineering practices show that bending stress exists near the anchorage section of the cable. The phenomenon of layered slip can be found in parallel steel wire, but for steel wire rope sling, because the structure of the steel wire rope sling is complex, the layered slip theory cannot be applied. In this paper, based on the test and engineering practice, a theoretical model for calculating the slip of steel wire rope sling is proposed to calculate the fatigue failure of the steel wire rope sling. Taking the most basic steel wire rope as an example, the theoretical stress calculation formula of the slip of the steel wire rope sling is deduced. Slip may occur in every steel wire of the wire rope sling, but in bridge engineering, slip occurs between side strand and side strand per share, and between side strand and core strand. According to structural mechanics, there is a corresponding relationship between bending moment and shear stress as follows: Q( Before the slip occurs, the section can be known as a section and its stress can be calculated according to Eq. (3). When the slip occurs, the moment of inertia of the whole section in the integral formula (3) is replaced by the moment of inertia of each section. The shear stress distribution in both cases is shown in Wire rope sling is composed of many steel wires, so it is very important to determine the damage model of steel wire for structural analysis [ According to damage mechanics, the damage degree (ω) is defined as the ratio of the bearing area ( Among them, In 1971, Lemaitre proposed the equivalent strain hypothesis, which enables indirect damage to be measured. The hypothesis was that the deformation of materials containing damage can be represented only by effective stress, and the constitutive relation of the damage model can be expressed by the constitutive relation of non-destructive mode. The one-dimensional linear elastic relationship of damaged materials is as follows: Steel wire rope used in this paper were high strength steel wires. The Ramberg-Osgood model considering strain hardening was selected and the damage variable was added on the basis of the original constitutive model. The damage constitutive relationship is considered as follows: Among them, k and m are hardening coefficients. The damage is represented by replacing the hardening coefficient k with the hardening coefficient In order to study the damage degradation process of materials, it is considered that the cumulative plastic strain rate of steel wire is: The relationship between damage variable ωand cumulative plastic strain p was obtained by combining the dynamic equation of damage evolution with the damage constitutive eq. (8).  Based on the above theory and material test, the results of parameters are shown in The main cable span of Jinsha jiang Suspension Bridge is 132 + 660 + 132 m. The main girder is a three-span continuous beam with a span composition of 110 + 660 + 98 m. The main girder is provided with vertical and transverse supports at the end of the girder and at the main tower. Jinsha jiang Railway Suspension Bridge is the first railway suspension bridge in China. The live load of railway suspension bridge accounts for a higher proportion of the total load. Its stress amplitude is larger than that of the highway bridge, and the suspension cable is prone to fatigue. For railway suspension bridge, the suspension cables are subjected to larger loads. The fatigue strength of the suspension cables may be the controlling factor in design and use. At the same time, the stiffening girder of suspension bridge will produce longitudinal and transverse displacement along the bridge under the action of vehicle operation, which will lead to the difference of longitudinal displacement between the upper and lower suspension points of the suspension cable anchored on the main girder. Therefore, it will lead to the bending of the sling and other phenomena, resulting in secondary stress and so on. In order to avoid fatigue failure of sling, it is necessary to calculate and analyze the response of sling under fatigue load in detail. Through the self-developed bridge structure static and dynamic non-linear analysis system BNLAS, the spatial analysis model is established ( Many engineering practices show that the short suspension cable of the suspension bridge is the most vulnerable place to damage. Due to the inconsistency of the top and bottom ends of the sling, the sling is not subject to simple tensile fatigue failure, but to a combined failure mode of tension and bending. According to the investigation of sling diseases over the past 30 years, it is found that the sling often suffers from corrosion fatigue damage due to the influence of accumulated water and other corrosive media (This paper does not consider the impact of corrosion). The specifications of the sling studied in this paper are 6 × 55SWS + IWR. Because of the complexity of wire rope sling, only the most dangerous section model is given in this paper. In this paper, three finite element models are given based on the proposed theory of split slip as showed in    In each load step, the internal force of the custom element should be extracted. In the three models presented in this paper, the phenomenon of share slip occurred near the fixed end. Slip displacement occurred at the contact between side strand and core strand at anchorage end. The length of the slip is shown in The results of three numerical models show that due to the restraint of the anchorage end of the steel wire rope sling, the shear stress at the end of the steel wire rope sling gradually increases beyond the ultimate shear stress, which results in the slip of the steel wire rope sling. Under multiple cyclic loads, the combined stresses of tension and bending exceed the damage threshold, which leads to damage degradation of materials and ultimately leads to fracture of steel wires. Model A can accurately simulate wire breakage and slip, but the calculation amount is relatively large (it takes about 300 h to calculate once in 20 core 40 thread server) and can only calculate very short length of the sling. Model B and model C, as showed in The acceleration sensor was installed to measure the acceleration at the corresponding place. The acoustic sensor shown was used to monitor the sound emitted when the wire breaks. The cable force sensor and reader were used to measure the cable force. Ultrasonic flaw detector was used to monitor the damage of pin shaft. The dynamic displacement of the model is measured by using the laser dynamic displacement sensor. The team has invented a patent for a cable tension and bending fatigue test device. Details can be found in the patent. The steel wire rope sling was tensioned to the designed cable force and stationed for at least 24 h to test the cable force state. After the cable force meets the test requirements, subsequent tests were carried out. The designed loading head was connected with the MTS actuator, and the loading head was installed in the middle position of the sling. The steel wire rope sling was fixed on the bracket through the cable clamp and steel anchor box, and was tensioned to the initial cable force by the jack ( In the process of loading, it can be found by the cable force sensor reader that the cable force varies according to the designed stress amplitude, and the rotation angle of pin hinge rotates according to the designed angle. The fatigue test successfully realizes the double index fatigue of tension and bending, which has important research significance. Test process diagram is shown in At the initial 300,000 times, everything was normal. During about 300,000 to 400,000 times, the wire rope at the clamp was slightly worn out. During loading, black powder was produced at the joint of pin shaft and steel anchor box. Because the surface is powdery and uneven, the light irradiated on the powders produces diffuse reflection. So the color of the powder is black. The phenomenon of share-splitting slip of steel wire has appeared. There are two kinds of damage to the sling: the outermost layer of each strand contact begins to break; the steel wire at the sling clamp is worn obviously. The slip length is measured by varying the spraying pigments on the wire rope. The maximum slip length in the test is about 8 mm, which is smaller than the numerical calculation of 11 mm. The anchorage end is considered as a fixed constraint in numerical calculation. However, the bending stress caused by pin connection is not as large as that of numerical analysis in test and practical engineering. Similarly, the change of damage degree is not so great as that of numerical calculation. The comparison is shown in  In view of the fact that the loads on the suspension cables of railway suspension bridge are much larger than those of highway bridge. Fatigue tests considering the coupling of tension and bending have not yet been reported. This paper designs a biaxial fatigue test which can consider both bending and tension of the wire rope. On the basis of practical engineering analysis, the most disadvantageous suspension position and load are calculated by BNLAS. According to the actual situation of the project, the theory of Share-splitting Slip is put forward and the three-middle numerical model is given. The material parameters are obtained by the material test. The experimental and finite element results show that the numerical model presented in this paper can reflect the failure process of the steel wire rope sling. Finally, the fracture of steel wire rope sling was photographed by the electron microscope. In practical engineering, the bending stress and shear stress of the steel wire rope sling are produced due to the restraint action at the anchorage end, which results in slippage of the steel wire rope sling. The simplified model presented in this paper can reflect slip and damage. How to choose reasonable anchorage end restraint mode to reduce the error of testing and numerical analysis still needs to be studied. This paper was financially supported by the