The performance of a flow-through electrochemical cell with an yttria-stabilized zirconia (YSZ) sensor for pH measurement in high-temperature nickel laterite pressure acid leach (PAL) process solutions was evaluated. Very good agreement was observed between the measured pH values and those theoretically predicted using the OLI Systems software package calibrated independently based on solubility measurements. PAL process solutions were simplified to ternary MgSO4–Al2(SO4)3–H2SO4 solutions by combining all the divalent metal sulphates into one with the properties of MgSO4. The experimental results support the postulation that the high-temperature behaviour of nickel, cobalt and manganese sulphates can be satisfactorily approximated with that of MgSO4. The experimental findings also support the postulation that acid should be added to a PAL process so that the solution pH is around 1 at the leach temperature, regardless of the feed composition.The measurement of pH at high temperatures is highly desirable for the control and monitoring of industrial processes. A typical example is in the pressure acid leaching (PAL) of laterite ores, which is conducted in autoclaves at a temperature around 250 Limonitic laterites are iron-rich oxide ores with iron content higher than 40 More specifically, the sulphuric acid consumption for pressure acid leaching of limonitic laterites is relatively low (180–260 Acid addition requirements in a PAL process were previously calculated using a speciation approach based on the postulation that high-temperature behaviour of divalent metal sulphates can be approximated with that of MgSO The yttria-stabilized zirconia electrode is considered a primary pH sensor ( The calculation of the calibration coefficient, α, is based on the following equation ( The measured potential of a test solution is converted into pH also using Eq. Pressure acid leaching experiments were conducted with a limonitic ore (originating from Indonesia) and a limonite/saprolite blend (originating from New Caledonia) to produce solutions, the pH of which was subsequently measured at temperature. The elemental composition of the feeds is given in Pressure acid leaching experiments were carried out in a 2 Metals in these solutions were analyzed using ICP-AES (Optima 3000 DV, Perkin Elmer). ICP-AES analysis was followed by complexiometric titration of the free acidity. Free acid titrations were performed with an auto-titrator (Tirtoline 96, Schott) which had a sensitivity of 0.01 PAL solutions were subsequently transferred to a flow-through electrochemical cell. The pH was then measured at 250 Three different PAL solutions were produced, P#1 to P#3, corresponding to the tests shown in In addition, two synthetic solutions, SP#1 and SP#2, were made to test whether the high-temperature behaviour of nickel, cobalt and manganese sulphates can be approximated with that of MgSO Furthermore, in order to test the effect of H Finally, six synthetic binary NiSO The flow-through electrochemical cell used for pH measurements consisted of a cylinder made of titanium Grade 5 ( Three HPLC pumps were employed to pump the solutions at a fixed flow rate of 0.5 The measurements in pressure acid leach solutions were performed with an yttria-stabilized zirconia electrode referred to as YSZ-3. Two sets of measurements were done, namely runs 1 and 2. The calibration coefficient, α, was evaluated using Eq. The comparison between experimentally derived pH values and theoretical pH values (OLI Systems software) for leach solutions P#1 and P#2 is given in Two conclusions can be drawn. One is that simplification of PAL solutions to equivalent-MgSO The experimental pH values for synthetic solutions SP#1 and SP#2 are also illustrated in The measurements in diluted, acid-adjusted leach solutions D#1 to D#5 are shown in The measurements in synthetic NiSO The measured and theoretical pH values for synthetic binary NiSO  In the present work, a method is proposed to predict the required free H Eq. In order to make the proposed method universally applicable, aluminium concentration is excluded from the equation, and the effect of aluminium on the measured free acid is accounted for separately. The correction for aluminium can be calculated based on the assumption that there is very little soluble aluminium at temperature in the last autoclave compartment (but not necessarily in the first). That is, aluminium at temperature is in the form of hydronium alunite, H Accordingly, for every 3 The effect of iron on the measured free acid can also be accounted for. It should be noted that Eq. If we then assume that all Fe(III) at temperature is in the form of hematite, Fe It can be readily calculated that 2.6 The behaviour of ferrous iron is different from that of ferric iron; in fact, ferrous iron would be expected to behave in the same manner as Mg, Mn, Ni and Co. That is, the concentration of Fe(II) can be added to the concentration of equivalent-Mg. Also shown in In addition to the data for PAL solutions P#1 and P#2, the pH of which was measured in this work, the data were also examined for PAL solutions obtained during batch PAL tests at the University of Toronto ( As can be seen in A flow-through electrochemical cell with an yttria-stabilized zirconia (YSZ) sensor was used for in situ measurement of pH of nickel laterite pressure acid leach (PAL) solutions at 250 There is good agreement between the predicted and measured free acid, within about ± The authors gratefully acknowledge financial support by the