Toxic inorganic depressants are commonly used in the flotation separation of polymetallic sulfide ores and it is desirable that they can be replaced by environmentally benign substances. Serpentine, a common gangue mineral encountered in complex sulfide ores, has been found to be an efficient depressant for ferric sulfide (e.g., pyrite). Serpentine was tested as a potential selective depressant in the differential flotation separation of galena and pyrite using potassium butyl xanthate (PBX) as a collector. In single mineral flotation, serpentine depressed the −150 + 74 μm and −74 + 37 μm galena while the −10 μm galena was floatable. Different from galena, serpentine has strong depression effect on all the three sizes of pyrite. So the flotation separation of fine grained galena and pyrite can be achieved. A concentrate with Pb grade of 65.09% and recovery of 67.72% can be achieved in the mixed minerals flotation when serpentine was added as depressant. Mechanism studies indicated that serpentine particles attach to the surface of pyrite more easily.Lead is widely used in the electrical industry; mechanical industry; metallurgical industry; chemical industry; pharmaceutical industry; medical industry; oil industry; military industry; nuclear industry; and other sectors. Due to the increasing demand for lead metal, mining companies today are involved in treating complex ores which may be risky on business operation [ Depressants can be simply classified into two types: inorganic depressants and organic depressants. In the flotation of complex polymetallic sulfide ores, inorganic depressants are usually added to selectively render given minerals hydrophilic thus achieving the separation of individual minerals [ Slime coating is a phenomenon often encountered in flotation process and it is primarily controlled by the magnitude and sign of the surface charge of the interacting particles as reflected by zeta potential measurements ([ The purpose of this work is to determine if serpentine possesses unique selectivity in the flotation separation of galena and pyrite. The selective depression mechanism of serpentine on pyrite was also discussed. The serpentine (lizardite) used for all experiments were obtained from Donghai, Jiangsu Province, China. The lump of mineral was crushed and hand-picked to obtain high purity sample. The sample was dry ground to −10 μm and used for all the tests. The high purity samples of galena and pyrite were acquired from Xitieshan, Qinghai Province, China. The samples were crushed, hand-sorted and dry screened to collect the three particle sizes of −150 + 74 μm, −74 + 37 μm and −10 μm. In order to minimize oxidation, all the samples were stored in vacuum-desiccators after prepared. The X-ray diffraction measurement results were shown in PBX (Potassium Butyl Xanthate) and MIBC (Methyl Isobutyl Carbinol) were used as collector and frother respectively. Potassium nitrate was used to maintain the ionic strength and hydrochloric acid (HCL) and potassium hydroxide (KOH) were used to adjust pH. Deionized distilled water was used for all tests. Single mineral flotation tests were conducted in a mechanical agitation flotation machine (FGC5-35 manufactured by Yunhao Mining and Metallurgical Equipment Co., Ltd., China). The amount of galena or pyrite for each single mineral test is 2 g. The mineral sample was pre-cleaned in 0.1 mol/L hydrochloride acid solution with stirring for 5 min. After several times rinsing and filtration with distilled water, the mineral samples were suspended in 40 mL distilled water and conditioned for 2 min while the desired pH value was adjusted and maintained by hydrochloric acid or potassium hydroxide. When needed, serpentine was added at the beginning of the conditioning period. The collector and frother were added and conditioned for 3 min after each reagent addition. Flotation concentrates were then collected for a total of 4 min. The floated and unfloated particles were collected, filtered and dried. The Pb content in sample was determined by volumetric titration method. The flotation recovery was calculated based on solid weight distributions and Pb grade between the two products. Recovery = Concentrate weight/Mixed ore weight× (concentrate grade/Mixed ore grade)∗100%. For the sedimentation tests, 0.1 g of sample was taken and made up to 100 mL after addition of desired mounts of 10 The effect of PBX concentration on the flotation performance of different-sized galena and pyrite at pH 7 is studied and the results are shown in The effect of pH on the flotation recoveries of galena and pyrite using PBX as collector is shown in The results in Under pH 7 and the fixed collector concentration of 1 × 10 The flotation of galena and pyrite was then tested at different pH at a fixed serpentine concentration of 1 g/L. As can be seen from The galena and pyrite mixture (weight ratio 1:1) flotation tests were conducted using serpentine as depressant at pH 7 and the results are shown in The aggregation/dispersion behavior of sulfide and serpentine is studied by turbidity technique. A decrease of turbidity value indicates a decrease in particle number, which is the result of particle aggregation. The results in Serpentine exhibits selective depression effect for pyrite, allowing preferential flotation separation of fine galena from pyrite by control of pulp pH at 7. Through analyzing the settlement behavior, it is concluded that serpentine particles attach to the surface of pyrite more easily and this is the reason for the selectively depression of serpentine. The authors acknowledge the support of