We report a series of comminuted periprosthetic fractures above total knee arthroplasties in 3 patients who were treated by using an intramedullary fibular strut allograft and a lateral buttress plate. The patients, whose ages ranged from 74 to 90 years, were grossly osteopenic on radiographs. All 3 fractures healed in a satisfactory alignment without any complications. We believe this technique is a feasible treatment option for periprosthetic fractures in this difficult group of patients, having both biologic and mechanical advantages.Fracture of the distal femur involving total knee arthroplasty (TKA) is a difficult orthopedic problem particularly in patients with poor bone stock. Such fractures may occur with minimal trauma and are usually associated with comminution. Various predisposing factors for this fracture include osteoporosis, rheumatoid arthritis, notching of the anterior cortex, neurologic disease, and revision arthroplasty Three displaced low periprosthetic fractures of the distal femur with metaphyseal comminution ( After initial assessment and resuscitation, the patients were taken to the operating room for surgery. Under a tourniquet with the knee flexed to 45°, a midline skin incision and lateral parapatellar approach was used to access the distal femur and the intercondylar notch. Intraoperatively, there were no signs of loosening of the primary knee components. Under radiographic control, the fracture reduction was achieved by manual traction and the fresh frozen irradiated fibular strut allograft was inserted through the intercondylar notch across the fracture site without reaming the medullary canal. The head of the fibula was wedged at the entry site in the intercondylar notch of the femoral component, which provided initial stability. After the graft was countersunk to avoid impingement, the fracture was fixed by using a lateral buttress plate with a combination of screws and cerclage wires for extra stability. Postoperatively, active and passive knee mobilization was started as soon as possible. Patients were advised to stay toe touch weight bearing for the first 6 weeks and then gradually progressed on to full weight bearing. All patients were followed clinically and radiographically. Radiographs were assessed for fracture healing, alignment at the fracture site, and signs of loosening of knee prostheses. All patients were discharged as soon as they achieved their preoperative functional status. All 3 fractures healed within a period of 12 to 24 weeks. The alignment in all cases was satisfactory and none of the fractures healed in angulation of more than 10° in any plane ( The aim of treatment in periprosthetic fractures involving TKAs is to achieve a painless and stable knee without residual malalignment. Periprosthetic fracture associated with loose implants can be treated by revision TKA, but if implants are well fixed rigid internal fixation is recommended. Although some studies have reported good results after nonoperative treatment To avoid problems of nonoperative treatment, several authors have recommended open reduction and internal fixation using conventional plates to treat these fractures Use of supracondylar nails is becoming the treatment of choice in most displaced periprosthetic fractures of the distal femur because it is a simple, safe, and less invasive procedure. Clinical studies have shown high union rates with minimum complications Our technique of using intramedullary fibular allograft is simple and can be used by general orthopedic surgeons if allograft is available. The graft acts as an intramedullary nail and provides good initial stability and helps to maintain the reduction during the application of lateral plate. The intramedullary graft provides 4 cortices for fixation of screws for rigid internal fixation and therefore probably does not require locking plates for fixation. Previously, studies have reported the use of fibular struts in such cases with good results. Tani et al In conclusion, the combination of intramedullary fibular allograft and a buttress plate provides satisfactory fixation of a displaced periprosthetic fractures above TKAs. This technique should be considered in patients who present with a low periprosthetic fracture of the femur associated with metaphyseal comminution and loss of bone stock at the fracture site because we feel it offers both biologic and mechanical advantages over other surgical techniques.