A substantial proportion of large industrial mines process low grade finely disseminated ore bodies that require fine grinding to liberate valuable minerals. In response to increasing energy costs, the industry is seeking energy efficiency milling technologies that can process large tonnages. Stirred mills are an attractive option as they have the ability to grind to fine sizes (below 100μm) at lower energy consumption than ball mills. The VTM is one type of stirred mill that has been used in mineral processing for secondary, tertiary and regrind duties and can be used in large throughput circuits at lower specific energy. The JKMRC has conducted an intensive survey program on VTM circuits in various grinding duties under the ‘Collaborative Research in Stirred Milling Technology’ project funded by Metso Minerals. The survey outcomes demonstrate that the VTM uses a low specific energy to reduce the particle size into the floatable regime by eliminating the coarser particles without producing excessive fines. This paper presents data on the performance of VTMs in secondary and tertiary grind duties that prepare feed for rougher flotation.It is widely reported that comminution consumes the greatest proportion of energy in most mineral processing plants. For mines processing low grade, hard and/or finely disseminated ore bodies, or where there are declining metal prices, it becomes a challenge to design and operate comminution circuits at lower specific energy and cost without jeopardizing metal recovery. Typical comminution circuits consist of AG/SAG in primary grinding stage and followed by ball mill in secondary/tertiary grinding, preparing the feed for rougher stages. With many ore types, the ore mineralogy dictates that fine grinding is essential for effective liberation. In the past, ball mills have been used for fine grinding but stirred mills have been shown to grind finer at lower specific energy. It has been reported that stirred mills consume 30% less energy in coarser fine grinding and approximately 50% in ultra-fine grinding regime ( The main objective of fine grinding is usually to prepare the feed for downstream flotation processes. It is essential to both liberate the valuable minerals and prepare particles into sizes suitable for flotation. Typically, a narrow size distribution lacking excessive slimes (−10 The Metso VERTIMILL® (VTM) is a low intensity stirred mill with a tip speed of 3 The JKMRC has been engaged by Metso Minerals to carry out a research project on ‘Collaborative Research in Stirred Miling Technology’ focusing on the VTM technology. The main goal of this research is to evaluate the performance of industrial scale VTM installations, and to develop improved process models and scale-up methodology for the VTM. BHP Billiton’s Cannington Mine (Cannington) and a gold–copper mine in New South Wales, Australia (Site A) have agreed to participate in this collaborative research program by supporting extended surveys of VTM circuits at their respective sites. Both Cannington and Site A have led the industry by adopting VTM in installations that were novel at the time. Cannington installed two VTM 1500-WB (1500 horsepower) units for secondary grinding of AG mill product, an application traditionally performed using ball mills. Site A installed the largest VTM to date, a 3000-WB in a tertiary grind duty to cope high throughput and harder ore in order to improve rougher stage recovery. Both sites also operate the VTM’s in more traditional regrinding applications and are successful VTM showcases for operating at low specific energy in various grinding duties i.e. secondary, tertiary and regrind duties. The VTM survey conducted by The aim of this paper is to present industrial performance data for VTM’s in secondary, tertiary and regrind duties, and assess their ability to prepare feed for rougher and cleaner flotation stages at low specific energy. Surveys at Cannington and Site A included most of the VTM’s on these sites allowing data to be collected for secondary, tertiary and regrind duties. Prior to surveying, the circuits were inspected in order to evaluate sample access and recommend any necessary modifications. Generally, the sampling points in these circuits were accessible and suitable for collecting representative samples. Steady state conditions were achieved by maintaining the relative standard deviation (RSD) of the circuit operating variables such as AG/SAG throughput, cyclone feed flow rate, cyclone pressure, mill power draw and water addition below 5%. The plant was held at steady state condition for at least two hours, prior to conducting a survey. Cannington, located in northwest Queensland, Australia, is one of the world largest and lowest cost Ag–Pb–Zn mine.   Site A is one of Australia’s largest gold mining operations. The details on this site can be referred in ( This section discusses the performance of the industrial VTM circuits and survey results. Five surveys from the three circuits were chosen to be presented in this paper i.e. two surveys of the secondary mills and one survey of the zinc regrind duty at Cannington; and two surveys of another tertiary grinding circuit at Site A . Survey 1 of the secondary circuit was conducted before plant shutdown (worn liner condition) whilst the second survey was done with new screw liners. One of the major challenges faced by the survey team was caused by the variability of water addition rates at the cyclone feed sumps as fluctuating water addition influences the cyclone feed density. Although, the variability of the water addition in the secondary circuit is high, the volume of water added to the cyclone feed sump is small compared to the circuit throughput and the circulating load. The large volume of slurry in the cyclone feed sump dampens the variations in slurry density. In this case, the cyclone feed density was maintained at 76% with a relative SD of 0.2%. Survey 2 at tertiary grind circuit behaved similarly with the cyclone feed density maintained at 51% with a relative SD of 0.6%. The fluctuation of water addition at the bottom of the secondary mill is high in the first survey. The purpose of water addition to the bottom of the mill is to reduce mill viscosity and some sites report that it prolongs the life of the screw liner. This is an important operational characteristic as it influences the particle residence time in the mill and mill content density. The water addition also provides a controllable uprising velocity which contributes to classification of particles in the upper portion of mill body. This form of classification may reduce overgrinding by causing fine particles to rise and be removed from the grinding zone, while retaining the large particles in the charge and ground and is an area of ongoing investigation.  Based on the data, the circuit feed F80 for the secondary mill ranges from 155 to 190 This section discusses the performance of the circuit, including the VTM and hydrocyclone. Most VTM installations are configured in close circuit, with fresh feed reporting to the cyclone feed sump, and operating in either top or bottom feed mode. The performance of the cyclone is essential as the cyclone underflow is the mill feed. Appropriate feed quality (in terms of mill feed rate, % solids and particle size) is essential for maximising mill performance. In this case, it is essential to evaluate the performance of the cyclone to identify where any bottleneck may be in the circuit that affects the mill performance. The performance of the hydrocyclone were evaluated based on percent feed to underflow, sharpness index (SI), water split and corrected cut size d50c. The evaluation of a VTM circuit includes specific energy (SE), Operating Work Index (OWi), size specific energy (SSE) and reduction ratio plot. The reduction ratio plot is introduced in this paper as a proposed means of representing the degree of size reduction in a VTM circuit, or in fact any circuit where using the 80% passing is not appropriate. The subscript for SSE refers to the size at which this is calculated, as an appropriate size needed depending on the final product size distribution. The plot is for all the values of  All curves show coarse inflection which is influence by particle size and density. The cut size is inversely proportional to particle density. The higher particle density will cut at finer size. In multi component ores, each component follows appropriate efficiency curves based on the particle density. These effects can result in unusually-shaped efficiency curves.  The regrind mill has a significantly greater specific energy and operating work index compared to the secondary and tertiary circuits. The key factor that should be considered is that the circuit is operating in an ultrafine grinding regime, reducing the circuit feed from 30 Another criterion that can be used for evaluating the circuit performance is the size specific energy. This indicator is a measure of the amount of energy required to produce new fines below a certain marker size. In this case, 25  As mentioned in the previous section, the Cannington base case survey was performed before and after shutdown. The screw has been relined during the shutdown. The VTMs in secondary, tertiary and regrind milling duties are operated at low specific energy to successfully prepare the feed to rougher and cleaner circuits. Each of the circuits consists of a VTM closed with a cyclone cluster. Among the common issues encountered during the surveys are: Inconsistent water addition to cyclone feed sump and bottom of the mill. Most of the sites maintained the sump level by varying the cyclone feed dilution water. When secondary and tertiary grind cyclones are operated at feed concentrations of more than 50% solids, it is crucial to maintain a constant density. Slight changes in the density will affect the cut size that may lead to inappropriate mill feed quality and fluctuating product to flotation feed. The water addition at the bottom of the mill to dilute the mill contents may affect the particle residence time in the mill. Excessive bypass of fines to underflow is another common issue that was encountered during the survey. Inappropriate spigot size (possibly in worn condition), high cyclone feed density and oversize cyclones are the possible cause of this issue. If too much fine materials enter the mill through underflow stream, there is a possibility of overgrinding and reduced grinding efficiency. Reducing the fines bypass in the underflow stream may reduce the circulating load thus potentially increasing the circuit throughput. Maintenance of cyclone parts i.e. spigot and vortex finder is essential to controlling the quality of the mill feed. The ability of the VTM to remove the coarse tail may improve flotation performance and recovery. This was observed in all VTM duties. The reduction ratio plot clearly shows that VTM’s are removing the coarser fractions without generating excessive slimes. Typically, the circuit performance is evaluated based on the Bond equation. This equation uses 80% as the marker to evaluate the operating work index. In the case of stirred milling, it may be the best to evaluate the performance of the mill at 95% or 98% as most of the energy is being used to break the particles in this size range. For instance, in many cases the mill reduction ratio observed by the authors is close to 1% at 80% passing but this value increases to 1.2% at 98% passing. Development of different marker and grindability tests are part of ongoing research at the JKMRC. Furthermore the use of SSE will be further explored. VTM circuit installations in secondary, tertiary and regrind duties can successfully prepare flotation feed within the floatable particle size range by removing the coarse tail (non-floatable particles) at lower specific energy. The good agreement between measured and balanced data indicates that the sampling practice and procedures are that have been applied to these circuits are suitable. Based on the survey data, the mills are operating as expected in their grinding duties, but do show upside potential in terms of classification control. JKMRC would like to thank BHP-Billiton’s Cannington Mine for permitting the survey results to be published and the assistance given for undertaking the successful surveys in 2013. The JKMRC also would like to thank Metso Minerals for providing the research funds to undertake the Development in the Stirred Milling Technology project. The authors would like to thank The JKMRC staff and students who were involve during the surveys and sample processing. The authors also would like to thank Peter Radziszewski for reviewing this paper.