Introduction
                  Proximal tibia fractures make up 1% of all fractures in adults. The fractures classified as Schatzker V and VI fractures can compromise knee structure and function. They are challenging to treat and often have complications. While plate fixation is the gold standard, the resulting infection rate has led us to favor external hybrid fixation. The aims of this study were to assess the radiographic and functional outcomes along with the complication rate when using this method and to compare them to historical plate fixation data.
               
                  Material and methods
                  This was a retrospective study of 40 patients. The complications, quality of reduction, IKS, Lysholm and Rasmussen functional scores at the latest follow-up and factors affecting the functional outcome were evaluated. These parameters were compared to published results from plate fixation studies.
               
                  Results
                  The deep infection rate was 2.5%. The union rate was 80%. Satisfactory reduction was obtained in 70% of cases; however, 52% of patients had malunion. The mean IKS score was 73.74, the mean Rasmussen score was 22.85 and the mean Lysholm score was 75.53. Age, reduction at latest follow-up, mechanical axis and anteroposterior laxity had a significant effect on the functional outcome.
               
                  Discussion
                  Despite the malunion rate being higher than other studies, the functional outcomes were nearly identical based on the variables measured. There are several advantages associated with using a hybrid external fixator: shorter operative time, less bleeding, shorter hospital stays and lower infection rate.
               
                  Conclusion
                  Hybrid external fixation is a reliable fracture fixation method that leads to satisfactory functional outcomes, while reducing the infection rate and allowing arthroplasty to be performed in the future if needed.Proximal tibia fractures make up 1% of all fractures in adults This was a retrospective study of patients with a proximal tibia fracture who were operated with a hybrid external fixator between January 2001 and December 2012 in the orthopedic surgery department of two university hospitals. Included patients had a Schatzker V or VI fracture, had been operated within 15 days of the fracture event and had at least 1 year of follow-up. Patients who were minors or had a fracture due to an underlying disease were excluded. Forty patients met the inclusion criteria. Other than in emergency situations such as ischemia or compartment syndrome, all patients had radiographs taken initially and underwent a CT scan to classify the fracture using Schatzker's classification of tibial plateau fractures The procedure was done using a traction table. Reduction was based on ligamentatoxis under fluoroscopy control. Depending on the fracture type, a short incision was made to lift the plateau using a spatula under fluoroscopy control; a sub-meniscal arthrotomy was done if necessary. Cannulated screws were placed in the subchondral bone parallel to the joint line. After selecting the optimal ring size, the first K-wire (closest to the joint) was inserted percutaneously lateral to medial so it completely crossed the fibular head at least 10 Mobilization exercises were initiated on the first day postoperative; weight bearing was allowed 3 weeks to 3 months later, depending on the fracture type. Radiographs were used to evaluated bone union, medial proximal tibia angle (MTPA), hip-knee-ankle (HKA) angle, tibial slope, plateau tilt (angle between tibial axis and line passing through the lower of the two plateaus), widening of the plateaus (measured between the edge of the tibial plateau and edge of femoral condyle) and depression of the plateaus. When one of the plateaus was impacted, the measurement was done relative to the contralateral plateau at the maximum depression; when both plateaus were impacted, the measurement was taken from a line parallel to the condyles passing through the base of the intercondylar eminence ( The clinical evaluation consisted of complications, joint range of motion (ROM), pain (on VAS), duration of rehabilitation, date of return to work, date of return to sports. The following clinical scores were used: IKS The statistical analysis was done using SAS Forty patients were included and evaluated at a mean follow-up of 42 months (12–156), except for one patient who required above-knee amputation (classified as poor outcome). The study involved 25 men and 15 women with a mean age of 48 years (23–79); there were 26 left leg fractures and 14 right leg fractures. The fracture was isolated in 15 cases, combined with other orthopedic injuries in 18 cases and with visceral or neurological damage in 7 cases. The mean operative delay was 1.1 days (0–15). All patients were treated with a hybrid external fixator (Orthofix Srl, Verona, Italy) consisting of a proximal ring secured with three K-wires. The construct bridged the knee in one patient (open Cauchoix 2 supra and intercondylar fracture of the ipsilateral femur). The average procedure time was 92 At the latest follow-up, mean knee flexion was 119° (median 125–130°). The mean extension deficit was 2°. Twenty-eight patients still had moderate pain (mean VAS of 2.8). Twelve patients required a walking aid. Of the 25 patients who were employed at the time of injury, 5 did not return to work, 4 returned to adjusted job duties (after a mean of 14 months) and 16 returned to the same occupation (after a mean of 16 months). Of the 22 athletes in the study, 5 did not resume their sports participation ( The clinical outcomes at the last follow-up are summarized in Postoperatively, 28 fractures (70%) had satisfactory reduction based on our criteria ( Loss of reduction was discovered in 18 At the latest follow-up, 19 Union was achieved in 31 patients in a mean of 7 months (3–14). The fixator was removed after a mean of 6.3 months (3–12). Among the 8 cases of nonunion, 4 occurred in patients with an open fracture. Fracture union was achieved in 1 Joint space narrowing was present in 21 There were 16 superficial infections on the proximal K-wires that resolved with local care or pin removal. Two patients had an infection of the distal fixator pins leading to its removal. One patient had a deep infection (2.5%). There were no cases of septic arthritis related to the K-wires. Five patients had preoperative common peroneal nerve palsy. Nerve release was not performed. Two patients recovered completely, two partially and one required above-knee amputation. Six patients subsequently underwent total knee arthroplasty due to the post-traumatic knee osteoarthritis after a mean of 39 At the latest follow-up, the IKS score in our study along with the ROM In our study, the functional outcome was not related to persistent articular step-off. This is contrary to the Blokker et al. study The 51% malunion rate at the latest follow-up in our study is higher than in other studies of plate fixation or external fixation. However, the criteria in our study were more demanding than the ones used in other published studies. In addition, the depression measurement strongly depends on the angle of the radius relative to the tibial plateaus, varying from single to double when the angle is between 90 and 115 We found a 40% rate of superficial infection at the K-wires; all of these cases resolved. The rate in other published studies ranges from 4% for Stamer et al. Studies comparing plates to external fixators are inconsistent. In their study, Krupp et al. Given the similar outcomes, we believe that a hybrid fixator has several advantages, such as reducing the duration of the surgery Fracture fixation using a hybrid fixator is a reliable method for treating Schatzker V and VI proximal tibia fractures. Despite the high rate of imperfect reduction and secondary displacement, it leads to satisfactory functional outcomes in 64% patient and has a low rate of major complications. Bone grafting reduces the occurrence of secondary displacement. The functional outcomes are strongly correlated to widening of the plateaus, the tibial slope, and the mechanical axis – it is essential that these be restored. Given that the clinical outcomes are the same as those obtained with plate fixation, the study findings reinforce our resolve to use a hybrid fixator. In addition, hybrid fixators have several advantages: shorter operative time, less blood loss, lower deep infection rate, shorter wait before treatment and shorter hospital stay. Lastly, this fixation method allows revision by TKA to be performed if the patient's progression is not acceptable. The authors have not supplied their declaration of competing interest.