After so many years of editorship in Mike's capable hands, we have a hard act to follow, but we look forward to the continued support of our colleagues, and to enhance the growth of the Journal whilst maintaining its respect and reputation in the mineral profession. Having served for over 20 years on the Editorial Board of the Journal, I have corresponded with Mike Slater many times and personally valued his time and contributions whilst witnessing many changes to the Journal, the people and the profession. On behalf of the international hydrometallurgy community, we wish you many years of enjoyable retirement and continued interest in the field as a valued member of the Editorial Board. No doubt we will witness more changes in the years ahead and I am pleased to have Nicholas Welham share this role with me to help develop more efficient and timely procedures for refereeing and processing papers from Europe, Asia and Australasia. Like me, Nicholas has a strong educational, research and industry background in hydrometallurgy and is also associated with the A.J. Parker Cooperative Research Centre in Hydrometallurgy in Perth. Together, we look forward to working with Prof. Osseo-Asare who will continue to handle manuscripts from North and South America China, Japan, Korea and Africa. The greater use of electronic mail for submission and refereeing of manuscripts will undoubtedly reduce the time to communicate and lead to more timely publication of papers. The electronic copies should be in Word, RTF or PDF formats with diagrams and tables embedded in the appropriate places to make the referees' lives easier. Although we will be encouraging manuscripts to be submitted electronically, printed submissions will continue to be welcomed with the same enthusiasm. We will look for the same scope and focus of work, but mindful of Gordon Ritcey's founding editor desire that papers are practical and relevant to industry. The only criteria are that all papers attain the necessary standard of quality and the accepted paper meets the Journal's submission guidelines. However, this cannot be achieved without the support of those we call upon to referee. We recognise that refereeing requests never come at a convenient time and are rarely easy, but they help set our standards and professional integrity. As editors, we hope to publicly recognise and acknowledge our deserving referees from time to time. David Muir, CSIRO Minerals. Nicholas Welham, Murdoch University.