The stress behaviour of particle beds describes the relationship between the forces acting on the particle bed and the total energy input supplied. The stress behaviour is closely related to the compaction of the particle bed, which has to be distinguished into a purely elastic and purely plastic deformation. The elastic deformation can be characterized by the elasticity Ε of the particle bed as a material-specific parameter which is different to the E-modulus of solids. The description of the purely plastic deformation of a particle bed allows to deduce a model of the stress behaviour.Compaction is the first visible change when an external load is applied to a confined particle bed. The particles rearrange themselves into a denser packing and the original volume of the bed decreases due to a falling void volume. If the load on the individual particles exceeds a critical value they start to break, producing a large number of smaller fragments with a corresponding size distribution. This is the objective of particle bed comminution of the type that is applied in, for example, vertical roller mills and high-pressure roller presses ( The relationship between the forces acting on the particle bed (bed pressure In addition to the external load, which acts integrally on a particle bed, there are stresses and resultant compaction gradients within the particle bed. Depending on the pressure level the literature essentially distinguishes between two sub-processes during compaction, each with two possible sub-categories ( At low pressure levels (about < At higher pressure levels cracks are formed within the particles which ultimately lead to fracture if the stress intensity is sufficiently strong ( With plastic deformation the contacts between the particles change from point contacts to planar contacts. This greatly increases the adhesive forces between the particles and the resistance of the particle bed to further compaction ( In addition to the two sub-processes described above, which mainly affect the solid particles, two additional sub-processes which are seldom mentioned in literature have to be considered in order to comprehensively understand the effects in particle bed comminution. On one side the fluid in the voids of the particle bed is displaced provided that it has the time and opportunity to escape ( This expansion is greater the higher the previous external load but shows always a similar behaviour pattern ( The compaction behaviour is affected not only by the applied pressure but essentially also by the particle size of the feed material, the stress velocity, and the material moisture. In the field of particle bed comminution this behaviour has been investigated comprehensively for quartz and limestone in the size range from 1 to 2500 The inner structure of a particle bed is a result of its initial condition, the stressing mechanism and intensity, as well as the compaction behaviour of the bulk material. The structure is often described integral by the bulk density of the particle bed Four fundamental models that are often quoted were developed by The compaction models are often used to indicate connections between the parameters in the model equations and selected powder properties such as density and the volumetric fraction of the solid material. There is hardly any discussion of the factors affecting the variables that are relevant for process engineers or in particle bed comminution, such as stress velocity, particle size, and particle size distribution. Most of these models also have a common deficiency in that they regard the elastic deformation of the particle bed as a minor sub-process that can be ignored ( The starting point for modelling the stress behaviour is the calculation of the stress energy The calculation is simplified in the case of a purely plastic deformation (Eq. Below is shown by empirical data that the elastic deformation of a particle bed can reach a significant magnitude and is therefore to be considered in the modelling of the compaction behaviour. Considering the elastic recovery allows modelling the purely plastic deformation of a particle bed which forms finally the basis for a dimensionless description of the stress behaviour. The test materials were selected on practical considerations and for orientation on fundamental research aspects. Limestone and quartz are the most frequently used model substances in comminution because they are inexpensive and easy to handle. Added to this are their great economic importance in, for example, the glass and building materials industries. Glass microspheres and silicon carbide have been also employed so that different material systems can be used to check the model formulae for limestone and quartz given in the literature and developed in-house. The glass spheres were also included because they are used repeatedly for fundamental investigations and because conclusions are drawn from their behaviour about that of other mineral substances. The four materials differ not only in chemical composition but also in hardness, elasticity, surface properties, particle shape, etc. The materials were dried, cooled in a desiccator and stored there until use to ensure a consistently low moisture content. Also fairly large quantities were obtained to ensure constant quality. After uniform sample preparation there were 32 fractions available in particle size ranges between 1 and 1000 narrow classified fractions (x bimodal mixtures (x polydisperse fractions (x Two compression presses – one hydraulic press and one spindle press – were used with pressure vessels that confined the particle beds laterally. Both presses have cylindrical pressure vessels with diameters between 30 and 35 The energetic aspect of the elastic recovery was examined in order to see the magnitude of energy stored in the elastic stress field. After that a description was found to model load relief curves during particle bed stressing. It is well known that the energy required for comminution of a solid matter is supplied from the elastic stress field inside the solid. When the load on the particle bed reaches its maximum and is lowered afterwards, the elastic deformation energy  The extent of the energy stored elastically in the bed structure depends not only on the external load on the particle bed but also very substantially on the material and its feed particle size. Glass microspheres, for example, store slightly more elastic deformation energy than quartz and both materials store a significantly higher amount of energy in the stress field of the particle bed than silicon carbide and limestone. With quartz, in particular, the finer-grained fractions store more deformation energy. The width of the particle size distribution did not exhibit any significant influence.  Quartz stores a significantly higher proportion of the energy, i.e. 10 to 15 %, in elastic deformation than limestone (only 4 to 7 %). This is caused by the higher tendency to break because of the lower strength of limestone compared to quartz. Therefore quartz can store a higher proportion of energy due to the elastic deformation of the particles which do not always reach the point of breakage. This higher proportion is recovered when the load is removed from the particle bed. Silicon carbide with compressive strengths of up to about 2500 The finer the feed material the higher is the energy stored elastically under otherwise equal test conditions ( As a whole, it is apparent that up to 15 % (and in extreme cases even up to 35 %) of the energy introduced into the particle bed is stored in the elastic stress field. These findings have to be compared with, for example, the fracture energy that is deployed during the comminution of the particles of a particle bed. It is estimated that the fracture energy covers 1.5 to 12 % of the total energy input of the particle bed ( The load relief curves are usually evaluated for agglomeration as well as for particle bed comminution. But the relief load curves are even more suitable for modelling the elastic recovery ( In addition to the irreversible rearrangement at full load relieve Eq. When all the fractions investigated are taken into account the elasticity Ε of the particle bed shows hardly any dependence on the particle size, particle size distribution, or pressure, i.e. on the state of compaction at the start of the load relief. In the range of low loadings the elasticity rises with the pressure force until it reaches a constant value at about 100 At low loads a particle bed compacts essentially by rearrangement of the particles. At higher loads stable force chains are formed which collapse only through the comminution of a link in the chain (i.e. a particle). As a whole the particle bed structure therefore becomes stiffer, which makes it capable of storing the elastic energy specific to the material. With monodisperse quartz fractions the elasticity falls slightly with increasing particle size. This phenomenon is not present either with the limestone fractions or with bimodal fractions and is not considered to be significant, bearing in mind the accuracy of the measurements. Comparison of narrow classified and widely distributed quartz fractions shows a similar behaviour pattern. As a whole, the results are in agreement with the information in the literature ( The dependence on the type of material turned out to be more significant here. The elasticities of the four materials investigated are compared in The elastic recovery model of To compare different fractions and materials a normalized compression was calculated similar to Eq. To differentiate between both effects the bulk density In order to model the stress behaviour, the following approach of modelling the plastic deformation proved useful. It describes the relationship between bed pressure and the pure plastic deformation of particle beds: This model differs typically less than ± compression phase I ( compression phase II ( The limit pressure The two model parameters reference pressure Since both parameters described the compaction behaviour, only one of them is shown and discussed exemplary for the further study of influencing variables. The reference pressure and thus the resistance of a particle bed against compression increases with decreasing particle size and increasing stress velocity ( Among the characteristic values which describe particle size distributions the mean particle size The parameter C For modelling the stress behaviour in Eq. with A contact area of force (bed pressure) acting on the particle bed The integral in Eq. Thus, the functional relationship between energy absorption and pressure acting on a particle bed is found: Since in the series expansion of the exponential function exists an absolute convergence, terms N This base may further be used to deduce a dimensionless stress number phase 1 (low loads): The energy absorption increases sharply with increasing external load on the particle bed. This is partly due to friction losses that occur during the strong initial deformation of the particle bed (see phase 2 (high loads): Here the rearrangement of the particles gradually comes to a halt and friction losses start slightly to decrease at high levels. Further only very few breaking events occur due to hydrostatic stress states. The transition between the two phases of particle bed stressing depends on the material, where particle size and shape have a central influence. Broad size fractions were compared to narrow classified feed materials both less compacted and crushed. Since consequently both the friction losses and the breakage energy of these fractions have been comparatively low, the stress number reaches here no maximum in the transition from the first to the second phase of particle bed stressing. Fractions of non spherical particles show a more or less pronounced maximum of the stress number. In contrast, glass beads show initially significantly lower and gradually increasing friction losses due to the preferred rearrangement of the particles by rolling. For modelling the stress behaviour of confined particle beds their compression behaviour has to be distinguished into a purely elastic and a purely plastic deformation. This is necessary because up to 15 % (and in extreme cases up to 35 %) of the energy that has been introduced is stored in the elastic stress field of a particle bed. Therefore the elastic deformation during particle bed stressing is not a minor sub-process. It has to be taken into account in the modelling of compaction and stress behaviour. As the plastic deformation of a particle bed the elastic one can be described by a two-parametric logarithmic model equation. For that purpose the elasticity Ε of the particle bed was introduced as a material property independent of the elastic modulus. With it the total deformation of a particle bed can be reduce by the load depending proportion of elastic deformation in order to model a purely plastic deformation. Further on the model of the plastic deformation was used on the particle level to distinguish between compression phases due to rearrangement and crushing or crushing and plastic deformation. The model of the plastic particle bed deformation allowed also to derive a dimensionless stress model describing the relationship between external load (bed pressure) and the energy absorbed by a particle bed. It needs only: Two parameters to characterize the solid material (solid density Two parameters to describe the compression behaviour of the material (reference compression To what extent this can be used to weight between individual sub-processes such as friction and breakage inside a particle during stressing, is one focus of further work on this topic. Also a new description of the elastic recovery is looked for in order to model this sub-process individually and as dimensionless number.  area energy elastic modulus force mass pressure reference pressure limit pressure displacement volume mean volumetric particle size  elasticity of a particle bed stress number density normalized compression reference compression  bulk total relieve elastic deformation plastic deformation solid initial condition (unloaded particle bed)