Two approaches for the use of the Electric Pulse Fragmentation (EPF) in the beneficiation of a low-grade cassiterite schist ore were investigated through pilot-scale tests performed on samples of about 270 kg. The first approach used EPF treatment for pre-concentration while in the second approach the EPF technology was mostly used for crushing. Comparison with the use of conventional crushers was performed.
                  Results showed that the EPF pre-treatment led to a decrease of the Bond rod mill work index while the Bond ball mill work index remained unchanged. This means that the decrease in the energy consumption requested to grind the material down to 1.18 mm (closing screen of the Bond rod mill work index) is no longer noticeable with additional grinding stage to reach a size down to 106 µm (closing screen of the Bond ball mill work index). This may be due to the fracture network generated during EPF being consumed immediately in the subsequent comminution step. Alternatively, it may be that the Bond ball mill work index is not appropriate for exhibiting the weakening effect of the EPF technology when the mineral liberation size is coarser than the closing screen size used for the test. Concentration tests performed on the sample treated with the first approach for EPF showed no marked change in separation performance. However, a higher concentrate grade was obtained when using this EPF pre-treatment, indicating a probable potential for improvement.Tin is used in a wide range of applications due to its malleability, ductility and resistance to corrosion. In particular, these applications include metal coating, tin plating, alloying, soldering, and plumbing ( The minerals industry in general is facing the dual problems of increasing ore competence with declining overall grades, meaning higher volumes of harder rock must be processed each year to recover the same amount of metal, resulting in increased overall energy consumption. One potential solution to the problem of excessive energy usage is to reject gangue rock from a material flow at an early stage, thereby expending less energy in the comminution of waste. Coarse rejection of waste upgrades the ore by concentrating the valuable minerals, and in the case of competent gangue, such as highly silicified rocks, this can also improve the grindability of the material. This pre-concentration ( Cassiterite is the primary economic tin mineral. It is heavy (specific gravity = 6.9-7.1), hard, extremely brittle in nature and is generally associated with lighter gangue minerals. Cassiterite occurs both in deep hard rock mines and near surface alluvial deposits ( Another approach for improving cassiterite recovery and reducing energy expenditure in comminution is to implement a selective comminution technology, which has the advantage of reducing fines production by generating cracks specifically at the boundaries between mineral grains rather than randomly as in a conventional mechanical comminution system. This allows the liberation of valuable components from the feed material without overgrinding. Liberation at coarser size ranges is not only beneficial for the subsequent separation techniques, but can also lead to significant economic benefits for mineral processing operations such as a reduction in the grinding energy since the material does not need to be ground as finely as in conventional comminution systems ( Selective comminution methods are usually based on anisotropic properties of the ore and related to varying properties of constituent minerals (e.g. mechanical, electrical or acoustic properties, thermal expansion). Electric Pulse Fragmentation (EPF) is one such technique that exploits differences in electrical and acoustic properties of a material’s component phases to selectively fragment it. EPF works by applying highly energetic electrical pulses (150–750 J/pulse) with a very fast pulse rise time (<500 ns) to materials immersed in a dielectric process liquid (usually water). Dielectric liquids such as water are more resistive than solids at this pulse rise time, forcing discharges through the immersed material. Upon discharge, a plasma channel forms that causes explosive expansion along its pathway through the material, and the collapse of the plasma channel produces a shock wave that propagates through the material (electrodynamic fragmentation). The high selectivity of the process arises from the way the electricity and shockwaves interact with physico-chemical properties of the material: discontinuities in mineral-specific electrical permittivity and conductivity at phase boundaries locally enhance the electric field forcing the discharge streamers to these boundaries and increasing the likelihood of discharge along these grain boundaries. The combination of the shock wave with acoustic discontinuities concentrates tensile stress at phase interfaces ( This work aims to investigate the influence of two EPF approaches for the mineral processing of a low-grade schist ore containing cassiterite. The first approach consists in using the EPF treatment for pre-concentration while in the second approach the EPF technology is mostly used for crushing, improvement in the mineral liberation being expected in both approaches. EPF was performed at pilot-scale to better simulate industrial processing conditions, and to have the opportunity to investigate the influence of this treatment on the downstream concentration processes. The ore used in this study is a tin schist ore from the Hämmerlein deposit located in the Erzgebirge in Germany. The Hämmerlein deposit is a polymetallic deposit that comprises a Sn-In-Zn skarn and a greisenized shale called Schiefererz ( According to deportment calculations from Mineral Liberation Analysis (MLA), more than 99 wt% of tin in the sample derives from cassiterite which is primarily associated to quartz (31%) and mica (37%) ( This ore has a crushability of about 19.1 kWh/t (measured with a Bond low energy impact test) and a Bond work index of 16.1 kWh/t. The samples were collected 2400 m from the main adit (Stolln Pöhla) entrance of Hämmerlein mine at the level +590 m ( Tests were performed with the SELFRAG Scoria pilot plant ( Two approaches for the EPF treatment were implemented during this campaign: The first approach (Test 1) was performed with the objective of assessing if the EPF technology could be considered as a pre-concentration step. One EPF treatment step of the material was performed at a discharged energy of 6.5 kWh/t, this discharged energy being chosen based on previous works performed at lab scale. The second approach (Test 2) used the EPF system as a crushing equipment. After a first EPF treatment step performed at a discharged energy of about 6.5 kWh/t, the products were sieved at 5 mm and the oversize was reprocessed in the EPF plant at the same discharged energy. This was repeated twice and then the oversize and the undersize were combined. The overall discharged energy was evaluated to 12.5 kWh/t. Tests were performed on a sample of about 540 kg previously crushed at 50 mm and sieved at 2 mm in order to remove particles which are too fine for feeding into the EPF machine. This sample was then divided into two representative samples of about 270 kg for the two EPF tests. Concentration tests were performed with a Mozley Laboratory Separator (MLS) to assess the effect of EPF pre-treatment on the cassiterite upgrading stage. For this purpose, a sample collected in the first sampling campaign was primarily crushed in a jaw crusher followed by a cone crusher and then by a roll crusher to reduce all material below 850 µm. A circular screen was used for size classification. A similar procedure was applied to a sub-sample of the product of EPF Test 1, except that this sample was directly fed into the cone crusher. Then, two standard trays were used depending on the size fraction to process: the “Flat” profile tray was used to test the size fraction <75 µm and the “V” profile tray was used to test the size fractions coarser than 75 µm (75/212 µm, 212/425 µm and 425/850 µm). The particle size distribution (PSD) was measured by manual sieving at thirteen sizes (40 mm, 31.5 mm, 20 mm, 16 mm, 8 mm, 5 mm, 3.36 mm, 2 mm, 1 mm, 500 µm, 250 µm, 125 µm and 63 µm), which enabled estimation of the product sizes P80 and P50 (i.e. 80% passing size and 50% passing size respectively). The Sn content was determined by a portable X-Ray Fluorescence analyzer in the section related to the characterization of the products obtained after the two EPF tests. Representative splits of each sample were pulverized before analysis and calibrated against in-house Sn standards. In the section related to concentration tests, the Sn content was measured by WDS - X-Ray Fluorescence spectrometry (Philips – PW 2404 X-ray Spectrometer). Regarding physical testing, the following tests were performed: abrasion index, Bond rod mill work index (with a closing screen size of 1.18 mm) and Bond ball mill work index (with a closing screen size of 106 µm). The PSD of the products obtained after the two EPF tests is given in  To compare the performances of the EPF approaches the cumulative Sn distribution from fine to coarse sizes was plotted to show the effectiveness of a selective screening applied after comminution ( Results from physical testing are given in A reduction in the Bond rod mill work index ( As such, the Bond rod mill work index, with a closing screen size of 1.18 mm, appears more relevant for studying the grindability of this ore and identifying any weakening effect of the EPF treatment. The energy consumption of the comminution circuit from coarse fragmentation to rod milling, i.e. taking into account the energy used for the first fragmentation step (either with conventional or with the EPF method), is given in Concentration tests were conducted with a Mozley Laboratory Separator on conventionally crushed and EPF pre-treated (from Test 1) samples, both ground at 850 µm. The particle size distribution and the Sn grade of each size fraction of these 2 samples are given in After the concentration test, it was observed that while EPF pre-treated sample led to higher concentrate grades in all size fractions, lower recoveries were achieved ( In the size fraction 425/850 µm, the concentration test performed on the EPF pre-treated sample led to a slightly higher-grade concentrate. This can be due to a higher cassiterite liberation. However, this result should be considered carefully since the feed grade of the sample from the conventional pathway was lower than the one of the EPF pre-treated sample (1.21% vs 1.71% respectively). In the size fractions 212/425 µm and 75/212 µm, a great increase of the concentrate grade was obtained with the Sn grade going from 13.89% to 31.30% for the size fraction 212/425 µm and from 30.51% to 73.30% for the size fraction 75/212 µm, but with a lower Sn recovery. This suggest that with a higher quantity of material collected in the concentrate (higher mass-pull) the concentrate grade will decrease. The amount of losses in the tailings and low-grade middling indicates that gangue minerals are already liberated in this size range. In the size fraction <75 µm, the cassiterite may be better liberated in the EPF pre-treated sample. The concentrates of both EPF and conventionally crushed samples showed a similar metal recovery (about 67%), however the EPF sample shows a higher Sn grade (67% against 50%) and lower mass-pull (1.15% against 1.50%). The losses in tailings and low-grade middlings increased in the finest size fraction. This is not due to lack of liberation but to technical issues related to the Mozley table, in which very fine cassiterite particles can be indiscriminately dragged to the tailings by the aqua flow phenomenon ( Weighing the results of all size fractions by the %mass of each size fraction, it was possible to calculate the performance of this gravity separation system in the whole sample ( The Mozley table tests were performed with the objective to obtain a first approach regarding the advantages of EPF pre-treatment in the further upgrading stages. Since no marked improvement was obtained, no upscaling tests were performed. Electric Pulse Fragmentation (EPF) treatment is a novel method for ore fragmentation that has been shown to be able to either induce a dense fracture network within a material, thereby weakening it, or preferentially fragment parts of a material with higher metal contents deporting the metal-bearing minerals to a finer size fraction than waste rock. As part of a wider work to exploit low-grade European ore deposits, a cassiterite ore underwent EPF treatment to determine whether it could be weakened or concentrated to improve the economics of tin beneficiation for the mine. EPF was performed at pilot-scale to better simulate industrial processing conditions, and to have the opportunity to investigate the influence of this treatment on the downstream concentration processes. Two approaches for the implementation of the EPF treatment were investigated. The first approach consisted in using the EPF treatment for pre-concentration while in the second approach the EPF technology was primarily used for crushing. The Bond rod mill work index performed on the EPF treated materials showed a reduction in energy needed to crush the material, while the Bond ball mill work index remained quite stable and an increase in abrasivity was observed. This is likely due to the deportment of some liberated minerals into a size fraction too small for the test, meaning test material possibly contained more resistant monomineralic particles such as quartz. For a better understanding of these results and confirmation of the hypothesis, additional tests should be performed and interpreted using liberation data. Exploratory concentration tests performed with a Mozley Laboratory Separator showed that while EPF pre-treatment can lead to a higher concentrate grade, there is no conclusive evidence that EPF treatment could have a positive effect on the final Sn recovery. However, EPF operating conditions used were based on previous lab-scale testwork and were not optimized for a pilot-scale treatment of the ore. From these results, it is difficult to conclude the influence of the EPF treatment on the performances of the concentration processes. Further testwork would then be required to optimize the EPF process for this material, to identify and quantify the effects of an EPF treatment on subsequent concentration steps and to optimize the performances of the concentration processes. The authors declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this paper. This study was performed under the project FAME (‘Flexible And Mobile Economic processing technologies) which has received funding from the