One of the key purposes of bone tissue engineering is the development of new biomaterials that can stimulate the body's own regenerative mechanism for patient's anatomical and functional recovery. Bioactive glasses, due to their versatile properties, are excellent candidates to fabricate porous 3-D architectures for bone replacement. In this work, morphological and structural investigations are carried out on Bioglass®- and CEL2-derived scaffolds produced by sponge replication (CEL2 is an experimental glass developed at Politecnico di Torino). Synchrotron radiation X-ray microtomography is used to study the samples 3-D architecture, pores size, shape, distribution and interconnectivity, as well as the growth kinetics on scaffolds struts of a newly formed apatitic phase during in vitro treatment in simulated body fluid, in order to describe from a quantitative viewpoint the bioactive potential of the analyzed biomaterials. An accurate comparison between architectural features and bioactive behaviour of Bioglass®- and CEL2-derived scaffolds is presented and discussed.Tissue engineering has emerged as a promising approach for the repair and regeneration of tissues and organs that are lost, damaged or in general functionally compromised as a results of trauma, injury, disease or ageing. A key component of tissue engineering approach to bone regeneration is represented by natural or man-made scaffold that acts as a template for cells interactions and formation of bone extracellular matrix providing structural support to the newly formed tissue. Bioactive glasses and glass-ceramics are attractive scaffold materials for bone repair because of their unique abilities to enhance bone formation and to bond to surrounding tissue The increasing attention of the scientific community towards the design and processing of bioactive glass-based scaffolds for tissue regeneration and in-growth is demonstrated by the publication, in the last three years, of four comprehensive review articles on this topic. X-ray computed microtomography (micro-CT) is a powerful tool for scaffold characterization. Unlike many other techniques for pores shape, size and distribution assessment, such as scanning electron microscopy (SEM) and mercury intrusion porosimetry, micro-CT can non-destructively obtain a 3-D image of a scaffold. The ability of micro-CT to Image 3-D structures in a non-destructive way has made its use and application extremely popular across several disciplines including physics, materials science, medicine, mineral processing and powder technology. In addition, the availability of synchrotron radiation X-ray sources has further stimulated the application of micro-CT due to its numerous advantages with respect to conventional X-ray sources, including higher beam intensity, higher spatial coherence and monochromaticity. This work exploits mainly the monochromaticity property of synchrotron radiation because it reduces significantly the beam hardening effects, thus allowing easing the segmentation step of the whole image analysis process. In the present study, synchrotron radiation X-ray micro-CT was used to analyze the 3-D porous architecture and microstructure of Bioglass Two melt-derived glasses of different composition were used as starting materials for producing 3-D scaffolds by sponge replication method. The molar compositions of glasses are reported in Sponge replication was chosen for making scaffolds due to its excellent suitability to obtain porous bioceramics with trabecular architecture closely mimicking that of cancellous bone. The scaffolds, ground in powders by means of a 1-ball milling machine, underwent wide-angle X-ray diffraction (WA-XRD; 2 Scaffolds Before and after BG- and CEL2-derived scaffolds underwent advanced microstructural characterization before and after Micro-CT experiments were performed at the SYRMEP beamline of the ELETTRA Synchrotron Radiation Facility (Trieste, Italy). The experimental conditions were selected, according to the properties of the samples. For this experiment, three cubic samples with a side of 5 The volume data obtained in absorption configuration was analyzed by using the software VG Studio MAX 1.2 and the Pore3D software. Representative volumes of interest (VOIs) of 2.7 The apatite volume was also directly measured from the 3-D image stacks. The apatite mean thickness was then calculated using a plate-model assumption in the 3-D analysis software VGStudio Max (v1.2, Volume Graphics, Heidelberg, Germany). The whole struts thickness distribution was measured using a module of VG Studio MAX 1.2, namely the “Wall thickness analysis” module Anisotropic measurements of the scaffolds, Provided that the scaffold is a connected structure with no closed void cavities, a simple indicator of the connectedness of the 3-D complex pore space is the Euler number WA-XRD performed on as-poured BG and CEL2 powders ( Na   A 3-D volume rendering and 2-D axial slices from the 3-D micro-CT images of GC-BG and GC-CEL2 scaffolds were illustrated in The total porosity and the SS/SV ratio are summarized in Especially for CEL2-derived scaffolds, the total pores content assessed by micro-CT analysis is lower than that evaluated by weight–volume measurements performed elsewhere Being the morphology of GC-BG and GC-CEL2 scaffolds very heterogeneous, as shown in It is interesting to make a comparison between the architectural features of the GC-CEL2 scaffolds analyzed in the present work and those of the CEL2-derived scaffolds produced by sponge replication method with different processing parameters Porosity and pore size of biomaterial scaffolds play indeed a critical role in bone formation GC-BG and GC-CEL2 scaffolds were soaked in SBF for different time intervals (14 days and 28 days) to investigate their bioactive potential by monitoring the modifications that occurred on their struts during immersion. After the experiments, some samples were embedded in epoxy resin (Struers Epofix), cut by a diamond wheel (Struers Accutom 5), polished by using #600 to #4000 SiC grit papers and finally investigated by SEM; two examples of resulting cross-sections are reported in The presence of an apatitic layer on scaffold struts plays a key role in promoting the graft colonization by bone cells, as it was widely demonstrated that osteoblasts attach preferably on crystals of apatite due to its chemical and crystallographic similarity to bone mineral. At a preliminary look, the apatite layer formed on GC-CEL2 scaffolds ( The relationship between glass composition and bioactive behaviour is generally a complex issue, as many factors have to be taken in account. For instance, it was suggested by Watts et al. The mean thickness of the newly formed apatite layer ( 3-D spatial distribution of the new phase into the analyzed scaffolds at 2 and 4 weeks after the immersion in SBF are illustrated in    On the basis of the reported analyses, the pores/struts modification occurring in GC-BG scaffolds during immersion in SBF can be therefore resumed as follows. During the early 14 days of soaking in SBF, GC-BG scaffold struts are progressively coated by an apatite layer, which ensues in a decrement of total pores content, as shown in As far as GC-CEL2 samples, we can suppose that the kinetics of apatite formation and scaffold material dissolution are both relevant during the early 14 days of soaking in SBF. In fact, we assist both to increment of total pores content ( In this work, Bioglass Micro-CT investigations showed that a HA layer progressively grew on samples struts during CEL2-derived scaffolds, as expected from their higher bioactivity, were also found more prone to dissolution is SBF, which ensued in marked pores enlargement during This work confirms that micro-CT technique can play a fundamental role in the advanced characterization of porous biomaterials because it allows, in a non-invasive and non-destructive way, a complete, precise and high-resolution analysis in 3-D of scaffold microstructural parameters. Specifically, micro-CT proved to be a powerful tool to investigate, from a quantitative viewpoint, the bioactive potential of foam-like glass-derived scaffolds, which is a crucial issue in view of their possible clinical use in the future. ELETTRA User Office is kindly acknowledged for providing beam time for the micro-CT experiments. The authors thank Prof. Jean-Marc Tulliani (Politecnico di Torino) for invitation at the International Workshop on Cellular Materials 2011 (December 16th, 2011, Politecnico di Torino, Italy), during which part of the results reported in this article was presented.