For various biomedical applications, biopolymeric films are often crosslinked using chemical crosslinker such as glutaraldehyde, which is considered as a toxic chemical. In this report, we have prepared and characterized biopolymeric films using different combinations of chitosan, CMC, alginate and PVA using glyoxal as the crosslinker. The prepared films were subjected to various physico-chemical and mechanical characterizations such as swelling index, surface pH, surface morphology analysis using SEM, interact ion study using XRD, flexibility study using tensile testing and hardness testing. Glyoxal crosslinking resulted in variation of physico-chemical and mechanical alteration of the chitosan-PVA films while it had the negligible effect on the CAP film. Further, the hardness of the films demonstrated a decrease in value in the crosslinked films as compared to non-crosslinked films. We have interpreted that glyoxal is a potential crosslinker for chitosan-based composite polymers while in this case, it did not show any significant effect on CMC and alginate based composite structures. Therefore, using this type of films would be the cheap, safe and new alternative in drug delivery and other biomedical applications.Biopolymers have been a boon for various biomedical applications such as drug delivery, tissue adhesives, wound healing coverings and scaffolds for tissue engineering. They are being employed attributed to their properties of biodegradability, biocompatibility, adhesiveness and non-immunogenicity. Various natural, semi-natural and synthetic polymers such as chitosan, silk, alginate, cellulosic polymers, poly acrylic acid (PAA), poly-lactic acid (PLA), poly (lactic- Chitosan, the deacetylated version of the parent polymer chitin, is one of the most exploited biopolymers. Apart from being biodegradable and biocompatible, it has a great anti-microbial activity. Chitosan is a natural bioadhesive too. Being a cationic polymer, it interacts with anionic groups easily and forms a strong bond. A few examples of its bioadhesive application are its mucoadhesive drug delivery system and bioadhesive surgical sutures Very often, blended polymeric films are crosslinked during their formulation to impart them strength. The most common chemical crosslinker applied is glutaraldehyde. Glutaraldehyde, however, is considered toxic for respiratory tract, eyes and skin and therefore alternative cross-linkers are being utilized for the polymeric films Chitosan [GRM9358] and CMC [GRM329] were procured from HiMedia laboratories India. Sodium Alginate [CAS 9005383] and PVA [CAS 9002895] were purchased from Loba Chemicals India while Glyoxal [92245072735] was purchased from SRL Chemicals. Glycerol [Merck; AK7AF57508] was used as the plasticizer. Acetic acid [Merck; AB8A580103] was used as the solvent content for dissolving chitosan. Chitosan, being soluble in acidic solution, was dissolved in 2% acetic acid (v/v) to form 1% (w/v) chitosan solution. CMC (1% w/v), Alginate (1% w/v) and PVA (5% w/v) were dissolved in double distilled water. All the solutions were kept for 4 The blended films were formed in two combinations; Bipolymeric (Chitosan The thickness of the films was measured using a manual vernier caliper. The thickness was measured at different portions and an average was calculated. The least count of the vernier caliper was 0.1 The surface pH of the polymeric films is an important consideration for drug delivery at particular site. An acidic or alkaline pH of the film surface could be erosive for the buccal mucosa or epidermal surface. For transbuccal and transdermal drug delivery, the surface pH should be between 6.5 and 7.4, as per the physiological considerations. The films were washed with NaOH followed by distilled water to bring the pH to physiological level in accordance with buccal mucosa and epidermal surface. The pH was measured using a pocket-size pH meter by Eutech Instruments. The experiment was replicated to cross-check each value obtained All the four films were subjected to swelling study under simulated condition which revealed the water absorbing capacity. For this purpose, 50 The films were subjected to surface morphology characterization using Scanning Electron Microscope (SEM) [ZEISS EVO Series Scanning Electron Microscope, Model EVO 18] available at Department of Metallurgical Engineering, NIT Raipur, Chhattisgarh, India. The samples were coated with gold before analysis using the Quorum-SC7620 Sputter Coater. The samples were subjected to EDX analysis for confirmation of possible ingredients. The films were subjected to X-ray diffraction analysis [PANalytical 3 Tensile strength and the stress-strain curve were obtained for all the four films using Instron 3369, Bioplus, USA. The dimension of each sample was kept same at 20 Hardness testing on the biopolymeric films was performed using Durometer Hardness (Shore A) Method. This method describes the indentation hardness and is applied for materials such as thermoplastic elastomers, rubbers, cellular materials and polymeric materials. A durometer (shore A type) instrument was used for this purpose. The instrument was pressed at 6 different surface positions of the polymeric films giving a hardness value and a mean value was calculated. All the testing were in accordance with ASTM The average thickness of the film was obtained to be 0.878 The surface pH of films was found to be 6.4, 6.2, 6.4, and 6.8 for films F1, F2, F3 and F4 respectively. This pH is acceptable for the films to be used for transbuccal or transdermal drug delivery, since the surface of buccal mucosa and epidermis favors the pH in this particular range. The swelling study revealed that the effect of crosslinking with glyoxal was negligible on the swelling index of CAP films as they demonstrated a slight decrease in weight from the 2nd hour of swelling, even when a good swelling was observed after 1st hour. The simple non-crosslinked CAP film displayed a subsequent decrease in weight from the 2nd hour of swelling. The glyoxal crosslinked ChPVA film displayed better swelling than its counterpart non-crosslinked ChPVA. The simple ChPVA displayed uniform swelling for the initial 2 The surface morphology analysis using SEM revealed a porous rough surface of the non-crosslinked CAP films while the crosslinked CAP films displayed a much smoother surface. Similar to the morphological change in CAP films, glyoxal crosslinking resulted significant change in surface morphology for ChPVA films too. The camera images of the films are shown in The XRD analysis of the individual polymeric ingredients and the composite films revealed a clear and significant interaction among the individual polymers in the films. Alginate showed two sharp at 2θ angle value of 15 and 23, chitosan displayed its sharp intensities at 2θ angle of 10 and 20, CMC displayed a sharp peak at 2θ angle of 20 while PVA displayed a short peak at 2θ angle of 12, a sharp peak at 2θ angle of 20 and another short peak at 2θ angle of 40. For the first film CAP (F1), blunt plateau intensity was observed at 2θ angle of 13 while a sharp peak at 2θ angle of 21. The sharp peak of alginate at 2θ value 15 disappeared while the sharp peak at 23 displayed a mild left hand deflected. For CAPG (F2) film, we observed a blunt peak at 2θ value of 10 while a relatively sharp peak at 22. For ChPVA (F3) film, we observed a blunt peak at 2θ angle of 10 and a sharp short peak at 2θ angle of 21 while for ChPVAG (F4) film, a single sharp peak was observed at 2θ angle of 20 while no other peak was observed in the graph. These XRD images revealed a significant interaction of polymers in the composite films. The corresponding XRD peaks have been shown in The tensile strength indicates the ability of the sample to resist the tension. The parameters obtained from tensile testing have been shown in The durometer hardness testing revealed that the CMC and alginate based polymeric films were significantly softer (less hard) as compared to the chitosan based films. Further, upon crosslinking with glyoxal, the mean hardness of the films decreased. As reported in section 3.6 previously, the crosslinking effect of glyoxal on tensile strength was observed as greater percentage of elongation in the crosslinked films and that also favor our hardness test since glyoxal crosslinked films became less hard as compared to the non-crosslinked films. The mean values of hardness for all the four films have been presented in Biopolymeric films have great acceptability for various biomedical applications like drug delivery (transdermal or transbuccal route), tissue engineering etc. Natural and semi-synthetic (or semi-natural) biopolymers are even better as they have least adverse effects on the physiological system. Chitosan, alginate, and carboxymethyl cellulose have been the most applied polysaccharide biopolymers for the various biomedical applications. In this article, we have prepared films using different combinations of chitosan, alginate, CMC and PVA. The emphasis lies here in glyoxal which is a widely used crosslinker in the textile industry, plastic industry, and in leather tanning. Glyoxal is the smallest dialdehyde and has a great crosslinking application for polysaccharide polymers. It forms hemiacetal bonds with the hydroxyl groups present in the polysaccharides Glutaraldehyde (one of the widely used crosslinker) has been reported to be relatively toxic in nature especially for the respiratory tract. It also has reported irritation on eyes and skin with reported dermatitis and rhinitis. Occupational asthma has also been reported for respiratory technologists who use glutaraldehyde for sterilization of endoscopes Authors declare no conflict of interest. Authors are highly thankful and acknowledge the kind support and facilities provided by Department of Biotechnology, National Institute of Technology Raipur, and CIPET Raipur, Chhattisgarh, India.