Microchannel reactors appear attractive as integral parts of fuel processors to generate hydrogen (H2) for portable and distributed fuel cell applications. The work described in this paper evaluates, characterizes, and demonstrates miniaturized H2 production in a stand-alone ammonia-fuelled microchannel reformer. The performance of the microchannel reformer is investigated as a function of reaction temperature (450–700 °C) and gas-hourly-space-velocity (6520–32,600 Nml gcat
                     −1 h−1). The reformer operated in a daily start-up and shut-down (DSS)-like mode for a total 750 h comprising of 125 cycles, all to mimic frequent intermittent operation envisaged for fuel cell systems. The reformer exhibited remarkable operation demonstrating 98.7% NH3 conversion at 32,600 Nml gcat
                     −1 h−1 and 700 °C to generate an estimated fuel cell power output of 5.7 We and power density of 16 kWe L−1 (based on effective reactor volume). At the same time, reformer operation yielded low pressure drop (<10 Pa mm−1) for all conditions considered. Overall, the microchannel reformer performed sufficiently exceptional to warrant serious consideration in supplying H2 to fuel cell systems.reaction enthalpy, kJ mol mass of catalyst in reactor, mg mass flow rate of hydrogen, kg s mass flow rate of residual ammonia, kg s mass flow rate of ammonia at inlet, kg s total molar flow rate at reactor inlet, mol s total molar flow rate at reactor outlet, mol s pressure, Pa fuel cell power output equivalent, W cartridge heater power requirement, kJ s molar hydrogen production rate, mol h ideal gas constant, 82.057 cm temperature, K reactor operating temperature, °C volumetric flow rate at inlet, cm volume of channel flow-by gap, cm volumetric hydrogen production rate at outlet, cm ammonia conversion, % residual ammonia mole fraction at equilibrium conversion ammonia mole fraction at reactor inlet residual ammonia mole fraction at reactor outlet hydrogen yield, mol g reformer energy efficiency, % PEM fuel cell energy efficiency, % contact time, ms PEM fuel cell hydrogen utilization, % approach to residual ammonia equilibrium concentration, % channel catalyst electric equivalent inlet outlet reactor total alkaline fuel cell daily start-up and shut-down density functional theory gas chromatograph gas-hourly-space-velocity, Nml g helium ionization detector Institut für Mikrotechnik Mainz low heating value, kJ kg polymer electrolyte membrane parts per billion volume parts per million volume thermal conductivity detector X-ray diffraction Fuel cells are fast gaining extensive interest for portable and distributed power generation systems. Their exceptional operational characteristics such as high power densities, quiet operation, and inherent ability to generate near-zero pollution make them particularly attractive for a world experiencing simultaneous energy and environmental sustainability challenges Ammonia decomposition as a fuel processing technology has lately been receiving increasing attention for fuel cell applications The on-site and on-demand H Very little work is however reported in literature on experimental investigation of microchannel fuel processors for NH Against this background, enormous opportunities exist to advance fundamental NH The microchannel reactor ( The plate consisted of 80 microchannels (depth = 150 μm, width = 450 μm, width of fin between channels = 250 μm, and length = 50 mm), along with right-angled triangular header and footer manifolds ( A commercial Ni–Pt/Al The experimental test apparatus ( The composition of the reformate gas was analyzed downstream of the reformer by an online SRI8610C GC equipped with two TCDs, one HID, two Molecular Sieve 13X columns (1.8 m and 0.9 m), and one HayeSep D column (1.8 m). The GC was configured in a manner that allowed simultaneous analysis of all species present in the reformate gas. H Prior to the experiments, the microchannel reformer was heated in Ar (75 Nml min Since DSS operations are envisaged for applications of fuel cell systems, experiments were essentially performed in a DSS-like mode, with the reactor started up in the morning then operating for 6 h before shut-down. Experiments were conducted for a total 750 h comprising of 125 DSS operating cycles. Also, experiments were conducted one parameter at a time while keeping the others constant. Pertinent runs were made both at highest and lowest space velocities. A performance durability and stability test was conducted on the reformer over a 150-h continuous operation. This test was performed after the reformer had endured approximately 750 h of DSS-like operation (>125 cycles). A reaction temperature of 650 °C and GHSV of 19,560 Nml g The important performance parameters used were NH The product of the last two terms in Eq. Equilibrium NH This section is structured in sub-sections as follows: The stability of the reformer performance is discussed upfront in section For the performance stability test, NH In The effect of reaction temperature on the residual NH The results presented in In The NH Hydrogen production was also investigated over the same range of reaction temperature and GHSV as previous experiments. The results shown in In From the reported results, the operating conditions for best performance are chosen such that the reformer could produce H The performance obtained by the microchannel reformer is compared with that attained by other micro-structured reactors reported in literature for H Our microchannel reformer performs relatively well against the other reactors. Apart from the reactor in Ref. The stand-alone ammonia-fuelled microchannel reformer with washcoated commercial Ni–Pt catalyst was successfully operated for more than 900 h and showed pleasing stability. Its performance was investigated by varying the reaction temperature and space velocity, then evaluating their effects on key performance variables vis-à-vis NH The authors would like to thank the financial support of the