A flue dust sample of copper from flash smelting furnace has been extensively characterized. The main phases of the dusts are magnetite, cuprospinel, chalcocyanite, zincosite, dolerophanite, and claudetite. As minor phases, tenorite, arsenolite, delafossite and enargite were detected. In the sample studied, particles were mainly spherical and less than 60μm. The leaching of flue dust sample with water dissolved copper sulfates and zinc sulfates and, partially, arsenic oxides, in an exothermic process. The leaching of the residue after water leaching in several acid media increased the dissolution of copper and arsenic oxides and small amounts of zinc. A preliminary study by hydrocyclone classification was carried out with the objective of to obtain two fractions: a coarse fraction rich in copper and a fine fraction rich in arsenic. However, results obtained in this sample were not very successful. In the stabilization study, the residue obtained after leaching the copper flash smelter flue dust with sulfuric acid was mixed with sludge from a paper factory (co-inertization process). The smaller size fraction (>12μm) obtained in the hydrocyclone was also mixed with this sludge. Results obtained derived of the application of a standard leaching test over these residues indicate that they were stabilized. Thus, the resulting mixtures should be dumped without generating major environmental problems.Copper flue dusts contains basically oxidized species such as chalcocite, spinel phases, arsenic oxides, copper oxides. Sulfuric acid leaching of the dusts makes it possible the extraction of soluble copper and zinc. Solubilization of arsenic oxides is also carried out. Residues from acid leaching are mixed with sludge from a paper factory for co-inertization purposes. Copper smelter flue dusts are generated in the pyrometallurgical process of copper extraction. The constituent elements, and their concentrations, depend on: the characteristics of the sulfurated ores that are processed, the species and their concentration, the reactor-type used in the different stages of the process and the conditions under which these stages operate. All these factors affect the chemical and mineralogical characteristics of the smelting dusts, thus explaining their variability and, consequently, the processes chosen for their treatment, which is based on the recovery of valuable elements and the stabilization of undesirable elements present in the dusts ( The treatment of flue dusts has been extensively studied by several authors. The processes put forward or implemented at the pilot and/or industrial scale, according to the reasons indicated, include: roasting of the dusts and leaching ( An ideal process for the treatment of copper smelter flue dusts should be a hydrometallurgical process, operating at room temperature and atmospheric pressure, with dilute reagents, few unit operations and low energy costs, that converts the elements of lesser value (or whose extraction is not profitable) into a compact and inert residue for landfill. In a previous paper ( The objective of this paper is to study possible treatments of a flue dust sample from a copper smelter flash furnace, for recovery of copper and zinc, and the stabilization of the arsenic contained in these materials. Complete characterization of the as-received material was required, along with a study of their reactivity and their response to hydrocyclone classification. Finally, the possibility of stabilization of the arsenic concentrates jointly with sludge from the paper industry, if necessary, is also put forward. A comparative study of the behavior of copper smelter flue dusts from a continuous furnace ( The flue dusts studied here was a sample from a flash smelting furnace. Several kg of this sample were collected from the furnace and according to the researchers of the company is representative of the copper smelter flue dust generated there. This sample was exhaustively characterized by X-ray fluorescence (XRF), scanning electron microscopy (SEM) in conjunction with microanalysis by energy dispersive X-ray analysis (EDS) and X-ray diffraction (XRD). Some of the solids obtained during this study were also characterized by electron microprobe (EPMA). For inertization purposes, sludge from the paper industry was used. This material was mixed with the flue dust leaching residue and with the < In this study, the sample was leached with water during 1 Hydrocyclone experiments over the residue from water leaching were conducted in a cyclosizer. The cut particle sizes were (in μm): 44 (T1), 33 (T2), 23 (T3), 16 (T4), 12 (T5) and the fraction < To develop the stabilization tests, the residue obtained after leaching copper smelter flue dust with sulfuric acid was mixed with the sludge from a paper factory (at a ratio 60/40, weight/weight) to obtain pellets of approximately 10 The moisture of the sample as received was less than 0.5%. The XRD characterization of the flue dust sample is shown in In the copper flue dust sample, spherical-shaped particles and other irregular ones with particle sizes from tens of micrometers to one micrometer are found (SEM-SE). In the BSE image ( A complex particle (≅ The water leaching process of copper smelter flue dust was carried out at a solid-liquid ratio of 1/5 (weight/volume) for 1 The amount of dusts dissolved was of 54 After solid–liquid separation and after several days, a precipitate was formed in the filtrate (sample D).  Almost all the iron contained in the dusts remains in the residue, because iron is in the original solids as magnetite and cuprospinel. Lead also remains in the residue. The copper dissolved is in the form of copper sulfate and dolerofanite. Copper also appears in the residue as cuprospinel, some residual sulfides and copper oxides. Zinc sulfate was dissolved, partially remaining in the residue as spinel. Arsenic was partially dissolved from arsenic oxides. A lot of sulfur is in the form of soluble sulfates, shown by sulfur dissolving to a high degree. The presence of different species in the residues was confirmed by XRD, The residue generated after leaching with water was subjected to different treatments with nitric, sulfuric and hydrochloric acids (0.1 The chemical composition of the different size fractions obtained from the hydrocyclone classification of the residue generated during leaching with water is included in Results obtained indicate that copper composition is homogeneous in almost all the fractions (17% Cu), iron and arsenic are also homogeneous in all the fractions (≅ Based on the chemical composition at different cut sizes and their weights, a mass balance was carried out. The residue obtained after leaching the flue dust sample with sulfuric acid (0.1 Also, the All the samples (R1, R2, R3, R4) were subjected to the leaching DIN 38414-S4 test (one part of solids with 16 parts water, for 24 The metals amount dissolved in R1 (residue after sulfuric acid leaching) at 24 In a previous paper ( The results obtained in the present work indicate: Leaching with water dissolved copper, arsenic and zinc at levels of 27, 1.4, and 4.7 Concentration of copper in coarse fractions by hydrocyclone was not well achieved. This is different to the behavior detected in a previous work ( Mixtures of residues from the treatment of copper smelter flue dust with sludge from a paper factory subjected to the standard leaching test, released between 1.4–3.5 Consequently, the process to be proposed for the treatment of copper flash smelter flue dusts can include the following steps: 1)Leaching the dusts with sulfuric acid 0.1 The residue obtained after leaching with sulfuric acid can be mixed with sludge from a paper factory, forming pellets of ≅ Alternatively, due to the fact that the residue after sulfuric acid leaching is mainly formed by spinel phases (magnetite, copper ferrite and so on) and enargite, this residue can be recycled directly to the flash furnace, without any additional treatment. An alternative process could be the same, but not the best, as was previously established by copper smelter flue dusts from a continuous furnace ( In all the cases, this is a proposal of an hydrometallurgical process operating at room temperature, atmospheric pressure, with dilute reagents, few unit operations, low energy costs and environmentally friendly. The copper flue dust sample consists mainly of oxidized species and a few sulfide species. The main components are magnetite, cuprospinel, chalcocyanite, zincosite, dolerofanite and claudetite. The minor components are tenorite, delafossite, arsenolite and enargite. The amount of dusts dissolved in water was 54%. Almost all the iron remains in the residue (like magnetite and cuprospinel). Copper dissolves as copper sulfate and dolerofanite, and remains in the residue as cuprospinel, some residual sulfides and copper oxides. Zinc sulfate was dissolved, with zinc remaining in the residue as spinel. Arsenic was partially dissolved from arsenic oxides. Almost all the sulfur dissolved is as soluble sulfates. Treatments of the residues after leaching with water in various acid media, increases the extraction of copper and arsenic, slightly increases the extraction of zinc, while almost all the iron remains in the residue. Dissolution of copper corresponds to its oxides and perhaps additional amounts of copper basic sulfates; therefore, additional amounts of arsenic oxides were dissolved. Residues generated after acid treatments consist basically of magnetite and cuprospinel. In the cyclosizer experiments, copper composition is homogeneous in almost all the fractions (17% Cu), iron and arsenic are also homogeneous in all the fractions (≅ The leaching DIN 38414-S4 test over the residue after sulfuric acid leaching indicated low elements dissolution, with the exception of arsenic (19 We are grateful to the “Serveis Cientificotècnics de la Universitat de Barcelona” for their assistance in the characterization studies developed in this work. Thanks are also due to Ms. Esther Vilalta and Ms. Gemma Garcia for their assistance with the microscopy studies.