Guar gum, a polysaccharide, is now widely used in many industrial areas such as pharmaceuticals, cosmetics, textiles, food and mineral industries. One important application is its use as a depressant for talceous gangue minerals in the flotation of nickel and platinum bearing ores. However, the mechanisms of gum adsorption on solids are not clearly established. In this work, adsorption of guar gum at the solid–liquid interfaces is investigated using spectroscopic and allied techniques. Guar gum adsorption on talc was found to be not affected significantly by changes in solution conditions such as pH and ionic strength, ruling out electrostatic force as the controlling factor. Electrokinetic studies showed that guar gum decreased the negative zeta potential of talc but did not reverse the charge. No desorption was observed, which suggests strong binding of this polymer on solid surfaces. Fluorescence spectroscopy studies conducted to investigate the role of hydrophobic bonding using pyrene and dansyl probes showed no evidence of the formation of hydrophobic domains at talc–aqueous interface. Urea, a hydrogen bond breaker, reduced the adsorption of guar on talc to the same extent as that for guar/alumina system, in which hydrogen bond plays an important role. All of the above results suggest that one of the main driving forces for guar adsorption on talc is hydrogen bonding rather than electrostatic or hydrophobic force.Talc is a layered hydrous magnesium silicate in which the layers are held together by van der Waals bonds. During grinding, two different surfaces are formed. Basal cleavage planes are formed by rupture of van der Waals bonds. Because the resulting planes contain no broken Si–O and Mg–O bonds, the surface is neutral and hydrophobic. However, the edges of the mineral sheets contain broken Si–O and Mg–O bonds and, consequently, charged species and the edges thus exhibit hydrophilic properties. Guar gum is a natural nonionic polysaccharide with an average molecular weight of 100,000–2,000,000. The repeating unit of guar gum is shown in In the flotation of platinum bearing ores, guar gum is often used as a depressant for talceous gangue minerals. In spite of a large number of studies conducted in the past, the mechanism of adsorption of guar gum on talc is not yet well-understood. The objective of the present study was to clarify the mechanistic aspects of the interactions between guar gum and talc using a combination of spectroscopic, electrostatic and adsorption measurements. Talc sample of 150–300 microns size used for the present tests was obtained from Cytec Industries. The nitrogen BET surface area measured using a Coulter Omnisorb 100 was 2.61 m Unmodified guar gum and dansyl-labeled Guar gum were obtained from Cytec Industries. GPC analysis showed that the weight average molecular weight of guar is 1,450,000 and the number average molecular weight is 961,000. All guar gum stock solutions were prepared by quickly adding 0.045 g of gum powder into 45 ml of vigorously stirred water and further stirring for 30 min. The solution was refrigerated overnight to ensure complete hydration or dissolution of guar gum and then filtered through filter paper (Whatman #4) to remove any undissolved impurities. The suspensions of talc, with ionic strength adjusted to the desired level using KCl at 10% solid loading, were ultrasonicated for 30 min and then stirred magnetically for 2 h after the pH was adjusted to the desired value using HCl and KOH. Guar gum stock solution was then added to the talc suspension and left for overnight conditioning. The suspensions were then centrifuged and the supernatants pipetted out for determination of guar concentration by Total Organic Carbon Analyzer. The adsorption density of guar gum on talc was calculated from the data for initial and residual guar gum concentrations. Polymer desorption experiment is carried out following the adsorption experiment in a similar manner. The rule of mass conservation is used to calculate the dilution ratio and the residual polymer concentration after each dilution procedure. Polymer concentration after desorption procedures is determined by Total Organic Carbon analysis and compared with the concentration calculated from the dilution ratio to obtain data on the desorption of adsorbed polymers. A colorimetric method described by Small amounts of talc was added to desired amounts of 10 Suspensions of talc at 10% solid loading were ultrasonicated for 30 min and mixed for 2 h with a magnetic stirrer. Guar gum stock solution with saturated pyrene in it or dansyl-labeled guar gum was then added to the talc suspension. The vials containing the suspensions were quickly wrapped with aluminum foil to keep the light away and left to condition overnight. Finally, the hydrophobicity of the supernatant and the solid were analyzed separately via a LS-1 fluorescence spectrophotometer (Photon Technology International). It is evident from the electrokinetic data shown in  Adsorption isotherms of guar gum on talc at pH 9 are shown in Desorption isotherm of guar gum on talc is shown in To explore the role of hydrogen bonding, adsorption tests were carried out in the presence of urea, a hydrogen bond breaker. Urea is a strong hydrogen bonding acceptor and it can affect the hydrogen bonding between the solid and the polymer in solution by preferential formation of hydrogen bonds between themselves and the polysaccharides and water. Tests were also done with alumina which is known to adsorb polysaccharides by hydrogen bonding ( To better understand the nature of guar gum adsorption, the microstructure of the adsorbed layer was probed using fluorescence spectroscopy. Fluorescence spectroscopy is a well-developed method (  Electrokinetic studies of adsorption of guar on talc in the pH range of 2–11 showed that guar gum decreased the negative zeta potential of talc but did not reverse it. Adsorption studies also showed that the adsorption of guar gum on talc is not affected by changes in pH. These results suggest that the electrostatic force is not the dominant force for the adsorption process. The adsorption of guar gum on talc was not affected by the ionic strength level. This also suggests that the electrostatic force does not play a role. The desorption study showed that adsorption of guar gum on talc is an irreversible process. Pyrene fluorescence showed no hydrophobic domain formation for the adsorption of guar gum at talc–aqueous interfaces. Measurements with a new fluorescence probe, dansyl, support the governing role of hydrophilic force. Urea, a hydrogen bond breaker, reduces the adsorption of guar on talc to the same extent as that on alumina. This result also supports a mechanism involving hydrogen bonding rather than a hydrophobic one. The authors acknowledge the support of the National Science Foundation (Grant # CTS-00-89530 Dynamic Aggregation Behavior of Surfactant Mixture In Solutions at Solid/Liquid Interface) and Cytec Industries.