The modification of the magnetic properties of mineral components in siderite ores by microwave heating results in increasing the efficiency of their magnetic separation. Pre-treatment in a microwave oven with maximum power of 900W of weakly paramagnetic ore (25.1% Fe, 9.6% SiO2) was realized with the samples (100g) of iron spathic ore of particle size 0.5–1mm from Nižná Slaná in Slovakia. After 10min of heating an essential change in the magnetic properties of the ore samples occurred, and after 15min, a rapid increase of magnetic susceptibility value was observed, showing the intensive decomposition of siderite. Changes in magnetic properties were confirmed by the measurement of magnetic susceptibility and by chemical analyses, and X-ray diffraction method confirmed the formation of new strongly magnetic mineral phases. Finally, after 40min of heating, a microwave sintering of powder grains in the form of agglomerates with molten mass was observed. The result of energy-dispersive X-ray (EDX) analysis showed the oxidic character of the phase consisting of complex oxides and metal iron and from the chemical analysis results: Fetotal 45.4%, Femetal 7.1%, SiO2 15.5%. After microwave treatment, the samples were subjected to the separation in magnetic field with maximum induction of 0.17T, where at 15min heated sample the 97.6% recovery of Fe was obtained.Magnetic separation processes utilize the differences in magnetic properties of the components of treated ores. The separation of weakly magnetic iron ores is limited by the magnitude of magnetic force that can be developed in high-intensity magnetic separators. From an economic aspect the use of low-intensity magnetic separators is more effective but they require the modification of magnetic properties of weakly paramagnetic ores and minerals. The increase of magnetic susceptibility of mineral components can be achieved by phase conversion, induced, for example by magnetic roasting, chemical or electrochemical pre-treatment, irradiation with accelerated electrons, or by the application of microwave energy. The results of magnetic roasting of siderite ore from locality Nižná Slaná in a muffle furnace were analyzed in detail in Microwave heating (roasting) appears to be a progressive treatment that can ensure the thermal decomposition of iron-containing ores with the aim to increase their magnetic susceptibility. Microwave heating utilizes the ability of some materials to transform electromagnetic energy into heat. When a dielectric material is placed in an alternating electric field (i.e. a microwave cavity), the molecular dipoles in the material exposed to the alternating electromagnetic field realign themselves approximately 2.45 It was shown in earlier published works that microwave treatment significantly increases the paramagnetic properties of chalcopyrite and tetrahedrite minerals The present contribution describes the utilization of microwave energy for modification of magnetic properties of siderite ore and its influence on the subsequent low-intensity magnetic separation. The experiments of microwave heating were carried out with different size fractions of siderite ore from Nižná Slaná (Slovakia). Chemical analysis of the siderite ore is shown in A microwave oven Whirlpool AVM 434 with a maximum power of 900 The mineral composition of untreated and microwave-treated samples was determined by X-ray diffraction analysis. DTA analysis was performed on a Derivatograph Q 1500 D, where the original sample was analysed in platinum crucibles using 10 The equipment Kappabridge KLY-2 in the magnetic field of intensity 300 At the present, the siderite ore mined in Slovakia is processed in a plant in Nižná Slaná. The processing technology consists of crushing of the mined ore and its subsequent roasting in rotary furnaces heated with natural gas. The roasted product, ground to the grain size of 0.06 The thermal decomposition of siderite that was determined by the methods of DTA, DTG and TG ( The oxidation can also be observed on the DTA curve as an exothermic reaction. The reaction is most intensive at 595 An alternative way to classical magnetic roasting is a magnetic roasting induced by microwave energy. The influence of different particle size on microwave heating of siderite ore was investigated at constant time of heating of 3 Studying the degree of conversion of siderite ore to magnetite on the specimen of size fraction 0.5–1 After 15 The X-ray analysis of 30 Finally, after 40 If the original sample of siderite ore ( Microwave heating of siderite ore is advantageous for subsequent magnetic separation. The influence of microwave radiation on the magnetic properties of siderite ore was confirmed by the change of magnetic susceptibility that occurred after 10 It follows from the results of the process of low-intensity magnetic separation that after magnetic separation of 15 The authors are grateful to the Slovak Grant Agency for Science (Grant no. 2/2105/22 and 3194/23) for financial support of research activities.