A new automated static optical image analysis (SOIA) method was developed for characterising the shape of sodium oxalate crystals by separately measuring their length and width. The automated size analysis combines crystal image acquisitioning with a custom-developed numerical algorithm for morphological analysis of crystals. The automation of the two main measuring steps enables characterisation of a large number of crystals ensuring statistically meaningful results. As part of the numerical algorithm, a rectangularity-based morphological filter was implemented to eliminate overlapping crystals and crystal networks. The developed optical sizing technique has a low detection limit of 0.25μm, which is close to the theoretical resolution of optical microscopy. It is demonstrated that the new automated SOIA sizing technique is very sensitive in identifying oxalate crystals of different shape. The measured crystal size distributions are compared to those obtained by an AccuSizer sizing instrument to confirm that they are consistent with the measurements obtained by a conventional crystal sizing instrument.In alumina refineries around the world, sodium oxalate emerges as a common impurity that needs to be appropriately managed to ensure efficient and stable operation of the Bayer process. Commonly, 5–10% of the organic carbon, which mostly enters Bayer process liquors in the form of humic substances Measuring oxalate particle size by traditional methods, such as laser light scattering Malvern Multisizer or AccuSizer instruments, only provides information on the diameter of an equivalent sphere. Due to the irregular shape of SPO crystals, this information is insufficient, as it does not provide information about the crystal geometry. A 2-D sizing method, at least, is required in order to characterise crystal aspect ratio, and crystal length and width. A 2-D technique for measuring crystal size was applied previously by Wang et al. To overcome some of the restrictions mentioned above, a new automated static optical image analysis (SOIA) based sizing technique for measuring a 2-D size of individual oxalate crystals was developed. The novel crystal sizing technique, which is based on the analysis of optical microscopy images of oxalate crystals, has a low detection limit of 0.25 In literature, three main types of image analysis algorithms for morphological separation of crystals are discussed. Firstly, model-based recognition algorithms compare measured crystal shape with a geometrical model of crystals. It was shown that in the systems with uniform crystals a model-based algorithm SHARC In this work, it is demonstrated that the new automated image analysis technique for characterising size and shape of oxalate crystals is very robust and provides statistically meaningful data. The novelty of this method is in its integration of a unique numerical algorithm and existing microscopy technology in order to deliver an automated optical crystal sizing solution that for the first time provides the resolution of crystal sizes at an optical near-diffraction limit of 0.25 The new SOIA methodology was applied to quantify shape of three different types of needle-like oxalate crystals prepared in the laboratory such to mimic properties of SPO crystals found in the plant. In all cases, SPO samples were transferred onto a glass slide used to acquire optical microscopy images. The preparation of sample slides involved a number of steps. Firstly, a representative sample of oxalate needle-like crystals was suspended in a non-dissolving liquid. A small volume of crystal suspension was transferred onto a 2 The image acquisitioning and pre-processing steps were controlled by Nikon’s NIS-Elements software. Original digital images for a given sample of crystals were subsequently batch-processed by the image analysis algorithm developed using Matlab Image Processing Toolbox (The MathWorks, Inc.). Edges of crystals in binary black-and-white images were detected through automatic threshold decomposition of the original gray-scale images. Internal holes in individual crystals in the binary images were automatically filled in. An example of binary images is shown in To apply morphological filtering, the shape of needle-like oxalate crystals, shown in Figs. For the purpose of further discussion in this work, we define the crystal aspect ratio as: An image analysis algorithm can apply morphological filtering based on the evaluation of the rectangularity of identified image objects This 2-D rectangularity-based morphological filter of Eq. (4) combines sensitivity of the “boundary-based” and “area-based” filters to detect both thin boundary intrusions and extrusions, and hollow areas between the networking crystals. As shown in Image analysis results, obtained using the rectangularity filter, are illustrated in One of the oxalate crystal samples prepared (SPO A) was analysed by processing 600 optical 5 In this case, using a rectangularity filter value of If the crystal population is consistent, or crystal width does not change during the process, a simpler, dimensional, morphological filter can be applied to recognise individual and overlapping elongated crystals using crystal width. For testing purposes a convex width separation algorithm was applied to exclude agglomerates with the convex width larger than a critical value. The critical value, or maximum convex width, of the individual needle-like crystals was set to 6 The 2-D crystal size distribution, shown in The use of any of the two filtering algorithms enables the rejection of overlapping crystals and crystal networks. However, the non-dimensional In comparison with methods reported in literature, the developed filtration algorithm can separately measure length and width of needle-like crystals that have rough irregular edges and non-rectangular ends. There is no known reports in literature of a technique for measuring 2-D crystal size, i.e. crystal width and length, that would provide statistically meaningful results for sub-micron crystal sizes. The International Organization of Standardization (ISO 13322-1:2004) Paine The critical number of particles is very sensitive to the width of the distribution, and its value can be estimated using the following quantitative relationships Reproducibility of the new image analysis technique, including sampling preparation, was tested by repeatedly applying the developed image analysis procedure using ‘SPO A’ oxalate samples. Three glass slides of the same oxalate sample (SPO A) were prepared and 600 images were collected from each slide. From each set of images more than 32,000 individual needle-like crystals were identified for each slide specimen. It is important to note that irregularly shaped particles, such as overlapping crystals and crystal networks, were filtered out during this analysis. Cumulative crystal length distributions obtained for each sample slide using the newly developed methodology is presented in The 16th, 50th, and 84th percentile sizes, i.e. The developed image analysis methodology was applied to quantify shape distributions of three different types of oxalate crystals with the aim to verify the ability of the new technique to differentiate between different types of needle-like oxalate crystals. Projected area-based size distributions, shown previously to be quite sensitive in revealing differences between different crystal types The corresponding crystal aspect ratio distributions are shown in  The results from the new image analysis-based 2-D sizing method can be converted into a 1-D form suitable for comparison against a laser light extinction sizing instrument, AccuSizer 780AD As a light extinction-based instrument, the AccuSizer evaluates the characteristic crystal size in terms of the equivalent circle diameter. For the purpose of comparison to AccuSizer data, the projected area of crystals obtained by the SOIA technique was also converted to the diameter of an equivalent-area circle using the expression in Eq. (1). In Possible reasons for the differences observed between the AccuSizer and SOIA size distributions can be summarised as: (i) possible preferential SOIA morphological filtering of larger crystals, (ii) clustering of SPO crystals during AccuSizer measurements, and (iii) random orientation of needle-like crystals within the AccuSizer optical path. The newly developed static optical image analysis (SOIA) for measuring shape of sodium oxalate crystals overcomes many difficulties of classical sizing techniques by separately measuring the length and the width of individual oxalate crystals. The SOIA technique combines automated acquisitioning of oxalate crystal images and a custom-developed numerical algorithm for crystal image identification and morphological analysis of detected crystals. The automation of the two main measuring steps enables characterisation of a large number of oxalate crystals ensuring that results are statistically meaningful. The critical number of oxalate crystals that needs to be taken into account in the optical image analysis, in order to achieve statistically reproducible results, was evaluated. As part of the image analysis algorithm two different filtering procedures, applied to remove overlapping crystals, were demonstrated: (i) non-dimensional rectangularity filtering, and (ii) dimensional convex width filtering. The more versatile non-dimensional morphological filter incorporated a specifically designed rectangularity classification algorithm to allow for the elimination of overlapping and networking crystals, ensuring that only individual needle-like crystals were identified. The developed image analysis methodology enables measurement of 2-D oxalate crystal size distribution, with the crystal length and width as size coordinates. This optical sizing technique has a low detection limit of 0.25 Samples of three different types of oxalate crystals were measured to successfully demonstrate the high sensitivity of the SOIA technique in identifying oxalate crystals of different shape. The optical image analysis-based measurements of SPO crystals were compared to those obtained by the AccuSizer sizing instrument to confirm that they were consistent with the results obtained by a conventional commercially available crystal sizing instrument.