Particle breakage during dense-phase comminution processes is significantly affected by mechanical multi-particle interactions, which are neglected in traditional discrete linear population model (DL-PBM). A discrete non-linear PBM (DNL-PBM) has been recently proposed to account for multi-particle interactions; however, the inverse problem, i.e., the estimation of the model parameters, has not been addressed. In this paper, a method for the estimation of DNL-PBM parameters is presented with a purpose of determining the consequences of neglecting multi-particle interactions in the traditional DL-PBM. The model parameters were obtained from a constrained, non-linear, least-squares minimization of the residuals between comminution data and discrete PBM prediction. Comminution data exhibiting multi-particle interactions were obtained from a DNL-PBM simulation followed by addition of 0%, 10%, and 20% random error. A comprehensive statistical analysis of the goodness of fit and certainty of the parameters was performed to discriminate the models. Using the estimated parameters, predictive capability of both models was further assessed by comparing their prediction with additional computer-generated data obtained with a different feed particle size distribution. The parameter estimation method was shown to be highly accurate and robust. DNL-PBM can predict the influence of different feed conditions better than DL-PBM when multi-particle interactions are significant. This study has demonstrated that neglecting multi-particle interactions in dense-phase comminution processes via the use of DL-PBM can lead to falsified kinetics with erroneous breakage functions.Comminution as an industrial process is commonly used in the processing of ceramics, foods, minerals, inks, pharmaceuticals to name a few ( While various equivalent forms of the PBM for batch and plug-flow continuous comminution operations exist, a commonly used form is the size-discrete, time-(or space-)discrete PBM developed by DL-PBM assumes that comminution occurs through a series of breakage events (stages). It incorporates the concepts of probability of selection-for-breakage and breakage distribution introduced earlier by  DL-PBM in Eqs. from While the linear PBMs, i.e., the DL-PBM and the TCL-PBM, have been used with some success in the literature, they suffer from a major limitation: they assume the validity of first-order breakage probability or breakage kinetics. In dense-phase comminution systems, particle concentration is high and particles with a multitude of sizes undergo mechanical By decomposing the specific breakage rate matrix into a first-order breakage rate matrix In order to account for multi-particle interactions in both event-based and rate-based comminution processes, Numerical simulations with DNL-PBM ( In this paper, the inverse problem of identifying the parameters of a DNL-PBM is addressed for the first time. A new method for the estimation of DNL-PBM parameters is presented with a purpose of determining the ramifications of neglecting multi-particle interactions in the traditional DL-PBM. The model parameters were obtained from a constrained, non-linear, least-squares minimization of the residuals between comminution data and discrete PBM prediction. Comminution data exhibiting multi-particle interactions were obtained from a DNL-PBM simulation followed by addition of random error. A comprehensive statistical analysis of the goodness of fit and certainty of the parameters was performed to discriminate the models. Using the estimated parameters, the predictive capability of both models was further assessed by comparing their prediction with additional computer-generated data obtained with a different feed particle size distribution. The parameter estimation method was shown to be highly accurate and reliable. DNL-PBM can predict the influence of different feed PSDs better than DL-PBM when multi-particle interactions are significant. This study has demonstrated that the use of traditional DL-PBM, which neglects the impact of multi-particle interactions on breakage probability, can lead to falsified kinetics with erroneous breakage functions for dense-phase comminution processes. Drawing an analogy from chemical reaction engineering, the functional in DNL-PBM has been identified as the “effectiveness factor”. Assessing the accuracy and robustness of the parameter estimation method can be accomplished by performing the method on computer-generated comminution data with (e.g. In this study, evolution of PSD due to Due to the recursive relation in Eq. The functional The feed PSD, i.e., Eq. The error-free mass fraction distribution Within the context of DL-PBM, there are two major approaches to the parameter estimation. One approach is to construct the elements of comminution matrix The non-linear optimizer “fmincon”, part of the Matlab v7.9 optimization toolbox, was used to estimate the model parameters through the solution of a constrained, non-linear, least-squares minimization problem. Fmincon, which is based on the interior-point algorithm (see Fmincon requires the minimum of an initial parameter set and a stopping criterion. The optimizer stopping criteria include the termination tolerance on the constraint violation, termination tolerance on the function value, and termination tolerance on the parameters, which were all set to 10 The sum of squared residuals ( The standard error of the parameter ( The purpose of the parameter estimation method is to determine the PBM parameters for a given set of material and comminution operating conditions. Extensive experimental work is required to determine the dependence of model parameters on operating conditions. Hence, the use of the estimated parameters with regard to design, scale-up, and optimization is beyond the scope of this paper. On the other hand, the PBM with estimated parameters for a given set of operating conditions can be used to determine the impact of feed PSD variations, which is important in industrial practice. When multi-particle interactions significantly impact breakage kinetics, the feed PSD will have a considerable effect on the milling process and the final product (  The parameters were first estimated from error-free computer-generated data, which were obtained from a DNL-PBM simulation to account for multi-particle interactions (retardation effect of fines). Ideally, a successful result is only achieved if the parameter set obtained from the parameter estimation method is identical to the set used to generate the data. Now that the parameter estimation method succeeded in determining the parameters based on the computer-generated data that have no random error, the procedure is repeated for data containing random errors to assess the robustness. The results for the parameter estimation performed on computer-generated data with 10% error are shown in Overall comparison of parameter estimation results in all tables suggests that increasing the amount of error in the data from 0% to 20% resulted in a less accurate fit, while the relative impact was greater on the DNL-PBM fit. Similarly, accuracy and certainty of the estimated DNL-PBM parameters decreased, but remained acceptable. This regular trend was not observed for the DL-PBM parameters especially when the error was increased from 10% to 20%. For example, relative  Up to this point, the parameter estimation was performed with computer-generated data that were obtained from a DNL-PBM simulation with pre-chosen actual parameters. This has allowed us to demonstrate the impact of neglecting multi-particle interactions in dense-phase comminution processes in a comparative analysis. The analysis has showed that DL-PBM parameters are erroneous and DL-PBM cannot fit comminution data exhibiting multi-particle interactions. Although absence of multi-particle interactions is not of great interest based on the scope of the paper, one would argue about the success of DNL-PBM if there were no multi-particle interactions. To test the robustness of the DNL-PBM for fitting comminution data that have no multi-particle interaction effects, computer-generated data were produced using the DL-PBM in Eq. Unlike the previous set of model fits in the presence of multi-particle interactions, both models led to fits with almost identical With the estimated parameters in  For data introduced with appreciable error as in the case of the computer-generated data with 20% error, the When multi-particle interactions are neglected in parameter estimation (DL-PBM fit), serious ramifications can emerge: false interpretation of the size dependence of breakage probability function (or breakage kinetics) and the breakage distribution function as well as poor predictions with incorrect parameters, as illustrated in Let us draw a rate-based analogy with chemical reaction taking place in a catalyst pellet under transport limiting conditions, i.e., finite intra-pellet heat–mass transfer rates. Due to intra-pellet concentration–temperature gradients, kinetics of the surface reaction taking place inside the catalyst pellet is falsified (see e.g. Furthering the analogy with heterogeneous catalysis from a rate perspective, one can define an effectiveness factor for dense-phase comminution processes. An internal effectiveness factor Similarly, an effectiveness factor for dense-phase particle breakage is defined as Inspecting Eq. The analogy has allowed us to redefine the mathematical functional While the rate-based analogy between heterogeneous catalysis and particle breakage has allowed us to introduce the concept of falsified kinetics to the area of comminution and to identify To avoid disguised or falsified kinetics in the context of comminution processes, it is then important to be able to identify when multi-particle interactions are significant. Generally, the impact of multi-particle interactions appears to be significant in dense-phase comminution processes or particle bed breakage tests ( A parameter estimation method based on constrained, non-linear least-squares minimization has been developed in this study and used with the traditional DL-PBM and a recently developed DNL-PBM ( In the presence of strong multi-particle interactions, the use of DL-PBM can lead to falsified kinetics, a concept commonly known in chemical reaction engineering. While the DL-PBM fit to the computer-generated data may be acceptable as a first engineering approximation and the parameters may be determined with acceptable certainty, the parameter values themselves can be highly erroneous. The deviation of the DL-PBM fit from the computer-generated data, which were assumed to contain the retardation effects, did not reveal a clear and informative trend about the nature of the multi-particle interactions. Drawing a rate-based analogy between particle breakage and chemical reactions inside catalyst pellets, we have identified the non-linear functional The parameter estimation method with the DNL-PBM developed in this study should serve as a starting point for inverse problems using genuine dense-phase particle breakage data. DNL-PBM should be preferred over DL-PBM for dense-phase systems, regardless of how significant the multi-particle interactions are. It is the expectation that this study will incite much stimulating research using the DNL-PBM. The true predictive capability of the DNL-PBM for varying feed particle size distribution should be experimentally validated. Of critical importance, perhaps for the future of comminution modeling, is the concept of falsified kinetics and the effectiveness factor, which are expected to receive some critical attention.  first-order (linear) breakage probability constant (dimensionless) breakage distribution matrix (dimensionless) breakage distribution parameter (dimensionless) cumulative breakage distribution parameter (dimensionless) parameter covariance matrix number of computer-generated data points (#) discrete linear discrete non-linear a time-dependent function in the context of time-variant PBM (dimensionless) functional matrix (dimensionless) discretized non-linear functional (dimensionless) identity matrix (dimensionless) Jacobian matrix first-order breakage rate matrix (s number of parameters (#) first-order breakage rate parameter (s breakage probability exponent (dimensionless) vector of the parameter set determined by parameter estimation mass fraction frequency distribution vector (dimensionless) mass fraction in size class number of breakage event (step or stage) (#) total number of size classes (#) total number of breakage events (steps or stages) (#) first-order (linear) breakage probability matrix (dimensionless) population balance model first-order (linear) breakage probability parameter (dimensionless) particle size distribution cumulative mass fraction undersize (dimensionless) a Matlab function that generates normally distributed pseudorandom numbers ratio of the upper edge to the lower edge of a size class (dimensionless) standard deviation of the residuals (dimensionless) standard error of the parameter sum of squared residuals (dimensionless) time (s) comminution (transition probability) matrix (dimensionless) time-continuous linear time-continuous non-linear linear (first-order) comminution matrix (dimensionless) weighting matrix (dimensionless) particle size (m) normalizing reference particle size (m)  exponent of the weighting parameter (dimensionless) standard deviation of random noise (dimensionless) increment effectiveness factor (dimensionless) non-linearity parameter (dimensionless) breakage distribution exponent (dimensionless) breakage distribution exponent (dimensionless) breakage distribution constant (dimensionless)  experimental data size class indices model predicted data sink class feed (initial) class containing the coarsest particles    matrix transpose operator matrix inverse operator data with random error The authors gratefully acknowledge financial support from the