Laser assisted machining is a promising new machining technology that can be used to assist with the fabrication of components from difficult to machine materials such as beta titanium alloys. To understand the mechanism behind this process, a reliable numerical machining model is needed. This study employed an SPH method to the problem of laser assisted machining of Ti–6Cr–5Mo–5V–4Al alloy. The SPH method has several advantages when dealing with large-deformation problems compared with traditional finite element methods. A laser scanning model was developed beforehand to predict the temperature elevation due to laser heating and the temperature results were used as initial conditions for the SPH/FE machining models. Johnson–Cook parameters and Zerilli–Armstrong parameters of Ti–6Cr–5Mo–5V–4Al alloy were acquired based on experimental data from the Split Hopkinson Pressure Bar (SHPB) test and were implemented in the machining models. The cutting force predictions of machining models using these two material models were discussed in this study. Both conventional machining (CM) and laser assisted machining (LAM) were simulated. The main cutting force predictions and the temperature predictions were compared with experimental results to validate the models.Owing to their inherent properties such as high strength to weight ratio, high fracture toughness and excellent corrosion resistance, beta titanium alloys are widely used in the aerospace industry for applications such as landing gear, springs, nacelle and empennage structure The basic idea of LAM is to introduce a laser beam into the conventional machining system as a heat source in order to locally heat and soften the workpiece material before the cutting tool removes the unwanted section. As a result of the laser heating, the yield strength and hardness of the workpiece material is reduced which should allow the material to be machined with lower power consumption and higher material removal rate and therefore greater productivity Experimental studies of laser assisted machining can be time consuming and expensive because it is a process with complex thermo-mechanical and highly dynamic features, and a large amount of heating and cutting parameters can potentially affect the process dramatically. Therefore, it is essential to have reliable numerical models to conduct parametric studies on laser assisted machining in order to understand the mechanism behind the process and optimize the machining parameters. Simulation of conventional machining processes have been widely studied by researchers The SPH method is a mesh-free Lagrangian numerical method originally developed in 1977 for astrophysics applications, and has since been applied in mechanics problems over the past three decades. Applying the SPH method to machining models involves several advantages compared to the traditional finite element method. First, the mesh-free SPH method does not have the mesh tangling and distortion problems which usually happen in traditional finite element analyses involving large deformation. Another advantage of the SPH method is that it does not need to use chip separation criterion or predefine the cutting path to allow the chip to separate from the workpiece. In SPH machining models, the chip will naturally separate from the workpiece, and the creation of the new free faces can be directly managed by the SPH method. Limido et al. Simulation of conventional machining has been widely studied by researchers, but only a few studies have addressed the simulation of laser assisted machining. Singh et al. Yang et al. Shen In this study, both a traditional finite element method and the SPH method embedded in LS-DYNA were used to simulate the laser assisted turning of the beta titanium alloy Ti–6Cr–5Mo–5V–4Al. A finite element thermal model was developed to predict the cutting area temperature distribution after the laser heated the workpiece material. The laser spot was modeled by an approximately uniform heat flux which was applied to elements within a circular spot on the top surface of the workpiece. A similar method was adopted in Shen’s study A 3D FE/SPH turning model was developed in this study. The machining parameters were chosen based on the laser assisted machining and conventional machining experiments previously conducted by the authors’ research group The cutting tool was assumed to be a rigid body in this study. Details of cutting tool geometry and its effect on the workpiece geometry were taken into consideration in the simulation, the cutting tool used in the turning experiments was a Sandvik CNMX1204 A2-SMH13A tool, the rake angle, clearance angle and tool nose radius of this tool are 15°, 6° and 0.4 As shown in SPH uses a set of particles to represent a continuum, material properties and state variables are approximated at these finite particles, which move with material deformation. Each particle interacts with all other particles that are within a given distance from it, the distance is usually assumed to be 2 Then, the smoothing function Normalization condition:  Delta function property:  Compact support condition: After several steps of derivation and by converting the continuous volume integrals to sums over discrete interpolation points, the equations can be expressed as follows: In the machining models, a material constitutive model is required in order to describe the relationship between flow stress, strain, strain rate and temperature. The Johnson–Cook (JC) material model Another frequently used material constitutive material model in finite element simulation is Zerilli–Armstrong (ZA) material model, which is a semi-empirical model based on the theory of dislocation dynamics Both the Johnson–Cook and Zerilli–Armstrong material constitutive models were used in this study to describe the material behavior of the Ti–6Cr–5Mo–5V–4Al alloy. In order to acquire the JC and ZA material constants for the Ti–6Cr–5Mo–5V–4Al alloy, Split Hopkinson Pressure Bar (SHPB) experiments were carried out. The results from these experiments were used by the authors’ research group in order to calculate the constants in the JC and ZA material models for the Ti–6Cr–5Mo–5V–4Al alloy A node to solid contact algorithm was adopted in this model, which is a contact type used particularly for SPH particles with solid elements using the plane stress, plane strain or axisymmetric formulation. The “tied” option was switched on for the contact interface between the SPH part and the bottom part of the workpiece to eliminate the gap between these two parts. The Coulomb friction model was implemented in this study. The friction coefficient was calculated using Eq. The nodes on the bottom surface of the workpiece were fixed in all directions so that the workpiece would not move during the machining simulation. The initial workpiece temperature was set to room temperature (20 A laser heating thermal model was developed to predict the temperature distribution in the cutting area of the workpiece material. The laser heating process was realized by a user-defined subroutine where the laser spot was defined by a heat flux Five sets of laser scanning speeds were simulated, these speeds were chosen based on previous parametric studies on laser assisted machining of titanium alloys The size of the workpiece was 211 The workpiece material was assumed to be homogeneous. The ambient temperature was 20 Air convention was ignored in this model. The workpiece density is 4.67 The details of laser assisted machining of Ti–6Cr–5Mo–5V–4Al alloy experiments have been reported by the authors’ research group The temperature distribution on the workpiece after laser scanning is predicted by the laser heating model, as shown in In In the laser assisted machining process, the distance between the laser spot and the cutting tool is 25 Temperature in the cutting area was predicted by the machining models and the results are shown in The main cutting forces predicted by the machining model during conventional machining and laser assisted machining are compared with the experimental results in When machining with the assistance of laser heating, the machining model using JC parameters predicted a maximum 17.40% decrease in the main cutting forces while the experimental results showed a maximum 15.07% reduction in the main cutting force. The predicted average main cutting force reduction within the tested cutting speed range is 13.79% which is also in good agreement with the experimental results 11.64%, see However, the machining model using ZA parameters offered a totally different prediction which showed almost no change in cutting force when the laser assistance was added into the machining process. Cutting forces predicted by the machining model in this study generally showed good agreement with the experimental results. However, machining models that employed ZA parameters failed in predicting the cutting force change caused by laser assistance in the machining process, therefore, the predictions produced by the machining model using JC parameters would be more reliable for this study. The machining model using JC parameters produced more reasonable results in this study, but all its predictions were slightly smaller than the experimental measurements. The possible reason for this is that the material constants were acquired based on the experimental data from Split Hopkinson Pressure Bar (SHPB) test results, and the SHPB tests produced less than 0.5 of strain which is obviously much smaller than the strain generated in the machining process. It is possible that the JC parameters acquired from this experimental data with lower strain results may lead to an underestimation of the cutting force in the machining simulation. Laser assisted machining of Ti–6Cr–5Mo–5V–4Al alloy models have been developed in this work. A laser scanning model was established beforehand to predict the temperature in the cutting area due to laser heating. The SPH method was used in this study to develop metal cutting models. The machining simulation employed a set of Johnson–Cook parameters which were calculated based on the experimental data of Split Hopkinson Pressure Bar (SHPB) Test. Both conventional machining (CM) and laser assisted machining (LAM) were modeled, and the predicted cutting force results from the machining models and the temperature results from the thermal models were compared with the results obtained from CM and LAM experiments in order to validate the simulations. The main findings of this work include:  The laser scanning model produced accurate predictions of the maximum temperature in the laser spot, it can be seen from both simulation and experimental results that the maximum temperature within the material subjected to the laser spot decreased when the laser scanning speed increased. A SPH approach may be able to model workpieces with relatively complex shapes, and both JC parameters and ZA parameters can be used in the machining simulations. The main cutting forces predicted by the machining model using JC parameters is much more accurate than that predicted by machining model using ZA parameters. Moreover, the machining model using ZA parameters failed in predicting the cutting force change caused by the laser assistance in the machining process. Both the results obtained from the machining model using JC parameters and the experimental data indicate that the cutting speed only slightly affects the main cutting force within the tested range. Both simulation and experiment showed that the main cutting force drops when machining with the assistance of the laser. The maximum main cutting force reduction predicted by the simulation is 17.40% while the experimental result is 15.07%. Although the main cutting forces predicted by the machining model using JC parameters are smaller than the experimental results, the good agreement between the main cutting force predictions and the experimental results might indicate that the reported Johnson–Cook parameters are suitable for implementation in Ti–6Cr–5Mo–5V–4Al alloy machining simulations for cutting force studies. The authors acknowledge the support of the Queensland Centre for Advanced Material Processing and Manufacturing. The authors would also like to acknowledge the support of the Defence Material Technology Centre.