A new type of Ti/SnO2-Sb electrode modified with carbon nanotube (CNT) has been fabricated using a pulse electrodeposition method. The electrode modified with CNT versus without CNT has larger surface area and smaller crystallite particles (41.9nm versus 46.8nm) as seen by scanning electron microscopy (SEM), and calculated through X-ray diffraction (XRD), respectively. It means that the CNT-modified electrode can provide more active sites for electrochemical oxidation of organic pollutants. Oxygen evolution potential of the CNT-modified electrode has 0.07V higher overpotential in the Linear sweep voltammetry (LSV) curve. The service lifetime of Ti/SnO2-Sb-CNT electrode is 4.8 times longer than that of the Ti/SnO2-Sb electrode without CNT modifying. The Ti/SnO2-Sb-CNT electrode is demonstrated to have a superior electrochemical oxidation and degradation abilities using Acid Red 73 (AR 73) as a model organic pollutant. The CNT-modified electrode has higher kinetic rate constant, chemical oxygen demand (COD) and total organic carbon (TOC) removals, and mineralization current efficiency, which is 1.93, 1.27, 1.26, and 1.38 times those of the Ti/SnO2-Sb electrode, respectively. The repeated experiments prove the reproducibility of the data. Ti/SnO2-Sb-CNT electrode is 1.15 times more effective in permeation flux than the Ti/SnO2-Sb electrode when combining electro-catalytic oxidation and nanofiltration for treating dye wastewater.In recent years, electrochemical oxidation, due to high energy efficiency, ease of operation, a fast reaction rate and environmental compatibility, has attracted considerable attention recently for application of treating organic pollutant wastewater Although anodic oxidation of organic pollutant for treating wastewater is a potentially superior technique, the lack of suitable anodes is still a major problem For the metal oxide-film electrodes, the electro-catalytic properties are mainly related to the chemical composition, the electronic structure and crystallinity of the oxide layers, and the morphology of the oxide film. Doping other metal ions to the oxides can enhance the electro-catalytic activity and chemical or mechanical stability of oxide electrodes Though Ti/SnO In order to enhance more reaction active sites and more contacts between coating catalyst and reactant to promote electro-catalytic efficiency, we introduced carbon nanotubes (CNTs) into coating to modify the electrode. Recent studies indicate that CNT has been attracted much attention owing to its unique mechanical and electronic properties, such as high specific surface area, good electrical properties and high chemical stability In this paper, we prepared new-typed electrodeposition bath and fabricated an efficient CNT-modified nanocrystalline SnO C.I. Acid Red 73 (>99% purity), structural parameters are shown in The Ti sheets, with dimensions of 2 The new high efficiency Ti/SnO In order to investigate the effect of CNT modification on the electrode, we prepared the Ti/SnO The morphologies of Ti/SnO The linear sweep voltammetric measurements of electrodes were carried out in a conventional three-electrode cell system at electro-chemical workstation (PARSTAT 2273, PARC, USA). Our prepared electrodes Ti/SnO The accelerated service life tests were performed by anodic polarization of the prepared electrodes at 1 A·cm The concentration of hydroxyl radicals (·OH) was determined using salicylic acid as probe, which was calculated according to the product (2,5-dihydroxybenzoic acid) amount of the reaction of salicylic acid and ·OH. 2,5-dihydroxybenzoic acid was detected and quantified by high performance liquid chromatography (HPLC, Ultimate 3000, DIONEX, USA) The electrochemical degradation of AR 73 was conducted in a one-compartment electrochemical system with effective electrolyte volumes of 150 The current efficiency (CE), representing the ratio of the current effectively used in the degradation of AR 73 at a given time to the applied current, was calculated based on the results of COD test and the following equation Where COD The specific energy consumption (SEC) was the energy consumption for the removal of one kg of COD and calculated as follows (express in kWh) Where The mineralization current efficiency (MCE) for the electrochemical contaminant degradation was calculated as Where Δ(TOC) Where  XRD can be used to examine the crystalline structure and lattice parameters of the electrode coating. In order to further explore the impact of CNT modification, linear sweep voltammetry (LSV) curves was investigated to examine the oxygen evolution potentials (OEP) of the two electrodes. As shown in The electro-catalytic oxidation efficiency and activity were also related to the real surface area per apparent geometric area and the number of active sites. The voltammetric charge (  Besides, the inner voltammetric charge ( The voltammetric analysis indicated that the organic pollutants solution easily diffuses into the inner layer through the coating surface for the Ti/SnO The electrochemical stability is an important factor that determined whether the SnO Where, As shown in  Where c The COD reduction reflected the electrochemical capabilities of the different electrodes. Therefore, COD removals of AR 73 solution by the two different electrodes were compared to further evaluate the effect of the CNT modifying for the electro-catalytic oxidation. The COD was removed more rapidly on the Ti/SnO In order to investigate whether the pollutant was completely converted to CO Mineralization at SnO Though electro-catalytic oxidation, with the electron as reagent, is a green and effective technology for organic pollutant degradation, the energy consumption limits its wide application in industry. As shown in To solve the problem, our group prepared electro-catalytic anodes and combined the electric field effect with nanofiltration (NF) process to treat wastewater. In the meantime, the membrane fouling and concentration polarization of NF were controlled to some extent. In our previous work, we discussed the mechanism of the coupling process and investigated the influence of operating conditions on the treatment effect Nanofiltration (NF) process, as a promising technology, has gained increasing attention due to its high level of separation, easy to scale-up possibilities and unique separation capability. A major obstacle for the application of NF process is the rapid decline of the permeation flux as a result of membrane fouling and concentration polarization In order to prove the reproducibility, we repeated the experiments for two times again. Every time, three Ti/SnO A high effective Ti/SnO Our research was supported by the National Natural Science Foundation of China (Grant No. 21276177). Supplementary data associated with this article can be found, in the online version, at 