The blends of high styrene rubber (HSR) and natural rubber (NR) with nano silica were prepared using a blending technique in presence of different types of carbon black. The effect of filler on morphological and wear characteristics was studied. ISAF (Intermediate Super Abrasion Furnace) type of carbon black have showed a significant effect on optimum cure time, cure rate index and mechanical properties by reacting at the interface between HSR and NR matrix. All the samples show only one melting peak on the DSC curve; this is attributed to the same backbone structure of the matrix and the carbon black reinforcement. The samples containing 30 wt.% of HSR with ISAF type of carbon black has shown maximum heat buildup, lower swelling and lower compression set value. Blends containing ISAF type of carbon black with 30 wt.% of HSR showed high abrasion resistant properties against Du-Pont abrader, DIN abrader and different mining rock surfaces and also is found to be the toughest rubber against all types of rock. Coal is main abrader against the rubber under this study.Polymer blends are being used extensively in numerous applications; this statement is also true with rubber blends, especially in tyre manufacture. Apart from blends of common rubbers, specialty rubber is also being utilized, depending on service demands and components of the tyre There are several types of damage occurred in the dump-truck tyre such as tread detachment, sidewall cuts, impact ruptures, bead damage etc. The wear of rubber is a complex phenomenon and dependent on a combination of processes such as Mechanical, mechano-chemical and thermo-chemical, etc. Schallamach The effort towards improving the efficiency of such transportation system is essential for reduce running costs and cutting down the end cost figures by using the HSR and NR rubber blends with nano silica. In this study, the cure characteristics, morphological and mechanical properties of carbon black filled blends of NR and high styrene rubber (HSR) were investigated. Also, these rubber compounds were examined in a specially fabricated experimental set-up for evaluating their wear resistance properties when abraded against various rock types. The parameters such as influence of composition of rubber vulcanizates on wear characteristics and the mechanism of wear of these compounds against different rocks are reported. A literature search shows a lack of studies about PBR, HSR with NR blends alone. With this work, we pretend to partially fill this gap. Natural rubber (RMA-1X) was supplied by the Rubber Board, Kottayam, Kerala. High styrene butadiene rubber (HSR) used was Krylene HS 260, No.-5 of 1948 grade of Bayer AG. Its styrene content is 63.5 The compounding formulation for the HSR and NR blends with its various ingredients were mixed in a two roll mill at a friction ratio of 1:2 following standard mixing sequence. Compounding formulations based on changing of the high styrene rubber (HSR), and natural rubber (NR) contents are shown in The cure characteristics of the rubber compound were studied with the help of a Monsanto Oscillating Disc Rheometer (ODR – 100 The cross-link density was determined by immersing a small amount (known mass) of sample in 100 Fourier Transform Infrared (FT-IR) Spectroscopy was performed using a NEXUS 870 FT-IR (Thermo Nicolet) instrument in dry air at room temperature. Spectra were taken in the range 4000–500 Vulcanized slabs were prepared by compression molding, and the dumb-bell shaped specimens were punched out from a molded sheet by using ASTM Die C. The tests were done by means of a universal tensile testing machine (Hounsfield H10KS) under ambient condition (25 Nine samples were tested for each set of conditions, at the same elongation rate. The values of the tensile strength, modulus at 100% elongation and 300% elongation, and elongation at break were averaged. The relative error was below 5%. The hardness was measured by Shore A hardness tester followed by ASTM D2240-05. DSC measurements were carried out using a Perkin–Elmer PYRIS Diamond DSC instrument. The samples (⩽10 TGA studies were carried out Shimadzu-DT-40 instrument in presence of air at a rate of 10 Swelling test (ASTM D471-08) in oil and solvent were conducted for the rubber compounds. Initially the dry weight of the samples had been taken. Then the samples are immersed in motor oil at 25 For solvent swelling study, the samples are immersed in mixture of solvents containing toluene and iso-octane (3:1) for 48 The tensile fracture surface of the samples were studied in a scanning electron microscope (JSM-5800 of JEOL Co.; Acceleration voltage: 20 DIN abrasion test was done by the DIN abrasion tester for determining the abrasion resistance of compounds of vulcanized rubber followed by ASTM D5963-96. Du-Pont abrasion test was done by the Du-Pont Craydon type of abrasion tester for determining the abrasion resistance of compounds of vulcanized rubber followed by ASTM D394. Heat buildup study was carried out using Goodrich Flexometer for the selective compounds having higher tensile strength. The test pieces were prepared in cylindrical shape having diameter 17.8 Compression set test {ASTM D395-03 (2008)} was performed on a standard test specimen of cylindrical shape 20 The indigenous experimental set-up was specially fabricated in our lab and the full arrangement of the experimental set-up, preparation of rubber specimen and rock sample are already discussed in our earlier literature Total weight of 450 The optimum cure for NSU-2 and NSU-5 rubber sample is higher than other rubber vulcanizates due to the mixing of ISAF N234 carbon black with HSR and NR is shown in Maximum torque can be considered as a measure of stock modulus Faster cure rate index is observed in The IR Spectra of the different samples are shown below in Another important observation was that unlike Padella. et al. Tensile strength, modulus, elongation at break, tear strength for all the compounds were shown in The tear strength for all the samples is moderate, but it varies with varying the matrix ratio and it is tremendously increased for NSU-5. So the system with carbon black ISAF N234 gives better reinforcing effect as well as tear strength. While for other blend types, mainly use of SAF type of carbon black the tensile and tear strength is decreased may be due to the effect of carbon black which suppresses the HSR effect in the system and the filler is uniformly dispersed in the natural rubber matrix that can be attributed to the aggregation of HSR The modulus of all the NR vulcanizates increased with increasing concentration of HSR. This was for one or two possible reasons: The restriction of molecular chain mobility, and an increase in the cross-link density. Elongations at break values are higher for the blends enriched with NR, because carbon black plays a vital role with the NR. The hardness value of the vulcanizates indicates the different trend as the modulus values; it is increased with incorporation of more HSR content. The mechanical property of rubber vulcanizates markedly depended on the number of conjugate double bonds and it is found for the samples ‘NSU-5’ and ‘NSU-6’. These observations suggest that more HSR react with the carbon–carbon double bonds of ISAF type of carbon black and slower the reversion reaction rate and hence increases the mechanical properties of the vulcanizates. The hardness of ‘NSU-5’ and ‘NSU-6’ rubber sample obtained higher than other blends by the influence of ISAF type of carbon black, whose results were shown in To study the thermal response of the blends Differential Scanning Calorimetry has been performed. The DSC curves for all rubber vulcanizates are shown in From High temperature TGA (50–650 It was observed that the onset degradation temperature was more or less same for all the samples. The onset degradation temperature thereby probably decreased in the case of rubber samples due to a decrease in cross-link density. Cross linking increased the rigidity of the system, which in turn increased the thermal stability The swelling ratios of the rubber compounds in solvent and oil are shown in The tensile fracture samples were scanned after gold coating, and are represented in Some samples like ‘NSU-1’, ‘NSU-2’, ‘NSU-5’ and ‘NSU-6’ have also shown rupture type of failure. More serious effects of hysteresis arise from chemical changes to the rubber structure at higher sustained temperatures; these effects include the rubber cross-linking system, and thermal degradation leading to explosive rupture (blowout). This phenomenon was studied by Gent and Hindi  The mass loss of rubber against Du-Pont abrader is given in From both DIN and Du-Pont abrasion studies, the compounds NSU-5 and NSU-6 have given lesser volume loss followed by NSU-4. From these studies, a balancing correlation has obtained for the same compounds under standard abraders. The values of heat buildup for the compounds, those are having good abrasion resistant properties against DIN and Du-Pont abrader, are shown in The compression set of the rubber compounds are shown in Based on DIN abrader test results and Du-Pont abrader test results, three types of rubber has been selected for abrading against the rock surfaces, namely, NSU-4, NSU-5, and NSU-6.  Since the low thermal conductivity of rubbers can result in a very high temperature at the interface, it is important to investigate the effects of frictional heating on the sliding friction of rubbers  The temperature generation during friction in rubber compound ‘NSU-4’ is slightly lower, which may be attributed to the presence of SRF N774 type of carbon black. The highest temperature was observed when rubbers are abraded against coal surfaces whereas the lowest temperature could be noticed for shale. As it is known that coal is the softest rock in mines, so when it abrades with the tyre then coal particle creates a tarry and oily nature on the tyre and a mechano-chemical reaction takes place between the coal and the abraded rubber, due to this reason only the abrasion is higher, though the shale is also same as coal. Nothing of that sort is occurring for shale. For other rocks the temperature generation was found to be in the moderate range. Preparation of abrasion resistant tyre tread rubber with the help of an open two-roll-mixing mill represents a novel method for making valuated rubber products. The NR-HSR blends with addition of nano silica obtained from this process have very good abrasion properties which can be withstand the rugged working condition of dump-truck tyre. It is seen that compounds containing 30 wt.% of HSR has got the maximum optimum cure time, higher abrasion resistance against Du-Pont abrader and rock surfaces with ISAF type of carbon black. It is also observed that the samples containing 30 wt.% of HSR having higher tensile strength and found to be the toughest rubber against all rock types with the addition of ISAF N231, higher tear strength with ISAF N234 and lesser heat generation with SAF N110 and SRF N774. The percentage of swelling decreased for the compounds containing 30 wt.% HSR compared to 20 wt.% HSR. Faster cure rate index is observed for the compounds containing 20 wt.% of HSR with ISAF N234 and the For samples, NSU-1, NSU-2, NSU-4, NSU-5 and NSU-6, it clearly observed fatigue type of failure from the SEM. The authors are deeply grateful to I-Cube Centre, Gyeongsang National University and Coal India Limited, Kolkata for their kind help. Authors wish to thank the tyre retreading companies for their immense support and supply of raw retreading compounds. Also, special thanks to the members of the project and key laboratory of Materials Science Centre and Central Research Facility at IIT, Kharagpur.