In the present study, the effect of boron and zirconium on the microstructural characteristics, ductility and the tensile strength of the wrought nickel-based superalloy 718Plus were investigated. In this regard, five alloys with different amounts of boron 0.00–0.016wt%) and zirconium 0.0–0.1wt%) were cast via the vacuum induction melting and then purified via the vacuum arc remelting. Microstructural observations were carried out through optical and scanning electron microscopes and phase analysis was performed by x-ray diffraction analysis. The tensile test was carried out at room temperature and 704°C on the alloys. The results showed a slight effect of boron and zirconium on grain size while they had significant effect on the amount and the stability of the delta phase. These elements increase the lattice mismatch and the elastic strain between the γ and γ′ phases. Boron and zirconium increased the ductility at room temperature by 10% and 12% and at the 704°C by 8% and 5%, respectively. The effect of these elements on the strength at room temperature was negligible, while at 704°C, boron and zirconium increased the yield strength by 17% and 16% and the ultimate strength by 8% and 7%, respectively. The improved cohesion and strength of the grain boundaries and an increase in delta phase and the elastic strain between γ and γ′ phases are the most important causes for improving the ductility and strength of the alloy 718Plus in the presence of boron and zirconium.Nickel-based superalloy 718Plus is able to provide thermal stability up to 55 Since the introduction of superalloys, the effect of grain boundary strengthening elements such as boron and zirconium on microstructure and mechanical properties has attracted many researchers. For the first time, Decker and Freeman Although the strength of the nickel-based superalloys is affected by γ′ phase and its interactions with dislocations more than anything, other strengthening mechanisms also contribute to the strength of this group of alloys. Generally, the strengthening mechanisms in the precipitation-hardened superalloys can be expressed according to Eq. When shear do not occur in precipitates and dislocations bypass them, the precipitate hardening is obtained by the Orowan relationship With a review of related studies, including our previous study on alloy 718Plus Nickel-based superalloy 718Plus with different boron and zirconium content was cast via the vacuum induction melting (VIM) and then purified via the vacuum arc remelting (VAR). The conditions for the casting process are presented in The homogenization heat treatment was performed at 1075 After preparing metallographic samples (including mechanical grinding and polishing with an active oxide suspension), Kalling's No.2 etching reagent was used to reveal the microstructure. The microstructures were studies by using an optical microscope (LEICA MEF4A) and scanning electron microscope (LEICA MZ75) according to ASTM E3-11 The hot tensile test was performed at room temperature and at 704 The important microstructural characteristics of the wrought alloy 718Plus include the grain structure, delta (δ-Ni According to Grain size changes with boron and zirconium elements were determined according to ASTM E112-96 The effects of boron and zirconium on grain size control have been reported by Hyjek et al. According to  The effect of boron and zirconium on the secondary γ′ phase which is larger than the tertiary γ′ phase is shown in The XRD analysis was used to study the γ′ phase precisely and determine the effect of boron and zirconium on the lattice mismatch and coherent elastic strain at the interface of γ and γ′ phases. This analysis was done in two states, on bulk samples and on the phases extracted from the matrix, in order to find the lattice constants of the γ and γ′ phases under constrained and unconstrained states, respectively. The results of the XRD analysis which shown in It should be noted that the results of this analysis are in good agreement with the results obtained by Xie et al. The lattice constants under constrained and unconstrained states were determined by using the Bragg's law ( The lattice constant of the γ′ phase under unconstrained state is only affected by its chemical composition. Therefore, boron and zirconium can be introduced as the main reasons for the change in the lattice constant of the γ′ phase. However, under constrained state, it was also affected by the elastic strain between γ and γ′ phases. Therefore, boron and zirconium by affecting the elastic strain between these phases have further increased their lattice constant compared to the unconstrained state. The coherent elastic strain for the γ′ phase is obtained from the difference between the lattice constants under constrained and unconstrained states in accordance with Eq. The constrained γ-γ′ mismatch was calculated for bulk samples by using Eq. The variations of the constrained and unconstrained mismatch for the γ and γ′ phases was obtained according to The tensile properties of base alloy 718Plus (4B) at room temperature and 704 According to According to The tensile ductility is directly related to the grain boundary cohesion and strength. Boron and zirconium by influencing the delta phase and increasing its amount on the grain boundaries, improve the strength of these regions and consequently the ductility of the alloy. As discussed earlier, these elements by shifting the nose of the TTP diagram for the delta phase to the left and up reduce the nucleation time and stabilize the delta phase at higher temperatures. The positive effect of the delta phase on the grain boundaries strength and controlling the grain size has been reported in many studies Li et al. Therefore, it is important to achieve an optimal amount of the delta phase in order to improve the tensile properties of alloy 718Plus. In other words, the main reason for the reduction of ductility in alloy 16B100Z, which has about 2.7% of the delta phase in the structure, is the increase of this phase over its optimal amount. In a general look, the effect of boron and zirconium on grain boundary strength and the ductility of alloy 718Plus can be summarized as follows: The segregation of boron and zirconium on the grain boundaries increases the cohesion and strength, and reduce the energy of these regions and consequently improves the tensile ductility. Increasing the amount and the stability of the delta phase on the grain boundary in the presence of boron and zirconium improves the strength of these regions and consequently the tensile ductility. However, an optimal amount of the delta phase on grain boundary is required to achieve the best tensile properties. According to However, these elements were found to be more effective on the strength at 704 In the following, it was attempted to determine the effect of boron and zirconium on each of the strengthening mechanisms of alloy 718Plus that led to the improvement of its tensile strength.  Grain boundaries are known as an obstacle to the movement of dislocations and the plastic deformation, which increase their volume fraction along with the reduction of the grain size. According to the Hall-Petch relation (Eq. As can be seen, the grain boundary strengthening mechanism has a small contribution (approx. 44.14  Based on the size of the solute atoms in a solvent such as the γ matrix in the nickel-based superalloys, it is possible to form two types of substitutional and interstitial solid solutions. Due to the size of the boron and zirconium atoms compared to the nickel atom (R Butt The strengthening constant Assuming the negligible effect of the 0.004 The effect of each alloying element on the yield strength is also presented separately in accordance with  After determining the contribution of each of grain boundary ( As previously discussed, the precipitation strengthening mechanism is defined for two states of cutting (shearing mechanism) or bypassing them (non-shearing mechanism) by dislocations. The shearing mechanism is activated for small precipitates that are coherent with the matrix while the non-shearing mechanism corresponds to coarse precipitates that are incoherent with the matrix. As the size of the precipitates increases and passing through a critical radius (r After determining the value of the Berger's vector and the γ-γ′ mismatch, the critical radius for the γ′ phase in alloy 718Plus with and in the presence of boron and zirconium were determined in accordance with As discussed earlier, the addition of boron and zirconium allows for more the tertiary γ′ phase to be formed by impeding the formation of the secondary γ′ phase. Therefore, the average size of γ′ phase (secondary + tertiary) is reduced, which means that there are more obstacles to the movement of dislocations, which ultimately results in work hardening and strengthening of alloy 718Plus. Moreover, the higher amount of the tertiary γ′ phase implies the greater contribution of the shearing mechanism to the precipitation strengthening. When dislocations predominantly cut through precipitates, the precipitation strengthening mechanism is affected by various factors including: the coherency of γ and γ′ phases, the anti-phase boundary, the difference between the shear modulus of the precipitates and the matrix, and the effect of the new surface formed by dislocations when passing the precipitates The greater effect of boron and zirconium on the strength of alloy 718Plus at 704 Generally, the elastic strain between the γ and γ′ phases is the most effective factor impeding dislocation movement in alloy 718Plus, at all temperature ranges. Moreover, boron and zirconium by increasing this strain (according to  Although boron and zirconium have a little effect on reducing the grain size, these elements increase the amount and stability of the delta phase, especially at higher temperature. The highest increase of the delta phase was obtained for alloy 16B100Z. The lattice constant of the γ and γ′ phases has increased in the presence of boron and zirconium. In addition, the γ-γ′ mismatch has a higher negative value in the presence of these elements. The coherent elastic strain between γ and γ′ phases has also increased up to 6 times. This strain is the main driving force for coarsening and agglomeration of the γ′ phase at high temperatures. The tensile ductility was enhanced by 10% and 12% at room temperature, and by 8% and 5% at 704 The yield and ultimate strength at room temperature were not much affected by boron and zirconium. While at 704 Boron and zirconium enhanced the tensile properties of alloy 718Plus with all three strengthening mechanisms. However, their effect on the precipitation strengthening was more significant, because these elements impede dislocation movement by increasing the mismatch and elastic strain between the γ and γ′ phases and are very effective on strengthening with the shearing mechanism.