Double refractory gold ores (DRGO) contain organic carbonaceous matter (CM) and sulfide minerals, and thus require pretreatment before cyanidation for gold extraction. Though there have been several studies into microbial pretreatment of DRGO, available literature indicates that microbial degradation of both sulfides and CM in a single-stage process has not achieved much success. In an on-going research, the fungus Phanerochaete chrysosporium, has been used to effectively reduce the gold adsorption (preg-robbing) nature of surrogate CM on one hand, and decompose sulfides (pyrite and arsenopyrite) on the other. Such an application of fungi in hydrometallurgy has been termed ‘mycohydrometallurgy’.
                  The present research focused on assessing the possibility of using the fungus to simultaneously decompose sulfides and deactivate carbonaceous matter in refractory gold ores so as to liberate locked-up gold and reduce preg-robbing. Flotation concentrate (FC) of DRGO and bacterial-oxidized FC (BFC) were utilized in this investigation. After 21days of fungal-treatment, overall sulfide sulfur decomposition of 57% in FC led to increase in gold extraction from 41% to 78%. Similarly, fungal-treatment of BFC led to 13% increase in gold extraction over the as-received (81%). The results demonstrate a novel alternative pretreatment process for DRGO.Gold ores are termed double refractory when they contain both organic carbonaceous matter and sulfide minerals ( Bacterial oxidation of sulfides has been the major biological pretreatment process for sulfidic gold ores on commercial bases for the past two decades ( Available literature, however, indicates that microbial degradation of both sulfides and CM in a single-stage has not yet been realized with great success ( In on-going studies, the white rot lignin-degrading fungus, The application of fungi in hydrometallurgy has been termed ‘mycohydrometallurgy’ ( In studies using pyrite and arsenopyrite,  The enzymes of Compounds I and II are the two free radical intermediates involved in the catalysis of the enzymes; R, is a substrate molecule, and R Several studies have been conducted by the authors ( The hydrogen ions used in the intermediate reactions are generated by the fungal action ( All these will contribute to the oxidative decomposition and dissolution of pyrite, hence the dissolved constituents and solid products reported by The gold-containing samples utilized in the study were flotation concentrate (FC) of double refractory gold ores (DRGO) and bacterial oxidized flotation concentrate (BFC). BFC was obtained from FC by biooxidation using the well-known chemolithotrophic microbes. Samples FC and BFC with particle size of 100% passing 75 Preparation of millet and wheat bran (MWB) medium, and culturing of the medium with spore suspension of Samples of the gold concentrate were vacuum-impregnated in epoxy resin and graded by density and particle size with the aid of a centrifuge. The centrifuged samples were cured and then cut longitudinally to expose the particle gradation. The cut samples were remounted in epoxy and polished for optical microscopy using Zeiss Universal research microscope under white light with oil immersion at 625 Partial determination of metals in the gold concentrate was done using aqua-regia digestion and fire assaying with atomic absorption finish, whereas carbon and sulfur were determined via the volumetric combustion technique using a LECO carbon and sulfur analyzer. Sulfide sulfur in the residual solids was determined by the volumetric combustion technique using LECO Sulfur titrator SC-4444DR. Before determining the sulfide sulfur in both the as-received and processed solids, sulfate sulfur and elemental sulfur, if any, had to be removed, and the details of the method are reported in literature ( Gold solution of concentration 5 Cyanidation was conducted at 25 Petrographic evaluation of the gold concentrate showed the presence of both sulfides and carbonaceous matter and revealed that organic carbon had particle size in the range of 10–40 Both the as-received and fungal-treated concentrates were contacted with 5 The dissolution of arsenic, iron and sulfur in incubation solution after 14 Chemical analysis of the as-received FC indicated values of 3.3% total As, 23.3% total Fe and 19.5% total S. These values represent a ratio of 1:7.1:5.8 in the order of As:Fe:S. The presence of these constituents respectively in the incubation solution was in the ratio of 1:0.3:1.7. The respective proportions of total arsenic, iron and sulfur in the as-received sample and the incubation solutions reveal deficiencies of decomposed iron and sulfur in the incubation solution. This discrepancy could be due to the precipitation of components such as FeSO The oxidation of sulfide sulfur in the presence and absence of The trend observed between sulfide oxidation and cyanide-amenability of sample FC as a function of fungal treatment time is presented in The as-received sample BFC had undergone 80% sulfide biooxidation, which resulted in 3.0% residual sulfide sulfur. This sample was subjected to treatment by Changes in cyanide-amenability of sample BFC as a function of fungal treatment time is presented in To evaluate the effectiveness of the fungal process as a potential single-stage pretreatment method for double refractory gold ores, it was necessary to compare the extent of gold extraction from as-received flotation concentrate (FC), fungal-treated FC (FFC), as-received bacterial-treated FC (BFC) and fungal-treated BFC (FBFC). The comparison is visually accessible in BFC and FFC are from single stage processes while FBFC is from a two-stage process. The gold recovery from FBFC was 13% above BFC and 16% above FFC. Gold recovery of 78% from FC after fungal-treatment alone (FFC) compares quite favorably with the 81% obtained after commercial bacterial-treatment process alone (BFC) ( To depict the double refractory treatment potential of the fungus, the percentage oxidation of metal sulfides, percentage reduction in preg-robbing following deactivation of carbonaceous matter, and the consequential percentage increase in gold recovery after fungal treatment of FC are all presented in The ore used in this work contained both carbonaceous matter and sulfides as integral components, and the microbial action was thus directed at both components at the same time. Hence, it was not possible to assess the exclusive effects of the individual constituents simultaneously. The exclusive effect of these components can be monitored when the ore contains only sulfides and not carbonaceous matter or vice versa. However, surrogates can be employed to observe the behavior of these constituents during fungal treatment ( This research examined the capability of The authors appreciate the enormous assistance provided by Prof. Yaw Yeboah, Penn State University, USA and Prof. Richard Amankwah, University of Mines and Technology, Ghana. The first author expresses gratitude to the