The effects of the addition of the inorganic salts NaF, NaCl, MgF2 or CrCl3 on the hydriding and dehydriding behavior of Mg and Mg–Ni mechanical alloys were investigated. It has been found that some inorganic salts, being mechanically alloyed with magnesium or magnesium alloys, not only promote metal powdering but also modify the metal surface. This leads to an acceleration of the hydriding and dehydriding reactions of these materials and to quite high hydrogen capacities (∼5.5–6 wt.%). The investigated salts had different influences on the metal surface properties, which was reflected in reaction kinetics, in particular at first hydriding.The high theoretical hydrogen capacity of MgH Various types of additives to magnesium have been tested for accelerating hydriding and dehydriding processes. The method of mechanical alloying (MA), which allows one to obtain fine materials with various microstructure, composition and components content, was successfully used by many researchers in preparing composites of magnesium with other metals, intermetallic compounds, non-metals and oxides Metals, in particular transition metals, are well known catalysts for the acceleration of dissociative adsorption (desorption) of hydrogen—the limiting stages of magnesium hydriding (at the beginning of the reaction) and decomposition of MgH It is difficult to disintegrate magnesium by mechanical alloying as it is very soft and ductile. Special surface-active additions capable of impeding aggregation processes are necessary to obtain fine magnesium powder. Some organic compounds Least attention has been paid to the addition of inorganic salts not only to magnesium-based materials but also to other metal–hydrogen systems. This may be because it is difficult to expect catalytic activity of inorganic salts in hydrogen chemisorption processes. Information has only recently appeared about the very important role of titanium and iron chlorides in reversible hydrogenation of alkali alanates This brings us to the conclusion that inorganic salts may be helpful in preparing mechanically alloyed metallic composites with modified surface and improved hydrogen storage characteristics. In this study, we demonstrate the use of inorganic salts (e.g. NaF, NaCl, MgF Magnesium powder (Alfa; particle size: 50–100 μm) and NaF, MgF Mechanical alloying was carried out with a high-energy planetary centrifugal mill of the AGO-2 type (acceleration ∼400 m s Specific surface of the samples was measured by the BET method with accuracy ±10%. The iron content in the samples was controlled by atomic absorptive analysis. X-ray powder diffraction data were obtained with Cu Kα radiation. All preparatory work was carried out in air without any precautions. The interaction with hydrogen was investigated using a constant-volume reactor made of stainless steel. The amount of absorbed or evolved hydrogen was determined by following the changes of pressure in the reactor. The pressure was measured by means of a piezoresistive transducer with overall precision better than 0.2%. Before hydriding, the reactor was evacuated and heated in dynamic vacuum of ∼5 Pa to the required temperature of the experiment. Temperature was maintained at an accuracy of ±1 K. Mechanical alloying of magnesium with addition of NaF, MgF A wide dispersion in particles size is observed after 5 min of MA ( The decreasing of the magnesium particle size of course affects the hydriding process, but cannot sufficiently explain the improvement of the hydrogen absorption kinetics in the first cycle of hydriding ( The absence of the induction period at first hydriding and the beginning of the reaction at maximal rate are evidence of the presence on the sample surfaces of places where hydrogen can easily be adsorbed and dissociated, perhaps due to Fe clusters which appeared in the samples as impurities during mechanical alloying. Indeed, according to the results of chemical analysis the iron content increased from 0.03 wt.% (original Mg) to a value that is approximately equal for all samples (0.2–0.3 wt.%) after mechanical alloying. But the iron content is quite low. Moreover, it cannot explain the different shapes of the kinetic curves of the first hydriding of the investigated mechanical alloys, particularly at the beginning of the reaction ( MgF The highest initial reaction rate at first hydriding was found in samples prepared with the addition of CrCl There are no reasons to expect catalytic activity of NaF or NaCl in the hydrogen chemisorption reaction. But these salts can affect the reaction rate at first hydriding by destroying the compact oxide layer on the magnesium surface. The different shapes of the kinetic curves of first hydriding of Mg–5%NaF and Mg–5%NaCl mechanical alloys ( According to X-ray diffraction (XRD) analysis the NaCl reflections broadened after MA and then remained unchanged after hydriding. This means that NaCl, most probably, acts mechanically on the magnesium surface during MA and destroys magnesium oxides, the oxide layer being thin or defective but not removed completely. As a result, the nucleation of MgH A different picture has been observed in the case of Mg–NaF mechanical alloys both as regards the hydriding reaction kinetics and the XRD data. As for NaCl, broad reflections of NaF are observed in the X-ray diffraction pattern ( During mechanical alloying, NaF seems to form on the magnesium surface a fluorine-contained layer transparent to hydrogen and protective against oxygen, water and other surface pollutants. (The protective properties of NaF may be confirmed by the almost unchanged kinetics of the first hydriding of MA Mg–5%NaF after long storage of the sample in air; The second and subsequent hydriding–dehydriding cycles of all the investigated Mg–salt mechanical alloys exhibited a similar and relatively fast reaction rate at hydriding ( The apparent energy of activation ( The decomposition of the hydrides formed as a result of hydriding of MA Mg–salts also proceeded faster than pure MgH The preparation of more complex mechanical alloys, for example, containing salt and metal-catalyst, may lead to further improvement of hydrogen storage characteristics of the obtained material. The addition of some inorganic salts to magnesium and magnesium-based alloys in the course of mechanical alloying leads to powdering of metal and simultaneous modification of metal particle surface, which improve the hydrogen storage characteristics of the material obtained. The action of salts differs and depends on their nature. Determination of the optimal compositions of mechanical alloys with salt additions may greatly improve the hydrogen storage characteristics of magnesium-based alloys and other probable alloys on the basis of hydrogen absorbing metals.