The bioleaching of flotation concentrate is a new method for copper recovery that could form the basis of an economic and environmentally friendly process. The main objective of this work was to evaluate a bioleaching process from the treatment of two concentrates, (i) a copper gold bearing concentrate and (ii) an ordinary copper flotation concentrate, using mesophilic bacteria. The special gold-bearing copper flotation concentrate was obtained from the Polkowice Mine. The second material was an ordinary copper flotation concentrate purchased from the Lubin Mine. Bioleaching experiments were carried out in 250 ml Erlenmayer flasks and a rotating bioreactor (biorotor). The most important operating parameters were copper dissolution (%) and surface area. A culture of Thiobacillus ferrooxidans was used for the bioleaching tests. The bioleaching maximum was obtained at both 12% and 15% of the solid. The effect of pyrite addition on the kinetics of copper concentrate bioleaching was also investigated. It was established that 3% of pyrite causes an increase in the bioleaching process. In the case of ordinary flotation concentrate bioleaching, 65% of the recovery was obtained at the initial stage (48 h). In the second stage, the copper recovery slowly increased and after 312 h 86% of the copper recovery was obtained. On the other hand, the surface area of copper concentrate initially increased (at 24 h it was 8.67 m2/g) and then slightly decreased in the second stage.The application of the bioleaching process for copper sulfide ores has been practiced for two decades ( Bacterial leaching of copper sulfide flotation concentrate is a complex process. Bioleaching of copper flotation concentrate has been investigated by The objective of this work was to evaluate a bioleaching-processing route for the treatment of two flotation concentrates. The second target was to investigate the effect of pyrite addition on the process. Bioleaching experiments were carried out with two flotation concentrates. The first was a special copper sulfide flotation concentrate, which contained gold. It was collected from the Polkowice Mine (Poland). According to the producer this concentrate contains 38 ppm of Au and 10% of Cu. The second material was an ordinary copper flotation concentrate purchased from the Lubin Mine (Poland). This concentrate contains 17.43% of Cu, 18.8% of SiO The bacterial culture used in the bioleaching study was obtained from the University of Opole, Poland, where it has been cultured continuously. The culture consists of mainly Bioleaching experiments were carried out in 250 ml Erlenmeyer flasks that were placed in a water-conditioned shaker. The temperature and rotation rate were maintained constantly at 28 °C. Bacterial activity was monitored by the protein concentration and Lowry method ( The bioleaching experiments in shaken flasks were carried out using various solid concentrations. The range of solid concentration was between 12% and 25%. The results of the leaching of gold–copper concentrate are shown in The effect of the ferrous iron concentration on the bioleaching kinetics was investigated. Three different media containing different quantities of iron(II) (0, 2 and 9 g/l) were used. The copper dissolution in these tests reached 31.4%, 53.5% and 55.82% for 0, 2, and 9 K, respectively. These results indicate that media rich in ferrous iron can leach copper better than the inoculum free of ferrous iron. The effect of pyrite addition on the rate of bioleaching of copper concentrate was investigated. The bioleaching data indicate that 3% pyrite addition resulted in the best efficiency of copper leaching. In the presence of 3% pyrite the surface area increased from 2.92 to 7.886 m A biooxidation experiment has also been performed using the biorotor. The results of the bioleaching of copper flotation concentrate in the biorotor are shown in  The presence of different sulfides dissolved during the bioleaching can affect the copper mineral leaching. The consequence of pyrite addition was to increase the Fe As can be seen in These results have demonstrated that the bioleaching of Polish copper ore flotation concentrates can be realised in a special bioreactor (biorotor). Copper recovery was satisfactory (86% after 13 days treatment). The high copper extraction was achieved in the presence of iron ions (2 K medium) or pyrite (3%). The changes in the surface area of the leached solid phase may be effective as an indicator of the bioleaching process. The authors thank Dr. T. Farbiszewska for providing