A method of de-convoluting a mixture composition from a set of property data for the mixture is presented and evaluated. This is the probability apportioning method (PAM version 4). It is compared with the well-known spectral analysis method of least squares (LSQ). Both these methods assume that the component data is combined in the mixture in a linearly independent manner. PAM starts with an assumed composition and uses Bayes’ theorem on conditional probabilities in an iterative procedure to recalculate the prediction. LSQ is shown to be generally more applicable, but PAM is less susceptible to noise where there are components in the mixture with similar property data (spectra).There are many examples in science and engineering where a mixture of two or more components gives rise to system properties that are a mix of the component properties. From measurements of the properties of the mixture it is often desirable to estimate the composition of the mixture. Examples include signal processing, analysis of coal blends, and analysis of particle size distribution. Considering the latter in more detail, there are many processes where system performance and economics depends upon the size distribution of particles, fluid droplets or bubbles, or pores in a solid structure. In bubble columns the bubble size determines the hydrodynamic behaviour. In fluidised bed coal combustion, the particle size is critical for fluidisation and reaction kinetics. In the manufacture of catalysts the structure of the substrate (pore size) will have a significant effect on the surface area for catalyst deposition. Hence, being able to measure or predict such size distributions can be very beneficial. To obtain such data, several different techniques have been developed and they are reviewed by Bayes’ theorem on conditional probabilities has been successfully applied ( Spectral analysis methods are widely used for extracting components of signals (  This paper develops the PAM model for general cases of de-convolution and demonstrates its applicability in some theoretical simulations. It shows where the model is accurate and how it can become unstable. The model has been successfully applied in an experimental study of coal blends ( This section summarises how Bayes’ theorem was applied to estimate particle diameter distributions from chord measurements of spheres in In this method we take each chord size detected and then calculate the probability   We defined a possible particle size range of 0 to 1 with Assume a uniform diameter distribution For each diameter bin For each For each For each If the diameter distribution This method is not complicated and is stable. It assumes that each particle detection is independent of all others. The results of the program can be observed after each iteration and the program terminated when required. Few iterations, 10–20 for the cases examined, were required for reasonable accuracy.   To illustrate this equation here, imagine we have a mixture of If An alternative representation of Here the PAM model described in Assume a uniform distribution in mix For each For each If the composition The composition fractions are not scaled by a parameter equivalent to hit probability which is a function of particle diameter.  The algorithm in The solution to this problem is to determine the minimum If some of the This is known as relaxation. With In this paper for all the PAM assessments 10 A simple example is shown in The  The LSQ model is generally more applicable than PAM. PAM is limited to positive component fractions An interesting comparison is made in Errors or noise can enter real systems in a number of ways. For example, they may occur due to measurement errors in the individual component spectra Taking the example in  In most situations it would be clear that an It is worth noting that ∑  It would obviously be known that two reference spectra are similar in this example. In such a case, only one set may be put into the LSQ model which would then predict the combined composition of the two components. When there are no simulated errors, the system reduces to the well-known set of simultaneous equations. Clearly LSQ has dramatically failed. (The inverse of matrix It is expected that this situation would not occur so frequently in practice, but it is clearly an area where the Bayes’ method has significant potential. It is briefly noted here that PAM can solve more general systems of linear simultaneous equations, The Probability Apportioning Method (PAM) version 4 uses Bayes’ theorem and an iterative procedure to calculate the composition of a mixture by de-convolution of the mixture's properties using the component properties. The model is shown to be reasonably accurate for some general cases given “reasonable” properties. Damping can improve the stability of the algorithm, but there are cases where the method is unstable. However, these are not likely to occur in predicting mixture composition. PAM has been compared with the well-established least-squares spectral analysis technique, LSQ, in theoretical simulations where noise and error have been simulated. In many cases PAM is equally as good, in some cases worse, and in some cases where there are similar spectra and noise or errors are present it can be significantly better. PAM can also give a reasonable result when there are fewer channels than reference spectra ( Further investigation is required to determine some quantifiable limits of stability for the PAM algorithm. PAM could also be developed to include weighted measurements, say when some channels give more reliable measurements than others. It would also be useful to consider the situation where the component spectra do not combine independently so that the mixture properties are not a linear sum of the components’ properties.  I would like to thank Dr. Owen Lyne, School of Mathematical Sciences, Nottingham University for helpful comments on an early draft of the paper.