Introduction
                  The majority (67%) of hospitalized injuries among Alaska commercial fishermen are associated with deck machinery. This paper describes the “Prevention Through Design” process to mitigate one serious machinery entanglement hazard posed by a capstan deck winch.
               
                  Methods
                  After observing that the capstan winch provides no entanglement protection and the hydraulic controls are usually out of reach of the entangled person, NIOSH personnel met with fishermen and winch manufacturers to discuss various design solutions to mitigate these hazards.
               
                  Results
                  An emergency-stop (“e-stop”) system was developed that incorporated a momentary contact button that when pushed, switches a safety-relay that de-energizes the solenoid of an electro-hydraulic valve stopping the rotating winch. The vessel owners that had the e-stop installed enthusiastically recommend it to other fishermen. NIOSH entered into a Proprietary Technology Licensing Agreement with a company to develop the system for commercial use.
               
                  Conclusions
                  This is an example of a practical engineering control that effectively protects workers from a hazardous piece of equipment by preventing injuries due to entanglement. This solution could reduce these types of debilitating injuries and fatalities in this industry.Commercial fishing is the most dangerous occupation in the United States. In 2006, 51 commercial fishermen were killed on the job resulting in an occupational fatality rate of 142 per 100,000 workers, the highest rate for any occupation in the United States and 36 times higher than the average fatality rate for all U.S. workers ( During 1994–2004, 641 commercial fishermen died in the United States. Of these, 332 (52%) died after their vessel sank, and another 184 (29%) fatalities were due to falls overboard. The remainder of the fatalities were due to a variety of causes, including deck injuries (51, 8%; An important issue to address is jurisdiction of regulatory agencies on uninspected commercial fishing vessels. Both the Occupational Safety and Health Administration (OSHA) and the U.S. Coast Guard (USCG) have authority over the safety of employees onboard commercial fishing vessels. The USCG is the lead agency; OSHA only has jurisdiction out to 3 miles from shore. In addition OSHA is precluded from enforcement with respect to working conditions regulated by other federal agencies. Therefore, the promulgation of safety regulations by the USCG preempts OSHA with respect to those working conditions specifically addressed by Coast Guard regulations. The USCG does have regulations in regard to machine guarding, but the extent to which these are enforced is limited. In Alaska, most fatalities in the commercial fishing industry are also due to the loss of a fishing vessel. However, injury epidemiologists at the National Institute for Occupational Safety and Health (NIOSH) Alaska Field Station have shown that most (67%) severe nonfatal injuries occur on deck during the deployment and retrieval of fishing gear ( The purpose of this paper is to describe the “Prevention Through Design” activities we completed in order to mitigate one machinery entanglement hazard posed by a deck winch commonly found on commercial fishing vessels. NIOSH is the federal agency responsible for conducting research and making recommendations to improve the safety and health of workers in the United States. The NIOSH Alaska Field Station has worked in the area of commercial fishing safety since 1991. After working with our industry partners on several safety issues, NIOSH developed the Deck Safety Intervention Project, which began in October 2000. Goals of this project were to determine when and where deck injuries occur and to develop intervention strategies. These intervention strategies included engineering designs with industry input to eliminate or lessen the risks deck machines pose. In 2002, NIOSH injury epidemiologists met with fishermen across Alaska to discuss the problem that 67% of severe hospitalized injuries were a result of deck machinery, with the hope that practical solutions could be developed to prevent these injuries from occurring. One significant entanglement problem fishermen identified was that posed by the capstan-type winches ( Vessels fishing with purse-seine gear are generally about 50-feet long and are accompanied by a skiff, which is integral to the fishing operation. The seine is a large net with thick mesh and small openings. It is not designed to catch fish in the mesh; rather, the net acts as a large cage trapping the fish. The seine is set by using the skiff to pull one end of the net off the stern of the vessel. The skiff is brought around so that the seine makes a half circle with the skiff on one end and the vessel on the other end. Both ends are towed equally to gather a school of fish. Then, the skiff pulls its end over to the vessel completing the circle. At this point, a line, which is threaded through rings at the bottom of the net, is wrapped around the drum of the capstan deck winch and pulled in. This line, the “purse-line,” draws the bottom of the net together making a large “bag” or purse. The fish trapped in the purse are brought onboard and dumped in the fish hold. The deck winch on purse-seine vessels is a powerful (up to 1000 foot-pounds of torque) capstan winch, usually mounted in the center of the deck near the wheelhouse. Its drum rotates while the crew is working on deck. Fishermen who lose their balance or are inattentive can become entangled in the purse-line as the line is winding around the drum. Crushing injuries to the hand or arm, and in some cases fatalities if the head or torso is caught, are the results. The winch hydraulic motor controls are usually located on the bulkhead just forward of the winch. Unfortunately, they are usually out of reach of the entangled fisherman to stop the drum rotation. In June 2002, tragedy struck the captain of a commercial purse-seine vessel fishing for salmon in Prince William Sound, Alaska. The crew had just set the seine around a school of fish. After drifting with the net open for about 15 minutes, the captain called for the skiff-man to close the net, which was done without incident. Then, as the captain wrapped the purse line around the drum of the deck winch to close the bottom of the seine, he reached across the winch, brushing his raincoat sleeve against the moving line. The sleeve caught between the line and the rotating drum. He called for help as he was being wrapped into the spinning drum. Two crewmen charged across the deck from the stern where they tried to work the hydraulic winch controls, located on the backside of the pilot-house. However, the captain had gone around the winch three times before it was stopped. Despite the best efforts of the crew and others nearby, the captain died the next day at an Anchorage hospital from multiple traumatic injuries. One year later in October 2003, another purse-seine captain was killed in the same type of capstan deck winch near Homer, Alaska. Working alone during an opening for rockfish, he was using the deck winch to lower a bag of fish that he had just weighed into the fish hold. Evidence suggested that the captain's right hand got too close to the rotating drum and his coat sleeve got caught in the line. Entangled in the deck winch, the controls were out of reach and the rotating winch could not be stopped. The captain's body was found mangled and wrapped repeatedly around the capstan several days later when his wife reported him overdue to the U.S. Coast Guard. NIOSH investigations identified two major safety hazards: no entanglement protection is provided by the winch and the hydraulic controls are usually out of reach of the person who is entangled. Injury epidemiologists from the NIOSH Alaska Field Station partnered with engineers at the NIOSH Spokane Research Laboratory to design a practical engineering solution to mitigate these safety hazards. This NIOSH team of epidemiologists and engineers met with vessel owners, purse-seine fishermen, and winch manufacturers to discuss the various safety design options. It was quickly realized that standard machine guarding and “dead-man switch” solutions were either not feasible or applicable to the typical machine use. Pressure mats for the dead-man switch would be subject to false signals from lines being coiled on deck, or from fish as the net is dumped. Physical guards are impractical because lines are fed onto the winch from virtually any angle ( The engineering design solution that was developed was an emergency-stop (“e-stop”) system that incorporated a robust, low-profile, momentary contact button mounted on the top port-side winch horn ( The time it takes the victim to strike the emergency switch is thus the controlling factor in arresting the drum rotation, not the valve response time. With the drums turning at a typical working speed (40–60 rpm), and considering a typical human response time (less than 0.5 sec), the winch drums could be stopped in less than 180° of rotation – sufficient to limit serious entanglement injury. A control box containing the safety-relay, pilot lights to indicate system status, and a system reset button, is mounted adjacent to the winch directional control valve. In the event someone becomes entangled, it is important that the winch directional control valve be returned to neutral before the e-stop system is reset; otherwise, further entanglement or injury could result by the rotating drum. On purse seine vessels, the manual winch directional-control valve is almost always mounted on the rear bulkhead of the vessel, usually about 5- to 6-feet forward of the capstan winch. The normal function of the manual valve precludes having a self-centering spool. The fisherman typically shifts the spool for either a forward or reverse winch operation, then leaves the winch running to execute his/her fishing duties. If there is a winch entanglement and the e-stop is used to stop the drum rotation, the safety relay requires a manual reset. If the prototype system was reset without verifying that the manual valves were in the neutral position, the winch drums may start to rotate again unexpectedly. The position of the reset function was moved from the position of the e-stop switch to the proximity of the manual valves. In the described scenario, this operating location removes the reset-switch operator from the possible hazardous area near the rotating winch drums. Yet, he/she is close enough to make a visual inspection of the clearance around the winch and to be able to observe the position of the manual valves, before resetting the system ( This design lends itself to the development of more advanced systems. Additional buttons, easily wired in parallel to the winch e-stop button, can be placed in other locations on the vessel such as in the wheelhouse or along the gunwales, leaving the reset switch at the manual winch controls. The e-stop system may be applied to other types of deck machinery, and may eventually incorporate wireless or voice activation features. A fishing vessel owner/operator home-ported in Seattle, Washington worked with NIOSH on the design and installation of this e-stop system, which was successfully tested during the 2005–2007 Southeast Alaska salmon seasons. This vessel's crew praised the device as a significant safety and, surprisingly, productivity improvement. As of this writing, they continue to use the winch e-stop system. The crewmembers have reported that although they have not had to use it in an emergency, it has come in handy when the purse-line gets knotted up while operating. This capstan winch e-stop system has been installed by NIOSH on two other seiners that operate in Alaska. Feedback from a qualitative evaluation of the e-stop system was completed. We asked the skippers who are currently using the system questions in regard to its acceptability, use in an emergency, its reliability, durability, possible design improvements, and examples of how it is making their fishing more efficient. The other fishing crews also like having the e-stop on their vessels. They believe the e-stop is very helpful, very important, and would enthusiastically recommend it to other fishermen. None of them have had to use it in an emergency. They did indicate that they found it increases efficiency because they are able to stop the winch faster when something is wrong with the lines. On rare occasions, the button is sometimes pushed unintentionally by someone's hand or elbow, but the system can be quickly reset so as not to be a problem. Note that the NIOSH-designed e-stop does not reset ‘automatically,’ and it cannot be reset by pushing the e-stop button a second time (i.e. ‘toggling’). It requires that someone manually push the reset button mounted in the control box on the rear bulkhead. Fishermen who have used the system are so pleased with it that they have cited other pieces of machinery on their vessels that could be made safer with similar e-stop buttons. The e-stop has received strong support at industry trade shows. It has been demonstrated at Pacific Marine Expo in Seattle in 2005, 2006 and 2007, the largest commercial fishing trade show in the United States, and at Comfish Alaska in Kodiak in 2007. The e-stop has received an overwhelming positive response from fishermen, with many fishing vessel owners and operators requesting information on how to obtain the device for their vessels. NIOSH staff have also produced and distributed copies of a deck safety awareness DVD that illustrates the entanglement hazard and e-stop solution to the hazard ( The NIOSH intervention design has been licensed to a manufacturer. In November 2007, NIOSH entered into a Proprietary Technology Licensing Agreement with Emerald Marine Products, LLC (Seattle, WA) to develop the e-stop system for commercial use. Emerald Marine Products, in cooperation with Kolstrand Marine Supply (Seattle, WA), will be manufacturing a similar system based on the NIOSH research. They will be selling the e-stop exclusively through their distributor Go2Marine. The e-stop is an example of a practical engineering control or physical modification that can be implemented to protect workers from a hazardous piece of equipment such as the capstan winch. Taking from the injury prevention literature ( By using injury epidemiology to identify problems, along with practical industry input, effective safety interventions to control such hazards can be designed and implemented. This “prevention through design” approach should prove effective in providing tools for this dangerous industry to prevent injuries on deck, and hopefully inspire others to apply similar ideas to these types of hazards.