Low gold and silver extractions have often been observed in the traditional gold–silver cyanidation process. The reactivity and availability of oxidant is a potential limitation for gold and silver dissolution in cyanide solution, especially in heap leaching operations. The oxidant reactivity seems to have more of an effect on silver extraction due to the different mineralogy of gold and silver in the ores. For example, the occurrence of silver sulfides such as acanthite (Ag2S) typically results in low overall silver extraction which may be due to slow kinetics of oxygen reduction on the acanthite mineral. The leaching of metallic gold and silver sulfide in the novel ferricyanide–cyanide leaching medium was investigated. The potential application of ferricyanide as a supplemental oxidant in gold–silver cyanidation process was proposed and the possible reagent regeneration methods were discussed.The cyanidation process has been successfully practiced for the extraction of gold and silver from their ores for more than 100 years. The well-known Studies on the leaching of gold and silver in aerated cyanide solution have shown that both cyanide and dissolved oxygen concentration play important roles. Since the solubility of oxygen in cyanide solution is relatively low, the availability and reactivity of oxygen is believed to be the critical factor in the traditional gold cyanidation process, especially in heap leaching operations. Moreover, some conventional extraction results have revealed that the dissolution rate of silver was noticeably lower than that of gold, possibly due to the occurrence of silver sulfide minerals in the ore, e.g. acanthite (Ag Sulfide ion may be oxidized to To increase gold and silver dissolution rate, the use of per-oxygen species and per-manganate (KMnO For some specific ores (particularly partially sulfidized ores), pre-aeration and the addition of soluble lead salts were sometimes applied to improve the efficiency of gold–silver cyanidation ( Though the standard reduction potential of A pure gold rod with a diameter of 2.4 The rotating disc tests (Au disc) were conducted in a sealed reactor. The reactor was put in a water bath in which the temperature of the leaching solution could be automatically controlled. The reactor lid had several openings which allowed the insertion of the rotating disc, nitrogen and reagents injection and sampling tubes. When necessary, the solution was purged with N Leaching of synthetic Ag The rate of dissolution of the rotating gold disc in different leaching conditions has been examined and the results are shown in The dissolution of Ag The dissolution rate of silver sulfide in 0.5 The effect of ferricyanide on the leaching of a gold–silver ore has been investigated and the plots of gold and silver extraction vs. leaching time are shown in Silver extraction in the two cases was stable after leaching for 12 and 30 The slurry potential in ferricyanide–cyanide leaching system dropped quickly in the first 30 According to the results from the leaching tests, it can be concluded that the addition of ferricyanide can raise the dissolution rate of gold and silver in cyanide solution. One potential application is to use ferricyanide as a supplemental oxidant in the gold or silver cyanidation process, especially in heap leaching operations where the availability of oxidant is more critical. An obvious advantage is the relative high solubility of ferricyanide which may potentially increase the availability and reactivity of the oxidant to catalyze the dissolution of gold and/or silver. Another potential advantage is that ferricyanide is very stable in a wide pH range and is not reacting with free cyanide. The economics of the novel leaching system will be dominated by the ease between the benefit of the increase of gold and silver leaching kinetics and the cost of additional reagent consumption, which is mainly of ferricyanide and probably some extra cyanide and alkali. The benefit will include possible shorter leaching time and/or extra gold and silver recovery. Obviously this will be ore-specific. It may be critical when treating those ore with high content of silver sulfide minerals. However, since the presence of sulfide minerals such as pyrrhotite and chalcopyrite will significantly consume ferricyanide, the economic level of the use of ferricyanide as the assisting oxidant should be thoroughly assessed before any practice. For those traditional cyanidation–zinc cementation operations, more work may need to be conducted to confirm the potential effect of iron–cyanide on the cementation process due to the possible formation of insoluble ferrocyanide precipitates. Since the consumption of ferricyanide in cyanidation process is the most critical factor in this leaching system, the feasibility of ferricyanide regeneration will be advantageous. The regeneration of ferricyanide may be realized through chemical or electrochemical oxidation. For those mining operations where the oxidation process (such as Caro’s acid or ozonation) have already used to treat clarified cyanide effluent, the regeneration of ferricyanide will be easily achieved with little extra reagent cost ( The treated wastewater can be recycled to the leaching unit. An alternative process is to extract iron–cyanide from cyanide effluent by special resins and further oxidize ferrocyanide in the eluent to ferricyanide either by chemical or electrochemical oxidation ( The authors wish to thank Dr. Berend Wassink for his helpfulness and Barrick Gold for sponsoring the research and providing the ore sample.