Copper adsorption was carried out using the novel material known as air-filled emulsion (AFE). AFE is a stable colloidal system containing microscopic protein-coated bubbles (<10μm) dispersed through an aqueous solution, resulting in an increased specific surface area and contact time between extractant and metal ions. Bovine serum albumen (BSA) generated emulsion concentration had a significant impact on copper removal, with maximum metal uptake obtained at 2.5g/l of BSA-coated bubbles. It was shown that copper sorption was rapid over the first 10min, and equilibrium conditions were reached within 40min. Separation of the copper-loaded microcells from the aqueous solution was also investigated. Micro-flotation was employed to remove the microbubbles by means of attachment to the surface of larger air bubbles. In absence of a cationic surfactant, approximately 0.5% copper recovery was obtained at pH ranging from 5 to 8 due to the lack of hydrophobic groups on the surface of Cu-loaded BSA emulsions. Due to the fine sizes of the emulsion bubbles (<10μm) a cationic flocculant was used to induce coagulation of the bubbles leading to easier phase separation. A combination of collector and flocculant at a concentration of 3×10−4
                     M and 0.025g/l, respectively, led to an increase in copper recovery to nearly 35% at pH 7.Toxic dilute heavy metal-bearing effluents generated in mining, metallurgical operations, petroleum, chemical manufacturing are considered to be a serious threat for human health and living organisms, as not only the heavy metal concentration in the wastes can be several times above permissible levels but they also disperse into the ground water ( In addition to the metal uptake capability of biosorbents, separation of heavy metal-loaded biomass from waste streams is a key factor in determining the efficiency of the technique and biosorbent. Centrifugation and sedimentation, the conventional separation techniques, are not suitable to be employed in the case of metal-bearing biosorbent due to the small size of solid particles present in the solution. In sedimentation, large settling tanks are needed due the low settling rate. Moreover, centrifugation can be an expensive technique for fine particle separation owing to the power demand per quantity unit of biosorbents recovered ( A novel material known as air-filled emulsion (AFE), introducing high surface area between metal ions and biosorbent was used in this work for copper removal. AFE is a highly stable colloidal system containing fine cysteine protein-coated bubbles as a dispersed phase distributed through the aqueous phase. Thereafter, copper-loaded microbubbles were separated from the solution using flotation. In this study, recovery of copper ions was examined under different experimental conditions such as solution pH, collector concentration and the addition of a flocculant. Bovine serum albumen (BSA, fraction V) was purchased from Bishop Canada Inc. to synthesize BSA-coated microcells. All solutions were prepared using reverse osmosis (RO) purified water (pH of 5.8 at 25 50 Copper (II) sulfate was dissolved in water for 2 In order to investigate the kinetics of copper adsorption by BSA-coated bubbles and to determine the required time for copper removal, a series of contact time experiments were performed. 50 Each biosorptive flotation test comprised two consecutive steps: (I) copper biosorption experiments at the optimum experimental conditions (Cu solution pH: 5, Temperature: 20 The conditioning time after surfactant addition was 30 5 ζ-potential measurements were performed on Cu-loaded BSAEM using the microelectrophoretic apparatus ZetaPlus (Brookhaven Instruments Corporation, USA). This instrument determines the electrophoretic mobility and converts to ζ-potential using Smoluchowski approximation. Reported values are an average of 10 measurements. In this section, time dependant adsorption behavior of BSA-coated microbubbles in removing copper ions is discussed. Variations of copper concentration over 5 The effect of BSAEM dosage on copper removal for 0.02 The ζ-potential measurements provide an indication of the surface charge (being the potential measured at the plane of shear) of Cu-loaded BSA microcells. The nature of the BSAEM, with fine, stable bubbles, means that the emulsion itself can be stable for a long period of time. In addition, in traditional flotation, the flotation of fine particles is very difficult due to the particles having to reach the surface of the bubbles, and break through the air–water interface. Flocculation of copper-loaded microbubbles significantly assists the separation process by means of an increase in buoyancy of bubbles. Due to the presence of higher number of negatively-charged ions around coated-bubbles illustrated by The impact of copper-BSAEM solution pH on flocculating activity was examined at various pH values (5–8). As shown in Solution pH is one of the most significant parameter among the experimental conditions in flotation that is used to control the floatability of a particle. The pH not only influences the ionization of functional groups existing on the surface of particle, but also modifies solution chemistry. In the case of copper solution, increasing pH to above 5 causes both copper speciation and a decrease in Cu Three types of cationic surfactant were used at different concentrations (1–9 Biosorptive flotation of dilute copper solution (0.02 The authors would like to acknowledge the financial support of