In this paper, Haar wavelets method (HWM) is applied to compute the numerical solutions of the foam drainage equation. The mathematical base of the method is presented. First, the time derivative is discretized by a forward difference scheme and then a quasilinearization technique is used to linearize the foam drainage equation. Finally, we solve a system of linear equations which is obtained by applying the Haar wavelet method for discretizing the space derivatives. Obtained results by HWM are very similar to the exact solutions. Further, a comparison between our results and results which are obtained by HPM, HPTM, LDM and ADM is presented. Numerical results show that our method works better than the other methods.One of the interesting and applicable partial differential equations is the foam drainage problem. The governing equation of this problem is expressed as follows Foams are very well known for both common people and scientists, because of their everyday utilization Fereidoon et al. In recent years the wavelets have been used for the solution of partial differential equations (PDEs). Different types of wavelets and approximating functions have been used in numerical solution of differential equations. The Haar wavelets method (HWM) is the most simple one among the different wavelet families which are defined by an analytical expression. Due to its simplicity, HWM is very effective to solve ordinary and partial differential equations. The notion of wavelets is introduced by Alfred Haar in 1910. Expression of Haar wavelets is very simple. Besides they have orthogonal and normalization with compact support properties. Therefore, the Haar wavelets are very efficient and effective tools to solve the nonlinear systems in physics, biology, chemical reactions and fluid mechanics, for more details, see In this paper, we use the HWM to obtain a semi-analytical solution for the foam drainage equation. In this composite scheme, first of all, we discretize time derivative terms by a forward difference scheme and linearize the nonlinear terms using a quasilinearization technique This paper is organized as follows: In the next section we present a brief introduction on preliminaries of Haar wavelets and its integrals. Section The Haar wavelets family { The quasilinearization approach Consider the nonlinear Multi-resolution analysis (MRA) is the best way to understand the notion of wavelets    See Saeedi et al. In this section, we obtain a numerical solution for the foam drainage equation. We first use the transformation Let us divide interval (0, 1] into We integrate  In this example, we consider the foam drainage equation with the following initial conditions  Consider the foam drainage equation The Haar wavelets method has been successfully utilized to establish semi-analytical solutions for the foam drainage equation. The results obtained from Haar wavelets method are better than the results which obtained by HPM, HPTM, LDM and ADM methods and are in a good agreement with the exact solutions. Therefore, we conclude that this method accompanied with the quasilinearization approach can successfully use to solve another nonlinear partial differential equations.