Gas-based reduction roasting magnetic separation process was conducted to separate and recover iron and titanium from oxidized vanadium titano-magnetite (VTM). The effects of reduction temperature, gas composition, reduction time, grinding fineness, and magnetic field intensity on the efficiency of Fe-Ti separation were investigated. Under the condition of reduction temperature of 1050°C, reduction time of 120min and gas composition of P(H2)/P(H2
                     +CO)=0.72, a magnetic product containing 84.5wt.% total iron with Fe recovery of 93.67% and a non-magnetic product containing 43.46wt.% TiO2 with the TiO2 recovery of 67.12% were obtained. The efficiency of Fe-Ti separation shows a rise first followed by a decline with the increases of P(H2)/P(H2
                     +CO). Theoretical analyses, XRD, and SEM-EDS results demonstrate that H2 has a higher reduction ability than CO on oxidized VTM while CO makes a better role in promoting the grown of metallic iron particles, which are both crucial for Fe-Ti separation.Titanium plays a considerably important role in the modern industry, which is widely used in aerospace, military, metallurgy, solar cell, pigment and other advanced materials fields Many researcher devoted themselves to the comprehensive utilization of VTM and many novel treatment methods have been developed successfully In a typical reduction roasting magnetic separation process, VTM pellets are reduced by coal at high temperature (1200–1300 In this study, gas-based reduction roasting and magnetic separation of oxidized VTM by H The chemical composition and XRD pattern of the sample are given in The oxidized VTM pellets were loaded into a quartz reactor. And then the quartz reactor was placed into a vertical roaster for reduction roasting. The CO-H Next, roasted products were wet ground in a ball mill at the certain grinding fineness and then processed through a magnetic separator with the certain magnetic field intensity. Two component parts which called magnetic product and non-magnetic product can be got after filtration and drying. The total iron and TiO The metallization rate was calculated by the following mathematics formula: The recovery rate of iron and recovery rate of TiO The mineral and compositions of oxidized VTM pellets and reduced products were investigated by X-ray powder diffraction method (Rigaku D/Max 2500) using Cu-Kα radiation (40 Oxidized VTM pellets were roasted at various temperatures for 120 As observed, with the increasing of reduction temperature from 850 In the condition of reduction temperature of 1050 If pellets were reduced by pure CO (P(H In the condition of reduction temperature of 1050 It can be seen in VTM pellets were roasted at the condition of reduction temperature of 1050 The effect of grinding size on the efficiency of Fe-Ti separation was studied by fixing the magnetic field intensity of 0.08 Under the condition of grinding fineness of 44 As can be seen in Based on the above results, optimized process conditions obtained by one factor at a time test for Fe-Ti separation from oxidized VTM are as follows: reduction temperature of 1050 Reduction and magnetic separation are two key steps in the treatment process. In order to obtain a high Fe-Ti separation efficiency, iron oxide of VTM ore must be reduced to metallic iron in the reduction roasting step so that Fe and Ti can be separated in the chemical state. Meanwhile, adequate metallic iron size is required to satisfy the monomer separation of metallic iron particles during the magnetic separation process. So, in order to achieve high Fe-Ti separation efficiency, a high metallization rate and a big size of metallic iron particles are both required. In order to reveal the influence mechanisms of gas composition on Fe-Ti separation, the samples were examined by XRD and SEM-EDS analyses. The XRD patterns of reduced VTM oxidized pellets at different P(H As evident in The main reactions are as follows Mineral phases in the reduced pellets are different if H All Fe The XRD results indicated that H  However, besides the degree of reduction, the size of metallic iron also plays a key role in the following magnetic separation, which directly affect the efficiency of Fe-Ti separation. When the pellets were reduced at the condition of P(H The difference of particles size of most metallic iron during different gas atmosphere can be attributed to the number of crystal nucleus and thermodynamics. The reduction ability and the reduction rate of H All in all, H  The separation between Fe and Ti of VTM could be achieved by gas-based reduction followed by magnetic separation. Under the condition of reduction temperature of 1050 The efficiency of Fe-Ti separation shows a rise first followed by a decline with the increases of P(H The authors declare no conflicts of interest. This study was financially supported by the Fundamental Research Funds for the Central Universities (2014zzts273).