The aim of this study is to delineate and recognize the different gold mineralized zones based on surface and subsurface lithogeochemical Au data utilizing concentration–volume (C–V) model in the Qoloqoleh gold vein deposit, NW Iran. C–V modeling outlined six geochemical populations and four mineralized zones for Au element based on log–log plot which was correlated with the mineralized veins from geological data. Extremely mineralized veins are higher than 14.12ppm in Au grade, which are correlated with surface weathered zone by oxidized pyrites. The main phase of gold mineralization where Au grade typically ranges between 3.98 and 14.12ppm is associated with thick quartz veins. Moderately and weakly mineralized zones ranging from 0.354 to 3.98ppm Au derived by C–V model were correlated with narrow quartz veins that contain minor sulfides in the deposit. Barren host rocks obtained by C–V modeling were correlated with barren quartz veins in the deposit. The results were compared with a geological model, showing a strong positive correlation between mineralized zones and quartz-sulfide veins hosted by meta-volcanic rocks and sericite schist. Results examined via the C–V fractal model illustrate that the interpreted zones based on the fractal model, mineralogical, SEM and EPMA analyses have strong correlation with highly and moderately silicic mineralized veins consisting of sulfides and Au. To certify this, a logratio matrix was employed to validate the C–V fractal model for Au and two lithological units namely meta-volcanic rocks and sericite schists indicating the overall accuracy of 0.56 and 0.58 respectively.Classification and delineation of mineralized zones from barren host rocks are important in economic geology, mineral exploration, resource evaluation and mine planning. Investigation of ore mineralogy and paragenetic sequence provides useful data on ore-forming processes in deposits, because the typical characteristics of various types of ore deposits are reflected by their mineral assemblages ( Fractal geometry ( Fractal analysis assists in describing relationships of geological, geochemical, and mineralogical settings with spatial information derived from analysis of mineral deposit occurrence data ( The application of fractal models for analysis of mineralized zones was based on relationships between metal grades and volumes or tonnages ( The C–V fractal model, which was proposed by The Piranshahr–Sardasht–Saqez zone comprises a NE-trending goldfield belt hosted by mafic to intermediate meta-volcanic and metasedimentary rocks, located in the northern part of the Sanandaj–Sirjan metamorphic zone. This zone consists of several orogenic gold deposits/occurrences including the Qolqoleh (here in discussed), Kervian, Qabaqloujeh, Kharapeh, Alut, and Hamzeh–Gharanein ( The alteration haloes bordering veins in the mineralized shear zone are distinctly symmetrical to quasi-symmetrical. Whereas the footwall of these veins shows narrow alteration haloes, alteration in the hanging wall of these ore zones is more extensive; this distinction is consistent with a steep, although not vertical, orientation of the original structure. The alteration phases commonly include carbonate, sericite, epidote, chlorite, quartz, and sulfide. Alteration assemblages comprise: (1) distal carbonate–chlorite alteration in the footwall phyllite and hanging wall chlorite schist, (2) intermediate sericite–carbonate alteration in the sericite schist and metavolcanic rocks, and (3) proximal silicification and sulfidation in the sericite schist and metavolcanic rocks ( Two distinct styles of gold mineralization have been recognized at the deposit ( The style of deformation, vein width, vein length, and orebody geometry, as well as associated mineralogy, is in part a function of the host rocks. Dilatant veins discordant to the sericite schist are planar and relatively sulfide-poor, whereas veins crosscutting the metavolcanic rocks are ribbon textured and more sulfide-rich. Based on paragenetic relationships, three main stages of hydrothermal activity are recognized in the Qolqoleh gold deposit ( As a whole in both styles of mineralization, gold is common as native gold in stage I and as inclusions along pitted edges of pyrite that is coeval with chalcopyrite, arsenopyrite, pyrrhotite, native gold, galena, and sphalerite in stage II. Higher gold concentrations were observed in association with the more fine-grained and fractured pyrite and arsenopyrite. The contact between the mineralized veins and the altered metavolcanic and sericite schist wall rock is sharp ( Sixteen mineralized veins are recognized in the Qolqoleh gold deposit, which are modeled based on surface and subsurface data. Detailed petrographic investigation of various rock types in both surface outcrops and 150 drillcores and trenches shows mafic to intermediate meta-volcanic rocks and sericite schist comprise the main host rocks in the deposit ( 8415 lithogeochemical samples were collected in 2-m intervals from 150 trenches and drillcores in the deposit and were analyzed by ICP-MS for Au and associated paragenetic elements. However, only Au results are investigated in this paper. The distribution of Au data is not normal with the Au mean value of 0.6 Based on the 3D modeling of the deposit, volumes corresponding to different Au grades were calculated to derive a C–V fractal model. Threshold values of Au are recognized in the C–V log–log plot ( The multifractal nature of Au log–log plot reveals that there are six population of gold mineralization, in which the main phase started from 3.98 Based on the C–V fractal model of Au, extremely and highly mineralized veins ( Results of C–V modeling of the deposit are correlated with the 3D geological model of the deposit constructed by using RockWorks™ v. 15 software and drillcore data (  Comparison between meta-volcanic rocks and sericite schist rock units obtained from 3D geological modeling and extremely mineralized zones from the C–V fractal modeling indicates that the meta-volcanic rocks are overlapped with the zone more than the sericite schist because of the fact that OA in the sericite schist (0.58) is higher than in the meta-volcanic rocks (0.56), as shown in A comparison between moderately mineralized veins based on the fractal model and the meta-volcanic rocks and sericite schist in the 3D geological model indicates that there is a similarity between two geological units. Moderately mineralized veins defined by C–V modeling have an overlap with the meta-volcanic rocks higher than the sericite schist in the 3D geological model, based on OA. Three samples from drillcores were analyzed by SEM and EPMA, as depicted in In this paper, the concentration–volume (C–V) fractal model was used to delineate different Au mineralized zones in the Qolqoleh orogenic gold deposit, NW Iran. Investigation of the Qolqoleh orogenic Au deposit reveals that four main Au mineralized zones can be classified using the C–V modeling. Furthermore, the number of phases resulted from C–V modeling is correlated with geological data including data from drillcores and trenches, mineralogical, SEM, and EPMA studies. Based on the C–V fractal model, auriferous veins including the extremely (> According to the correlation between results driven by fractal and geological models from drillcores and trenches in Qolqoleh gold deposit, extremely and highly mineralized zones identified by the C–V fractal model have a positive correlation with meta-volcanic rocks according to the 3D geological model, whereas moderately mineralized zones correlate with sericite schist in the Qolqoleh deposit. The main gold mineralization (> There is a strong relationship between mineralized zones derived by the C–V model and the mineralogical, SEM, and EPMA results. Furthermore, the extremely mineralized zone correlates with the surface weathered zone formed by oxidation of sulfides and Au concentration in the weathered regime. Highly mineralized veins derived by C–V modeling are associated with quartz veins with high sulfidation particularly pyrites with Au particles. Barren host rock and weakly mineralized veins identified by C–V modeling exhibit barren quartz veins and quartz veins with minor volumes of sulfidation, respectively. The authors would like to thank Mr. Behroz Borna and Mr. Mahmoud Ghazanfari from the Geological Survey of Iran (GSI) for their logistic support and authorizing to access the Qolqoleh drillcores and dataset. The authors would also like to acknowledge Mr. Amir Bijan Yasrebi for her help in English writing corrections in this paper. The authors wish to thankfully acknowledge the editor and reviewers of this paper for their comments and valuable remarks.