Post-operative periprosthetic fractures have an incidence of 1.1% (Berry, 1999 [1]). The periprosthetic fracture is commonly classified by the location of the fracture. The most frequently utilized fracture classification categorizes patients by the location of the fracture including: peritrochanteric, around the stem, or distal to the femoral implant. Additional considerations incorporated in this classification include femoral implant stability and host bone status. We will review the different treatment modalities for each fracture type with consideration given to stem stability and host bone status.Fracture of the femur after total hip replacement is an uncommon mechanism of failure and the incidence has been estimated to be around 1.1% The incidence of greater trochanteric periprosthetic fractures have been estimated to be as high as 3% with some of these occurring intraoperatively and post-operatively (Brun, 2013). According to the Vancouver classification, peritrochanteric fractures are denoted as type A fractures with A Displaced fractures in the setting of minimal osteolysis warrant open reduction and internal fixation of the fracture. However, if there is a displaced fracture in the setting of osteolysis, the amount of displacement will factor into the surgical recommendations. Occasionally, if there is minimal displacement, it is often possible to treat the trochanteric fracture non-operatively. After the fracture is healed, the osteolysis generator can then be revised with bone grafting of the trochanter as needed. If the fracture is greatly displaced and there is no lysis, these fractures can be managed with a construct that holds the trochanteric fragment in a reduced position. When revising patients with osteolysis in the setting of a trochanteric fracture, if the trochanter is very thin, care should be utilized to not further disrupt the abductor mechanism. The following are two separate examples of peritrochanteric periprosthetic fractures. The first case is a 62-year-old male with an uncemented femoral component with a nondisplaced greater trochanteric fracture. The above x-rays show minimal osteolysis, and, therefore, the patient was treated non-operatively. The patient required Tylenol for pain control and has no issues healing the injury ( Fractures about the stem are categorized according to the Vancouver classification as Type B fractures. They are further categorized as B B The following example is a 72-year-old female with an uncemented proximally coated femoral stem. The stem appears stable radiographically and was confirmed at the time of surgery. The patient underwent an open reduction internal fixation with a locking plate. We utilized bicortical nonlocking screws distally. Proximally there is a combination of unicortical locking screws and cerclage wires to bolster fixation in this area. The patient did great after surgery and was discharged four days post-operatively. The final x-rays 2 years post-operation show complete union of the fracture, continued stem stability, and no hardware failure ( Periprosthetic femoral fractures with loosening of the stem are treated very differently than the B The goals of revision surgery include a stable femoral component, healing of the fracture, a quick return to pre-injury functional level while minimizing complications associated with the injury and the surgery. Surgical considerations include obtaining adequate exposure, avoiding fracture propagation, and properly preparing the remaining bone stock for the new hip prosthesis. We commonly utilize an ETO for exposure and removal of the femoral component. This allows excellent visualization of both the femoral and acetabular components and allows the stem to be removed easily. Prior to preparing the femoral canal a cerclage wire should be placed around the femur just distal to the level of the fracture to prevent fracture propagation during preparation of the femoral canal. After the stem is placed, the ETO can be repaired with cerclage wires as well. Levine et al. A couple of cases that illustrate the above principles are shown below. This is a 71-year-old male with an uncemented stem with a type B Periprosthetic fractures in which the stem is loose and there is significant osteolysis represent the most challenging periprosthetic reconstruction. Similar to type B The following patient is a good example of a patient with a B According to the Vancouver classification, fractures distal to the stem of the femoral component are categorized at type C fractures Our final example is an 73-year-old male who fell on ice and sustained a fracture well below a solidly ingrown total hip replacement. The patient had a well-functioning total hip replacement prior to the injury. The fracture was reduced and a lateral locking plate was placed with minimal disruption of the soft tissues surrounding the fracture. Screws were inserted percutaneously with the use of an external guide and fluoroscopy. Intraoperatively, rotational alignment was assessed by comparing the rotation of the knee and ankle of the operative leg to the contralateral leg. Additionally, we assesed that we have restored the mechanical axis of the knee by ensuring that an alignment rod held from the center of the femoral head to the center of the ankle passes through the center of the knee. This is most commonly confirmed utilizing fluoroscopy. The patient did well after the surgery, he was maintained on PWB for 4 weeks post-operatively. Our final x-rays show excellent restoration of the mechanical axis, union of the fracture, and the stem remains well fixed ( Post-operative periprosthetic fractures around total hip arthroplasties are a unique mechanism of failure. It is likely that there will be increasing numbers of these fracture patterns with rising numbers of total hip arthroplasties being performed annually. The treatment of these fractures is not complex but requires evaluating (i) the location of the fracture (peritrochanteric, around the stem, or distal), (ii) whether the stem is loose, and (iii) the status of the host bone. Our preferred method of treatment for Type A fractures is most commonly non-operative management. For type B