Vast reserves of peridotite and serpentinite rocks can be utilised for the safe and permanent sequestration of global CO2 emissions via aqueous mineral carbonation. These, and indeed most feedstocks used in mineral carbonation require ultrafine grinding and/or heat-activation, to engender significantly enhanced reactivity in the rock such that it can then be carbonated. Both activation processes are energy intensive and present significant obstacles to the commercial application of mineral carbonation. Here we show that these limitations can be addressed, at least in part, through the application of a concurrent or in operando grinding technique which does not require feedstocks which have been subjected to prior ultrafine grinding nor heat-activation.
                  Concurrent grinding is shown to result in a significant increase in magnesite yields for non-heat activated feedstock, prepared such that fines (<20 μm particles) were excluded from the feed. We assert that concurrent grinding may be a suitable technique for the processing of feedstocks such as those containing significant proportions of forsterite and pyroxene, minerals which are unresponsive to thermal activation for use in aqueous mineral carbonation. This study also investigates the effect of different grinding media particle size on reducing the particle size distribution (PSD) of the feed. Optimum ratio of grinding media size to feed particle size, optimum grinding media and slurry concentrations, optimum time for grinding and optimum impeller designs are determined for the system under study. The quantitative effect of grinding media concentration, slurry concentration, pressure and temperature on magnesite yield has been investigated.It has been predicted (  Park and Fan ( Julcour et al. ( Dunite rock for this study was collected from The Great Serpentine Belt, NSW, Australia. The initial feed size of the rock was 2–3 mm which was then ground in a ball mill (roller ball mill, MTI Corporation, USA) followed by wet sieving to obtain a 20-45 μm fraction where fines (particles < 10 μm) were essentially absent. Seven different batches of feed material were prepared, having similar and definite size “bins” A 300 mL reactor (Parr Instrument Company, USA; Model 4560) made of 316 stainless steel was used for single stage carbonation reactions ( Dunite slurry (typically 15 wt % solids in distilled water) was charged into the reactor, followed by reactor re-assembling. The reactor was then evacuated using a vacuum pump to remove any residual air present in the reactor. Control of the reaction initiation point is important to enable an evaluation of the reaction kinetics. Following reactor evacuation, heating of the reactor was commenced and, typically, continued up to the final reaction temperature of 180 °C. When the temperature stabilised, the reactor pressurised using the CO An acrylic reactor was used during initial screening of impellors, which was constructed from poly carbonate materials and has dimensions virtually identical to the Parr stainless steel reactor. Dunite slurry, of different compositions, was charged into the (transparent) reactor. The slurry was stirred and visual examination of the material during mixing was undertaken. Different impeller designs were explored to engender optimum stirring and agitation conditions by observing the vortex formation and the extent of solids mixing. Dunite slurry, of varying composition between experiments, was added to the stainless steel liner for the reactor (used to minimise excessive wear of the reactor vessel), along with grinding media and the reactor was then assembled. For experiments at room temperature, heating was not initiated and the stirrer was fixed at 600 rpm and the experiment proceeded for the predetermined time. At the end of each experiment, the reactor was opened, the slurry removed and the resulting PSD of the solid product was measured. For experiments performed at high temperatures (180 °C), the slurry was added to the liner, along with grinding media and the reactor was then assembled. Stirring was initiated at 600 rpm and the reactor was heated to the desired temperature (180 °C) and the experiment was continued for the desired time (5 h, 2.5 h or 1 h). In a reference experiments with dunite, the slurry was added to the reactor liner and the reactor was assembled and heated to 180 °C. The reactor was then pressurised with CO To conduct In concurrent grinding experiments, the dunite slurry was charged into the reactor liner, along with grinding media. The reactor was assembled and heated to the desired temperature. The reactor was then pressurised with CO The mixing behaviour of hollow and solid shaft turbine impellers, pitched turbine impellers with hollow and solid shaft and hollow rod type impellers with hollow shaft was studied in the acrylic (transparent) reactor. These experiments were undertaken in distilled water, slurries, various grinding media concentrations in distilled water and finally a combination of slurries and grinding media. Details of these experiments are provided in Supplementary Information document, Experiments using the clear acrylic reactor assisted in disclosing the appropriate combination of grinding media and solids concentrations (50 wt% media with 15 wt% solids, 40 wt% media with 15 wt% and 35 wt% solids, 55 wt% media with 20 wt% and 35 wt% solids, 60 wt% media with 25 wt% solids) as the initial experimental conditions for particle size reduction. Davis and Dawson ( The data in A mixture comprised of 50 wt% media (0.5 mm zirconia) and 15 wt% solids was selected for further study, to establish the effectiveness of concurrent grinding at 180 °C, which is the temperature often adopted for aqueous mineral carbonation of peridotites (dunite, olivine) rocks. A comparison of PSDs following 5 h of concurrent grinding at room temperature (25 °C) and at 180 °C shows significant enhancement in the effectiveness of grinding at the higher temperature. ( To determine the optimum time for concurrent grinding, experiments were performed for 1 h, 2.5 h and 5 h, using 0.5 mm zirconia and 50 wt% media and 15 wt% solids concentration ( High d Different media size and compositions (0.5–1 mm alumina, 1 mm alumina, 1 mm zirconia, 0.6–0.8 mm zirconia and a mixture (50:50 by mass) of 1 mm and 0.5 mm zirconia) were studied for their efficacy in reducing PSD following 1 h of concurrent grinding ( A grinding media size of 1 mm appeared to be the optimum size for effective grinding, corresponding to a grinding media size to feed size mass ratio of 20. This finding is consistent with the study by Mankosa et al. ( Alumina, zirconia and stainless steel media have a density of 3.9 g/cm To determine the effect of slurry concentration, grinding media concentration, temperature, pressure and time on magnesite yield during carbonation with concurrent grinding; statistical experimental design was performed adopting the Placket Burman technique ( The increase in grinding media concentration from 30 wt% to 50 wt% had the largest effect on magnesite yield ( We acknowledge that number of experiments should have been more for statistical experimental design. Here our results are based on testing each variable three times at its low level and three times at its high level (refer to Supplementary Information for detail). 50 wt% media and 15 wt% slurry concentration provided best yields (32% and 23%) under carbonation ( PSD measurements ( In response to these results, extended 8 h experiments using raw 20–45 μm dunite (without heat-activation) wereperformed using the optimised reaction conditions of concurrent grinding established from the statistical design experiments i.e 50 wt% media, 15 wt% slurry at 130 bar using 0.64 M NaHCO XRD analyses ( A 20–45 μm dunite sample was ground at 180 °C for 8 h using 1 mm zirconia (50 wt%). This prepared feed was carbonated in a second step for 8 h at 130 bar, 180 °C, 15 wt% solids and using 0.64 M NaHCO Concurrent (  Four individual experiments were performed to study the effect of sampling (of reactor contents) on magnesite yield. Experiments without sampling were performed for 2.5 h, 60 min, 30 min and 3 min respectively. Comparable yield results ( For our system, 50 wt% media and 15 wt% slurry concentrations were favoured in terms of particle size reduction, in which the ratio of percentage of grinding media to percentage of solids was 3.3. Grinding media concentration should be selected such that the media sits partially as a layer at the base of the reactor so that falling media balls impact on this media layer to engender grinding action. Maximum solids concentration was found to be 15 wt%. With a higher solids concentration the grinding media commenced as wirling motion with the solids, with an associated reduction in effectiveness. Grinding performance was enhanced at elevated temperatures (180 °C). Concurrent ( Grinding media tests at constant volume disclosed that 1 mm zirconia media resulted in a significant reduction in PSD compared to 1 mm stainless steel and 1 mm alumina beads. 1 mm zirconia media converted virtually all the feed into sub 10 μm size fraction during 2.5 h grinding at 180 °C. These results show that it is better to have media with high hardness and medium density. In carbonation experiments with concurrent grinding, grinding media concentration had the most significant effect on magnesite yield. A high slurry solids concentration (30 wt%) had a negative effect on magnesite yield as compared to low slurry solids concentration (15 wt%). High pressure (130 bar) had a positive effect on magnesite yield when compared to low pressure (65 bar), and high temperature (180 °C) had a (slightly) positive influence on the magnesite yield as compared to yields obtained at a reaction temperature of 155 °C. The parameters in order of importance influencing magnesite yield were found to be grinding media concentration followed by slurry solids concentration, pressure and temperature. Using optimised conditions as determined from statistical experimental design,a magnesite yield of 62% was attained in carbonation of raw 20–45 μm dunite without heat-activation. XRD analysis showed that brucite and olivine were almost completely consumed while lizardite was partially consumed. Concurrent ( We conclude that concurrent grinding may be a suitable technique for the processing of feedstocks such as those containing significant proportions of forsterite and pyroxene, minerals which are unresponsive to thermal activation for use in aqueous mineral carbonation. Muhammad Imran Rashid would like to thank the University of Newcastle for his postgraduate research scholarship. The authors acknowledge the support from The following is the Supplementary data to this article: Supplementary data to this article can be found online at