A Solar Enhanced Natural Draft Dry Cooling Tower (SENDDCT) is an air-cooled hybrid cooling system that uses solar energy to enhance the cooling efficiency of natural draft dry cooling. In this paper, a three-dimensional numerical analysis was carried out using commercial software ANSYS FLUENT to investigate the effects of the introduction of a partial blockage on the cooling performance of the SENDDCT and to determine the upper limitation of increasing the solar collector size in the SENDDCT design with a fixed area of heat exchangers. In the simulations, the cooling capacities of SENDDCTs with the same geometric and operating parameters, such as the heat-exchanger areas and tower heights, except for different collector sizes and blockage ratios (the ratio of the blocked area to the area offered at the collector outer edge), were evaluated and a comparative analysis was performed. The results showed that for an SENDDCT with fixed heat-exchanger area, the upper limitation of increasing the solar collector size is that corresponding to a blockage ratio reaching 50%, above which the heat dump capacity of the SENDDCT decreases with a further increase in the solar collector size owing to vortices generated at the back of the heat exchangers reducing the effective heat transfer area. In addition, with a distribution of small-unit heat exchangers, this effect can be significantly reduced.surface area of the numerical cell, m frontal area of Heat exchangers, m constants in the turbulence equations, – constant for buoyancy effect in the turbulence equations, – specific heat of air, J/kg fin diameter, mm fin root diameter, mm tower base diameter, m tower exit diameter, m sunroof diameter, m tower throat diameter, m gravitational acceleration, m/s generation of turbulent kinetic energy due to buoyancy, – generation of turbulent kinetic energy due to the mean velocity gradients, – heat transfer coefficient based on the frontal area of heat exchangers, W/m heat source, W/m tower height, m height of heat exchangers, m convective heat transfer coefficient, W/m pressure drop coefficient of heat exchangers or turbulent kinetic energy, – thickness of layer, m air mass flow rate, kg/s water mass flow rate, kg/s number of tube per row, – number of bundles, – pressure, Pa transversal tube pitch, mm Fin pitch, mm relative pressures at the ambient and tower exit respectively, Pa laminar Prandtl number, – turbulent Prandtl number, – heat flux, W/m heat transfer rate of heat exchangers, W solar radiation intensity, W/m volumetric source term of scalar quantity fin thickness, mm temperature, K air inlet and outlet temperatures, K environmental temperature, K ground temperature, K water inlet and outlet temperatures, K velocity vectors in component of the flow velocity parallel to the gravitational vector, – component of the flow velocity perpendicular to the gravitational vector, – air velocity flow normal to the frontal area of heat exchanger, kg/s volume of the numerical cell, m wind speed at sunroof elevation, m/s Cartesian co-ordinates absorptivity of ground surface, – turbulent kinetic energy dissipation rate, – emississivity of sunroof, – transmissivity of sunroof, – scalar quantity ( pressure drop, Pa diffusion coefficient of variable quantity laminar viscosity, kg/m turbulent viscosity, kg/m constants, – air density, kg/m air inlet density, kg/m reference density, kg/m velocity, – Geothermal energy is a reliable, clean and sustainable energy resource that can provide base load power for human activities. Although conventional geothermal energy existing at shallow depth underground is cheap to produce, such geothermal resources are limited. The more abundant geothermal energy is associated with hot dry rocks at depths ranging around 4–5 Studies showed that most potential geothermal sites using EGS technology in Australia are located in arid areas, where EGS power plants cannot be wet cooled owing to the shortage of water. Hence, the only alternative for heat rejection is air cooling. There are two technological options for a dry cooling system: natural draft and mechanical draft cooling. Mechanical draft cooling systems inevitably lead to high parasitic loss due to power consumption by fans, especially during hot periods in summer. Therefore, natural draft dry cooling may be the cost-effective solution for these power plants. The disadvantage associated with all dry cooling systems is the low cooling efficiency when the ambient temperature is high, which is usually the period of peak electricity demand ( At the potential EGS sites in Australia discussed above, high ambient temperature accompanies high solar intensity. This high solar intensity could be used to compensate the net power losses due to the low cooling efficiency of a natural draft dry cooling system in hot periods. A new cooling system, named the Solar Enhanced Natural Draft Dry Cooling Tower (SENDDCT), was introduced in a previous study ( Theoretically, the larger the solar collector size selected, the more quickly the cooling air flows through heat exchangers, which results in better cooling performance. In an SENDDCT configuration, the solar collector size can be varied while keeping a constant area of the heat exchangers. It is possible that the selected numbers (area) of heat exchangers may not be large enough to fully cover the open area offered by the outer edge of the solar collector. In this case, the rest of the outside perimeter of the collector must be blocked to ensure that air only flows into the space of solar collection through heat exchangers. There is a concern that vortices may form at the back of heat exchangers owing to the introduction of partial blockage at the collector entrance when increasing the collector size for greater solar enhancement, and this may affect the cooling performance of the SENDDCT adversely. If so, that raises two questions. (1) What is the upper limitation of the increase in the solar collector size for a fixed area of the heat exchangers? (2) Can the negative effect of the introduction of a partial blockage be reduced? To answer these questions, three-dimensional (3-D) analysis is necessary. The computational fluid dynamics (CFD) software ANSYS FLUENT has proven to be an accurate and reliable tool with which to conduct fluid dynamics studies. Hence, a 3-D model including the solar collection space, heat exchangers and tower was built in ANSYS FLUENT. Firstly, a test case with the collector entrance fully covered by heat exchangers was run for both 1-D and 3-D models, and 3-D simulation results of the heat transfer rate and air mass flow rate of the heat exchangers were compared with 1-D results to verify the correctness of boundary condition settings and parameter inputs of the 3-D model. Sequentially, effects of the introduced partial blockage on the performances of SENDDCTs with fixed heat-exchanger areas but different collector sizes were examined using the developed 3-D model. This paper adopts a geometric model of an SENDDCT with three-row finned tube heat exchangers aiming to dissipate 135.5 The heat exchanger performance plays a significant role in air cooling towers. Hence, the pressure drop and heat transfer parameters of the selected heat exchanger should be predetermined before the development of a 3-D model. In ANSYS FLUENT, the radiator boundary condition can be used to model heat exchangers ( To predefine the coefficients, we used a toolbox called the Aspen Air Cooled Exchanger in the software Aspen Exchangers Design and Rating (V7.1). The Aspen Air Cooled Exchanger toolbox employs equations developed by According to the heat exchanger design described in In the 3-D model, we assumed the sunroof is made of glass (emissivity and transmissivity values of 0.84), and the ground serves as a natural energy storage layer that is 10 Proper boundary conditions must be applied to obtain accurate results. The solar radiation was modeled as a heat source stored in a thin layer on the ground surface following This heat source transfers heat with the air under the sunroof and the ground. The coefficient of heat transfer by convection between the sunroof and the ambient was specified as 14 Periodic boundary conditions were applied on both sides of the sector. These boundary conditions ensure that the airflow entering the computational domain through one periodic plane will be identical to the airflow exiting the domain through the opposite periodic plane. Pressure inlet and outlet boundaries were applied at the inlet faces of the outside-air zone and tower exit with relative pressures set as 0 Radiators that represent the heat exchangers were applied at the inlet face of the inside-air zone. Eqs. (3) and (4) were pre-input into the radiator boundary condition with the radiator temperature being 60 Sandstone was selected as the material of the ground, and the air was regarded as a compressible ideal gas in the 3-D model. The properties of the sandstone and air used in the model are listed in The SIMPLE (Semi-Implicit Method for Pressure-Linked Equations) algorithm was used in this numerical simulation with discretisation for governing equations under second-order accuracy. A standard k–ε model was used to describe the turbulence condition of the SENDDCT system. Accordingly, governing equations including continuity, momentum, energy, and k–ε equations can be written in the general form During the running of test cases in ANSYS FLUENT, computations continued until residuals of all governing equations reached minimum values. The convergence criteria are that the residual of the energy equation falls below 10 Since the previously developed 1-D model ( 3-D model results showed that the calculated heat transfer rate and air mass flow rate of the heat exchangers were 135,865,322 The air temperature distributions predicted by the 3-D model at different heights (namely, 2, 4, 6, 8, 10, 12 and 14 The stream traces of airflow on one side of the sector are plotted in  The pressure distributions at different heights along the sunroof predicted by the 3-D model were very similar. Hence only the pressure distribution at a height of 6 According to the above comparisons of 1-D and 3-D simulation results, a conclusion can be drawn that the boundary conditions and other parameters used in the 3-D model are correct and that the created 3-D models can be used to predict the performance of the SENDDCT if the outer edge of the solar collector is partially covered by heat exchangers, as shown in the next section. The effect of this partial blockage and the limitation of increasing the solar collector size with a fixed heat exchanger area are investigated in this section using the developed 3-D model. In the following sections, the ratio of the heat exchanger area to the area offered at the collector outer edge is referred to as the coverage ratio. Conversely, the ratio of the blocked area at the collector entrance to the area offered at the collector outer edge is referred to as the blockage ratio. Note that for a fixed area of the heat exchangers, the blockage ratio increases with an increase in collector size while the coverage ratio decreases with an increase in collector size. Five new cases were run with the 3-D model to investigate the effect of the partial blockage on the cooling performance of the SENDDCT. All the geometric and operating parameters such as the tower height and area of the heat exchangers in these five new cases were the same as those given in The solver and boundary conditions used in this section were the same as those used previously. Grid independence was tested by varying the number of elements from 4000 to 700,000 until consistent results were obtained (less than 0.1% error). Calculated velocity vector fields are shown in As shown in Air mass flow rates and corresponding heat transfer rates are listed in  In To avoid an unfavourable vortex effect on the cooling performance, it is important to arrange the heat exchangers and blockage at the solar collector entrance properly in the SENDDCT design. To clarify this effect, another test case, case G, was run for the 3-D model with the same operating and geometric parameters as used in case D (50% blockage), except for a different arrangement of the heat exchangers and blocked area at the collector entrance. In cases D and G, the areas of the total heat exchanger were the same, and were only large enough to cover 50% of the open area provided by the perimeter of the solar collector. In case D, heat exchangers were divided into smaller units than they were in case G, and the blocked area and heat exchangers were placed as evenly as possible around the perimeter as shown in A 3-D model of the SENDDCT, which consists of heat exchangers, the solar collection space and the tower, was developed using ANSYS FLUENT software. A baseline case (case A) was run for both the created 3-D model and the author-developed 1-D model. Satisfactory agreement was found between the results obtained with the two models. It showed that the boundary conditions and parameter inputs of the 3-D model are correct and that the 3-D model can accurately predict the performance of the SENDDCT. The created 3-D model was used to investigate the effects of the introduction of a partial blockage at the collector entrance on the performances of SENDDCTs with different collector sizes and blockage ratios but the same areas of heat exchangers. Meanwhile, the limitation of increasing the solar collector size was analyzed using the developed 3-D model. From the CFD simulation results, the following conclusions can be drawn. For a fixed heat-exchanger area, the air mass flow rate of the SENDDCT increases with an increase in the collector size because more solar enhancement can be achieved. For a fixed heat-exchanger area, the heat rejection rate of the SENDDCT increases with an increasing collector diameter up to a certain limit. Although the heat rejection performance initially increases with an increasing collector diameter, it decreases when more than half of the collector entrance is blocked. The performance reduction is due to generated vortices partially blocking air flow path through the heat exchangers and reducing the effective heat transfer area of the heat exchangers at a lower coverage ratio. The introduction of a partial blockage at the collector entrance of the SENDDCT increases the turbulence of air inside the solar collector, and hence, more solar energy stored in the ground surface is able to be extracted by airflow. This means that additional solar enhancement can be achieved through this effect. This effect cannot be modeled with the 1-D model, which tends to underestimate the cooling performance of the SENDDCT when a partial blockage is introduced. For a fixed heat-exchanger area, the limitation of increasing the solar collector size is that the corresponding blockage ratio reaches 50%, which may be used for the optimization of the selection of the heat-exchanger area and sunroof size. An even distribution of heat exchangers and blocked area with small heat exchanger panel units should be considered for better SENDDCT performance.