Background
                  Tibial plateau fractures involving two or more columns were routinely assessed by two-dimensional radiography in the past. This often misled surgeons and attention was given only to the medial and lateral column without consideration of the posterior column, especially the postero-medial corner. Luo in 2010 introduced the new three-column classification system based on multiplanar computed tomography images. This study was conducted to assess the outcome after internal fixation of tibial plateau fractures involving two or more columns in our centre based on the column specific approach.
               
                  Materials and Methods
                  This was a prospective study conducted at our institute, between 2011 and 2016. Total of 183 patients with tibial plateau fractures involving two or more columns were admitted during this study period of which 123 patients were satisfied our inclusion criteria. 8 patients were lost to follow up. Hence 115 patients with tibial plateau fractures involving two or more columns were classified based on the new three column classification system. Dual column fixation (Anterolateral +Anteromedial) was done in 76 patients, (Anterolateral+Posteromedial) fixation in 25 patients and triple column fixation (Anterolateral + Anteromedial + Posteromedial) in 14 patients. Post operatively patients were assessed by Modified Rasmussen functional and radiological scoring system.
               
                  Results
                  Based on Modified Rasmussen functional scoring system, 73 patients (63.5%) had excellent results, 37 patients (32.2%) had good results and 5 patients (4.3%) had fair results. Based on Modified Rasmussen radiological scoring system, 71 patients (61.7%) had excellent results, 38 patients (33.1%) had good results, 6 patients (5.2%) had fair results. 3 patients had deep infections.
               
                  Conclusion
                  Based on our study, we like to conclude that we had good outcomes utilizing this modern column specific approach to the treatment of these two or more column tibial plateau fracture injuries, which includes assessment of three columns.Tibial plateau fractures have become very common nowadays due to high energy trauma as a result of increased incidence of road traffic accidents This was a prospective study conducted at our institute which is a tertiary care center, between March 2011 and December 2016. Patients with tibial plateau fractures presenting in the emergency department were assessed and those with Schatzker Type V and VI or AO type C injuries were included in the study. The inclusion criteria were 1. Adult patients (18 to 70 yrs) 2. Isolated, closed two or more column tibial plateau fractures 3. Medically fit 4. Patients who were willing to participate in the study. The exclusion criteria were 1. Open fractures 2. Paediatric fractures 3. Patient with compartment syndrome, neurovascular injuries and bad skin condition 4. Associated with other long bone fractures. Patients underwent thorough clinical and radiological (Roentgenographic and computed tomography) evaluation. Standard anteroposterior and lateral roentgenograms and CT scan with 3D reconstruction were taken for all the patients. Patients were classified under the new three column classification system The standard anterolateral approach for fixation of lateral column injury and anteromedial approach for fixation of medial column injury was used. Posteromedial approach was used for fixation of posteromedial and medial column injury For triple column injury (Medial, Lateral and Posterior column), we used posteromedial gastrocnemius- soleus approach Post operatively the mobilization of the knee was started by continuous passive motion (CPM) followed by active mobilization and non weight bearing walking with elbow crutches. The functional results were analyzed as per the Modified Rasmussen Functional Scoring System [ Postoperatively radiographs were taken to assess the fracture reduction, implant position. Following discharge patients were reviewed regularly in the out patients department. Solid union was conformed when patient was able to walk without support, pain and radiological evidence of union. At the end of the one year all the patients were subjected to full length scanogram xray and CT scan to assess radiological parameters of Modified Rasmussen Radiological Assessment scoring system. [ Among the 115 cases, 84 (73.04%) were right and 31(26.96%) were left tibiae. The mean follow up was 3 years 4 months (range 12 months to 6 years). We studied a total of the 115 knees, 96 were male patients and 19 female patients. The youngest patient was 19 years old and the oldest being 70 year old. The average age of patient was 41.4 years (19–70 years) in the series. In our study, 93 cases (80.9%) the time interval between injury and surgery were within 12 h. In 22 cases (19.1%) the time interval between injury and surgery was more than 12 h. In 76 cases (66.1%), we used dual column fixation method Anteromedial + Anterolateral plating( In the post operative period we started continuous passive motion (CPM) within one week in 92 cases and 23cases within 2 weeks. The mean range of motion in our study at the end of the one year was 126.2° (90°–140°). The radiological results were analyzed as per the Modified Rasmussen Radiological Scoring System. Out of 115 cases in our study, 71 cases (61.7%) had excellent radiological outcome and 38cases (33.1%) had good radiological outcome. So, 94.8% of our cases had acceptable radiological outcome with The functional results were analyzed as per the Modified Rasmussen Functional Scoring System. Out of 115 cases in our study, 73 cases (63.5%) had excellent functional outcome and 37cases (32.2%) had good functional outcome. So, 95.7% of our cases had acceptable functional outcome with In our study, three cases developed deep infection. Of these, one case was treated by antibiotic therapy as per culture sensitivity report, wound debridement + vacuum application and followed by implant removal. Second case was treated by antibiotic therapy as per culture sensitivity report, wound debridement + vacuum application and followed by secondary suturing. Third case was treated by antibiotic therapy as per culture sensitivity report, wound debridement + vacuum application and followed by flap cover. The average radiographic bony union and weight bearing period was 13 weeks (10 to 18 weeks). In our study, we used Luo three column classification based on multiplanar CT scans and column specific approach for treating two or more columns tibial plateau fractures. Compared to other studies Biggi et al. The optimal surgical treatment of Schatzker's type V and VI tibial plateau fractures have remained challenging and controversial, despite the development of various new techniques of fracture reduction, implants for fracture fixation and better techniques of soft tissue handling [ The old classification systems of tibial plateau fractures are based on two-dimensional imaging. This misleads the surgeons to pay attention to medial and lateral column without considering posterior column in tibial plateau fractures, especially for the posteromedial corner Kye et al. A small percentage of tibial plateau fractures need the ``three-column fixation'' technique [ The limitations of our study were 1.Single centre study 2.Non randomized with no comparative or control group, 3. long term follow up is required to confirm the acceptable outcome Based on our study, we like to conclude that we had good outcomes utilizing this modern column specific approach to the treatment of these two or more column tibial plateau fracture injuries, which includes assessment of three columns. None. This paper would not have been possible without the guidance and the help of several individuals who in one way or another contributed and extended their valuable assistance in the preparation and completion of this study. First and foremost, my utmost gratitude to my parents, without whom it would not have been possible for me to reach so far in my life. I would like to gratefully and sincerely thank statistician who helped us with calculations and results, My acknowledgements are also to all the staff of Devadoss Multispecialty Hospital and the patients for their help and co-operation during the course of the study and preparation of this article.