The solvent extraction of trivalent lanthanoids (without Pm) with mixtures of chelating extractant 1-(2-thienyl)-4,4,4-trifluoro-1,3-butanedione (thenoyltrifluoroacetone, HTTA) or 4-benzoyl-3-methyl-1-phenyl-2-pyrazolin-5-on (HP) and 1-(2-pyridylazo)-2-naphthol (PAN, S) in C6H6 has been studied. It was found that in the presence of 1-(2-pyridylazo)-2-naphthol the lanthanoids have been extracted as Ln(TTA)3S and LnP3S. On the basis of the experimental data, the values of the equilibrium constants have been calculated. The addition of PAN to the chelating extractant produces synergistic effect which is larger for the heavier lanthanoids. The separation of the lanthanoids with synergistic mixtures was higher than those obtained with HTTA or HP alone. In the most cases an enhancement of the metal ions separation was observed upon the change of the chelating extractant HP with HTTA.Solvent extraction has been widely employed as a versatile separation method of metal ions in various fields from analytical chemistry to hydrometallurgy because of its simplicity, speed, and applicability to both tracer and macroamounts of metal ions. As there are a number of different solvent extraction systems that could be used for metal ions separation, synergistic extraction systems have received attention for a long time. The synergistic extraction of trivalent actinoids and lanthanoids is of great interest because of the high extraction efficiency of these metal ions in presence of a chelating agent and a neutral donor 1-(2-Pyridylazo)-2-naphthol (further abbreviated as PAN or S) has been used several times for the extraction of metals The object of the present work is to investigate the synergistic solvent extraction of the metals of the lanthanoid series with mixture of a chelating extractant 1-(2-thienyl)-4,4,4-trifluoro-1,3-butanedione (HTTA) or 4-benzoyl-3-methyl-1-phenyl-2-pyrazolin-5-on (HP) and 1-(2-pyridylazo)-2-naphthol (PAN) in C The commercial products HTTA (purity >99%, Fluka), HP (purity >99%, Fluka) and PAN (p.a., Fluka) were used as received. The diluent was benzene (Merck, p.a.). Stock solutions of the metals were prepared from their oxides (Fluka, puriss.). Arsenazo III (Fluka) was of analytical grade purity as were the other reagents used. The experiments were carried out using 10 The distribution coefficients of the lanthanoids were determined in three series of experiments: with fixed HTTA(HP) and PAN concentration and varied pH; with fixed pH and PAN concentration and varied HTTA(HP) concentration; with fixed pH and HTTA(HP) and varied PAN concentration. The solvent extraction of the lanthanoid(III) ions with HTTA in C The solvent extraction of 13 lanthanoid metals with HP alone in C The synergistic solvent extraction of the lanthanoids was studied using a traditional and effective means of obtaining both stoichiometric and equilibrium constant information about extraction processes, called “slope analysis”. It is based on an examination of the variation of The experimental data for the extraction of the lanthanoid metals with mixture of HTTA–PAN and HP–PAN are given in The formation of the species Ln(TTA) Taking into account that the partition of HP The formation of mixed complexes in the organic phase can be described by the equations: The equilibrium constant The values of the equilibrium constants The synergistic enhancement produced by HTTA–PAN and HP–PAN mixtures can be determined using the synergistic coefficients (SC). They were calculated according to the equation proposed by Taube and Siekierski The separation of the lanthanoids using HTTA–PAN and HP–PAN mixtures can be assessed by the separation factors (SF) calculated as a ratio of the distribution coefficients of two adjacent lanthanoids (the heavier and the lighter one). When the metal ions form complexes of the same type (as in the present case), the separation factors can be determined as a ratio of the equilibrium constants The metals of the lanthanoids series were extracted with binary mixtures HTTA–PAN and HP–PAN as Ln(TTA)