Land rehabilitation constitutes an integral part of surface mining design aiming at returning the mined-out area to its former suitability to accept new land uses. The effectiveness of alternative rehabilitation plans depends on many parameters, the majority of which can be quantified in physical terms. One of the most difficult issues to deal with, however, is still the impact on the landscape during the operation and the improvement achieved after rehabilitation of the mine site. Towards this direction, the paper presents, through an illustrative example, a new method for the quantitative evaluation of the impacts on the landscape. This method, named LETOPID, focuses on the measurement of two main parameters: (i) the alteration of topographic relief and (ii) the sensitivity of observation conditions, both making use of GIS tools. The arithmetic values produced for each of the above parameters facilitates the discrimination of seemingly similar alternative design and rehabilitation plans.Land rehabilitation, implying the re-establishment of a stable and self-sustaining ecosystem and utilization of the site for its proposed land use after mining activities ( The complexity of the problem has led to an important effort worldwide for the development of techniques that could deal with the various aspects of mined land rehabilitation. As a result of this effort, there are recommended practices for soil management, erosion control, slope stabilization, species selection, seed collection, nursery establishment and maintenance, seeding and planting strategies, weed control, fauna attraction and other aspects of rehabilitation techniques ( Nevertheless, most of the existing visual impact assessment (VIA) methodologies are semi-quantitative and conclude in visual quality objectives or in visual sensitivity classes (e.g. A key factor in achieving better results is the development of procedures capable of quantifying the various aspects of visual impact ( Bearing in mind the abovementioned remarks, the paper describes a new method for the quantitative evaluation of the impacts of opencast mining on the landscape and the improvement achieved by alternative rehabilitation plans, called LETOPID (Landscape Evaluation Tool for Open Pit Mine Design). The methodology, which has been developed by the Laboratory of Mining and Environmental Technology (LMET) of the National Technical University of Athens (NTUA), is based on the main principles of VIA approaches and takes advantage of modern tools such as contemporary mining software and GIS (ibid.). The results are quite promising since it is proved that the methodology developed is capable of providing a coherent framework for the design and the evaluation of surface mining installations during all stages of mine's life (i.e. design, operation and closure). To validate the methodology, a case study of an aggregate quarry site has been used. The quarry has been abandoned after massive exploitation, which took place during the last decades, causing serious environmental impacts. Two alternative rehabilitation plans have been proposed. In the paper the plans are evaluated with regard to the landscape improvement achieved in each case. The intrusion into the landscape by surface mining is attributed to the drastic change of topographic relief. The degree in which this change becomes perceptible depends on the number as well as the sensitivity of the viewers. Based on these commonly accepted assumptions, the LETOPID focuses on the measurement of two main parameters: (i) the alteration of topographic relief and (ii) the sensitivity of viewing conditions. For the measurement of the topographic relief alteration (TRA) five indices have been formed, namely the Landform Index (LI), the Altitude Index (AI), the Adjusted Landform Index (ALI), which is produced as a combination of the LI and AI, the Slope Index (SI) and the Aspect Index (AsI). Each one of these indices determines the average alteration of specific landform characteristics due to the surface mining activities. The necessary data for the calculation of each of the indices formed results from Digital Terrain Models (DTMs) created for the original contour and the surface under investigation ( The Landform Index (LI) is a quantified measure of the association between the original and the final surface. The LI examines whether the excavation or the reformed land follows the lines of the original contour. The development of the LI is based on spatial statistics and random variables theory. On this basis, the properties In the case where a uniform vertical shift of the original contour takes place, the two surfaces vary together, which means that var( The Altitude Index (AI) is set as a corrective index to the LI and measures the vertical change of the topographic relief on the assumption that no other change has occurred. For that reason, the mean altitude of the final surface is estimated and a new surface is created ( The AI is also divided in 10 value classes, where class 1 denotes the best condition and class 10 the worst. The Adjusted Landform Index (ALI) is a linear function of the LI and AI, as follows: Slope Index (SI) estimates the average slope difference between the original and the final surface and is calculated, as follows: The denominator indicates the maximum inclination of a sampling cell towards the horizontal level and is used in order to normalize the results. SI is classified into 5 categories, based on the slope categories that usually occur in open pit designs, where category A denotes the best condition and category E the worst. The Aspect Index (AsI) measures the average aspect change between the original and the final topography and is estimated, as follows: The denominator indicates the maximum aspect alteration (clockwise or counterclockwise) of a sampling cell and is used in order to normalize the results. AsI, after the study of numerous exploitation cases, is classified into 4 categories, where category A denotes the best condition and category D the worst. The degree of alteration is a linear combination of the ALI, the SI and the AsI, using equal weighting factors ( The methodology introduces the Viewing Sensitivity Index (VSI), which estimates the visual impact of a surface mining operation through the quantification of two selected sub-indices, namely: the Observation Characteristics (OC), including the degree of excavation exposure, the distance of observation, the surrounding land uses and viewers’ sensitivity and the Visibility Field Extend (VFE). The visibility analysis is carried out by means of GIS and is based on the intervisibility principle, which means that if a point A can see the point B, then the point B can also see point A. Contrary to the existing methodologies that select critical, yet subjective, vantage points, the viewpoints in LETOPID are placed systematically on a grid map with specific cell size inside the quarry site and the viewshed analysis takes into consideration the total area of the surrounding zone. Taking into account that from a distance greater than 8 After viewshed analysis, each point of the surrounding area is weighted in order to define the observation characteristics (OC) in quantitative terms. Three main categories of weighting factors are applied to each cell in order to define: (i) the degree of excavation's exposure to the cell, (ii) the influence of the distance zone, at which the cell is located and (iii) the particular character of the land use at which each cell is located. The latter is a way of measuring the number of potential viewers from each specific cell located inside the mine site. The viewer's sensitivity is practically incorporated into this last parameter. More specifically, the sensitivity of a viewer depends mainly on the prevailing socio-economical conditions and increases when the quality of life is improved (ibid.). For that reason, according to authors’ opinion it should be considered always high to prevent future reactions. The overall value of OC is given as follows:   The Visibility Field Extend (VFE) is given by the following equation: The combination of the value of OC with the value of VFE results in the Viewing Sensitivity Index (VSI) ( In order to illustrate LETOPID, the “Merenta” quarry site rehabilitation is used as case study. The site is located at the north-western side of Merenta Hill, 2 Due to the large volume of excavation and the irrational exploitation plan, the extractive activity resulted, among other impacts, in significant visual intrusion. Given that the excavation is highly visible from the Athens International Airport, other primary travel routes, the Markopoulo town and adjacent historical monuments on the one hand and its vicinity to Athens on the other hand, two alternative reclamation schemes have been proposed: the backfilling of the site towards restoring its original topography, to the degree possible, and the reforestation of the final surface, the partial backfilling of the site and the installation of new land uses, aiming at reducing the visual impacts and providing a re-profiled landform capable of accommodating new land uses. Each of the above plans presents pros and cons. The first plan eliminates the visual impact of the quarries’ open cuts but the backfilling of the entire excavated area encounters serious difficulties. The two major areas of concern are: (1) the acquisition of the bulk fill material from nearby areas, which is estimated to last about 20 The digital terrain models of the surfaces under examination for the measurement of TRA are illustrated in The visibility analysis was carried out making use of the viewshed module of the ArcView™ software, with the extensions 3D Analyst™ and Spatial Analyst ™. The VSI measurement has been conducted only for the current form of the site and the first rehabilitation plan, since in the case of the second rehabilitation plan the landform has been reshaped to the original contour and the excavated area has been totally backfilled. The terrain elevation model of the surrounding area as well as the total distribution of the land uses in the three distance zones is given in According to the results, the viewing sensitivity of the site to its current form is characterized as intermediate, while the viewing sensitivity of the first rehabilitation plan is low. This is mainly due to the reduction of the value of Observation Characteristics, since the Visibility Field Extend has been reduced as shown in LETOPID is an effective tool developed for estimating the degree of visual impacts caused by mining activities and the improvement achieved by alternative rehabilitation plans. The main elements that differentiate the specific methodology are, as follows: The degree of change of the topographic relief is quantified in terms of the forms and the lines of the landscape under investigation. The extent of the visibility field is separated from the quality of observation characteristics (observation distance, degree of excavation's exposure, viewer's sensitivity). The arithmetic values given to each of the impact categories facilitate the comparative evaluation between different types of exploitation and rehabilitation plans and make possible even the distinction of similar cases. In general, the methodology can be implemented in every stage of a project (ex ante and ex post evaluation). Moreover, the arithmetic values of the model can be combined with cost estimates in order to provide mining managers as well as decision makers with a structured and flexible cost-effectiveness framework (e.g. As regards the case examined, it has been proved that the partial backfilling of the quarry site could effectively reduce its visual impacts, attaining low TRA and VSI, respectively. The above results could facilitate the decision-making process with regard to the selection between the alternative rehabilitation plans, given the disadvantages of the restoration alternative. Nevertheless, the selection of the most proper alternative is beyond the scope of this paper.