Aim
                  Open reduction and internal plate fixation of the fibula is the gold standard treatment for ankle fractures. The aim of this study was to perform a prospective randomized study to compare bone union, complications and functional results of two types of internal fixation of the fibula (plating and the Epifisa® FH intramedullary nail).
               
                  Materials and methods
                  Inclusion criteria were: closed fractures, isolated displaced fractures of the lateral malleolus, inter- and supra-tubercular bimalleolar fractures, and trimalleolar fractures. This study included 71 patients (mean age 53±19): plate fixation group (n
                     =35) and intramedullary nail fixation group (n
                     =36). In seven cases, intramedullary nailing was technically impossible and was converted to plate fixation (the analysis of this sub-group was performed independently). Two patients died and two patients were lost to follow-up. The final comparative series included 32 cases of plate fixation and 28 cases of intramedullary nail fixation. Union, postoperative complications and Kitaoka and Olerud-Molander functional scores were analyzed after one year of follow-up.
               
                  Results
                  There was no significant difference in the rate of union (P
                     =0.5605) between the two types of fixation. There were significantly fewer complications (7% versus 56%) and better functional scores (96 versus 82 for the Kitaoka score; 97 versus 83 for the Olerud-Molander score) with intramedullary nailing than with plate fixation.
               
                  Conclusion
                  Intramedullary nailing of the lateral malleolus in non-comminuted ankle fractures without syndesmotic injury is a reproducible technique with very few complications that provides better functional results than plate fixation.
               
                  Level of evidence
                  II (randomized prospective study).Ankle fractures are frequent, with an estimated 125/100000/year We performed a prospective, randomized single blind multi-surgeon (4 senior and 5 junior surgeons) study including 71 patients, hospitalized in our unit for ankle fracture between April 2011 and January 2012. Randomization was performed with a random table of numbers (odd: nailing, even: plating). Inclusion criteria were the following: closed fractures, isolated displaced fractures of the lateral malleolus, inter- and supra-tubercular bimalleolar fractures and trimalleolar fractures. Exclusion criteria were the following: open fractures, fractures with a fracture line more than 9 All patients received prophylactic antibiotics before surgery. The patient was placed in the supine position with a pillow under the homolateral buttocks with a pneumatic tourniquet on the limb. An associated procedure was performed in bi- or trimalleolar fractures: suturing of the medial collateral ligament, fixation by tension band wiring or screw fixation in fractures of the medial malleolus and anteroposterior screw fixation in posterior malleolar fractures depending on the size of the fragment. Plate fixation was performed by the lateral approach with Synthes AO Nail fixation was obtained with Epifisa The patient was immobilized for 6 weeks in a plastic boot cast with a window. Weight bearing was progressive over a 1-month period. Rehabilitation was begun when the cast was removed. The preoperative evaluation included: gender, age, cause of trauma and side and type of fracture. The main judgment criterion was bone union 1 The results of quantitative variables were presented as means and standard deviations, maximums and medians. Qualitative variables were expressed as frequencies and percentages. The distribution of quantitative variables was compared by the non-parametric Mann and Whitney test for unpaired series. Qualitative variables were compared using the Chi Seventy-one patients were included in the study: 34 women and 37 men, mean age 53 years old There was no significant difference between the two groups for the type of fracture ( Bone union was obtained in 94% of the cases in the “plate fixation” group and 100% of the cases in the “intramedullary nailing” group ( The conversion sub-group (7 cases) included younger men only (mean 45.6 years While epidemiologically, numerous other studies of ankle fractures have identified a majority of older women The main goal of this study was to compare the results of bone union with two types of internal fixation: there was no difference in the rate of union between fibular nailing and plate fixation. There were two cases of lateral malleolar nonunion (3%), which is comparable to rates reported in the literature (1.5–2.2%) In our series, plate fixation resulted in union in 94%, postoperative complications in 56% and good functional scores. These results are comparable to those in the literature In our series, fibular nailing resulted in union in 100%, postoperative complications in 7% and excellent functional scores. There are very few studies on intramedullary fibular nailing. The main criticism of this system is that it is not rigid enough François et al. This prospective, randomized study compared the results of intramedullary nailing of the fibula to plate fixation in ankle fractures. Although there was no difference in the rate of union, there was a fairly high rate of complications with plate fixation compared to intramedullary nailing. Intramedullary nailing is a percutaneous mini-invasive technique that provides stable fixation and reduces the risk of wound complications. The main limitation is in the treatment of comminuted fractures. Nevertheless, further randomized comparative studies should be performed to show the non-inferiority or the equivalence of this technique in a larger number of patients to clearly validate this surgical indication. The authors declare that they have no conflicts of interest concerning this article. Mr François Dalmay, Biostatistics Laboratory, Cebimer. Medical School, Limoges.