The degradation of four nitrophenols (NPs), namely 2-nitrophenol (2-NP), 4-nitrophenol (4-NP), 2,4-dinitrophenol (DNP), 2,4,6-trinitrophenol (TNP) with Fenton process, solar- and UV-assisted Fenton processes were investigated and compared for their treatment efficiency. The maximum mineralization observed for mono-NP, DNP and TNP was 32%, 25% and 21%, respectively, i.e., only one-third to one-fifth of NPs were mineralized to CO2 by Fenton process. More than 92% of NPs were mineralized by solar- and UV-assisted Fenton processes. The formation of nitrate as a result of mineralization of organically bounded nitrogen was identified during the treatment of NPs studied. Near-stoichiometric accumulation of nitrate was observed during the degradation of NPs studied in both Fenton and photo-Fenton processes. A short-chain aliphatic carboxylic acid like oxalic and acetic acids were produced as final products during degradation of NPs studied by Fenton process. In both photo-Fenton processes, these acids were found as short-lived intermediate during the degradation process and were almost completely eliminated from the aqueous media. Ferrous ion regenerated during photo-Fenton processes accounted for more than 82% of Fe2+ ion for NPs studied. The relative degradation of NPs obeys a pseudo-first-order kinetics, and the treatment efficiency for the NPs follows the sequence: NP > DNP > TNP, irrespective of the processes studied. The reactivity follows Hammett's law with regard to the effect of nitro groups on phenolic functionality for Fenton and photo-Fenton processes. The results of the study showed that photo-Fenton processes was an effective treatment processes for NPs under acidic conditions by producing higher mineralization efficiency in a relatively short radiation time compared to Fenton process.Nitrophenols (NPs) are anthropogenic, toxic, inhibitory and bio-refractory organic compounds used extensively in chemical industries for the manufacture of pesticides like parathion, fluoridifen, nitrofen, triolit, pharmaceuticals like acetophenetidine, phenetidine and dyes like nitro and nitroso derivatives. 2-Nitrophenol (2-NP) and 4-nitrophenol (4-NP) are found in rainwater of Azusa, California and in different locations in West Germany at 0.031–1.42 Advanced oxidation processes (AOPs) is one of the chemical oxidation process that offers a highly reactive, non-specific oxidant namely hydroxyl radical ( The present study aims at comparing the kinetics and mineralization of mono-, di- and tri-NPs towards Fenton and photo-Fenton processes utilizing both natural sunlight and artificial UV light. Most of the degradation studies on NPs have focused on combining UV light with Fenton process. The possibility of applying natural solar light in the present study in renaissance to artificial UV light would pave a new way for industrial wastewater treatment methods. In almost all the studies reported, destruction of NPs was emphasized to a greater extent with fewer studies on total carbon reduction were carried on. It is possible that while initial NPs are degraded, some other compounds like nitro, aryl or azo-oxy compounds, which are more toxic than the parent compound Analytical-grade reagents, mono-NPs namely 2- and 4-NP were purchased from CDH, while DNP and TNP were obtained from Lancaster and BDH, respectively. All chemicals were used as received without any purification, and the stock solutions (10,000 All experiments were carried out in duplicate, batch mode and in unbuffered solution. A 1-l glass beaker containing 500 During UV-assisted photo-Fenton process, experiments were performed in immersion-type photoreactor (Heraeus, TQ150) and in batch mode. The ultraviolet source was a 150 Samples were withdrawn from the batch reactor at selected time intervals during the course of the reaction and analysed for DOC, H Fenton's reagent (a mixture of Fe The products of the reaction are ferric ion (Fe The degradation reaction continues, until Fe The parameters optimized for Fenton reaction during 2-NP, 4-NP, DNP and TNP degradation were adopted for comparing their efficiency in Fenton, solar- and UV-assisted photo-Fenton processes. As shown in In this way, two During degradation of NPs, low-molecular weight aliphatic acids like oxalic and acetic acids were monitored and are presented in Thus, both these acids were removed with concomitant increase in mineralization efficiency for NPs studied. As seen in The formation of inorganic nitrogen species is the result of denitration of NPs. Nitrite and nitrate ions were easily identified as by-products in oxidation of NPs. The concentration of ferrous ion and peroxide was monitored during the course of Fenton and photo-Fenton oxidation of NPs and is presented graphically in Hydroxyl radical ( A second-order rate equation can be applied to fit the data, where The overall mineralization of NPs by Fenton and photo-Fenton processes involves the following three distinct kinetic steps as shown in Eqs. As seen from above equations, NPs were removed immediately from the aqueous solution leading to the formation of aromatic and aliphatic intermediates. Hence, it would be appropriate to assess the overall rate constant with respect to DOC rather than to a particular nitrophenolic compound. Thus, the Eq. The rate constants and the corresponding half-life ( In Based on the above findings, a tentative reaction pathway for mineralizing NPs to CO The following points can be drawn from the present investigation: Photo-assisted Fenton processes were effective for complete abatement of NP compounds in wastewater, since only 20–32% carbon mineralization was observed in Fenton process while almost complete mineralization (>92%) was experienced in photo-assisted processes. Short-chain aliphatic acids like acetic and oxalic acids were identified and quantified during Fenton process, while those acids were almost completely eliminated during photo-assisted processes. Nitrate ion was identified as major nitrogen by-product during NP oxidation in both Fenton and photo-Fenton processes, while minor amount of nitrite was left behind in Fenton process. The processes can be modelled as a pseudo-first order when Fe The pseudo-first-order rate constant and half-lives ( Among Fenton processes studied, natural sunlight in solar-assisted Fenton process proves to be a powerful driving force in treating wastewater containing NPs completely to CO