The major limitation of low-cost and high-safety aqueous Zn–MnO2 batteries for grid storage is largely hampered by their poor cyclic stability, which is usually caused by the manganese dissolution and interfacial kinetics. Herein, we demonstrated that an effective surface coating of MnO2 with an interfacial Mn–N bonding can effectively alleviate the manganese dissolution and facilitate the interfacial kinetics. As expected, the MnO2/polypyrrole electrode shows lower electrochemical polarization compared to the bare MnO2 and possesses no capacity fading at both low current density (50 cycles at 100 mA g−1) and high current density (500 cycles at 1000 mA g−1). The fundamental mechanism revealed in this work will contribute to establishing a rational strategy to further optimize the cycle life of the aqueous zinc-ion batteries.Aqueous zinc-ion batteries (ZIBs) with excellent safety and low cost are highly desirable for the large-scale electrical energy storage [ Generally accepted by researchers that the fundamental mechanism of manganese dissolution is a disproportionation reaction of Mn In light of the above issues, a concept of surface coating on active material is proposed to addressing the manganese dissolution and the sluggish interfacial kinetics ( In this work, we constructed a polypyrrole (PPy)-coating MnO In a typical synthesis, the 1.2 mmol MnSO 100 mg MnO XRD data were collected using a Rigaku D/max 2500 powder diffractometer (Cu Kα, λ = 0.15405 nm). SEM images were collected on a Sirion 200 operating at 10 kV. TEM or HRTEM images, SAED patterns and EDS mapping images were collected using a Titan G2 60–300 transmission electron microscopy. XPS spectra were performed on an ESCALAB 250Xi X-ray photoelectron spectrometer (Thermo Fisher). Raman spectra were collected on a LabRAM HR800 microlaser Raman spectrometer. ICP-AES spectrometer (SPECTRO BLUE SOP) was used to determine the concentration of K and Mn elements. The spin-polarized first-principles calculations based on the Density Functional Theory (DFT) were performed using the Vienna The electrochemical analysis of the MnO The phase and morphology of the as-obtained bare MnO It is reasonable to expect that the stability can be improved through fixing surface Mn atoms. Therefore, the bare MnO To evaluate the effect of the coating PPy, we further explore the interface between the Most manganese-based materials with poor electrical conductivity may exhibit sluggish kinetics and severe polarization during charging and discharging process, that leads to poor cyclic life. To explore the benefits of the coating PPy, the electrochemical storage capability of bare MnO The phenomenon behind electrochemical performance was further analyzed by charge-discharge curve and cyclic voltammetry (CV) curve. In addition to having a higher open-circuit voltage, MnO MnO As known, the dissolution of manganese is a major factor for the poor cycle stability [ Mn columns in the interior area of nanorod also appeared defects (labeled with dotted box), indicating the severe manganese dissolution. However, the coated MnO The localized stress may be caused by the interfacial charge transfer and internal ion diffusion. In order to study the impact of surface coating on the charge transfer process, the electrochemical impedance spectroscopy (EIS) was adopted to monitor cell impedance at varied temperatures ( The previous electrochemical discussion suggested that the limited kinetic in the redox reaction would result in poor cycling stability. To reveal the different kinetic behaviors in different discharge plateaus (1.39 V and 1.22 V), the standard reaction constants In conclusion, the construction of surface coating to form an interfacial bonding and address the sluggish interfacial kinetics for MnO Jing Huang: Methodology, Software, Investigation, Data curation, Writing - original draft; Xuekun Tang: Writing - original draft, Validation; Kun Liu: Supervision, Conceptualization, Writing - review & editing, Visualization; Guozhao Fang: Conceptualization, Writing- review & editing, Visualization; Zihao He: Validation; Zishun Li: Validation. The authors declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this paper. This work was financially supported by the The following is/are the supplementary data to this article: Supplementary data to this article can be found online at