Spinel lithium manganese oxide ion-sieve is considered the most promising adsorbents to extract lithium from brine. Here, we report a Fe3O4-doped magnetic lithium ion-sieve prepared by a facile hydrothermal method. The Fe3O4-doped lithium manganese oxide (LMO/FO) was first synthesized as the magnetic ion-sieve precursor. The chemical and morphological properties of LMO/FO were investigated by X-ray diffraction (XRD), X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS), scanning electron microscopy (SEM) and transmission electron microscopy (TEM). The results showed that Fe3O4 was uniformly dispersed in the precursor. Doping Fe3O4 into LMO led to the increase of the average valence for Mn in the precursor from +3.48 to +3.53, which helps improve its structural stability. The equilibrium adsorption capacity of acid-treated LMO/FO (i.e. HMO/FO) was 29.33 mg/g which was greater than that of the undoped (i.e. HMO). Moreover, the adsorption behavior of the both ion-sieves well fitted with pseudo-second-order kinetic model. In 0.05 mol/L HCl solution, the desorption equilibrium could be achieved after 30 min. The dissolution loss of manganese and iron were 6.22% and 4.14%, respectively. The saturation magnetization value (Ms) of LMO/FO is 2.5 emu/g and the solid-liquid separation can be achieved by a magnet. In addition, the magnetic ion-sieve demonstrated excellent adsorption selectivity to Li+ in a mixed solution containing Li+, Na+, K+, Mg2+ and Ca2+.The market demand for lithium resources is increasing rapidly because of its wide applications in ceramics, batteries, medicine and other fields Numerous studies have been conducted on preparing the spinel lithium manganese oxide (LMO) as the precursors of ion-sieve adsorbents including LiMn Recently, magnetic-separation has been used in many separation processes including biomedical engineering and ore dressing Magnetic Fe 0.1 g FO were dispersed uniformly in 50 mL deionized water. Then, 3.958 g MnCl The LMO with spinel structure was synthesized by the same procedure as the synthesis of LMO/FO except introducing FO. The crystal structure of ion sieve samples was analyzed by X-ray diffraction (XRD, D8-ADVANCED) at room temperature using Cu-Kɑ radiation (λ = 1.5406 Å, 40 kV, 15 mA), scanning from 10° to 80° with 10°/min. The morphologies of samples were observed by a scanning electron microscope (SEM, Hitachi, S-4800) and high resolution transmission electron microscope (HRTEM, JEOL-2100F). An energy dispersive X-ray (EDX) analyzer coupled with SEM was used to provide elemental composition. The surface chemical compositions of ion sieve samples were measured by X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS, Escalab 250Xi). The magnetic property of as-prepared samples was investigated by a vibrating sample magnetometry (VSM). The concentration of the ions was determined by inductively coupled plasma atomic emission spectroscopy (ICP-AES). The precursors, LMO/FO and LMO, were immersed in 0.05 M HCl solution (500 mL) at 30 ℃ for 1 h to obtain ion-sieves (denoted as HMO/FO and HMO, respectively). Li To study the relationship between the equilibrium adsorption capacity and the initial Lithium concentration, a certain amount of HMO/FO was put into different Li After Li The selectivity of HMO/FO ion-sieves for Li      The Li Based on the Li   The selectivity of HMO/FO was measured by its adsorption performance in the mixing solution. According to In summary, magnetic Fe This work was financially supported by Priority Academic Program Development of The authors declare that they have no conflict of interest. Supplementary data to this article can be found online at The following are the Supplementary data to this article: