This study investigated the mechanisms of fragmentation leading to bolus formation during chewing in the elderly population for two cereal foods of different compositions and cellular structure: sponge-cake (SC) and brioche (B). For both products, mechanical properties were characterized by uniaxial compression and 3D cellular structure was determined using x-ray micro-tomography. Stress-strain curves showed two distinct ductile-like behaviors: product B underwent plastic deformation, whereas product SC displayed a hyper-elastic behavior. Twenty subjects aged 65 years and over with two different oral health conditions (poor vs satisfactory dental status, variable stimulated salivary flow rate) were asked to consume both products. Bolus particle size was determined at three different chewing stages through image analysis, and the resulting particle size distribution (PSD) curves were fitted by Gompertz model. The model parameters were related to bolus particle heterogeneity and fragmentation, thanks to their correlations with median particle size diameter D50 and interquartile ratio (D75/D25), directly extracted from PSD curves. The use of model parameters allowed discriminating between chewing sequences for both products and revealed different fragmentation patterns: while SC boli exhibited a continuous particle size reduction during chewing, B displayed a combination of fragmentation and agglomeration. In addition, results showed that subjects with a satisfactory dental status produced significantly more degraded boli than those with a poor dental status. These results highlight distinct fragmentation mechanisms for these two soft products that were interpreted in relation to their differences in composition, structure and mechanical behavior.Gompertz fitting parameter, maximum size value achieved Acronym for the French ‘National Agency of Drugs and Safety’ Brioche Gompertz fitting parameter, slope at the inflexion point Gompertz fitting parameter, size value at the inflexion point 1/3 of chewing duration, first chewing sequence 2/3 of chewing duration, second chewing sequence Particle diameter of first the quartile of the distribution Median particle diameter of the distribution Particle diameter of the third quartile of the distribution Interquartile ratio of the particle size distribution Dental status Young's modulus (kPa) Food Oral Processing Poor (Dental status) Particle Size Distribution Posterior Functional Unit Satisfactory (Dental status) Sponge-cake Swallowing Point, total chewing duration, third chewing sequence Stimulated Salivary Flow rate (mL∙min X-Ray Micro-Computed Tomography Critical stress (kPa) The physiological deterioration that accompanies ageing, together with the fact that the population aged 60 and over is expected to nearly triple by 2050 ( Peleg early pointed out the need for understanding the relationship between the mechanical and geometrical properties of a food and its perceived texture in order to provide guidelines to develop specific products targeted for the elderly ( The PSD of foods during oral processing has been early recognized as a crucial factor in bolus formation ( As far as we know, the only cereal food exhibiting ductile behavior for which PSD after chewing has been studied and modelled is bread. Different methods have been used to characterize the PSD, such as drying, sieving and weighing the recovered fractions. Image acquisition - based on optical scanning, camera and/or laser diffraction for small particles (≤1 mm) ( Hence, considering the various aspects involved in food fragmentation and bolus formation, the objectives of this study were, in the first place, to accurately describe and assess the fragmentation process during the chewing of two soft cereal foods with different composition and structure in an elderly panel; and secondly, to assess the impact of the oral health status of the participants in the said foods' fragmentation process. In this purpose, we have fully characterized the PSD of sponge-cake (SC) and brioche (B) boli collected after three chewing stages from a group of elderly subjects. Additionally, the data was fitted with a mathematical model in order to be able to extract as much information as possible and avoid single parameter comparisons. With this information, the influence of the dental status (DS) and salivary flow rate (SSF) of the elderly on the PSD of the boli was evaluated. The sponge-cake and brioche used in this study were provided by CERELAB Their instrumental texture was defined by their density, 3D cellular structure and mechanical behavior. The product density was measured by the rapeseed displacement method. The three-dimensional cellular structure was determined by X-ray micro-computed tomography (XR-μCT), using a compact table-top system Skyscan 1174 (Bruker microCT, Belgium). A cylindrical sample of each product with a diameter of 2 cm and a height of 3 cm was prepared with a steel cutter and placed on a rotating plate while the X-ray beam passed through. A CCD camera with a resolution of 1304 × 1304 pixels was used to acquire the 2D radiographic images. The exposure time was 2000 ms, and the pixel size was adjusted to 22 μm. Two images were taken per rotational step (every 0.5°, until 360°) and were averaged. The projections were then reconstructed to obtain cross-sectional images using the NRecon reconstruction software (Bruker microCT, Belgium). Reconstructions were based on the Feldkamp cone-beam algorithm ( The mechanical properties were determined by uniaxial compression test. A circular steel cutter was used to prepare cylindrical samples with a diameter of 40 mm and a height of 30 mm. Both products were subjected to uniaxial compression using a universal testing machine (Adamel Lomarghy, France) equipped with a 1 kN load cell. The testing was performed with a cross head speed of 50 mm/min until 66% in height reduction between parallel plates. Five replicates were performed for each food sample. Results were expressed as the stress versus strain plot, from which Young's modulus (E), and the critical stress (σ Twenty subjects (9 men and 11 women, aged 65–82 years, average 72 ± 5 years) participated in the study. Their dental status (DS) was assessed by determining the number of Posterior Functional Units (PFU's), allowing their classification within two groups: poor (≤4 PFU's) and satisfactory (≥7 PFU's) DS. Additionally, their salivary flow rate in mL∙min Mouthfuls of 20 cm Before analysis, the boli suspended in glycerol were re-agitated at a rotation speed of 170 rpm during 80 min at 20 °C in a water bath (Julabo SW23, Germany) to ensure homogenous particle dispersion for all samples. Bolus particles were carefully placed in a Petri dish (diameter = 5.5 cm) that was placed over a matte dark background and was backlighted through an optical fiber ring (Schott DCR IV, USA) placed underneath, as described by For each subject and each chewing sequence (C1, C2, SP), the median equivalent diameter (D A one-way ANOVA was performed to determine the differences of structural and mechanical properties between the two products. In order to investigate differences between products at each chewing stage, a repeated measures ANOVA (product + subject + chewing sequence) was carried out for the median particle size D The values of structural and mechanical properties of both products are reported in From the granulometric curves ( Differences between products with regards to their mechanical behavior can also be observed from the stress-strain curves obtained by compression tests ( The values of Young's moduli (E), for both products, and critical stress (σ Finally, these values of structural and mechanical properties are in the range of those found for other baked products like breads ( Cumulative particle size distributions of food boli (PSD) were determined by quantitative image analysis for each subject, each chewing sequence and each product ( These results also show that using a single parameter from the PSD, such as D As expected from cumulative curves ( The remaining 8 “misfit” PSD curves came from boli that featured a high percentage of large size particles, which introduced jaggedness to the distributions, hence making them difficult to fit (see Actually, there was no particular relationship between the individual physiology and the agglomeration patterns, for these 10 specific cases as illustrated by Table D ( The influence of the oral health status on particle size distributions and model parameters was investigated through ANCOVA model and the results are shown in the present section. In spite of large variations of SSF, from 0.3 to 3.84 mL/min overall (see Table B in Our results demonstrate that the Gompertz model accounts for the variability the particle size distribution (PSD) of food particles, and that the two parameters, “b” and “c” that result from it, are sufficient to discriminate between products and chewing sequences. Therefore, they are worth to be related to bolus and chewing characteristics. Also, the analysis of the quality of fit resulted in a quick way to detect atypical data, allowing the identification of different fragmentation patterns in the two studied foods, as discussed in section Conversely, the mechanical behavior of SC was best described by a hyper-elastic constitutive law. Like previously mentioned, this behavior is characterized by a continuous non-linear increase of stress that results from reversible structural modification during compressive loading. However, SC cannot be considered as a true hyper-elastic material since it is neither isotropic nor incompressible ( At the individual level, part of the variability observed in the bolus particle size was explained by the physiology and particularly the dental status (DS) of the elderly subjects. As discussed in section Finally, from the ANCOVA analysis performed with Gompertz model parameters, we found that DS has a significant impact on fragmentation. This result suggests that Gompertz parameters provide more information about the fragmentation properties of the food bolus than the parameters extracted directly from the distribution curves. Moreover, modelling the PSD should facilitate the implementation of numerical models based on discrete elements in similar conditions to chewing, like the one proposed by By using quantitative image analysis of food boli taken at different steps of oral processing, we demonstrated that particle size distribution could be usefully fitted by Gompertz model. This model allows interpreting the food particle size evolution the chewing process in terms of bolus particle heterogeneity and fragmentation. We identified and described different fragmentation mechanisms for two soft cereal products differing in their initial structure and mechanical properties during oral processing in the elderly: sponge-cake was regularly fragmented, whereas brioche agglomerated. These mechanisms were explained the compressive mechanical behavior and intrinsic cell wall properties of the food products. Finally, we put into evidence the importance of the elderly dental status in the fragmentation of both foods, while salivary flow rate was not found to be involved in this process. This study also highlights the need to understand the chewing process of cereal products as a combination of fragmentation and agglomeration mechanisms, and spurs the use of mathematical models to describe the evolution of particle size in order to be able to take this complexity into account. This work was funded and supported by 