Spent hydrodesulphurization (HDS) catalysts containing valuable Mo and Ni ions are potential source for the recovery of Mo and Ni from the point of commercial, environmental and conservation of natural mineral resources. In the present study, oxidative roasting of spent HDS catalyst followed by ammonia leaching results in the leach liquor with about 15.3 g/L Mo (~85% recovery), ~125 g/L (NH4)2SO4 and ~0.9 g/L Ni as impurity. Therefore Ni separation from this ammoniacal molybdate leach liquor is essentially the first step to obtain high pure molybdate and ammonium sulfate solution. In this study, separation of nickel from ammoniacal molybdate leach liquor was reported using commercial chelating iminodiacetate resin, Lewatit TP207 by batch and column methods. Optimization of process parameters include equilibration time, acidity of leach liquor, aqueous flow rate, metal concentration, loading capacity of resin for Ni during sorption of Ni, desorption of nickel from loaded resin and stability and reuse of resin in continuous column experiments. Feed leach liquor of pH >8.0 is important to achieve clear separation of Ni from Mo. Loading capacity of resin and break through curves are optimized to achieve <10 mg/L Ni in purified Mo leach liquor and further processing results in high grade ammonium octamolybdate (AOM) and ammonium sulfate crystals. Finally, a process flow sheet for the complete separation and recovery of Ni, Mo and ammonium sulphate with material balance from ammoniacal molybdate leach liquor of spent HDS catalyst was demonstrated for possible industrial application.Spent hydrodesulphurization (HDS) catalyst is considered as a hazardous waste due to presence of toxic elements. At the same time, it is a valuable raw material due to the presence of metals like molybdenum, nickel, cobalt, vanadium etc. Various processes such as (i) oxidative roast- alkali leaching ( Oxidative roast-ammonia leaching process of spent HDS catalyst (containing Mo = 8–10% and Ni = 1.5–2%) generate ammonium molybdate leach liquor (~85% Mo recovery) with a pH of ~9.0–10 containing impurities like Ni ~0.5–1 g/L and Al ~0.1–0.2 g/L levels. It is always advantageous to remove Ni from the ammonaical molybdate leach liquor as a first step of purification. The purified molybdate leach liquor is acidified with H In the present paper, for the first time commercial resin such as Lewatit TP207 (Functional group: Iminodiacetic acid) was applied for nickel separation studies from ammoniacal molybdate leach liquor of spent HDS Ni Commercial plant ammoniacal leach liquors containing Mo, Ni and ammonium sulphate having pH of 9–10, were used for Ni separation studies in the present study. L.R grade H An inductively coupled plasma optical emission spectrometer (ICP-OES, iCAP 6000) was used for determining the concentrations of Mo and Ni and other associated impurities in minor amounts in the feed ammoniacal molybdate leach liquor and process solutions. Direct use of acidic form of resin for adsorption study of metal ions releases H For carrying out sorption experiments, appropriate amount of resin was added to leach liquor in beaker and agitated for different time intervals using laboratory magnetic stirrer. At fixed intervals, stirring was stopped and separated aqueous phase was analysed for metal values using ICP-OES equipment. The amount of metal ion transferred into the resin phase was determined by difference of metal concentration before and after equilibrium in the leach liquor. The percentage removal of metal (Ni/Mo) from the ammoniacal molybdate leach liquor was calculated according to following the equation: Calculation of distribution ratio and separation factor: The distribution ratio ( All the experiments for Ni removal using IX resin by batch and column mode were conducted at room temperature (300 ± 1 K). The experiments were carried out in batch scale at room temperature (300 ± 1 K) with constant agitation. Pretreated resin was added to leach liquor containing Mo and Ni and effect of time from 30 to 210 min and feed leach liquor pH from 6.5 to 9.5 were varied at constant temperature and agitation speed in all the experiments. The volume of aqueous phase to volume of resin was maintained at 2:1 (100 mL leach liquor: 50 mL resin). Column experiments were conducted as per the dimensions of column shown in The objective of the present paper is the removal of nickel from molybdate leach liquor by ion exchange resin to below 10 mg/L in order to obtain high grade ammonium octamolybdate and white crystal of ammonium sulphate product. Theoretical calculation for fixing Ni in purified molybdate leach liquor was fixed at <10 mg/L. Such solution after evaporation and filtration would result ammonium sulphate crystal with <5 mg/L Ni and most of the Ni would end up with mother liquor. Keeping this objective, detailed studies were conducted for optimization of the process parameters for Ni removal and the results were presented in the following discussions. The possible species of Ni and Mo present in the leach liquor was determined by using HSC Chemistry 6.0 software ( Though the predominant species of Ni at optimal pH is nickel hexamine complex ([Ni(NH Conditioning:  Sorption: Elution: The effect of time in the range from 30 to 210 min on the extraction of nickel was studied using leach liquor (pH: 9.5) containing 0.9 g/L Ni and 15.32 g/L Mo with 125 g/L (NH Effect of feed pH from 6.5 to 9.5 on the sorption of metal ions was studied from aqueous phase (feed molybdate leach liquor) containing 0.9 g/L Ni and 15.32 g/L Mo by keeping the ratio of volume of aqueous phase to mass of resin set at 2:1 ( Feed leach liquor containing 0.9 g/L Ni and 15.32 g/L Mo with a pH of 9.5 was used to determine the breakthrough curves at three flow rates 10, 15 and 20 BV/h and results are presented in Feed solutions with 9.5 pH containing 15.32 g/L Mo and different concentrations Ni (0.5, 0.75 and 0.9 g/L) was used to determine the break through curves ( It is important to wash the nickel loaded resin column to remove any adhered Mo impurity that was retained in the column. This washing step helps to improve the purity of nickel sulphate solution that will be obtained after the desorption of column. Washing of resin column is conducted with DI water maintained at a flow rate of 5 BV/h and results suggest ( In any commercial sorption process, it is essential to desorb the metal from the loaded resin phase. H Conditioning of resin column has been carried out with DI water maintained at 5 BV/h flow rate and washings were collected at one BV intervals as per the data depicted in Experiments on the recycling capacity of Lewatit TP 207 resin for removal of nickel from molybdate leach liquor was carried out under optimized sorption and elution conditions ( Based on the present study, a complete flow sheet of the process for the separation and recovery of Ni as pure NiSO In this paper, an efficient ion exchange resin, Lewatit TP 207 was demonstrated for selective separation and recovery of nickel from spent HDS catalyst ammoniacal leach liquors. Clear separation of Ni from Mo was achieved around operating feed pH of 9.5. H The authors express sincere thanks to the management of Rubamin Ltd., Vadodara, India, for their constant encouragement and permission to publish this work.