The main aim of this study was to separate and recover bismuth from a bismuth glance concentrate through leaching, purification and electrowinning from chloride solution. This paper reports on optimization of the process parameters for hydrochloric acid leaching and electrowinning in a membrane cell. Parameters such as bismuth and sodium chloride concentration in catholyte, temperature, current density etc. were examined for their effect on the voltage requirement and current efficiency of bismuth electro-deposition. A maximum current efficiency of >97% was attained with an catholyte composition of 70g/L Bi, 25g/L NaCl, 4.5mol/L HCl and an anolyte composition of 20g/L NaOH at 55°C and a cathode current density of 200A/m2. Under these optimized conditions, the cathode bismuth purity was 99.98%. An XRD analysis of the condensed salt obtained from the anolyte identified pure sodium chlorate, which can be recycled to the leaching stage.Very little bismuth comes from the primary processing of bismuth minerals. Most bismuth is obtained as a by-product in other metallurgical processes for copper, silver, tin, lead and gold where it is usually present in sludges or in acidic liquors. During the processing of these bismuth minerals, leaching with H In our previous study ( The bismuth concentrate obtained from ShiZhuYuan Rare Metal Co., China, was characterized physically, chemically and mineralogically. The dry screen analysis was around 100 mesh (147 The schematic procedure for leaching, purification and recovery of bismuth from this bismuth glance concentrate by electrowinning is presented in The leach solution was recycled to leach fresh concentrate until the bismuth concentration in solution was enriched to more than 70 The oxidation of sulfur to sulfate ion was not significant under the conditions and duration of these tests. In the purification procedure, a weighed amount of active bismuth powder was added to the stirred solution to reduce Fe(III) and displace Cu(II) and then a quantity of ammonium sulfide was added dropwise to precipitate remaining copper. After filtration, the degree of purification was calculated from analysis of Fe In the electrowinning tests, a two-compartment acrylic cell (dimensions 85 The composition of the catholyte was 70 At the cathode, the electrode reactions are: At the anode, the following reactions are possible, but no oxygen or chlorine was detected under the conditions used: During preliminary experiments, various leaching conditions were examined and the most suitable conditions for bismuth extraction was obtained in the temperature range 60 to 85°C over two hours with 150 The major aim of purification was to produce a pure electrolyte for electrowinning. The most suitable purification conditions were obtained in the temperature range 30 to 45 The two-compartment electrowinning experiments were carried out in order to establish optimum electro-deposition parameters such as the effect of bismuth and sodium chloride concentration in catholyte, temperature, cathode current density and electrode distance on the main cell performance parameters such as cathodic current efficiency (CE) and cell voltage. The resultant sodium chlorate concentration in anolyte and the mass of deposited bismuth on the cathode were also determined. Electrowinning was first conducted by varying the bismuth concentration in the catholyte from 25 The concentration of sodium chloride in the catholyte was varied from 5  The effect of cathode current density on the current efficiency, cell voltage and resultant sodium chlorate concentration in anolyte was conducted by varying the cathode current density from 100 The effect of cathode current density on the sodium chlorate concentration in the anolyte is also shown in Based on the above studies, the optimum conditions for the electro-deposition of bismuth from a chloride solution in a membrane cell were as follows: Bi 70 A comprehensive procedure was developed for the separation and recovery of bismuth from bismuth sulfide concentrate containing mainly pyrite and minor quantities of copper, lead and silica. All the process conditions, including HCl leaching; purification and electrowinning of bismuth, were optimized. Selective leaching of bismuth from pyrite was achieved using chlorate ion as oxidant and copper and lead impurities were removed by cementation and sulfide precipitation. By using an electrolytic cell fitted with an anion exchange membrane separator, pure bismuth plate (99.98%) was obtained from the purified leach liquor catholyte with > Project (