In Zambia, under-five mortality declined from 1958 to 1975, rose from 1975 to 1992, before resuming its decline from 1992 to 2001. The study investigates the economic, political, and epidemiologic determinants of these changes. The rise in mortality could be explained by an economic downturn (declining income per capita, resulting from lower copper prices on international markets and decreasing production, and its numerous consequences), and to a lesser extent by emerging diseases (increasing mortality from HIV/AIDS and resistant malaria). However, mortality decline could resume as a result of building social and health capital, in particular health personnel, and favorable health policies.Mortality changes in the second half of the 20th century were dramatic throughout the world and occurred in the context of the development of public health and of major economic and social changes. In many countries, mortality declines occurred at times of increasing income The situation in sub-Saharan Africa since 1950 appears as contrasted as elsewhere ( Differences between the African countries demographic dynamics could be due to a variety of economic, epidemiologic, political, and social factors. Economic opportunities could develop, such as a high demand for available natural resources, as well as misfortunes, such as a series of natural disasters or a change in the demand for a major export good. Above all, the capacity to take advantage of opportunities and to respond to shocks seems to be determined to a large extent by the level of development of the state, its management capacity, and its stability. Countries devastated by civil war (like Mozambique) or simply poorly managed (like Madagascar) had no chance of economic development and often did poorly on social indicators, whereas countries that were more stable and better managed (like Botswana or Gabon) could enjoy economic growth and social development. Case studies of efficient or deleterious state management are useful for revealing the crucial determinants of demographic changes. The situation of Zambia appears atypical, and has drawn the attention of scholars on many grounds since it is a case of declining income The increase in under-five mortality became visible in the first Demographic and Health Survey (DHS) report of 1992, and was confirmed by the following DHS surveys in 1996 and 2001. This phenomenon occurred long before HIV/AIDS became an important cause of death.  To understand the situation of Zambia in 1975 and the crisis that followed, it is important to provide a background on population dynamics in Zambia, and related major political and economic events. Zambia is a landlocked country of central Africa, with a medium-size area (752 A striking feature of population dynamics of Zambia is the changing rate of urbanization. Before independence, migration controls limited urbanization to what was considered needed by the colonial authorities. After independence, urbanization grew very quickly in Zambia, from 20% in 1963 to 40% in 1980, at a rate of 6.8% per year. Most of the migrants to the cities were coming from rural areas of the country, although there were also some migrant workers from nearby countries, in particular Malawi, and refugees from surrounding countries ruined by civil wars, Angola, Mozambique, and Zaire, as well as South Africans from the ANC fleeing the apartheid policy. Urbanization became possible due to the lift on formerly existing controls, by the new opportunities created by the boom in copper industry, and attractive because of the generous social policies for housing, education, and health (see below). However, this rapid rate of urbanization stopped suddenly, and after 1980 the proportion of the population living in urban areas declined slightly, that is, from 39.4% at the 1990 census to 35.1% at the 2000 census. Migration flows to the Copperbelt province, which were highly positive in the 1960s, became negative, population growth in Lusaka became hardly higher than natural increase, and provinces which were losing people in the 1960s (Northern and Luapulu) received positive flows of migrants after 1990. These are the signs of a very serious crisis in the last two decades of the 20th century. Under-five mortality was estimated at 197 per 1 These estimates differ somewhat from earlier estimates simply because the calculation method is more precise than the indirect estimates or the 5-year averages utilized by other studies, which tend to smooth out the trend reversals ( Part of the increase in mortality in the 1990s could be attributed to the impact of pediatric AIDS. Details of the computation of the mortality impact of HIV/AIDS on under-five mortality are given elsewhere ( Therefore, there is no doubt that mortality rose during 1975–90, and tended to decline thereafter, though this trend was compounded by the rising effect of AIDS on under-five mortality, which prolonged the mortality increase (for all causes of death combined) until 1993 ( The history of this newly established country gives clues to understand the multi-faceted crisis initiated in 1975. The territory was first colonized by British settlers at the end of the 19th century. Colonization formally began in 1899, when the British South Africa Company (BSA) ran by Cecil Rhodes was given the mandate of administering the land. The territory was placed under British protectorate in 1924, and the capital city moved in 1935 to Lusaka, its current location. For a long time the colony, known as Northern Rhodesia, had close links with Southern Rhodesia and Nyasaland, under the umbrella of the “Central African Federation,” which disappeared with the independence movements in 1963. The country became independent in 1964, and took the name of Zambia. Zambia was never a major destination for British settlers, and it was estimated that no more than 74 Independence was proclaimed on October 24, 1964. The first president, Kenneth Kaunda, a teacher by training, was a humanist and an African socialist, and known for his sympathy for non-violence in politics and for the anti-apartheid movement. He stayed in power for 27 years, and had to go through severe crises (see below). After independence, his main policy was to establish state control on the economy. In 1972, he imposed a unique political party (UNIP: United National Independence Party). In the 1980s he had to face a series of political and social unrest, which culminated in 1990. The constitution was changed in 1990, multiple parties were allowed in 1991, and free elections were organized. The opposition won the elections, and Mr. Chiluba became president. He was re-elected in 1996 for another 5-year term, and changed again the constitution. A coup d’Etat was organized in 1997, Kaunda tried to come back but was jailed. Contrary to his predecessor, Chiluba was a liberal, in favor of multipartism, and open to privatization policies in vogue at that time ( The first government after independence, directed by Kenneth Kaunda, had in mind to correct what was seen as the errors of the colonial policies. It followed an “African Socialism” line, aiming at correcting economic inequalities, and redistributing equitably the wealth of the country ( Control of the economy started in 1968, after the so-called Mulungishi declaration. The idea was to control all major sectors of the economy, production and distribution, including retail trade in urban and rural areas. The first parastatal companies, in which the state was the dominant stakeholder, were created in 1968–69 ( In 1969, the government created the National Agricultural Marketing Board (NAMBOARD), with which the state could control agricultural production and trade through a network of cooperatives spread all over the country. In return, the state was providing inputs (seeds, fertilizers, etc.), was organizing storage, and was providing subsidies when needed. In addition, prices given to producers were fixed, as well as prices of some vital consumer goods such as maize, oil, salt, milk, and soap. In 1975, the “Conversion of Titles Act” permitted the nationalization of all agricultural land. By that time, 97% of peasants had yet no property rights, which is considered a major handicap for future development and agricultural productivity, because this implies no incentive for investment ( By the early 1980s, the government started to change the main orientation of its economic policies, primarily to answer the difficult situation of food supply since state control was initiated, and the growing discontent of the population ( GDP Reasons for the major downturn in economic growth can be found in the international price of copper and the Zambian production system. Copper is the leading export of the country, representing some 95% of total exports, and the leading source of state revenue. Demand for copper was high for a long period of time, since the early years of the 20th century, primarily due to the development of electricity all over the world, and the choice of copper for electric wires. Demand for copper dropped suddenly around 1975, owing to the end of the Vietnam war during which large stockpiles of copper had been built, and to recessions following the first and second oil price boom (1973–79), which resulted in a major drop in international prices. Copper prices on international markets, expressed in constant 1997 USD, were increasing from 1950 (141 USD per ton) to 1974 (246 USD per ton), the year at which the highest price was recorded, to drop to a low 118 USD per ton in 1997 ( In addition to declining prices, copper production also went down. In fact, copper exports in volume were declining since independence, and over the whole period the decline was dramatic: 681 Copper mines were open to privatization in the year 2000. However, by that time the production cost of Zambian copper (85 cents a pound) became higher than the international market price (75 cents a pound), so that production was no longer profitable, and mines were likely to close. The failure of the Zambian copper mines is primarily attributed to poor economic policies, mismanagement, and lack of investments for a long period ( This drop in copper prices, which occurred quite suddenly in 1975 (from 246 to 187 USD per ton, a decline of 24% in one year), and the decline in volume of copper production and exports, had major long term consequences and produced a break in the whole development process of the country. Most of the indicators which were favorable prior to 1975 became negative afterwards, at least until 1992 ( Furthermore, many of the food production indicators also evolved negatively over the 1975–92 period ( The data after 1992 provided a positive contrast. Although copper prices and production continued to decline, as well as state budget, some of the indicators registered a positive path. For instance, the real value of state expenses in health increased by 2.4% a year after 1992, imports of good and services also increased (+2.3% a year), as well as During the colonial period, the health system in Zambia appeared to have been somewhat more developed than elsewhere in Africa, because of the revenues of the mines. The mining sector was running a comprehensive system of hospitals and health centers, for blacks and whites separately. The public sector health services were primarily in urban areas and along the railway. The rural areas were covered mostly by missionary hospitals and health centers, with varied coverage owing to the scattered nature of settlements. By the time of independence, the population benefited from free and comprehensive services for all. Most medical services were integrated around health posts. The existing infrastructure was developed, and increased faster than the population after independence. The number of hospitals went from 46 in 1964 to 75 in 1975, and 84 in 1992; some of the health centers were upgraded later, so that the number of hospitals jumped to 153 in 1999. The number of health centers increased from 306 in 1964, 631 in 1975, 1 The country ran typical international health programs after independence: maternal and child health (1969), family planning (1973), training of TBA (1976), Primary health care (1980), National immunization campaigns (1978) boosted by the UNICEF sponsored EPI (1985), and control of diarrheal diseases (1985). With the emergence of HIV, a National AIDS Prevention and Control Program was set up in the mid-1980s. In addition, special project for community outreach programs were developed, and the “Bamako Initiative” was adopted in the late 1980s. Therefore, there was no shortage of efforts during the main crisis years (1975–90). However, several authors mention problems with drug availability in the public clinics during this period, as well as lack of personnel due to departures of physicians and nurses ( With the new government, the National Health Policies and Strategies were revised in 1991. ( In the first phase of colonization, education was run primarily by missionaries, as elsewhere in Africa. With the first development program (1947–56), a public infrastructure of primary and secondary schools was developed, and by 1964 the average level of education in Zambia was among the highest in Africa, slightly higher than that of Kenya, although the country had very few university graduates. During the first 10 years of his rule, Kaunda continued to promote public education, and the level of education continued to increase rapidly. He also founded the University of Zambia in 1966. From 1964 to 1975, primary school enrollment increased by 7.8% a year, and from 1970 to 1975 secondary school enrollment increased by 6.6% a year, much faster than the population growth rate. However, by 1975 trends were reversed. The growth rate of primary school enrollment (3.1% in 1975–80) hardly matched that of the population in age of schooling, and likewise for secondary school enrollment. As a result, the level of education stopped increasing. We built an index of primary school enrollment in grade 7, by dividing the number of students in grade 7 by the population aged 10–14 (  Data on malnutrition of young Zambian children are limited, and some are controversial ( We re-analyzed the data on nutritional status for adult women and young children from the DHS surveys, which were combined together ( For under-five children, nutritional status data were available for the last two DHS surveys, covering cohorts born during 1987 and 2000. Because of the strong age component of stunting, we selected children aged 18–59 Malaria is highly endemic in Zambia, and is the leading cause of visits to health centers and cause of hospital admissions. Malaria morbidity and case fatality seem to have increased in Zambia over the study period, in sharp contrast with other diseases like measles which declined instead. According to published statistics, the number of reported cases of malaria increased by 2.8-fold, the number of reported malaria deaths by 4-fold, and therefore the malaria reported case fatality rate increased by 1.4-fold over the 1976–92 period ( Malaria strains resistant to choloroquine treatment have been documented in Zambia since the late 1970s. A study conducted in 1995 found that 69% of children with malaria showed some resistance to chloroquine (RII or RIII level) and 41% experienced clinical failure to treatment ( The Ministry of Health of Zambia publishes causes of death statistics for selected diseases reported in hospitals and health centers (Republic of Zambia, Bulletin of Health Statistics, 1994 and 1997). The only disease among children that showed an increasing trend, and faster than the trend in overall mortality, was malaria. Reported malaria deaths among children increased by 6-fold during 1976–92, when population increased by 45% and all causes mortality by 31%. The increase in malaria mortality per population was different from trends in other causes, such as pneumonia and diarrhea which approximately followed the increase in all causes mortality, or from causes such as malnutrition and measles which declined. Given the increase in under-five mortality, malaria mortality seems to have increased by 3-fold over the period, and its share of the total number of deaths could have increased from some 4% to some 15%. This implies that the increase in malaria mortality could explain some 18% of the total increase in under-five mortality for all causes. The increase in malaria mortality could be attributed primarily to resistant malaria, and therefore is somehow independent from the economic and socio-political crisis, although its effect might have been enhanced by the crisis. Similarly, HIV/AIDS explains also a significant part (about 15%) of the mortality increase. Hence, discounting for the effects of both diseases leads to reduce the net effect of the economic crisis on overall mortality by about a third. There is no doubt that vaccination coverage increased during the 1980s and 1990s in Zambia ( Several econometric models were tested to investigate the relationship between under-five mortality and economic indicators. First, a multiple linear regression model linking under-five mortality, after discounting for the net effect of HIV/AIDS, was tested on a set of 30 economic indicators. Four variables stayed significant after numerous runs and stepwise regressions: a linear trend, Gross Domestic Product Since there are obvious correlations between economic indicators, in particular the strong effect of copper price on GDP and the state budget, we developed a path analysis model, where the first equation relates GDP to copper price, the second equation relates health expenditures to GDP, and the third equation relates under-five mortality to health expenditures and a time trend. All variables were taken in logarithms. The effects were in the expected direction. Elasticity between GDP-PPP and copper price was +1.14; elasticity between health expenditure and GDP-PPP was +1.68, and the elasticities between under-five mortality and other variables were: −0.152 with health expenditure, −0.018 with international aid, and −0.022 with the time trend. The three regressions explained well the mortality decline during 1960–75 (275 to 183 per 1 Last, we carried out time series analysis, to take into account possible co-integration of variables. We first discounted for the time trend, and regressed the residuals on GDP-PPP, health expenditures, and medical imports, allowing for an autoregressive term with lag ( Several authors have noted the divergence of mortality trends between urban and rural areas. In our analysis, the overall trends were the same, with declining mortality in both areas in the first period, increase in the second period, and decrease in the third period. The turning points (1975 and 1992) were basically the same in the two areas, the data being not precise enough to make an assessment more accurate than within two years. Mortality decline was faster (−8.3% and −5.0% per year respectively, Zambia can be considered as a quasi-experimental case-study to evaluate the effects of rapid changes in income on the social sector, and in particular on under-five mortality. Our analysis shows that a serious shock such as a decline in income of about 30% in a period of 17 years (1975–92) had serious consequences on most economic and social indicators, and led to increasing under-five mortality, and to halting improvements in levels of education. This can be easily understood by the changes in real value of the state budget spent on health and education and on various consequences. However, the social system appears resilient in the long run, as coping mechanisms were obviously found in Zambia after 1992. With respect to under-five mortality, the main focus of this study, the determinants of changes were analyzed in a health transition framework. Under-five mortality is primarily the product of public health policies, preventive and curative medicine, and nutrition. Cases of rapid mortality decline without increase in income are numerous in the world, although when income rises, usually enough money is put in public health, medicine, and nutrition. In the case of Zambia, the mortality increase over the 1975–92 period appeared primarily as the result of the negative changes in income, which had effects on health services and on nutrition. Decline in income also lead to the departure of physicians and nurses, in particular in the public sector, who could find higher income in neighboring countries. In addition, this period was also affected by increases in malaria mortality, and by the emergence of HIV/AIDS, for independent epidemiological reasons. The recovery period (1992–2001) is most interesting, since under-five mortality resumed its decline despite continuous depreciation of income. Many reasons could explain this trend. As far as health personnel is concerned, the 1992–2001 period was favorable, as the ratio of physicians and nurses per population increased in both the public and the private sectors. In terms of health policies, the program of decentralization probably led to better efficiency of the health system, while cost recovery led to improved availability of medicines. In terms of health programs, the immunization program had probably a maximum effect after 1992, when vaccination coverage was high among the under-five population (it takes four years after systematic vaccinations of 12-months old babies until all under-five children are protected), and clearly measles mortality declined during this period. Let us note that mortality decline occurred despite continuous deterioration of the nutritional status, which implies that malnutrition is better treated, as can be seen in the decline in the proportion of reported deaths due to malnutrition. This can be taken as an indication of improvements in curative medicine. Furthermore, the education effort of the 1960s and 1970s could have had cumulative effects, since by the 1990s most women in their reproductive ages would have been educated. Indeed, it takes some 30 years between the time educated women leave secondary school and the end of their reproductive period. The regression equation linking under-five mortality to economic indicators confirmed our findings. The main determinant of mortality trends seems to be the underlying trend, which is the health transition independent from income, resulting primarily from health policies and programs. The economic shock of 1975 and the subsequent recession do explain the rise in under-five mortality until 1990, but appear to not have had longer term effects. The effects of the external economic shock, the decline of copper prices on the international market, shows the frailty of the state in a country like Zambia, which depended largely on a single export commodity ( Of course, this type of negative impact of an economic shock is country specific, and the same shock could have different effects in a different situation. With respect to the copper crisis, a good example of an alternative path is provided by Chile. Chile bears some similarities with Zambia: the country is about the same size (757 In Zambia, however, resilience of the system and its capacity of recovery are more important, and more informative for future action. Despite declining income, the Zambian government found a way of coping with the difficulties. By implementing new policies, and by continuing its effort in medical training and in medical infrastructure, it was able to resume the health transition. In particular, the implementation of structural adjustment policies appeared to have had positive effects on health indicators. We found similar evidence in other African countries, such as Madagascar (after 1986), Uganda (after 1986), Ghana (after 1983), and Mozambique (after 1992), where under-five mortality resumed its decline after structural adjustment policies were put in place, when it was increasing before ( Some authors have put a large emphasis on epidemiological factors in the case of Zambia. We found a significant effect of HIV/AIDS, though not large enough to inhibit the mortality decline in the 1990s nationwide. Of course, the net effect of HIV/AIDS on mortality trends depends on the underlying level of mortality. When mortality gains due to the health transition become lower than the mortality losses due to HIV/AIDS, mortality increases, at it is the case in nearby Botswana. In Zambia, the underlying mortality level is still above this threshold, although this may not last. The AIDS epidemic is raging, and its full effect is going to be seen in the coming years. In spite of declining mortality for other causes, AIDS could well lead to another reversal in mortality in the near future, unless proper measures are taken to limit mother to child transmission of HIV and to treat infected mothers. Malaria did play a role in the mortality increase of the 1980s, although, according to our computations, it had only a minor effect. Proper prevention and treatment of resistant malaria is still not resolved in sub-Saharan Africa, and could also lead to mortality increases in the future. Some other authors have pointed out the possible role of cholera. We found little evidence that cholera could have played a role here. According to cases reported to the World Health Organization, three major epidemics struck Zambia in 1978–83, 1990–93 and 1996–2001. We found no correlation with our under-five mortality estimates, which can be easily understood, since cholera affects primarily adults, and rarely breastfeeding children, the prime age group for under-five mortality. This case study displays some of the complex relationships between income and mortality outcome overtime, and is primarily a longitudinal analysis put in a broader context of the health transition and emerging diseases. It differs in its nature from large scale cross country studies, relating both variables in regression analysis, which are primarily cross sectional. Endless debates about the role of income, education, nutrition, and public health in mortality decline have attracted the attention of scholars and international organizations up till recently. A good recent review and critical analysis is provided by Our analysis tried to encompass a systematic analysis of mortality trends, discounting for independent epidemics such as HIV/AIDS or malaria, and a systematic analysis of various determinants: economic, social, public health, and nutrition. This is probably why our conclusions differ also from some of the other authors. Of course, much remains to be done to analyze in detail the precise mechanisms, in particular morbidity and mortality by cause, use and access to health services, efficacy of prevention and treatments etc. Similarly, the economic analysis could be much improved by analyzing private consumption of health services and medicines ( The authors acknowledge the support of the “Health Consequences of Population Change Panel” of the Wellcome Trust, London, who provided a grant to conduct this study [Grant # 062885/Z/00Z]. The authors would like to thank very warmly all those who welcomed Dr. Enéas Gakusi in Lusaka, and provided time, information, documents, and the data necessary for the analysis, in particular: Ms. Efreda Chulu, acting director of the CSO, Mr. Chimfwembe, director of Planning and Development at MoH, Ms. Chivundu Leo, EPI officer at MoH, Ms. Jenny Meya Nyirenda, Child Health Specialist, Central Board of Health, Ms. Catherine Mwape, International Trade Division at CSO, Mr. Edgar Musonda at CSO, Mr. William Mayaka, Deputy Director at CSO, Mr. James Lungushi, Director of Planning at the Ministry of Finance, Dr. Edward Maganu, Director of WHO regional office in Lusaka, Dr. Eddie Limbambala at the WHO office in Lusaka, and Ms. Liseli Simasiku-Sikota at the World Bank office in Lusaka. They also thank warmly Dr. Theophilus Fadayomi for his useful comments.