Purpose
                  We examined whether stone composition in pregnant women reflects peculiar pathophysiological conditions.
               
                  Materials and Methods
                  We analyzed in detail the composition of stones from 244 pregnant women 17 to 44 years old and from 5,712 nonpregnant women in the same age range, as recorded between January 1991 and December 2007. Clinical features were also recorded. All stones were analyzed by morphological examination coupled with infrared spectroscopy. The 2 patient groups were compared by clinical and biochemical characteristics.
               
                  Results
                  Stone episodes in pregnant women manifested mainly in trimesters 2 and 3 (39% and 46%, respectively). Spontaneous passage was noted in 81% of pregnant vs 47% of nonpregnant women (p <0.0001). Calcium phosphate, mainly in the form of carbapatite, was the main stone component in 65.6% of pregnant vs 31.4% of nonpregnant women (p <0.0001). Octacalcium phosphate pentahydrate, a transition phase in calcium phosphate stone formation, was found in a 5-fold higher proportion in carbapatite stones in pregnant than in nonpregnant women, a finding also suggesting recent stone formation during pregnancy.
               
                  Conclusions
                  The composition of stones manifesting during pregnancy clearly differs from that of stones formed in nonpregnant women of childbearing age, suggesting a different pathophysiology specific to the pregnant state. In view of the pH dependency of calcium phosphate stones factors that increase the physiological elevation in maternal urinary calcium excretion and pH are likely to have a role in the preferential formation of calcium phosphate stones during pregnancy.S Few studies to date have described the composition of stones produced in pregnant women. More than 70% of calculi are predominantly pure CaP or mixed with CaOx vs the 30% in nonpregnant women of childbearing age. We compared the composition of calculi passed by or removed from pregnant women in a recent period with that in nonpregnant women of childbearing age recorded during the same period to evaluate whether calculous composition in pregnant women has differences vs that in nonpregnant women to provide insights into pathophysiology. A total of 43,930 urinary calculi were analyzed at the Necker Hospital stone laboratory between January 1991 and December 2007, of which 244 were from pregnant women 17 to 44 years old (group 1) and 5,712 were from women in the same age range who were not pregnant at the stone episode (group 2). All stones were expelled after acute renal colic or ESWL®, or removed during endoscopic, laparoscopic or surgical procedures. Patient clinical history and characteristics were recorded. Stone composition was determined by Fourier transform infrared spectroscopy. The stone core, and the inner and peripheral layers were picked up to identify chronological stone composition. A global powder of the stone was analyzed to assess the relative proportion of the various compounds identified by sequential analysis. Special attention was given to the nature and proportion of secondary components associated with carbapatite in phosphate stones. We assessed the 2 patient groups by considering various clinical and biochemical features. Data are shown as the mean ± SD and range. Intergroup comparisons were done with ANOVA and the chi-square test. Statistical analysis was performed using NCSS software (NCSS, Kaysville, Utah). Of the 244 pregnant women 73 (30%) had urolithiasis before the pregnancy considered for study, including 9 (3.7%) during a previous pregnancy. Previous stone composition was not available in these 73 patients. Also, the exact number of nonpregnant women with a history of urolithiasis during a past pregnancy was not available. Of calculi in pregnant women 80.8% passed spontaneously vs 47.1% in nonpregnant women (p <0.0001,  The proportion of CaP stones was higher in pregnant than in nonpregnant women (65.6% vs 31.4%, p <0.0001). Carbapatite was the main component in each group but in a higher proportion of pregnant than in nonpregnant women (56.7% vs 29.0%, p <0.0001). OCP and brushite, which are uncommon forms of CaP, were the main stone component in a significantly higher proportion of pregnant women.  Information on stone episode gestational time was available with certitude in 206 women. The stone episode occurred during trimesters 1 to 3 in 32 (15.5%), 79 (38.4%) and 95 cases (46.1%), respectively. The Because the accurate composition of CaP stones was different in pregnant vs nonpregnant women, the second component of carbapatite stones was considered with respect to gestational time. CaOx was the most common component associated with carbapatite. The OCP composition constantly increased from 16.7% during trimester 1 to 24% in trimester 2 and 32.7% in trimester 3. The proportion of carbapatite stones containing OCP as the second component in the last 2 trimesters of pregnancy was significantly higher than in carbapatite stones in nonpregnant women (p <0.0001). We approached the problem of urolithiasis in pregnancy by comparing stone composition in a large series of consecutive calculi analyzed in the last decades that were produced in pregnant and age matched nonpregnant women. Our aim was to search for possible differences in stone composition that may reflect peculiar pathophysiological conditions related to the pregnant state. The limitation is absent concomitant metabolic evaluation but 4 main findings emerge from this case-control study. 1) We confirmed by direct comparison in the same population that stones produced in pregnant women are predominantly CaP instead of CaOx, as in age matched nonpregnant women, and the proportion of phosphate stones is twice as great in the former as in the latter. 2) Most stone episodes occurred in the last 2 trimesters of gestation with a high predominance of CaP calculi. 3) Twice as many calculi passed spontaneously in pregnant than in nonpregnant women. 4) The proportion of OCP, a rare stone component in common lithogenic conditions, was unusually high in pregnant women, a finding also suggesting recent CaP stone formation. As recently proposed by Ross et al, The reported incidence of urolithiasis in pregnancy varies widely in the literature from only 1/3,821 deliveries to 1/188 in the total of 8 reports published up to 1982 for an average incidence of approximately 1/1,500. Although we have no full or exact information on pregnancy time in 38 women, clearly the stone distribution underscores a significant difference between pregnancy trimesters 1 vs 2 and 3, suggesting a lower incidence of stones during the first months of pregnancy and possibly a slightly increased risk thereafter, in agreement with physiological changes such as increased 1,25-dihydroxycholecalciferol, absorptive hypercalciuria and increased urine pH. On the other hand, hypercalciuria of pregnancy is associated with slightly increased urine pH The few groups who have examined the composition of stones produced in pregnant women consistently reported CaP as the predominant component, including in 13 of 15 cases (87%) reported by Cass et al, In all published studies symptomatic stone episodes consistently occurred in gestation trimester 2 and even more in trimester 3 in pregnant women. Also, 60% to 84% of stone episodes in pregnant women ended in spontaneous passage. Ross et al reported a mean size of 5.3 mm (range 2 to 11) in 27 calculi extracted by urological procedures in pregnant patients. To our knowledge a not yet reported argument suggesting the recent formation of CaP stones in pregnant women is the finding of an unusually high prevalence of OCP, a rare stone component. In our series OCP was the second component of carbapatite stones in as many as 23.2% of pregnant women but in only 4.7% of carbapatite stones in nonpregnant women of similar age. OCP is a transition phase of CaP in the carbapatite formation, The preferential development in the last 2 trimesters of gestation of small CaP stones with the common persistence of OCP in their composition strongly suggests that stones produced in pregnant women were formed de novo during pregnancy rather than being previously formed. These conclusions from stone analysis are in keeping with the physiological adaptations that occur in pregnancy. Peculiar conditions could favor stone formation, such as preexisting idiopathic hypercalciuria, Gynecologists who follow pregnant women must be aware of stone prevention, particularly in women with a urolithiasis history. Further studies including comprehensive blood and urine evaluation, and stone analysis in women with urolithiasis during pregnancy would provide more precise information on the pathophysiological mechanisms resulting in stone formation and help elaborate preventive measures.