The increased demand for lithium salts puts pressure on the available production capacity. The current technology for lithium extraction is highly time consuming and has raised great concern because of the evaporation, on average, of 500 m3 of water per ton of lithium carbonate. We propose a new technology based on membrane electrolysis to crystallize lithium carbonate from lithium-rich brines. Brine that has been previously deprived from divalent cations and reduced in Na+ concentration, is introduced in the middle compartment of a three-compartment electrochemical reactor. This compartment is separated from the anolyte and catholyte by an anion and a cation exchange membrane, respectively. When a current is applied, anions and cations selectively migrate into the anionic and cathodic compartments, respectively. Water reduction increases the pH of the catholyte, which is recirculated in a crystallizer where CO2 is bubbled and converted to carbonate, precipitating Li2CO3 with a purity of at least 93.8 wt %. Current values ranging from 10 to 100 A m−2 were applied, producing cell voltages from 2.5 to 30 V (highest values correspond to end of batch experiments). The method allows to recover as much as 90% of the volume of the lithium containing solution as low salinity water, with up to 99.7% less total dissolved solids than the processed brine, in marked contrast with current practice. In a non-optimized electrochemical reactor, designed for proof-of-concept experiments, the energy consumption for the electrolysis was calculated at 70.6 kWh m−3 of treated brine.The fast-growing production of lithium ion batteries in recent years and the forecasted further increase has led to a major increase in the demand of lithium salts [ The key problem to tackle lithium recovery from brines, is its extremely low concentration (0.3–1.5%) in a complex solution with many more components, most of which show relatively large water solubilities. The current process to recover lithium salts is brine evaporation in large and shallow open air evaporation ponds. Wind and solar evaporation is the easiest and most cost-effective technology developed so far. Over 90% of the water originally contained in the brine is evaporated and lost [ Most prospective new lithium recovery technologies propose the use of some physical or chemical methodology to selectively capture lithium ions, such as insertion into selective electrodes [ Performing cation-extraction via membrane electrolysis without Li-selective electrodes concentrates a mixture of Li We propose a full membrane electrolysis concept for a more sustainable production of lithium carbonate (Li Simultaneously, CO Our method takes advantage of the differential solubilities of Li The electrochemical cell was designed and made in house based on a previously described design [ The three cations experiment was run in triplicate. Results comparing all three replicates are shown in S.I ( Experiments were run in batch mode at room temperature (22 ± 3 °C). The anodic compartment was connected to a 2 L plastic drum, the middle compartment was connected to a 5 L plastic drum, while the cathodic compartment was connected to a 0.5 L Schott-bottle, serving as a decanter. The total volumes for anolyte, middle and catholyte were 2 L, 5 L, and 0.5 L respectively. These volumes were constantly recirculated through the cell compartments using a peristaltic pump (flow rate = 6 L h New membranes were immersed in NaCl 5% for 24 h and then washed with de-ionized water, in order to hydrate and stabilize them. After each batch run, the reactor and the membranes were rinsed with de-ionized water. When not in use, the membranes were kept in artificial brine. For each experiment, cell potential vs. current graphs for the first 50% of the electrolysis were plotted and are shown in The coulombic efficiency for cation removal (%) was calculated as: The energy consumption per volume of treated brine (Wh L The separation coefficient ( The calculation of the transport number ( The migration rate ( CO At the end of the batch runs the precipitates recovered were vacuum filtered and washed with de-ionized water at 45 °C, and dried at 100 °C during 24 h. Cation compositions were determined by either ICP-OES analysis (SPECTRA modula Flame) or flame photometry (BWB technologies). All analyses were run in triplicate. Detection limits were 0.5 ppm. Acid-base potentiometric titration was used to determine carbonate and bicarbonate concentrations in precipitated solids (re-dissolved in de-ionized water). The titrant solution was 0.15 M HCl. The pH was registered with a pH-meter (Hanna) as the titrant was added. The endpoint was determined by second derivative method of the titration curve (see X-ray diffractograms were measured on a SIEMENS D5000 powder diffractometer, with Cu-Kα radiation λ = 1.54056 Å. The spectra were recorded over a 2θ range from 15° to 90° with a step of 0.02° and a count time of 1 s/point. Membranes were imaged by Scanning electron microscopy using a Zeiss Evo® MA10 microscope, operating at 10 kV, with a focus between 5 and 6 mm, at 30 Pa of pressure in the chamber and using a backscattered electron detector. Membranes imaged before the electrolysis were still immersed in a 5% NaCl solution followed by washing for three days with reverse osmosis water. Before SEM analysis, membranes used in the electrolysis were washed with reverse osmosis water for one week. Micrographs correspond to membrane sides facing the anolyte and catholyte, respectively. In a first series of experiments, the artificial brine consisted of a mixture of LiCl, NaCl, and KCl. Next, we run experiments with two cations only (LiCl, and alternatively NaCl or KCl). As expected, panels A–C in   In the experiment with the three cations we performed periodic concentration measurements of cations in the middle compartment during the electrolysis. A faster membrane permeation for K  To further confirm the identity of our solid precipitates, the solids were re-dissolved and analysed, see It is also important to stress once again that the methodology proposed here, and the great purity achievable for the solids was possible, assuming two preliminary steps. The first one is needed to fully deprive lithium rich brines from divalent cations, namely Mg Lithium carbonate is one of the least soluble lithium salts [ A closer look at An average continental brine contains 700 ppm Li The energy consumption was estimated according to equation Assuming that 90% of the original Li Our methodology consumes large amounts of CO This study was aimed at a detailed study of cations’ transfer through the CEM, showing the crystal formation of high purity Li After 300 h of continuous electrolysis, neither of the electrodes showed macroscopic changes suggesting ageing. Microscopic studies on the electrodes were not performed. Dimensionally stable anodes such as the one used here have purposely been developed and improved over years to endure aggressive media [  Isolation of Li Solid samples with purities ranging from 93.8 to 97.5 wt % of Li Walter Ramón Torres: Conceptualization; formal analysis; investigation; methodology; writing-original draft. César Horacio Diaz Nieto: Conceptualization; investigation; methodology, visualization. Antonin Prevoteau: Conceptualization; writing-review and editing. Korneel Rabaey: Conceptualization; funding acquisition; writing-review and editing. Victoria Flexer: Conceptualization; formal analysis; methodology; writing-original draft; writing-review & editing; supervision; funding acquisition. The authors declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this paper. WRT, CHDN and VF are permanent research fellows from CONICET. This work was supported by the ERA-MIN2 call, an ERA-NET Cofund scheme under The following is the Supplementary data to this article: Supplementary data to this article can be found online at