The T-plate is a recently developed low-profile plate for use in the fixation of distal radius fractures. Its design allows contouring to fit the unique surface of the volar surface of the distal radius. This is an angled T-plate well suited for volar fixation of distal radial fractures. There has been a recent report of delayed extensor tendon rupture after volar fixation of a distal radial fracture, A 49-year-old right-handed man sustained a comminuted, intra-articular distal radial fracture after a fall onto his outstretched left hand. He was initially treated with closed reduction and immobilization along with referral to physiotherapy. The follow-up visit 10 days later showed that the fracture reduction was lost and open reduction and internal fixation was suggested. So, after 3 weeks of injury, he underwent open reduction and internal fixation with a T-plate placed on the volar surface. The implant was applied through a volar approach to the radius. The flexor carpi radialis subsheath was opened and the tendon was retracted in an ulnar direction along with the flexor tendons and the median nerve. The sheath was released distal to the wrist flexion crease so that it could be mobilized adequately. The pronator quadratus was exposed and elevated off the volar aspect of the radius from a radial to ulnar direction without detaching it form its attachment. Fracture fragments were reduced directly and with fluoroscopy, as there was considerable intra-articular comminution and displacement, so then the brachioradialis and the first dorsal compartment were elevated off the distal radius and the radial shaft was pronated to facilitate exposure. This allowed access through the fracture site to the entire distal radius. Under fluoroscopy, the articular fragments were reduced with a bone clamp using the scaphoid and lunate as a mold. Preliminarily, the fragments were held in place by using K-wires. Once preliminary reduction was achieved, the selected volar plate was positioned and held in place with stabilization wires. Confirmation of preliminary reduction and guide wire placement was obtained with intrasurgical fluoroscopy. It is mandatory that the intra-articular fracture fragments be aligned anatomically before drilling the tine holes. By application of a dorsal- and radial-directed force, the plate was reduced to the volar surface of the radial shaft, resulting in additional volar tilt and radial inclination to the distal radial fragment. The final reduction was checked radio graphically and the plate was secured to the radial shaft using 3.5-mm cortical screws. After surgery, a volar splint was applied and digital ROM and edema control were begun immediately. The T-plate used was manufactured by Stryker Howmedica Company. It was made up of the Titanium which, as a pure metal, has an extraordinary tissue compatibility and resistance from corrosion. These T-compression plates (palmar) had profile height ranging from 2.2 to 2.5 He had uneventful recovery and was followed up in fracture clinic and occupational therapy department for postoperative mobilization and rehabilitation. He had received regular supervised hand therapy, including a volar wrist splint, which was removed after 11 weeks. He regained good range of motion, including near full thumb flexion, and normal sensibility. The fracture had united completely and there was no loosening or failure of the fixation device noted on radiographs. The patient was examined finally at 6 months after open reduction and internal fixation and he was discharged from outpatient clinic. After 1 year and 2 months of fracture healing, patient reported recent sudden onset of pain in the thumb and an inability to flex at the interphalangeal joint. The symptoms persisted for 2 weeks when patient consulted his GP whose examination showed that all flexor tendons were intact except flexor pollicis longus with no sensory deficit. Union of the distal radius in a satisfactory position was again confirmed with radiographs and there was no change in the position of the plate ( The incision was same as old one and after dissection of the fibrous tissue around the scar, it was found that flexor pollicis longus was ruptured at the level of distal 4 At the last follow-up examination, 4 months after surgery, the patient reported satisfactory function; the silicone rod interposition grafting was functioning well, with 60° of active interphalangeal flexion. Histologic examination of specimens obtained during surgery revealed degenerative changes within the excised proximal stump of the flexor pollicis longus tendon and reactive papillary hyperplasia of the synovium. One of the goals of the low-profile T-plate design was to minimize extensor tendon irritation when used for fixation on the dorsal surface of the distal radius. I suggest that for prevention of any friction over any tendon, it is best to cut the pronator muscle in line of the incision and insert the plate subperiosteally and stitch the muscle over it so that there is no chance of any contact between any soft tissue and metalwork.