With the ever-increasing demand for cobalt in India it is worthwhile exploiting secondary resources. A step in this direction has been taken in our laboratory at BARC by recovering cobalt from spent ammonia cracker catalyst after leaching with sulfuric acid. The removal of Fe3+ and Al3+ from the leach liquor can be achieved by either chemical precipitation or solvent extraction using DEHPA as an organic extractant. When nickel is present as an impurity, it is separated by extraction with LIX 84I. This process has been scaled up and it has been possible to obtain a cobalt recovery of ∼85% with a purity greater than 99.9%.Cobalt has strategic and industrial importance due to its application in many technological fields ( Hence, it was desirable to develop a commercial hydrometallurgical process for the production of cobalt from this source. In this paper the production of high purity cobalt from both nickel-free and nickel-containing catalyst is discussed. The leach liquor obtained in this process is such that the downstream processing can be done using either of the two routes viz. precipitation or solvent extraction. The appropriate route can be chosen depending upon the requirement of purity and throughput as well as the availability of equipment and manpower. In this process, cobalt and iron were quantitatively leached along with some aluminium. In order to remove iron and aluminium in a single step, it was necessary to convert iron into ferric form. The leach liquor was treated with ammonia for the quantitative removal of Fe The catalyst was obtained from a fertilizer plant in the form of 4–5 mm pellets with the composition in For preliminary laboratory studies the pellets were ground to −250 and −75 μm. Larger scale leaching trials were carried out using 3.0 kg of unground pellets. The catalyst was leached with sulfuric acid at 80 °C for 6 h in a stirred, teflon lined, stainless steel reaction vessel which was heated using a silica coated immersion heater. After leaching, ferrous was oxidised to ferric state with nitric acid at 60 °C for 2 h. Depending on the type of catalyst, the leach liquor was treated by different routes. Both precipitation and single contact solvent extraction have been adopted for removal of Fe However, raffinate from the nickel-containing catalyst (Ni:Co 1:100) has to be further treated by solvent extraction for removal of nickel, since nickel coprecipitates with cobalt during oxalate addition thereby reducing the purity. Nickel, and not cobalt, should be extracted to minimise the solvent inventory and make the process cost effective. However, the extractants suitable for sulfate medium (DEHPA, PC-88A and CYANEX-272) all preferentially extract cobalt and hence are not suitable. Selectivity of nickel over cobalt is only possible by oxidising Co(II) to Co(III) and stabilizing it as ammoniacal complex. Ni(II) also forms an ammoniacal complex and does not precipitate at pH 9–11 where it can be extracted using LIX64N or LIX84I. Since LIX64N is no longer available from Henkel Corporation, LIX 84I was used. The raffinate from the first step of solvent extraction, containing cobalt and traces of nickel, was added to 13N ammonia, with stirring followed by calculated quantity of 30% v/v H The cobalt present as Co(NH The pure cobalt solution obtained from both types of catalyst was converted into cobalt oxalate at a pH of 7.0 by addition of oxalic acid solution. The cobalt oxalate was filtered, washed free of electrolytes with demineralised water and any adherent organic matter removed by washing with acetone. The precipitate was dried at 120 °C for 3–4 h. The oxalate route is preferred over the hydroxide route as its thermal decomposition yields cobalt metal powder of the desired morphology and >99.85% pure Co. Co A sample of the dried cobalt oxalate was dissolved quantitatively by treatment with 6N nitric acid at 60–70 °C for 2 h and made up to a known volume. The cobalt content was determined by UV visible spectrophotometry and trace impurities like Fe, Al, Ni and Cu by atomic absorption spectrophotometry. In the laboratory it was observed that Fe and Al were leached along with Co. Although the leaching of Fe could not be avoided, conditions were standardized to restrict the leaching of Al to 26%. The recoveries of cobalt for the −250 μm sample were around 95–97% and the improved recoveries with the finer grind size (−75 μm) were not sufficient to compensate for the additional cost of grinding. Besides, the grinding process was not only cumbersome but also required removal of moisture before grinding. In view of this, the moist pellets were directly leached with 20% sulfuric acid in the bench scale studies. The acid requirement was found to be 1.3 gm/gm of catalyst, which gave the appropriate pulp density to facilitate agitation in addition to maximising dissolution. The oxidation of Fe Solubility product data calculations showed that pH 3.0 was sufficient for the quantitative removal of Fe(III) and pH 4.0 for removal of Al(III). Since the objective was to remove both ions in a single step, the precipitation was carried out at pH 4.0–4.2. The results of purification of nickel-free catalyst pellets by precipitation method are shown in The pH of the feed was adjusted to 0.3 and the extent of saponification of DEHPA was fixed at 85% to optimise the requirement of solvent. A feed pH>0.3 resulted in the precipitation of Fe(OH) After a single contact stage, it was found that even with an aqueous to organic ratio of 10:1, the purity of cobalt in the raffinate with respect to nickel is 99.95%. The requirement of the solvent was also verified by stoichiometric calculations based on the mechanism of extraction and the estimated quantity of the active component of LIX84I. The conditions of precipitation of cobalt oxalate and the analytical data for cobalt oxalate purity are shown in The entire sequence of operation can be grouped into four stages and their respective percentage recoveries at laboratory scale are shown in In the processing of spent ammonia cracker catalyst, iron and aluminium can be more easily removed by a single stage solvent extraction than precipitation. The slow filtration rates and repulping of the precipitates to obtain recovery comparable to that from single stage solvent extraction, are time consuming. The processing of nickel-free catalyst as compared to nickel-containing catalyst involves less steps. Consequently, higher recoveries can be obtained in the former case. The technical feasibility of the process at bench scale has been established to recover >99.9% pure cobalt as its oxalate. The process flow sheet for the same is shown in The authors are thankful to Dr. S Baneerjee, Director, Materials Group and Director, Bhabha Atomic Research Centre for his keen interest and guidance during the course of this work.