The concept of semisolid processing was explored to generate alloys by mixing coarse particulate precursors with different chemistries. The experiments with several magnesium alloys revealed that the control of chemistry and the proportion of precursors, as well as the solid to liquid ratio during their partial melting, allowed the selective partition of alloying elements between the solid and liquid phases, thus designing unique solidification microstructures.Processing metallic alloys at temperatures in their solidus–liquidus range allows a reduction in the drawbacks inherent in casting overheated melts. The benefits are primarily associated with the thixotropic slurry, which replaces the molten alloy used in conventional casting. The slurry consists of spheroidal solid particles with a higher melting point surrounded by a liquid having a lower melting temperature This paper explains the concept and provides the phenomenological description of processes, which take place during the formation of magnesium alloys by semisolid state mixing of coarse particulate precursors with different chemistries. Four magnesium-based alloys with different chemical compositions, melting ranges and properties were selected as precursors for the purpose of this study ( During conversion of the as-cast ingots into coarse particulates, as a result of interaction with the cutting tool, the alloys experienced cold work. The extent of deformation depended on the chip's size. For smaller chips, deformation was severe, very often accompanied by cracks originating at the interface between massive precipitates of the intermetallics and α-Mg. Heating particulates within a solid state therefore caused recrystallization The alloy generation experiments were conducted by the individual mixing of each Mg–6Al, Mg–5Al–2Sr and Mg–2Ce–0.3Zn precursors with the Mg–9Al–1Zn grade, having the lowest melting range ( Both the Mg–6Al and Mg–9Al–1Zn alloys contain Al as the major alloying element and exhibit close to 20 In this case the precursors not only had different melting ranges ( The Mg–2Ce–0.3Zn alloy has a very narrow melting range located at significantly higher temperatures than Mg–9Al–1Zn ( Melting behaviour of mechanically comminuted chips and the formation of thixotropic slurries from individual precursors are of key importance during creation of alloys by semisolid state mixing The overall microstructure of the created alloy is similar to those described previously for Mg-based alloys and consists of unmelted spheroids surrounded by the solidified liquid The concept of alloy formation during the semisolid mixing of two precursors of the same major elements can be deduced from a comparison of the phase diagram and a selection of room temperature microstructures ( A contribution of the solid-state diffusion to alloy generation is not fully clear. It is reasonable to assume that there is no direct diffusion-controlled transport between solid particulates originating from different precursors because they are mostly separated by the liquid alloy. Since the material is conveyed within the machine barrel by an injection screw, there is an intense mixing and redistribution of chemical elements in the liquid state. The solid-state diffusion, therefore, relates to the spheroidal solid particles and their interaction with the liquid. A diffusion impact is suppressed mainly by the alloy residency time within the system, being of the order of 3 The concept of alloys generation during semisolid injection molding is of great engineering importance, and the potential advantages are clear when considering the alloy examples used in this study. While Mg–9Al–1Zn shows good mechanical properties with excellent castability, the Mg–6Al is known for its high ductility and toughness. The alloys formed by mixing will cover an intermediate range of properties. On the other hand, alloy Mg–5Al–2Sr has excellent creep resistance at high temperatures. An increase in Al content during alloying with Mg–9Al–1Zn improves castability and room temperature strength while still preserving satisfactory creep resistance at moderate temperatures. Similarly, the alloy Mg–2Ce–0.3Zn is designed for high creep resistance. An absence of Al results in reduced tensile properties at room temperature and demanding casting behaviour. Combining it with Mg–9Al–1Zn could allow for balancing between alloy's castability, room temperature yield, tensile strength and creep resistance. Our previous research Mixing of thixotropic slurries, formed during partial melting of coarse particulate precursors, represents a novel technique of alloy generation. The microstructure of the created alloy consists of a mixture of unmelted spheroidal solids originating from individual precursors and the matrix, which results from combining their liquid fractions. A selection of the feedstock chemistry, mixing proportions and preheating temperature allows controlling of the selective partition of alloying elements between the solid and liquid thus generating alloys with unique microstructures, essentially different from those formed after the conventional mixing of completely molten ingredients. It is anticipated that alloys with microstructures created by semisolid state mixing will exhibit unique properties, required for specific applications.