A survey of the comminution energy requirements of gold and copper producing mines has been conducted to provide reliable benchmarking data which can be used to compare comminution energy consumption across different mine sites. The total gold and copper production of the mines included in the study equated to 15% and 24% respectively of global production and all of Australian production. The comminution energy per unit metal product has been presented in a graphical form similar to a cost curve. This simple technique allows individual mines to be ranked with respect to energy consumption and clearly displays the potential energy and cost benefits of moving down the graph into more efficient operating regimes. Assuming similar specific energy requirements for other sites, comminution of gold and copper ores can be expected to consume about 0.2% of global, and 1.3% of Australia’s electricity consumption. Efforts to reduce this figure should be aimed at the top third of consumers as they are responsible for 80% of the total consumption. Analysis of the contribution of circuit efficiency, ore competence, grind size and ore grade showed that ore grade was the greatest determinate of specific comminution energy. Therefore, concentrating the ore via gangue rejection or grade engineering prior to grinding is likely to achieve the largest positive effect on comminution energy efficiency.Comminution is the process by which rocks are reduced in size to liberate the valuable components for subsequent separation events. The process of rock breakage consumes a considerable quantity of energy and is a significant component of international electricity consumption.  The energy consumed through comminution is quantified using a number of different bases. It is most commonly reported as the specific energy per tonne of material processed (kW  The Coalition for Eco-Efficient Comminution (CEEC) roadmap proposed that clear benchmarks and standards are required to allow performance targets to be compared with industry standards ( The focus of the current investigation was limited to gold and copper producing mines to assess the applicability of the analysis technique on commodities with the greatest availability of data. A database was constructed to calculate each mine’s comminution energy requirements individually before the results were combined, and anonymity was preserved. The comminution energy requirements were obtained from JKTech surveys, published reports, energy audits and publications of installed equipment. Although a number of different sources have been used, consistency was maintained throughout the process. Historical comminution circuit survey (JKTech) reports between 1992 and 2012 were used to provide operating information on the milling circuits. These reports provided throughput, feed and product size distributions, mill power measurements and ore hardness parameters. Installed power requirements were obtained from a minerals processing survey published in AMM magazine ( Complete power data was available for SAG and ball milling, but it was only partially available for fine grinding and crushing. The data is also heavily weighted towards Australian mines; international mines were sampled sparsely with a skew to larger mines. Comminution data was available for 68 mines, effectively accounting for all the copper and gold produced within Australia but only 24% of the copper and 15% of the gold produced internationally. Copper and gold production data, as well as material milled, was obtained from publicly available annual reports. The most recent production data available for each mine was collected, but inconsistencies in reporting resulted in dates varying between 2007 and 2012 for different mines. The combination of this variance and the timing of the comminution circuit surveys may result in some inconsistencies in the results, but every attempt was made to minimise this effect. Total mine site energy consumption was also collected from compulsory reporting initiatives such as Australia’s Energy Efficient Opportunities Act ( The results have been presented in a graphical form similar to the cost curves that are generated by financial institutions. Each mine is presented as a separate bar in a bar chart, the width of which represents the annual production and the comminution energy intensity is the height ( The comminution energy intensity can be expressed in a number of different ways. The most powerful unit is energy per unit metal product as it is not only influenced by unit comminution efficiency but also upgrading strategies and recovery increases. Because copper and gold are associated geologically in orebodies, to compare like-with-like, mines were classified as either copper or gold producers depending on their major production. Grasberg was the only mine that was deemed to have equal production value of copper and gold. The gold and copper comminution curves are displayed in The concept of ‘copper equivalent gold production’ was used to present data from gold and copper mines on the same graph. Metal equivalent calculations are a common practice for polymetallic deposits and are especially popular in South America ( The results of this analysis are shown in The authors acknowledge that copper equivalent production relies heavily on the spot prices of the commodities at the day they were accessed but, it was deemed to be the most reasonable method available. To assess the validity of the calculation, the 2011 global production figures for gold and copper ( The annual comminution energy consumption can also be effectively displayed using a Pareto chart ( The proportion of energy consumed by comminution is variable across the mines surveyed ( The size specific energy is plotted against the annual throughput in The mines included in this study contribute 15% of the global gold production and 24% of the global copper production. 7.51 Terawatt hours of electrical energy was consumed by comminution at those mines annually. Three measurement bases were used to estimate the total world consumption for this survey. The average energy per tonne of ore, per ounce of gold, per tonne of copper, and per tonne of copper equivalent can all be used to calculate the remaining energy requirement. Using the average of all three methods, the annual comminution energy consumption for the mining of copper and gold is approximately 44 terawatt hours. This equates to approximately 0.2% of the global electricity consumption (calculated as 22.12 petawatt hours by the The range of values for specific comminution energy across the surveyed mines is a marker of the variability that is inherent at different mineral processing plants. Metal specific energy (MSE) of final product is driven by ore competence, fineness of grind, comminution efficiency, the grade of the deposit and separation recovery. The Bond work index is a measure of competence and The objective of the analysis was to ascertain the additive contributions of each of the major factors to the total MSE. Due to the complex interplay of the parameters this is not a simple additive contribution, and despite extensive analysis of the data the authors have not been able to achieve this objective. However, a good semi-quantitative assessment is provided by the box and whisker plot presented in There is a significant reduction in the MSE range after converting to a standard grade. What is particularly noticeable is that it is the only factor which increases the lower end of the energy range from 0.2 to 0.5 The relationship between un-corrected specific energy and ore grade is shown in The energy curves investigated in this paper are useful for mine sites to benchmark their operation in the context of the wider mining industry. Leveraging off the widely used cost curve and Pareto chart formats, the results are easily interpreted and adopted. By determining the relative efficiency rank of a mine in this way also provides motivation for the mine to identify improvements that will help move down the curve, thus saving energy and also reducing the costs associated with energy. However, it must be kept in mind that the size specific energy is related to rock competence. Furthermore, the resulting energy reduction can be measured in relation to the energy consumption of the industry as a whole. It is intended that this tool can be used by sites to identify opportunities to reduce energy and operating costs within the process, such as inefficient parts of the comminution circuit; changes to grind size (varying grind size to improve recovery); and the penalty of competent ore zones. Finally, addressing grade through ore upgrade strategies clearly provides a significant avenue to reduce comminution energy and processing costs ( Utilising a reliable measure of rock competence, such as energy required to generate new minus 75 The authors have focused on comminution energy efficiency in this paper and acknowledge that overall profit must be optimised for individual cases according to the specific local drivers, with energy efficiency no doubt being a key driver in this assessment. The authors would like to acknowledge the support of CRC ORE, established and supported by the