The effect of surfactants on bubble properties was examined in turbulent conditions. A multi-scale analysis was accomplished with the primary aim to identify the relationship between the size-scale determined surface properties leading to the decrease in bubble size.
                  The adsorption of the surfactants triggers chain reactions acting along different size-scales: it diminishes the tension at the air-liquid interface and increases its surface elasticity (micro/nano-scale; 10−10 to 10−5
                     m) leading to modified coalescence and breakup properties and lower bubble rise velocity (meso-scale; 10−5 to 10−2
                     m) that finally result a smaller bubble size (macro-scale; >10−2
                     m). The weakly surface-active DF200andPentanol cause a different change in the dynamic properties of the air-liquid interface compared to the strongly surface-active DF250andPPGleading to differences in size-scale properties and eventually in bubble size.
                  The main result of this work is a comprehensive picture of the dynamics of surface-active molecules affecting bubble size in the presence of random momentum transfer.As expressed by Flotation frothers are commonly employed to aid air dispersion. Frothers are surface-active agents with the primary aim to reduce the size and the rising velocity of the bubbles, and to enhance froth stability ( In gas dispersion measurements the bubble samples used for calculating D The D Bubble breakup is caused by hydrodynamic stresses of size and magnitude that are capable of disrupting the bubble surface ( The adsorption and desorption properties of the surfactant molecules determines the molecule exchange between the bulk solution and the air-liquid interface. The surface coverage (Γ) of the air-liquid interface increases with time as more and more molecules adsorb leading to decrease in surface tension. Molecule adsorption takes place on the interface until the equilibrium coverage (Γ The surface coverage of a bubble moving through the quiescent zone of the cell is in quasi-equilibrium; therefore, the surfactant concentration remains constant at any surface unit area in a sense of Eulerian frame of reference. This approximation will not be true if the bubble moves through a turbulent zone. Local random momentum transfer will arise due to the Kolmogorov eddy cascade leading to bubble oscillation and wobbling ( The present study aims at understanding the effect of surfactants on bubble properties in dynamic conditions while exploring the chain reaction triggered by molecule adsorption: the adsorption of surfactants affects the properties of air-liquid interface leading to a change in bubble properties and bubble interaction properties that eventuate in smaller bubble size. As it can be concluded based on the article review the effect of surfactants on the air-liquid interface can be investigated in different size-scales: on molecular level (micro/nano-scale; 10 In the past 20 Commercially there are two main surfactant classes ( In the present work the properties of the two different frother types are investigated in all the size scales to gain deeper understanding on the distinct effect of these two surfactant families. Four individual surfactants were systematically investigated. Two reagents, the 1-Pentanol and the Polypropylene glycol 425 (PPG425, industrial name: F150), with ≈99% purity were distributed by Aldrich-Sigma. The two chemicals were chosen due to their different chemical structure. The 1-Pentanol is a weakly surface-active alcohol while the PPG425 is highly surface-active polyglycol. Two commercial polyglycol frothers were also studied, the Dowfroth 200 (DF200) and the Dowfroth 250 (DF250) distributed by Nasaco International Ltd. Detailed information on the employed surfactants are presented in In this new experimental approach, a wide variety of measurement techniques covering all the three size-scales were employed to study the effect of surfactants on the properties of the air-liquid interface. For the macro-scale characterisation, Because of the lack of commercial methods available for investigating the dynamic meso-scale properties of the surfactant systems, new experimental set-ups were designed and built that allowed the simulation of dynamic conditions similar to that present in mechanical flotation cells. The experimental set-ups were designed for the visual observation of the properties of air bubbles using high-speed imaging technique. The basic concept was similar in these experimental techniques: the bubbles were sampled at their creation point and later during the bubble rise. The difference in measured bubble size and frequency distribution in the two sampling areas gave indication on the effect of surfactants on bubble coalescence/breakup due to the dynamic conditions.  The size of the generated bubbles was controlled by airflow using GFC mass flow controller (Aalborg Instruments & Controls, Inc.). Size of generated bubbles were between 2.1 and 2.8  A three-bladed axial flow impeller was installed about 5 The micro/nano-scale properties of the air-liquid interface were studied with commercially available laboratory equipment produced by Biolin Scientific (formerly KSV Instruments). Three dynamic properties of the air-water interface were investigated: The maximum bubble pressure method ( The Bubble oscillation method ( A multi-scale property study was accomplished with all the studied surfactants. The present work does not aim to present all the measured size-scale data in detail, as these have been presented separately ( Sauter mean diameter is a surface, volume mean diameter representing the whole bubble population. The purpose of mean diameter is to represent a group of individual value in order to understand the group ( The PPG425 and DF250 diminishes bubble size significantly already at small concentration and the bubbles reach their minimum size in lower concentration than in 1-Pentanol or DF200. The size distribution of the bubbles at equal D The 1-Pentanol and DF200 have similar effect on bubble size based on the D This finding contradicts with the results of The  It is also worth noting that the minimum size of forming bubbles ( The The The The above-introduced findings indicate that the addition of weakly surface-active alcohols cause different changes in the properties of the air-liquid interface compared to the strongly surface-active polyglycols, leading to differences in size-scale properties and eventually in bubble size. The 1-Pentanol shows rapid diffusion controlled adsorption/desorption. When the air/liquid interface is perturbed, the molecules are more willingly desorbing from the interface instead of preventing it from local thinning resulting a mobile bubble-surface similar to the one observed in water; consequently, the breakup properties of bubbles do not differ significantly from the ones observed in water. Because even the smallest surface perturbation can lead to molecule desorption the coalescence properties of the bubbles in dynamic condition do not differ significantly from the one observed in quasi-equilibrium conditions. Therefore, it can be concluded that the bubble breakup and coalescence in dynamic condition has no significant effect on the bubble swarm composition and hence the bubbles with increasing frother concentration follow the classical CCC theory: with higher froth concentration less coalescence occurs hence the D The PPG425 shows really slow adsorption/desorption indicating molecule re-orientation, which helps to stabilize the air-liquid interface against local thinning in the presence of surface perturbation leading to a stiff air-liquid interface. This stiff bubble surface will result less coalescence in quasi-equilibrium conditions, but it will also cause “rigid” breakup resulting more small bubbles in the system. Therefore, in the presence of long chain polyglycols the change in bubble size cannot simply explained with the CCC theory. The composition of bubble swarm is determined by the dynamics of the turbulent zone that will affect the breakup and dynamic coalescence of the bubbles. The effect of DF200 on the properties of the air-liquid interface is similar to that of 1-Pentanol in all the three studied size-scales while the effect of DF250 corresponds to that of PPG425. The similarity refers to the tendency and not to the quantity of the results. The close similarity between the DF200 and 1-Pentanol and between the DF250 and PPG425 is easily noticeable; nevertheless, there is no quantitatively determined surface property factor making connection between the two well-distinguished groups. The difference in chemical structure between the two DFs is not that outstanding (only one propylene group) as in case of alcohols and polyglycols; so this could be the reason why based on the HLB number the distinct effect of the two DFs is not predictable. However, the excess Gibbs energy and activity coefficient predict the distinct effect of the two DF’s; nevertheless, even this method fails to highlight the extensive difference between DF200 and PPG425. The impurities contained in commercial frothers might be a possible explanation for this. A detailed, scale-dependent approach was developed to characterise the effect of frothers on bubble size in dynamic conditions. The change in dynamic properties of the air-liquid interface as the results of the addition of surface-active molecules was studied in three size-scales: micro/nano-, meso- and macro-. Two reagent grade surface-active agents (1-Pentanol and PPG425) with distinct properties were employed to characterise the major differences between the two main commercially used frother classes, e.g. alcohols and polyglycols. The results highlight sharp differences between the two frother classes in each size-scale. Two commercially used DF’s (DF200 and DF250) were also studied and the corresponding effect of the weak DF200 with 1-Pentanol and the strong DF250 with PPG425 was highlighted in each studied size-scale. The physico-chemical picture of the effect of frothers on the air-liquid interface drawn based on the quasi-equilibrium phenomena changes in the presence of local random momentums caused by turbulent eddies. Not all the phenomena-taking place in turbulent zone during particle-bubble interactions is predictable with the quasi-equilibrium approach. For example, the type of adsorbed molecules already determines the size of the bubbles during formation and breakup. The bubble breakup results (observed in SOC) confirm the hypothesis of The study also highlighted that the decrease in bubble size with increasing concentration of 1-Pentanol and DF200 can be explained with the CCC theory; however, in case of PPG425 and DF250 the CCC theory alone cannot be employed to understand the frother effect on bubble size. The excess Gibbs energy appears to be a more rigorous measure of the hydrophilic-lipophilic characteristic of a surfactant than the HLB number nevertheless, even the excess Gibbs energy can be misleading when reagent grades are compared with industrial surfactants.