Nano crystalline High Entropy Alloys (HEA) with equi-atomic compositions were synthesized through mechanical alloying followed by Spark Plasma Sintering (SPS). Alloys with nominal compositions of TiAlNiCo, TiAlNiFe and TiAlNiCoFe were selected for the study. Microstructure, hardness and room temperature compressive strengths of the alloys were studied. All the alloys had a single phase BCC microstructure along with TiCx nanoparticles dispersed uniformly in it. The alloys exhibit good hardness of more than 700 HV1.0 and a compressive strength more than 2.5 GPa.Conventional alloy systems contain one or two elements as the main components and the secondary elements are added for getting the desired properties. A new class of alloys was developed by Yeh et al. [ Most of the HEAs reported in literature are processed through casting route. Detailed analysis of these microstructures reveals typical dendritic microstructure with segregations in the inter-dendritic regions [ There has been a lot of interest in HEA compositions having BCC structure [ In the present study, HEAs with nominal compositions of TiAlNiCo, TiAlNiFe and TiAlNiCoFe were processed through mechanical alloying followed by Spark Plasma Sintering (SPS). The composition were chosen since the Ti-Al, Fe-Al, Ni-Al, Ti-Ni systems form an intermetallic having equiatomic composition and B2 crystal structure. So the probability of forming a B2 or a disordered BCC structure is high with these compositions. High purity powders of Ti (99.5% pure, −325 mesh size), Al (99.5% pure, −325 mesh size), Ni (99.5% pure, 200 mesh size), Co (99.5% pure, −325 mesh size), and Fe (99.5% pure, < 10 μm) procured from Alfa Aeser, India have been used in the present work to synthesize equiatomic TiAlNiCo, TiAlNiFe and TiAlNiCoFe alloy. These powders were ball milled in a high energy planetary ball mill (Fritsch Pulverisette P5) using tungsten carbide lined vials and 10 mm dia. tungsten carbide balls under a wet media of Toluene to minimize the oxidation of the powders. The ball to powder weight ratio was 10: 1 and milling speed was 300 RPM. Milling was done for 8 h and powders were extracted at the interval of two hours for XRD analysis. All the blended powders were consolidated using Spark Plasma Sintering equipment (Model SPS-625, Fuji Electronic Co. Ltd., Japan). Samples were sintered at a temperature of 1000 °C with a heating rate of 100 °C.min   The crystallite size and lattice strain for the phases in all the three alloy powders after 8 h of milling were calculated from single peak broadening analysis. A Lorentzian distribution was used for the most intense peak and the peak broadening was measured. To remove the instrumental broadening, a silicon sample in fully annealed state was used as the reference and its peak width was subtracted from sample value. The corrected value was used for calculating the crystallite size using Scherrer's formula. Gaussian distribution of the most intense peak was used for the strain calculation using Xpert High score software. The strain is given by It is to be noted that the size calculated are very small and this could be due to the fact that there are two BCC phases with overlapping peaks which leads to broadening (see   It is also observed that peak broadening for α Thus, it is confirmed that the microstructure contains a BCC and B2 phase. It is also observed that small amount of TiO  It is noted that of all the elements present in the alloy, the free energy of carbide formation is most negative [ It has been observed by Guo et al. [   From   The TEM images indicate ultra-fine grains of the matrix bcc phase. The dark field image in  In order to understand the phase stability of the materials DSC was carried out on the SPS compacts. From the curves it is clear that the phases are stable up to melting temperature and no phase transformations are observed. This indicates that the BCC phases are quite stable and also do not undergo any decomposition or phase transformations. There is a small peak at 1100 °C which could be due to dissolution of TiC in TiAlNiCoFe alloy. In the other alloys, it seems that the TiC remains stable up to the melting point of the alloys. Further experiments are needed to study the high temperature stability and precipitate dissolution in these alloys. Sriharitha et al. [ The Vickers hardness of TiAlNiCo, TiAlNiFe and TiAlNiCoFe was found to be equal to 672 ± 10 HV  Sun et al. [ This indicates that these alloys could have very good mechanical properties and can find several applications. Further studies are necessary to evaluate the tensile properties, toughness and high temperature strength of these materials. TiAlNiCo, TiAlNiFe and TiAlNiCoFe multicomponent alloys were successfully synthesized through ball milling of elemental powders followed by Spark Plasma Sintering. Homogeneous mixing and formation of BCC phase was observed after 8 h of milling. After SPS, XRD patterns indicated the presence of a major BCC and minor BCC phase. SEM of the microstructure indicated a fine dispersion of the two BCC phases along with fine dispersion of TiC nanoparticles. The TiAlNiCoFe alloy exhibited very fine TiC nanoparticles compared to the 4-component alloy indicating a slow growth rate due to sluggish diffusion. Elemental compositions analyzed using EDS at three different regions in all the alloys shows that the elements are more or less uniformly distributed. TEM analysis on the alloys confirms the presence of two ultra-fine disordered BCC phases. DSC curves also indicate the phase stability up to 1300 °C. Hardness of the alloys measured using Vickers indenter also shows good results with values close to 700 HV. All the alloys show a good compressive strength (>2 GPa) at room temperature. Srinivasa Rao Bakshi would like to acknowledge funding from The following is the Supplementary data to this article: Supplementary data to this article can be found online at