Novel bead-milling (BM), comprising of rough- and fine-milling processes, was developed and adopted to mechanically pulverize natural carbonate manganese (MnC) and zinc oxide (ZnO). Real-time trackings showed that bulk mineral particles were finally pulverized to ultrafine scale (Z-avg hydrodynamic diameter ∼244 nm for MnC, ∼178 nm for ZnO), implying excellent activation potential of BM. Meanwhile, tracking results strongly indicated that BM process was in the feature of initial coexisting mineral dissociation and subsequent mechanico-chemical reaction, even phase transformation. Besides initiating the decrease of mineral particle size (also the increase of surface area), fierce mechanico-chemical reaction caused the dislocation and edge/corner generation, crystalline structure destruction, which were among the effective approaches for defect formation. Note that all these processes were inherently interrelated and contributed to the energy storage of activated mineral, which was verified by the TG/FTIR characterization. The stored energy would make up for the energy required to break the lattice constraint by acidic extraction. Consistently, it was found that BM evidently promoted the Mn extraction efficiency from 46.5% to 74.8% and additional ligand complexation further promoted the extraction efficiency by another ∼10%. As a result, less acid was consumed and accordingly less acidic wastes was discharged. This investigation might be enlightening for adopting proper strategies to promote the mineral extraction in a cleaner way.Extraction was a central unit operation in the hydrometallurgical processings of different types of minerals ( The acid consumption curb emerged to be one of the most promising alternatives for pollution prevention, which would decrease the wastewater discharge at the source ( Therefore, as the potential alternative to promote the mineral extraction, BM was extensively explored in the MA of manganese carbonate and zinc oxide in this study. The pH, leached ion and particle size distribution within the BM were real-time monitored and discussed, to provide sufficient cognitive into the process. The aggregation of ultra-fine particles, which was a spontaneous response to high enthalpy and free energy ( All reagents (Sinopharm Chemical Reagent) were analytical grade and used without further purification. Ultrapure water (18 MΩcm Bulk Mn Mineral extraction was performed in a glass vessel containing 250 mL aqueous solution with the solid loading fixed to be 8.0 g L The physical-chemical properties of raw and activated minerals were acquired and compared, which would help to determine the activation capability of BM. Particle size distributions during BM were tracked using dynamic light scattering (DLS) with a Mastersizer 3000 (Malvern, UK). Readings were taken in distilled water after bath sonication and Z-avgs (short for Z-avg hydrodynamic diameters) were reported. Nitrogen gas adsorption and desorption was performed at 100 K with an ASAP 2020 analyzer (Micromeritics, US), pore size distributions were determined using density functional theory (DFT) and surface areas were calculated from the Brunauer-Emmett-Teller (BET) equation. The pH of solid-liquid mixture was monitored by pH FE20 (Mettler, Switzerland) every 10 min during BM process. Zn XRD patterns of the solid samples after freeze-drying were collected using a D8 Advance Powder X-ray Diffractometer (XRD) (Bruker, Germany). Morphologies of raw and activated minerals were obtained using a field emission scanning electron microscope (SEM) (Hitachi S-4800, Japan), and energy dispersion X-ray spectrometer (DES) was applied to recur the element distributions before and after BM. Fourier transform infrared spectroscopy spectra (FT-IR) of the solids were recorded to monitor changes in the functional group on a Nicolet 5700 spectrometer using KBr pellets in the range of 400–4000 cm To quantitatively evaluate the capability of BM in the pulverization of mineral particles, Z-avgs were real-time tracked within the whole BM process. Meanwhile, pH and detached ions in the solid-liquid mixtures were monitored. As can be seen in Patterns of pH and leached ions evolution curves were quite consistent with that of Z-avgs trend. The pH values in both minerals were noticed to decline slightly in the first 1 h rough-grinding. This phenomenon was suggested to be ascribed to the dissociation of coexisting minerals, for isoelectric points (pH High potential of BM in mineral particle pulverization was quantitatively elaborated above, which could also be directly deduced from The above speculation that continuous mechano-chemical reaction might induce the phase transformation was confirmed in Ball-milling induced the MA was confirmed by us in decreasing the activation energy of Mn What's more, the potential of BM in decreasing the acid consumption was anticipated. The bead-milling improved the extraction efficiency from 46.5% to 74.8% in 1.0 h with 0.1 mol/L H High activation potential of BM was revealed in sufficient detail above, for mineral particles were finally sieved to ultrafine scale (D For any given particle, the total free energy was the sum of free energy contributions of the bulk and surface: With the bulk mineral particles sieved from micron-scale to (near) nano-scale, the percentage of surface atom increased in massive amount, accomplanied by the increase of the contribution of For a spherical particle, Therefore, thermodynamically unstable feature of bead-milled Mn The relevant reaction for the acidic extraction of MnCO Under standard conditions, the free energy required can be expressed as Eq. Massive generations of solid waste, wastewater and waste gas were incorporated in numerous hydrometallurgical industries, which were directly correlated with the acidic extraction process. The potential toxicity of these acidic wastes has been elaborated in detail in the past decades. Adoption of feasible strategy to cut down the waste generation at the source provided another pathway to prevent the pollution ( In this study, bead-milling (BM) potentials in the mechanical activation and thereby extraction promotion of two natural minerals, including carbonate manganese and zinc oxide, were extensively investigated. To maximize the mechanical activation effectiveness, BM that consisted of rough-grinding followed by fine-grinding was presented. Excellent activation potential of BM was concluded, for bulk mineral particles were finally sieved to ultrafine scale (∼244 nm for Mn This work was supported by the The following is the supplementary data related to this article: Supplementary data related to this article can be found at