Milk industry is one of the most important economy sectors in Brazil and in many countries. However, it is also the sector that most generates environmental impacts due to the large volume of waste generated and its high polluting load. The objective of this study is to evaluate the efficiency of a dissolved air flotation system to treat a synthetic milk industry wastewater. In the experiment, batch tests were carried out using a dissolved air flotation bench system with a flotation column and utilizing the turbidity removal efficiency as response variable for the analyses. For the study of the process, an experimental design was used to optimize the process, in two stages and in acid and basic media separately. In the first stage, a fractionated factorial design was used to test five factors and its range of values: Saturation pressure (4–10 bar); recirculation ratio (20–100%); pH (3–12); coagulant doses Ferrous sulfate (0–1000 mg L−1) and cationic organic polymer TanFloc (0–50 mg L−1). In the second stage a central rotational compound was designed for optimization of the process and determination of the best treatment. The inferences were made using: Pareto graph; generated models with their respective statistical parameters; contour plots and the response optimization function. As a result of the experiment it was possible to verify that the factors that significantly (p ≤ 0.1) affected the flotation process were the saturation pressure, pH and coagulant dose. The optimum treatment determined in the second phase was obtained in acid medium using saturation pressure of 10 bar, recirculation ratio of 20%, pH of 4 and ferrous sulfate concentration of 250.0 mg L−1, obtaining removal efficiencies of 97.8% (turbidity), 83.1% (color), and 87.5% (chemical oxygen demand). The new approach used to study the optimization of the dissolved air flotation process proved to be a useful tool to determine the relevant factors and best operating parameters for the treatment of milk industry wastewater.Brazil is the world's fourth largest milk producer, with an estimated production of more than 34.3 billion liters and an employment of approximately 1 million people in the country ( In the dairy industry, wastewater is often produced intermittently, and its nature and composition depend on the type of products produced and the processing capacity of the plants. The cleansing waters may also contain a variety of disinfectants and various acidic and alkaline detergents. Due to the intermittent generation of the effluent, equalization tanks are generally adopted, and there may be a pH correction that can vary from 1.6 to 14.0. Thus, the pH of dairy wastewater can vary significantly, depending on the cleaning strategy used ( Dairy effluent contains soluble organic substances, suspended solids and organic compounds that contribute, in large part, to its high biochemical oxygen demand (BOD) and chemical oxygen demand (COD). Dairy effluents are white in color and generally slightly alkaline, and they become acidic very quickly due to the fermentation of lactose into lactic acid. The suspended matter content of milk waste is considerable and mainly occurs because of the fine curd found in cheese production residues. Its pollution is attributed to the immediate and high oxygen consumption of the medium and is characterized by the decomposition of casein, which leads to the formation of black and heavy mud banks with strong odors of butyric acid ( The release of dairy effluent into water bodies without treatment generates several negative environmental impacts, including the following: water reduction availability for human consumption; eutrophication and excessive growth of algae and aquatic plants, which can lead to complete surface coverage, increased turbidity and toxin production by some species of algae; navigation impediments caused by surface macrophytes; and recreational use restrictions due to color change, bottom sludge formation and the produced foul odors. It can also change the water body condition and consequently generate damage to its various uses ( Dissolved air flotation (DAF) has been used for decades in water treatment and, in recent years, has been used to treat a wide variety of effluents from the food industry (e.g., beer, milk and dairy products, meat, fish, vegetables), with total suspended solids (TSS) removal efficiencies of up to 99% ( In most cases at these industries the DAF is used as a primary treatment followed by a secondary treatment. Some options of secondary treatments aligned with the European Commission recommendations guidelines ( The most important parameters for obtaining high efficiencies in DAF include determining the volume of microbubbles formed in the process (depending on the recirculation ratio and the pressure in the saturation chamber) and the coagulation/flocculation steps (affecting the collision/adhesion between the bubbles and particles and the size of the flocs formed). In turn, the coagulation/flocculation steps are dependent on the medium pH, doses and types of coagulants used ( The objective of this work is to test the DAF system for use in treating synthetic dairy wastewater by optimizing five factors (pressure, recirculation ratio, pH, dose of ferrous sulfate coagulant and dose of cationic polymer TanFloc Pop) through sequential experiment planning (fractional factorial and rotational central composite design). Due to the great variability of the characteristics in the generated effluent of the dairy industry, it is common practice to use a synthetic effluent to obtain a better uniformity of effluent characteristics and a better control of the process to be studied ( The synthetic effluent used was prepared as suggested by  In each trial, a 2-L volume of the SDW was used and placed in a 2-L beaker. The SDW was agitated in a jar test apparatus at 320 rpm (220 G) for solubilization of the products and coagulation (destabilization) of particles. To aid the coagulation/flocculation of particles, ferrous sulfate (FeSO The pH of the samples was adjusted after the dosing and complete dissolution of the coagulant and/or polymer using a pH meter and with the addition of 1:1 v/v sodium hydroxide (NaOH) or hydrochloric acid (HCl) solutions. After adjusting the pH, the SDW was agitated for 5 min at 120 rpm (80 G) to allow the formation of micro flocs, which, according to At the end of the flocculation, the 2 L of SDW was transferred slowly through the wall of the flotation column to prevent the formed micro flocs from breaking, and the flotation was then complete. In the experiment, a batch dissolved air flotation system was used, as shown in The flotation process was done in the same way in all tests, where atmospheric air was injected through the lower inlet and dissolved in potable water under pressure in the saturation chamber until the desired pressure, adjusted by the pressure regulating valve, was reached. The air inlet flow into the system was adjusted to 5 L min The values of air solid ratio (A/S) used in the experiment, estimated based on the value of TSS ( The experiment was divided into two stages, using two different statistical designs in sequence: a fractional factorial (FF) and a central rotational composite design (CCRD). The first design had an exploratory objective to select the factors with a significant effect on DAF and to evaluate the ranges (levels) of the values tested. The second design had the objective of optimizing the dissolved air flotation process and determining the optimal treatment through the surface response method. The turbidity removed was the response variable chosen for the DAF optimization because it is a quick analysis and because it is a good representation of flotation process behavior. Residual turbidity was measured using the Thermo Scientific portable model turbidimeter, model Orion AO3010, at the end of each flotation test, and the value of turbidity removed was calculated using Eq. T T RR - recirculation rate (%). In the first stage of the experiment, two experiments were carried out, one in acidic medium (pH ≤ 7) and the other in basic medium (pH > 7), for a better interpretation of the results and a statistical analysis of the responses because the behavior of the coagulants and polymers is strongly dependent on the pH of the medium. First, a fractional factorial was used to select five factors and evaluate the range of values tested for DAF efficiency. The five factors and their ranges evaluated for the two experiments were pH (3–7 in acidic medium and 8–12 in basic medium), saturation pressure (4–10 bar), recirculation ratio (20–100%), doses of ferrous sulfate coagulant (0.0–1000.0 mg L The ranges of variation between the lower and upper limits (levels) of each independent variable were established based on preliminary tests. In the second stage, based on the results of the fractional factorial in acidic and basic media, the central rotational composite (CCRD) was used in sequence to optimize the process in each medium.  For the statistical analysis of the results and to generate the predictive models, optimize the response and construct the graphs, the Minitab 17 (Minitab) computational application was used. The optimum response was determined for the acidic and basic media through the To validate the generated models, the optimum treatment determined in each medium plus two treatments with their levels, defined randomly within the studied ranges ( Objecting the selection of factors and evaluation of ranges of values tested, a fractional factorial experiment was first carried out. In the acidic medium, the highest value T Pareto graphs, as shown It can be observed in The pH affects the quality of the coagulation/flocculation process of the particles and, consequently, the efficiency of the DAF because it is the factor with the second greatest effect in both media. A pH range close to neutrality (5–10) provided the highest values of T The saturation pressure affects both the amount of air (bubbles) released in the process and the size distribution of the bubbles, which are the main parameters for obtaining the high efficiencies in DAF. In the acidic medium, the saturation pressure had a very similar effect to that of pH, but in the basic medium, it had almost no significant effect on the process. The recirculation rate had negligible effect on both media, indicating that the minimum value of 20% is sufficient for the efficiency of the process. The RR value found in this work is less than the value of 25% indicated by In most cases, recirculation ratio values between 10 and 30% are suggested for batch systems. However, this value may vary from 5 to 100%, depending on the DAF system used and the characteristics of the treated effluent ( The TanFloc polymer had some effect on particle coagulation in the acidic medium, but it was not statistically significant for α = 10% (  From In the acidic medium, the selected factors were pH, saturation pressure, coagulant and polymer. The polymer was selected because of its positive effect (increase of turbidity removal) and its p-value of 0.098, which is very close to 0.1. Due to the value of its effects ( For the basic medium, the factors selected were pH, saturation pressure and coagulant. Due to the value of its effects ( With the CCRD, in the acidic medium, the lowest value of T As seen in Additionally, in The mathematical model obtained to represent the turbidity removed as a function of the values of pH, saturation pressure, coagulant and polymer doses, with their respective coefficients, is presented in Eq.  The coefficient of determination (R According to Analyzing Eq. Using the computational tool Choosing the maximum T To test the validity of the model, the first optimum treatment was used, targeting a turbidity removal of 625 NTU, which was the turbidity of the SDW; otherwise, it was necessary to use a SDW with a different composition. Of the test three trials performed, two were composed of a random combination of factor values, and the optimum trial used the values determined during the process optimization, and each trial had three replicates. Data for the validity test are presented in According to According to data from  In Analyzing In Considering With the CCRD, in basic media, the highest value of T The coefficients of the analysis of variance (ANOVA) of the CCRD for the coefficients of the model are significant for an α equal to 10% are presented in It can be seen in The mathematical model obtained to represent the residual turbidity in the function of the values of pH and saturation pressure, with their respective coefficients, is presented in Eq.  The coefficient of determination (R An analysis of the coefficients associated with each model parameter (Eq. Using the computational tool Choosing the maximum T To validate the obtained model, the best obtained treatment was used to target a turbidity removal of 625 NTU for the same reason that the validation test was used in the acidic medium. This validation was performed with two tests, each with three trials: two of the trials used a random combination of the values, within the limits tested, of each factor of the model, and the third trial used the determined values of the optimum treatment; each trial had three replicates. Data for validation tests are given in Analyzing A possible explanation for this observation is the formation of iron hydroxide due to the addition of ferrous sulfate, which becomes insoluble at a pH above 9, causing the formation of gelatinous and heavy flocs that tend to precipitate in solution ( The formation of FeOH Despite this observation, Observing the contour plot ( In the continuous flow DAF systems employed in water treatment plants or effluents, the saturation pressures used may vary in the range of 3–8 bar, but pressures of 4–5 bar are more commonly used (   Evaluating a DAF system for treating wastewater from a chicken slaughterhouse, Using a central composite design, In a coagulation study for the treatment of synthetic dairy wastewater,  Due to the work done to date, it is observed that there is a great variability of values for the studied parameters, influenced by the characteristics of the treated effluent and the particularities of the treatment system used. Under the conditions used in this experiment, in the acid medium, it was possible to obtain turbidity removal efficiencies greater than 85% when applying pressure in the saturation chamber greater or equal to 8 bar, with the pH in the range of 4–5 (near the isoelectric point of casein), with the addition of 250 mg L The combination of ferrous sulfate and the coagulation auxiliary, i.e., the natural cationic polymer TanFloc Pop, did not have a positive effect on the increase of the efficiency of the system or the reduction of the doses of ferrous sulfate, as the dose of 250 mg L Among the evaluated factors, the saturation pressure (10 bar) and the air/solids ratio (0.066) were higher than the values normally used. However, the characteristics of the system used and the characteristics of the synthetic effluent greatly influence the amount of air required in the flotation. Another possible factor was a saturation time less than or equal to 2 min: 5 min is normally used, so this difference may have led to the need for higher pressures in a lower saturation time to obtain the same amount of solubilized air at lower pressures and longer saturation times. The best efficiencies found in pH in the range of 4–5 are strongly influenced by the natural coagulation of casein, the protein in most milk, at pH equal to 4.6. Thus, the effectiveness of the system in treating dairy effluent is strongly dependent on the presence and concentration of casein in effluent ( What is normally observed is a great variability in the characteristics of the effluent generated based on the types of products manufactured by the dairy, which products are produced in each day or time and if the effluent contains residues of milk and cheese or only sanitizing products and inorganic materials (such as soot and dust). It would be advisable to separate the effluent that contains waste from the production of the products from the washing water used in the installations and to treat them separately. At the end of the experiment, it was noted that the DAF has great potential for use in treating dairy effluents due to the quality obtained for the treated effluent, the speed of the treatment and the operational simplicity of the system. Applying the optimum treatment (presented in It was also possible to prove the usefulness of the response surface methodology as an efficient and effective tool for the study and optimization of processes. However, optimization should not be done with the execution of only one experimental plan but in steps and in sequence to reach the optimum response. It should be noted, however, that new tests under the determined optimum conditions should be carried out on a pilot scale, thus enabling a better study of the process (including economic feasibility) and improvement of all DAF system components and considering flotation columns and operating in batch, aiming for the application of this technology on an industrial scale. Finally, due to the peculiarities of the dairy industry and the great variability of the characteristics and quantity of the generated effluent ( The conclusions obtained in this research for the experimental conditions studied were as follows: The novel application of the experimental planning to evaluate a DAF system treating milk industry wastewater, composed by a fractional factorial followed by a central composite design, proved to be an reliable, fast and economic method to optimize the efficiency of the treatment and determine the best operating parameters. The significant factors of DAF for the removal of turbidity from the effluent were the saturation pressure, pH and coagulant concentration. The generated model for the acidic medium proved to be reliable for estimating the residual turbidity within the range of values studied. The best turbidity removal results were obtained in acidic medium. Lower variability and higher reproducibility of the results for a given treatment were observed in all tests performed at this medium. Removed turbidity values higher than 500 NTU or efficiencies greater than 80% can be obtained at a pressure of 7.5 bar and pH of 5 with the addition of 250 mg L The optimum treatment based on the generated model was obtained for a saturation pressure of 10 bar, pH of 4, ferrous sulfate concentration if 250 mg L We thank the CNPQ (Conselho Nacional de Desenvolvimento Científico e Tecnológico) for financing the experiment and the Tanac company for donating the polymer used in the experiments.