Mechanical separation of different plastics should be established in planning and constructing a recycling plant for scrapped office and home appliances. The authors studied jig separation of small plastic particles (two types of burn-resistant polyethylene (PE) and polyvinyl chloride (PVC)) using a TACUB jig. The size of the particles was 0.5–3 mm and the specific gravities of the two PEs and PVC were about 1.1, 1.3 and 1.4, respectively. The jig separation experiments were carried out under various water pulsations, at which the amplitude, frequency, and pattern of pulsation were varied.
                  Based on the observation of separation progress and water pulsation, it was found that the upstream velocity of the pulsation is a very important factor to form high grade PE and PVC product layers with high efficiency. Moderate fluidization of particle bed caused high separation performance. High-grade PE and PVC products over 99.8% were recovered under pulsations of small frequency and amplitude. The optimum separation condition was determined easily by measuring the fluidity of the plastic beds in the separation chamber.Jig separation is one of the oldest methods of gravity concentration in mineral processing and it is still in widespread use because of its high separation precision, easy maintenance, cost-effectiveness, and high throughput rate ( The authors reported that the dilation and compaction of particle beds due to water pulsation in a jig separator alter its separation performance (Tsunekawa et al., 2004, In this paper, jig separation of small plastics of non-spherical shape was conducted using a TACUB jig to investigate the relationship between optimum separation conditions and fluidization behavior of the plastic beds. The plastics used were crushed waste plastics: two types of burn-resistant polyethylene (green PE and gray PE) and polyvinyl chloride (red PVC) of non-spherical random shape. The specific gravities of the plastic samples were measured by the Ultra Pycnometer (Yuasa Ionics Co., UPY-14L). The average and standard deviation of 30 measurements for each sample are presented in Jig separation experiments were carried out using the TACUB Jig (R&E Co., Ltd.) with separation chamber dimensions of 135 mm length, 145 mm width, and 320 mm height. The outline of the jig is shown in Each of the three samples was fed in the separation chamber of the TACUB jig to form a bed, and then the jig separator was operated at various pulsation conditions to keep the constant velocities of upstream water flow. During the upstream flow, the plastic bed was dilated and the height of the dilated plastic bed was measured. Mixtures of PE1–PVC, PE2–PVC and PE1–PE2 were used in the experiments. Each mixture was fed to the separation chamber then jigging was started under various pulsation conditions in the range of 1–5 cm amplitude and 10–90 min    It is known that the thickness of the particle layer is related to the loss of pressure due to the particle layer. Loss of pressure due to particle layers [Pa] Thickness of particle layer [m] Porosity of particle layer [‐] Viscosity of fluid of rising flow [Pa･s] Velocity of rising flow [m/s] Diameter of particle [m] Density of fluid of rising flow [kg/m  The discussions described above conclude that the best separation result is induced at below the point of minimum fluidization velocity for the heavy particle layer and around the point the light particles fluidize substantially. The feed mixture is also fluidized and separated under the best condition, where the heavy particles move to the bottom and the light particles to the top. When separation is performed under a particular rising flow velocity below and above the point of minimum fluidization velocity for the heavy particle layer and the light particle layer, respectively, the movement of bottom layer particles becomes difficult while that of the top layer particles becomes easy. The bottom layer heavy particles move slowly and do not disturb the separation that has occurred over this layer. The unstratified middle layer is still separated by the rising flow, and the top layer containing only the light particles is formed. This layer also does not disturb the separation that has occurred under it. The authors applied jig technology by using a TACUB jig to separate plastics used in electrical appliances. Jig separation for plastics of smaller sizes (0.5–3 mm) and similar specific gravities was performed using PVC and PE from scrap electric wires. High-grade PE and PVC products of over 99.8% grade were obtained under pulsation of smaller frequency and amplitude than that for coarser plastics. The best results were obtained by applying rising velocity which is near the minimum fluidization velocity for the heavy particles. Based on the investigation of the separation progress and the fluidities of the particles, it was found that the fluidization caused by the optimum upstream flow velocity is the most important factor to form high grade PE and PVC product layers. The authors would like express their appreciation to the Japan Society for the Promotion of Science for the research grant. This research was conducted as a part of the 21st COE program of Hokkaido University.