In this paper the high energy milling was evaluated as a technique to obtain fine powders in the ZnO–Co3O4 system for utilization in photocatalytic processes. This study was divided in two parts named part I and II: the first part (present article, part I) describes the methodology of processing and the powders characterization before and after the milling; the second part (that will be present in a second article, part II) is related to the photocatalytic evaluation of the milled materials. At the first part, the raw materials (ZnO and Co3O4 powders) were characterized by Sedigraph technique, BET Analysis, Helium Pycnometry, X-Ray diffraction and Thermal Analysis (DSC/TGA) aiming to know their physicochemical, structural and thermal properties. The raw materials (95% ZnO, 5% Co3O4, molar ratio) were milled during four and ten hours (the dry and wet media milling were investigated). One sample was thermally treated in order to solubilize the cobalt in the zinc oxide lattice aiming the formation of the Zn0.95Co0.05O solid solution. The milled and heat-treated powders were characterized by X-ray diffraction and thermal analyses (DSC/TGA). The samples milled during ten hours also were analyzed by scanning electron microscopy. The results indicated that the starting materials were obtained in a micrometric scale and presented high purity. Moreover, there was observed any phase transformation or any detectable contamination of the materials during the milling. The powders showed nanocrystalline characteristics in all of conditions of milling; however, the comminution was more effective for powders milled in wet medium. The thermal treatment was efficient to obtain a ZnO–CoO solid solution.The heterogeneous photocatalysis has been developed to treat recalcitrant dye effluents Chemical methods have been efficient to production of fine powders in order to be applied in photocatalytic process Some combined semiconductors might improve the photocatalytic properties of the materials Solid solutions with zinc and cobalt oxides can be made by heat treatment In this paper, the high energy milling was evaluated as a technique to the production of fine powders in the ZnO–Co This work follows the stages: evaluation of physicochemical features of the starting materials; milling conditions utilized for obtainment of fine ZnO–Co Specific surface areas of the cobalt oxide (II, III) Differential Scanning Calorimetry (DSC) and Thermogravimetric Analysis (TGA) were simultaneously carried out in a Netzsch STA equipment. The analysis were performed between 200 and 1100 The X-Ray diffraction technique was used to the structural characterization of ZnO (JCPDS card no. 36-1451) and Co The powder mixtures of ZnO (95 Dry media and wet media millings in isopropyl alcohol were conducted during 4 and 10 In order to minimize the powder agglomeration due to the milling process, all milled samples were dispersed in isopropyl alcohol by sonication during 15 The milled materials were characterized by X-ray diffraction at the same conditions previously described to the raw materials. The Scherrer method was used in order to estimate the crystallite sizes of the particles. It was utilized the maximum intensity peak of each diffractogram, which refers to ZnO (101) plane (2 The parameter Scanning electron microscopy was realized by the Magellan 400L equipment for samples milled by ten hours. The powders were prepared on carbon tapes and the gold coating was not necessary. The magnifications utilized were 20 and 200 thousand times and the others analysis parameters were changed in each image. Thermal analyses (DSC/TGA) were performed to the milled samples at the same conditions previously applied to the raw materials characterization. Heat treatment was performed to one unmilled sample in order to obtain the solubilization of cobalt ions in the zinc oxide lattice To minimize the effects of sintering, the treated sample was milled in wet medium (isopropyl alcohol) during 2 Results of the Particle Size Distribution, specific surface areas and real densities of the Co The cobalt and zinc oxides exhibited unimodal and the Co X-ray diffractograms of starting ZnO and Co The zinc oxide presented like Wurtzite/ hexagonal structure while that the cobalt oxide exhibited like-Magnetite/Spinel structure. These indexed phases are recognized as the most stable forms for ZnO and Co Thermal analyses (DSC/TGA) were performed for both starting materials. The thermal performance for the Co  The experimental mass loss obtained was 6.81%. The stoichiometry of reaction predicts decomposition of 6.64% to be lost as oxygen gas. Therefore, these results have revealed the high purity of the starting Co  The values of crystallite size are shown in The images obtained by scanning electron microscopy for samples milled during 10 The  In regard to these results, three main phenomena might concomitantly occur during the high energy milling: crystallites refinement, comminution of particles and generation of aggregates. Thus, the parameters of milling have to be controlled in order to avoid undesirable transformations.    Comparing with the starting powder mixture and as-milled powders, the heat-treated samples presented different visual feature, i.e., the powder before treatment presented gray color whilst the treated powder showed intense green color, which is typical in ZnO–CoO solutions X-ray diffractograms of the starting mixture (ZC) and heat-treated mixture (ZCT) of ZnO and Co The thermal behavior of heat-treated sample is shown in High energy milling was considered a potential technique to produce fine powders in system ZnO–Co Nanocrystalline structures were produced by high-energy ball milling. The wet media milling showed the most effective comminution for long times of milling and it avoided the aggregates generation. The heat treatment at 1100 Authors thank to the