The thin film pressure balance (TFPB) technique was used to measure the kinetics of thinning of single foam films and disjoining pressures in the presence of sodium dodecyl sulfate (SDS) and electrolyte (NaCl). The results were analyzed in view of the Reynolds equation to determine the role of surface forces in film thinning. It was found that film thinning is controlled by surface forces at thicknesses below approximately 200nm. It was found also that hydrophobic force plays an important role particularly at low SDS and NaCl concentrations. The values of the hydrophobic force constant (K
                     232) estimated from the film thinning experiments were used to predict the disjoining pressure isotherms using the extended DLVO theory, which were found to be in excellent agreement with experiment. The TFPB technique was also used to measure the equilibrium thicknesses (H
                     e) of the foam films stabilized by a non-ionic surfactant, n-octanol, in the presence of NaCl. At a given ionic strength, H
                     e increased noticeably with increasing octanol concentration at very low concentrations. This observation suggests that hydrophobic force is maximum in the absence of surfactant and decreases with increasing surfactant concentration. The results obtained with the single foam films were used to explain the stability of the three-dimensional foams.Control of the stability of foams and froths is of critical importance in froth flotation. Froth is a three-phase foam in which particles are dispersed, and its stability is largely dependent on the stability of the foam. Foam is a dispersion of gas bubbles in a liquid. When the gas fraction is high, the bubbles contact with each other and deform, creating lamellae and Plateau boarders between the bubbles in contact. The large surface area of the bubbles (or lamellae) in a foam represents high surface free energy, which makes foams thermodynamically unstable. Various surfactants are used to produce and stabilize aqueous foams. Surfactant adsorption at the air/water interface lowers the energy of the system, which in turn reduces the energy required to produce foam and increases thermodynamic stability. When using an ionic surfactant, the surfactant adsorption also increases kinetic stability by increasing the electrostatic repulsion between the two air/water interfaces of a lamella (or foam film) and, thereby, retards film thinning. As a foam film thins further, it undergoes either a spontaneous rupture or reaches a final equilibrium state. Foam stability is largely determined by the disjoining pressure of the thin liquid films between air bubbles in contact. A positive pressure stabilizes the foam, while negative pressure destabilizes it. In general, the positive disjoining pressure arises from repulsive double-layer force, while the negative pressure arises from attractive van der Waals forces and possibly from hydrophobic force ( In the present work, the thin film pressure balance (TFPB) technique was used to measure film thickness and disjoining pressure isotherm for single foam films. The measurements were conducted using both ionic (i.e., SDS) and non-ionic (i.e., In this section, the method of determining the electrical surface potentials of foam films stabilized by ionic surfactant and electrolyte is described, which is followed by the theoretical basis for deducing the hydrophobic force in film thinning kinetics. In the presence of electrolyte (e.g., NaCl), the surface excess ( It is unlikely, however, that the DS One can then determine the surface excess of the counterions ( The rate of film thinning can be analyzed using the Reynolds equation ( In the present work, Eq. Specifically, for stable films at equilibrium, Δ Specially pure sodium dodecyl sulfate (SDS) was obtained from BDH and recrystallized from ethanol. Its surface tension isotherm showed no minimum near cmc, indicating that the surfactant has no significant impurities. A Nanopure water treatment unit was used to obtain double-distilled and deionized water with a conductivity of 18.2 The surface tensions were determined by the pendant drop method, utilizing a surface tension/contact angle meter, FTÅ 125, from First Ten Ångstroms. The TFPB technique was used to measure the rate of film thinning in a Scheludko cell ( The disjoining pressure isotherms were probed by measuring the equilibrium thickness of a film under varying gas pressure in the TFPB vessel, in which a film holder was placed. Two types of film holders were used. One is the Scheludko cells with 1.0 and 2.0 The stability of three-dimensional foams was measured by the shake tests ( The pressure decay method (PDM) was used to assess the stability of three-dimensional foams/froths in a more reproducible manner. The principle of this method is based on monitoring the increase in pressure in a froth chamber when bubbles rupture. In a closed foam column, the pressure inside rises as bubbles collapse as a result of bursting, coalescence, and/or diffusion. The change in pressure (Δ A dimensionless fractional interfacial area at any given time Similar to the device described by   Note here that the The next series of film thinning experiments were conducted at a higher SDS concentration (10  When 1 The results showed that as the NaCl concentration increased, the films became thinner because of double layer compression, and yet the foam film became more stable. The increased stability may be at least partially due to the reduction in hydrophobic force with increasing NaCl concentration. As one can see from The shake tests were carried out to measure the stability of three-dimensional foams stabilized by SDS in the presence and absence of NaCl. For the solutions containing 10 The pressure decay method was employed to assess foam stability more exactly and reproducibly.  In The results presented hitherto showed evidence for the hydrophobic force in soap films. It has been shown that the hydrophobic force, whose magnitude is represented by The results presented obtained in the present work showed that   Interestingly, Note here that the slope of the The PDM method was used to measure the stability of three-dimensional foams with various concentrations of octanol in the presence of 5 The results presented in the present work showed that hydrophobic force may play a role in determining the foam stability at very surfactant concentrations. The PDM method is a useful tool for assessing the stability of foams at very low surfactant concentrations, where flotation is usually carried out. The PDM method is currently used at Virginia Tech to study the stability of froths in the presence of solid particles of varying hydrophobicity. The presence of NaCl in SDS solution enhances the surfactant adsorption at the air/water interface. The TFPB technique was used to measure the film thickness as a function of time. By comparing the results with those predicted from the Reynolds equation, it was possible to identify the factors affecting the film thinning process. During the initial stages, the process is controlled by the capillary pressure, while it is controlled by surface forces as the film thickness is reduced to below approximately 200 The The logarithms of the The TFPB technique was also used to measure the equilibrium film thickness of foam films stabilized by The pressure decay method was used to study the stability of foams and froths at low surfactant concentrations. The results were consistent with those obtained from the shake tests and the TFPB measurements. The authors express sincere gratitude to Dr. H.J. Müller and his co-workers for their help with the experimental set-up and training. They are also thankful for Dr. L.G. Cascão Pereira and Prof. C.J. Radke for kindly providing the bike-wheel microcell and sharing information on related experimental details. Prof. W.A. Ducker’s help is duly acknowledged for allowing them to use the pendant drop apparatus in his laboratory. Finally, the authors are grateful for the financial support from the US Department of Energy (Cooperative Agreement No. DE-FC26-01NT41091).