Laboratory investigations on the kinetics of gold electrowinning from acidic thiourea solutions containing alcohol admixture which can be obtained by gold elution from activated carbon in the processing of gold-bearing raw materials have been carried out as depending on temperature, current intensity and type of the cathode material. It has been found that a high gold recovery (96%–100%) can be obtained under suitable conditions (especially at elevated temperature of 60°C). The current efficiencies in the experimental conditions were in the range of 0.5%–1% and the energy consumption can be less than 15 kW h kg−1 of gold using a platinum mesh cathode.The hydrometallurgical recovery of gold from gold-bearing materials by leaching with acidic solutions of thiourea shows some important advantages as an alternative to conventional cyanidation. Benefits include faster kinetics of gold dissolution, lower toxicity and fewer environmental problems and greater selectivity with respect to several common metals which allows gold recovery from more refractory sources Thiourea forms with gold a cationic complex according to the following reaction: Moreover, the gold leaching with thiourea must be carried out in the presence of an oxidant. The first step of the thiourea oxidation to formamidine disulphide (RSSR) is reversible and even useful because RSSR is a good oxidant for gold and the following reaction can take place: RSSR itself is toxic. After a leaching process under controlled conditions, however, it disappears according to reaction (2) or decomposes into a less toxic species. If the oxidation potential of the solution is too high, RSSR can be oxidized irreversibly to sulphocyanamide, elemental sulphur or even to sulphate ions There are several possible methods for gold recovery from diluted thiourea leachates (often even less than 1 mg dm Carbon adsorption is generally used in the conventional gold cyanidation processes The elution of the gold–thiourea complex from loaded activated carbon can be carried out using dilute acidic, aqueous thiourea solutions containing an alcohol, e.g., a hot solution containing 5–10 g dm The gold electrowinning process from thiourea solutions can be written: This reaction is diffusion-controlled, so efficient mixing must take place. In this process thiourea is recycled. Thiourea present in the solution can be partially oxidized at the anode but its first oxidation product, RSSR, may be reduced on the gold deposition surface. The irreversible, further, anodic oxidation of thiourea is possible in time, which may deposit elemental sulphur on the cathode. Gold redissolution can occur by the action of RSSR oxidant as can hydrogen evolution which could diminish the rate of gold deposition. A membrane can then be used to separate the cathode compartment from the anode compartment In this paper, detailed studies are described of gold electrowinning from synthetic solutions. The solutions have a composition very close to that of typical eluates from activated carbon obtained by the elution with acidic solution of thiourea containing an alcohol admixture. Restricted technical facilities resulted in the use of a simple, undivided cell. Gold was a spectrographic purity metal. Other chemicals used were of analytical reagent grade. A cylindrical glass laboratory electrolytic cell was used (6 cm diameter and 6.5 cm high) having a volume of 180 cm The cell was connected to an AMEL potentiostat–galvanostat equipped with an automated instrument system (programmable function generator model 568, interface model 560/A, integrator model 721 and differential electrometer model 631 AMEL) to control process parameters. Solutions for electrowinning experiments were prepared by metal gold dissolution in a well-mixed thiourea solution acidified with sulphuric acid and with dropwise addition of a small excess of 30% hydrogen peroxide. (Residual H Electrowinning experiments were carried out in a galvanostatic system, the kinetics of gold deposition being examined at various temperatures and current densities. At specific times, small samples (2 or 3 ml) were taken for gold analysis. At the end of some experiments the thiourea concentration was also determined. Gold concentration was determined using a Perkin-Elmer Model ICP 6000 inductively coupled plasma spectrophotometer. Thiourea was determined in fresh solutions and in solutions obtained after finishing electrolysis experiments using a titration method with KIO In preliminary experiments involving current density vs. cathode potential curves, the “cathodic decomposition potentials” of the gold–thiourea complex were determined at the experimental conditions ( In In In The term “integrated current efficiency” denotes that values were determined for a total period of an experiment from its beginning to the time point t. The highest current efficiency values, in the range 3%–8%, were obtained at 60°C ( At lower temperatures ( Results of the gold electrowinning using stainless steel or graphite cathodes are shown in The deposition rate constant, In some experiments, solutions became somewhat cloudy at the end of the process and a small amount of elemental sulphur was precipitated on the platinum mesh cathode. Improved control of the process conditions could be achieved by the use of an electrolytic cell having separate anodic and cathodic compartments with the proviso that in both compartments the solution must be well-mixed. Our preliminary tests with separation of a small anodic compartment without mixing inside did not improve the appearance of the gold deposit. Energy consumption Although the experimental system could be improved, it seems that the thiourea decomposition was insignificant despite the use of an undivided cell. The absence of a significant decay in the thiourea level may be due to the relative anode/cathode area used. Formation of toxic RSSR did not occur during electrolysis and the intermediate is practically absent after the process. The authors plan to extend their work using a divided cell having controlled flow conditions in each compartment. This work was carried out within the framework of the Scientific Cooperation Agreement between the Polish Academy of Sciences and Consiglio Nazionale delle Ricerche (Italy). The authors thank also the technical support of Mrs Emanuela Tempesta for the implementation of figures and tables.