Reaction kinetics for gold dissolution in acid thiourea solutions were investigated with the rotating disc technique using formamidine disulfide as an oxidant. For the conditions studied, it appears that a surface reaction limits the rate of gold dissolution. The rate was found to be first order with respect to thiourea concentration and half order with respect to the concentration of formamidine disulfide; the apparent activation energy for the reaction was 10.4 kcal/mol (43.4 kJ/mol); and the reaction rate was independent of pH for the pH range of 1.0–3.0.
                  The kinetics were found to be described by the following rate expression:
                        
                           
                              
                                 
                                    dC
                                       Au(I)
                                    
                                 
                                 
                                    dt
                              =k[Tu][FDS]0.5
                           
                        
                     which was substantiated from electrochemical theory using the Butler–Volmer equation.Since the initial report of thiourea (Tu) as a complexing agent for gold dissolution By comparison of the standard half cell potentials, it is evident that formamidine disulfide (FDS) produced in situ from the oxidation of thiourea (Tu) can act as an active oxidant for gold dissolution under some circumstances: The rotating disc technique was employed for leaching experiments. A gold disc (>99.9% purity, 14.0 mm diameter) was purchased from the Pine Instrument. An analytical rotator (Model: ASR, Pine Instrument) was used, and the rotational speed was controlled by the ASR Speed Control (Pine Instrument). Before each experiment, the disc surface was carefully ground and polished with successively finer grades of alumina powder of size 1.0, 0.3 and 0.05 μm. After rinsing with deionized water, dipping in 0.5 M HCl for more than 10 min, and rinsing with water again, the disc was ready for the leaching experiments. The gold leaching experiments were carried out in a 1-l cylindrical reactor immersed in a thermostatically controlled water bath. A solution was freshly prepared for each experiment and open to the atmosphere during the experiment. The volume of the solution was 1000 mL. The pH was adjusted by addition of ammonium hydroxide or sulfuric acid. Formamidine disulfide was used as the oxidant. Solution samples, about 5–6 mL, were taken at selected time intervals and analyzed for gold with a Perkin-Elmer model 603 atomic absorption spectrophotometer. Thiourea (99.0%, Fisher Scientific) and formamidine disulfide dihydrochloride (97.0%, Aldrich) were used as received. AR-grade ammonium hydroxide and sulfuric acid were obtained from Mallinckrodt. Reaction rates were determined by fitting the rate data to a regression equation. Similarly, the order of the reaction and the activation energy of the reaction were deduced by a best-fit statistical analysis of the experimental data. A typical three-electrode system was used for electrochemical measurements. Potential measurements between the working electrode and reference electrode (SCE) were made through a Luggin capillary. Polarization curves were obtained with an EG&G Princeton Applied Research Potentiostat–Galvanostat (Model 273). The gold leaching experiments in acid thiourea solutions, using formamidine disulfide as an oxidant, were designed to measure the effect of system variables on the rate of gold dissolution and to determine the reaction kinetic parameters. Generally, the experiments were done at a thiourea concentration of 4.0 g/L, a formamidine disulfide concentration of 1.0 g/L, pH 1.5, temperature 25 °C and a disc rotational speed of 800 rpm. Variations from these conditions are noted in the text and in figure captions. Results are presented sequentially in terms of the following variables: thiourea concentration, formamidine disulfide concentration, temperature, and pH effects. It is desired to determine the kinetic details for the gold dissolution reaction. If the reaction is limited by mass transfer, the reaction rate will be dependent on the disc rotational speed according to the Levich equation: The conclusion that a surface reaction is the rate-limiting step for gold dissolution under these conditions is further supported by the following analysis. If the rate were controlled by diffusion of either thiourea or formamidine disulfide, then the Levich equation could be used to estimate the rate of reaction. The diffusion coefficients can be estimated using the following equation as suggested by The effect of thiourea concentration from 1.0 to 8.0 g/L on the rate of gold dissolution is shown in Additionally, it is important to note from For a thiourea concentration of 8.0 g/L, it can be noticed from As was observed in The effect of formamidine disulfide concentration from 0.5 to 8.0 g/L on the rate of gold dissolution is presented in A plot of the logarithm of the rate of gold dissolution vs. the logarithm of formamidine disulfide concentration from 0.5 to 2.0 g/L is presented in The effect of temperature is shown in Experiments to evaluate the effect of pH on the rate of gold dissolution were conducted for the following conditions: a thiourea concentration of 4.0 g/L, a formamidine disulfide concentration of 1.0 g/L, temperature 25 °C and a disc rotational speed of 800 rpm. The results are presented in In view of the experimental results, the empirical rate equation for gold leaching by FDS in thiourea solution has the following form: It can be concluded from the experimental results that the rate-limiting step for gold dissolution under the conditions studied is a surface reaction, which is expected to be an electrochemical reaction. In this regard, the overall reaction given by The partial current equations according to the Butler–Volmer theory can be written for At the mixed potential (Em), the contributions of the second term in It can be seen from As mentioned previously, experimental results indicate that the empirical rate expression, The apparent first order with respect to thiourea concentration is further confirmed by the current density of gold dissolution at corresponding mixed potentials with variation of thiourea concentration (1.0–4.0 g/L) and a fixed concentration of formamidine disulfide (1.0 g/L) as shown in From an electrochemical perspective then the anodic reaction is second order with respect to thiourea concentration, and the cathodic reaction should be first order with respect to formamidine disulfide concentration. In the case of the anodic reaction, the rate-limiting step involves mainly an electrochemical reaction, and the following reaction sequence is suggested: It was found that the rate of gold dissolution by formamidine disulfide (FDS) in thiourea (Tu) solutions under the conditions studied is limited by a surface reaction. This conclusion is supported by the following points: The rate of gold dissolution was found to be first order with respect to thiourea concentration and half order with respect to the concentration of formamidine disulfide. The apparent activation energy was calculated from the temperature dependence of the rate data and was found to be 10.4 kcal/mol or 43.4 kJ/mol. Experimental results showed that the rate is independent of pH for the pH range of 1.0–3.0. A fundamental kinetic expression for gold dissolution as derived from electrochemical theory is consistent with the experimental results.