Composting is considered a suitable process for organic waste management, providing stable products that can be safely utilized as fertilizers, but little is still known about the variation of phosphorous (P) extractability during the stabilization process. In this work, sequential chemical extraction (SCE) with increasing strength extractants (H2O; 0.5M NaHCO3 pH 8.5; 0.1M NaOH, 1M HCl) was applied for P speciation over 56days of composting of either agro-industrial or urban wastewater sludge with green waste treated (AICFe+; SSCFe+) or not (AICFe−; SSCFe−) with FeSO4 (2%v/v). Composting strongly reduced the H2O-P, promoting the organic-P (Po) mineralization from the labile fraction (H2O+NaHCO3 40%), in addition to the increases of NaHCO3- and HCl-extractable inorganic-P (Pi) in both AICFe− and SSCFe− (+20% on average). The FeSO4 treatment did not negatively affect the process, reducing the Po mineralization during composting by increasing the NaOH-P, also protecting this fraction from fixation in the sparingly soluble fraction. The final P fractionation (%) was in AICFe−: NaOH (41)=NaHCO3 (38)>HCl (18)>H2O (3); in AICFe+: NaOH (53)>NaHCO3 (24)=HCl (22)>H2O (2); in SSCFe−: NaOH (46)>NaHCO3 (29)>HCl (21)>H2O (4) and in SSCFe+: NaOH (66)>NaHCO3 (13)>HCl (20)>H2O (1). Composting reduced the more easily leachable fraction (labile-Po), reducing the risk of P loss by increasing the long-term available P fraction (NaOH-P). This was enhanced by the FeSO4 addition. Further investigation into soil behaviour and plant availability of P from this source is needed.Phosphate rock (the main source of phosphorus for P fertilizers) is recognized as being non-renewable with increasing extraction costs ( Iron sulphate (FeSO The added FeSO As previously said, the relative amount of the different P forms in composts affects potentially leachable P, besides potential P availability for plant, but to date there is a lack of information about these issues. P in composts is generally assessed as total P, while a better understanding of the variation of P fractionation during composting can give more information for efficient and environmentally safe application of composts to the soil. We performed an investigation of the different P forms (organic and inorganic), in sequentially extracted fractions (H For the composting experiment, we selected a sludge from the physical-chemical separation of agro-industrial wastewater (AI) and another from the digestion of urban wastewater (SS) in addition to green wastes (GW) as bulking agent. The main characteristics of the raw materials are reported in The sequential extraction of the different forms of phosphorus was done according to the method proposed by Samples were very carefully ground in an agate mortar and densely packed in a flat sample holder. X-ray powder diffraction (XRD) patterns were recorded using a PANalytical X’Pert PRO powder diffractometer equipped with a fast X’Celerator detector. Ni-filtered CuKα radiation was used (λ As reported in   In addition to the stabilization process, the FeSO Tested samples displayed very similar XRD patterns ( The composting trial showed that all piles reached the thermophilic stage rapidly after mixing: after one week the average temperature was 75 It is recognized that microbial respiration occurring during composting mineralizes part of the organic carbon to CO During the stabilization process, the phosphorous fractionation was affected by the composting time and by the FeSO In addition to composting time, the FeSO The utilization of composts in soil is generally based on their nitrogen content and its potential mineralization, while less attention is given to their P content, their leaching potential and potentially availability for plant. In this framework, the utilization of stable composts is the best practise to preserve the soil OM, and the composting experiment showed we obtained stable products in the end, that can be safely used in agriculture. Moreover, the P fractionation showed that the composting process reduced the more easily leachable P fraction (labile organic P), thus reducing the environmental risks following the amendment with this type of composts. On the other hand, labile P is recognized as being easily utilized by plants, after mineralization by soil microorganisms if organic ( Composting is a reliable process for the management of both agro-industrial and wastewater sewage sludge, giving very stable products in the end that can be safely utilized as fertilizers in agriculture. The stabilization process induced intense carbon mineralization besides the mineralization of organic P, this being mainly derived from labile (bicarbonate extractable) and intermediate fraction (alkali extractable) to a lower extent. Composting also promoted fixation of P with Ca, reducing the whole potentially plant-available P. The utilization of FeSO Supplementary data associated with this article can be found, in the online version, at 