Quartz is a hydrophilic mineral that usually associates with other ores. In this paper, the effect of UV stimuli on the wettability and floatability of quartz was studied. An azobenzene-containing surfactant was synthesized and its structure was identified by 1H NMR. We used UV–vis and 1H NMR spectra of the surfactant to study its photoisomerization. After UV irradiation of the surfactant molecular, the trans isomer concentration decreases and the cis isomer concentration increases; both the aromatic protons of the azobenzene moiety and aliphatic protons experience an upfield shift, indicating that the surfactant molecular isomerizes from the trans isomer to the cis form. We used contact angle measurements to demonstrate that UV irradiation decreases the hydrophobicity of the quartz and increases the adhesion tension of the surfactant on quartz. The results of flotation tests demonstrate that the azobenzene-containing surfactant has higher performances than alkyl amine salt, and UV irradiation improves the selectivity of the azobenzene-containing surfactant in the flotation of quartz. This study demonstrates that the azobenzene-containing surfactant can be used as a light-responsive collector for quartz in the flotation of phosphate ores.Smart materials are capable of responding to diverse external stimuli, such as light, temperature, pH, electrical stimuli [ Wetting is an important phenomenon that can be widely observed in many industrial processes, such as oil recovery, lubrication, flotation and detergency. Surfactants adsorb onto solid surfaces. The orientation and packing of surfactants are the major factors determining the extent of wetting [ Phosphate ores are non-renewable materials and are mainly used to produce phosphate fertilizers. The composition of phosphate ores varies from one deposit to another. Therefore, phosphate ores from different sources may behave differently in a flotation process. Most of the available phosphate ores are of sedimentary origin. These phosphate ores are primarily composed of the apatite group in association with some gangue minerals, such as carbonates, quartz and metal oxides. As for siliceous phosphate ores, quartz is a main gangue mineral. It is very difficult to separate quartz from phosphate ores because apatite often has similar physical and chemical properties to the gangue minerals [ The presence of free quartz in the phosphate ores usually has negative effects on the manufacture of phosphoric acid. The free quartz, in association with metal oxides, blinds the phosphogypsum filters and greatly influences the production of phosphoric acid [ Recent studies have shown that the amine surfactants are effective in removing the SiO In this paper, we study the effect of UV stimuli on the wettability and floatability of quartz. We use the surfactant containing an azobenzene moiety as a collector for quartz. This study aims to demonstrate the role of the azobenzene-containing surfactant in controlling wettability and floatability of quartz. The pure ores (quartz and apatite) and phosphate ores were obtained from Wenfu Phosphate Company in China. The pure ores were over 90% in purity based on mineralogical analysis and X-ray diffraction data. A chemical composition analysis of the phosphate ores showed that the ores contained 28.25% of P The structure of the azobenzene-containing surfactant (AS) is shown in The aqueous solutions of azobenzene-containing surfactants were previously UV irradiated for 30 min before use unless otherwise indicated. UV irradiation was operated by a Prizmatix device with photodiodes (365 nm, YL-512, China). The intensity of UV light was 700 mW/cm UV–vis spectra were determined using a HITACHI U-3010 spectrophotometer. To a solution of 4-butylanilin (15.0 g, 10.0 mmol) in concentrated hydrochloric acid (25 mL) was added dropwise sodium nitrite solution (6.9 g, 10.0 mmol, 200 mL H To a solution of the previously obtained solid in THF (50 mL) were added KOH (10.0 g, 0.18 mol) and 1,3-dibromopropane (10.0 g, 5 mmol). The mixture was refluxed for 24 h, followed by TLC (Silica gel, V(CH To a solution of trimethylamine (35%, 33 mL) was added the previously obtained oily liquid dissolved in ethanol (30 mL). The mixture was refluxed for 2 h. The mixture was allowed to cool to 0 °C. The reaction mixture became cloudy with a precipitate. This solid product was recrystallized three times in a solution of ethanol and was dried in vacuo. The final product was attained in 55% yield.   The surface tension was measured with a surface tensiometer (K100, KRÜSS Company, Germany) using the Wilhelmy plate technique at 30 ± 0.1 ℃. All the solutions were prepared in triply distilled water. The experimental error was within 0.1 mN/m. The contact angles were measured using a Drop Shape Analyzer (DSA25, KRÜSS Company, Germany) at 30 ℃. The results presented were the average values of three repeated measurements (measurement error <0.3°). The micro-flotation test was operated in a XFGⅡflotation machine with an impeller speed of l600 r/min (mechanical agitation). Exactly 3.0 g of pure ore sample (−74 + 38 μm fractions) and water (30 mL) were carefully added to a 40 mL plexiglass cell and agitated for 3 min. The pH was adjusted to 8.0 using dilute Na Flotation tests were done in a 1L-XFD III flotation machine. Exactly 290.0 g of phosphate ore sample (85% passing 74 μm) was added to water (630 mL). The slurry was agitated for 3 min with an impeller speed of 2200 rpm. The pH value was adjusted to 8.0. Then the solution of azobenzene-containing surfactant (20 mL, 1.0%) was added and agitated for 3 min. The final concentrate and tailings were filtered, dried, weighed and sent for assay. The results are the average values of three independent measurements. An azobenzene-containing surfactant can isomeris by irradiation with UV light from the trans isomer to the cis form, while reverse isomerisation can be triggered by illumination with visible light. Isomerisation of the surfactant is accompanied by an appreciable shape change as the trans isomer adopts a more linear conformation than the cis isomer [ As shown in the  Surface tension versus the surfactant molar concentration is plotted in The values of the For surfactant the maximum surface excess concentration, R T γ C   The area per molecule at the interface, After UV irradiation of the surfactant molecular, the trans-cis photoisomerization of the surfactant undergoes bending of the azobenzene moiety, leading to less space occupied by the surfactant molecules at the water-air interface. Thus the Monteux et al. studied the adsorption dynamics of the azobenzene-containing surfactant at the water-air interface. They found that the cis isomer adsorbed much faster than the trans isomer and the air/water interface was first dominated by the cis surfactant, leading to a decrease in the dynamic surface tension [ The influence of the surfactant concentration on the contact angle is shown in As shown in The contact angle depends upon the surface tension of quartz (γ Eq. (  The maximum recoveries of quartz and apatite are 90% and 30%, respectively. The surfactant shows great selectivity in the flotation of quartz. As reported, this surfactant predominantly adsorbs onto quartz [ After UV irradiation of the surfactant molecular, the recovery of quartz shows an increase of 4%, while the recovery of apatite shows an increase of 1%. For two reasons, UV irradiation can promote the flotation of quartz. As indicated by Santana, the bubble-particle collision plays an important role in the flotation of mineral particles. Smaller bubbles can get more opportunities to collide with mineral particles, increasing the floatability of the particles [ The flotation performances of the azobenzene-containing surfactant (AS) were investigated. In this study, the effect of UV irradiation on the wettability and floatability of quartz was investigated. The azobenzene-containing surfactant exhibits light-responsive surface properties. UV irradiation decreases the surface activities of the surfactant. UV irradiation increases the adhesion tension of the surfactant on quartz and decreases the hydrophobicity of quartz surface. Our study has established the feasibility of employing the azobenzene-containing surfactant to separate quartz from phosphate ores. Upon exposure to UV irradiation, the surfactant has an improved flotation performance. Further work is needed to study an in-depth interfacial adsorption of the azobenzene-containing surfactant. This research was sponsored by