Concerning the potential positive role of water in oil emulsification in enhancing oil recovery, the current research builds on finding reasons responsible for the considerable water in oil emulsification observed in the produced fluid during carbonate sand pack floodings in the previous works. Allowing a systematic comparison, the results on floodings of three Fe3O4-based nanocomposites were selected from previous studies. The XRD and FESEM of nanocomposites, zeta potentials, stability of synthetic emulsions, IFT, bulk and interfacial oil/water viscosities, and asphaltene adsorption in the presence of nanocomposites were analyzed.
                  The XRD and FESEM results showed a successful synthesis for all nanocomposites. Zeta potential measurements showed values far above −40 mV, which confirm a good stability for all nanocomposites in the base fluid. In terms of emulsion stability, microscopic images showed that all synthesized nanocomposites had better performance in stabilizing synthetic emulsion droplets as compared to Fe3O4 NPs. IFT measurements indicated an 18–21 mN/m decrease with the addition of nanocomposites to the seawater. The bulk viscosity measurements indicated that Fe3O4/Chitosan nanocomposites present in the aqueous phase increase the water/oil (30/70 vol%) emulsion viscosity up to 334 cp. The interfacial viscosity measurements also showed a reduced oil/water interfacial viscosity by the addition of nanocomposites to the aqueous phase, which is probably due to the increased presence of asphaltene molecules at the interface. In the end, the absorbed asphaltene particles by nanocomposites were measured using batch adsorption experiments and fitted to the BET adsorption isotherm. The results showed that by deploying at the interface, Fe3O4-based nanocomposites are highly capable of asphaltene adsorption, which can stabilize the water in oil emulsions.Thermal and non-thermal recovery methods including, but not limited to, steam injection, surfactant flooding, miscible gas injection, and polymer flooding are the most widely used EOR methods ( For several years, great effort has been devoted to the study of NPs for EOR methods. According to these results, NPs are capable of participating in the reduction of oil/water IFT, wettability alteration, the formation and stability of the emulsion, and decrease in asphaltene precipitation ( On the investigation of the emulsion formation and stabilization by NPs, several publications have appeared in recent years documenting the efficient role of metal oxide NPs in the adsorption of asphaltene and controlling the asphaltene precipitation, which noticeably promotes the emulsion stability ( The usual kind of emulsions formed in the oil reservoirs is oil in water emulsions, however, in those containing high polar components, the formation of water in oil emulsions is more common ( Contacting time ( Initial asphaltene concentration ( Water saturation ( Temperature ( Other existing molecules in the crude oil ( Recently, researchers at the Canadian University of Calgary have succeeded in the formation of water in oil emulsions stabilized with metal oxide NPs for upgrading the crude oil properties. These NPs-stabilized emulsions with catalytic and adsorptive behavior disperse NPs in the porous medium and borehole pipes, which upgrades the oil properties by removing asphaltene depositions through surface adsorption ( Over the past years, much works on the potential of NPs for the formation and stabilization of emulsions have been carried out. As reported by Seawater injection is considered as a well-known EOR method for improving oil recovery. Adding NPs to the seawater for the promotion of oil/water interfacial properties is the method has been greatly noticed over the past years. In this regard, different NPs have been reported efficient for preventing asphaltene deposition and upgrading oil/water properties. Some of these NPs including Silica, Titania, and iron oxide have more attracted attention. In the previous studies, we have attempted to make benefits from the synergistic effects of these NPs for EOR as a nanocomposite form through static and flooding experiments ( The crude oil used in this research was obtained from one of the Iranian southern oil reservoirs, with a gravity of 21°API. Colloidal Instability Index (CII) argues the possibility of asphaltene deposition in the crude oil, based on the SARA analysis as follows: For CII values < 0.7, the asphaltene particles are considered to be stable, whereas, they become instable for those >0.9 ( The compositional analysis performed on the formation water (FW) is tabulated in The seawater used in this research for secondary injection mode was obtained from the estuary of the Ghafghas river to the Persian Gulf. The analytical analysis performed on the seawater sample is presented in The beige carbonate sands used in this research were 0.2–1 mm in size. The mineralogical analysis of them is shown in Fe Medium molecular weight Chitosan ((C The sol-gel method was used for the synthesis of Fe The synthesis procedure was the same as adopted by previous studies ( The synthesis process was based on the method performed by Chen and Chen (2005) ( The method used was the same as performed by Using a PW1840 Philips X-ray diffractometer (λ = 1.542 ̊A), the XRD of the nanocomposites was analyzed. In order to determine the particle morphology, FESEM images were taken from the synthesized samples. To investigate the stability of the synthesized nanocomposites in the seawater, different 0.05 wt % nanofluids were analyzed by the Microtrac Zeta Check apparatus (US), with a supporting range of – 200 mV to + 200 mV and an accuracy of ±1 mV. To simulate the injection into the oil reservoir, a carbonate sand pack was used. The flooding set-up shown in To prepare the porous medium, the carbonate sands were packed into a cylinder. The average permeability and porosity of the sand pack were calculated as 3.5 Darcy and 41%, respectively. To saturate the porous medium with FW, a vacuum pump was used. For this, the sand pack was first placed vertically and isolated with two valves on the inlet and outlet. The upper valve was connected to the vacuum pump and the lower one was connected to the beaker containing FW through a pipe. Vacuuming the porous medium by the pump led to the flow of FW into the porous medium. In this process, the volume of the pipelines and valves were calculated to account for the dead FW volume in the system. The dead volume of each valve, inlet, and outlet pipelines were 0.6, 1, and 0.75 cc, respectively. In each flooding, the porous medium was sequentially saturated with FW and crude oil. Seawater (as a secondary injection scenario) and different nanofluids (as a tertiary injection scenario) were injected into the sand pack according to the experimental plan shown in In order to investigate the effect of different synthesized nanocomposites on the formation and stabilization of the emulsions, the bulk and oil/water interfacial viscosity measurements of the prepared samples with an oil: water ratio of 70:30 vol% have been carried out according to the outlet of the sand pack during different floodings. The composition of investigated emulsions is tabulated in The MCR-302 Rheometer (Anton Paar) with RheoComposs software was used for measuring the bulk viscosity of the crude oil and different prepared emulsions shown in For determining the asphaltene adsorption by various nanocomposites in water in oil emulsification, different synthetic oil samples with an n-heptane/toluene ratio of 40/60 vol% were prepared first. The amount of asphaltene in these oil samples varied from 0.1 to 0.3 wt%. The emulsion models consisted of 30 and 70 vol% water and oil, respectively, and prepared by shaking for three hours. Allowing them to reach equilibrium, the oil and water separated into two phases, facilitating taking a sample from the oil phase for absorbance measurements at 700 nm by the Dynamica DB-20S UV/Visible Double Beam Spectrophotometer. These steps were performed for different concentrations of nanocomposites in the emulsion water phase. Based on the absorbance measurements, the equilibrium asphaltene concentration of different emulsions was calculated using the initial one. The data were then questioned for the best-fitted isotherm (Langmuir and Brunauer–Emmett–Teller). Crystalline structures of the synthesized nanocomposites are easily determined by XRD results. Based on this method, each sample diffracts some incident x rays at different wavelengths, which are useful in the identification of the sample purity, presence of caly and grains, and the crystalline patterns of the sample. On the other hand, FESEM is a useful imaging technique for determination of topography and elements present in the nanocomposites. In comparison with SEM, it provides high-resolution images by which the uniformity of the nanocomposites can be easily identified. In the following, the results on XRD and FESEM analyses performed on each individual Fe  The FESEM of the synthesized Fe   The XRD pattern of the synthesized Fe  The zeta potential values of various fluids used in the emulsion water phase are indicated in As noted earlier in Section The accuracy of floodings was calculated as 1% by five times repetitions of SW injection into the carbonate sand pack. According to During nanofluid injection, a considerable fluctuation in pressure differences was observed. These pressure fluctuations may reveal the blockage of the pore throats. This blockage requires a sufficient force for overcoming the high capillary force available in the system. Therefore, it is clear to mention that the pressure fluctuations arise in case of successive trapping and releasing of oil droplets.  As indicated in The formation of water in oil emulsion can increase the fluid viscosity noticeably. To evaluate the viscosity variations, the viscosity of the crude oil and prepared water in oil emulsions with a ratio of 30/70 vol% were first measured and displayed in Colloidal dispersions like emulsions and foams hold high interfacial areas. Injected or natural surfactants like polar asphaltene molecules tend to adsorb onto the oil/water interface. This would considerably apply excess stresses on the interface, and change its rheological behavior. These stresses differ from interphase homogeneous stresses. Therefore, the calculation of interfacial stresses dictates the presence of asphaltene particles at the water/oil interface. Measuring the interfacial oil/water viscosity is a useful method for calculation of interphase stresses. Monitoring interfacial viscosity is useful for the analysis of interfacial properties. In this regard, this would be more critical for the surfactant-covered surfaces and can be discarded fro those with a little surfactant. In fact, interfacial viscosity gives a rise with an increase in surfactants at the interface ( For those Bo values greater than one (i.e. for surfactant-covered surfaces), bulk flow close to or at the interface is governed by the shear viscosity of surface ( As shown in To examine the emulsion stability by different nanocomposites, the RPM needed for phase separation of prepared 30/70 vol% water/oil emulsions were analyzed ( The role of NPs in the oil reservoirs is various. Changes in pressure, temperature and oil composition would cause asphaltene to be aggregated, precipitated and finally deposited ( Where Q The Langmuir parameters (  Analyzing the amount of asphaltene adsorption by different NPs and nanocomposites indicated in Based on the results of this research, According to the results, the adsorption of asphaltene molecules by the synthesized nanocomposites is higher than that of Fe According to the results obtained from the application of synthesized Fe Coating Fe The produced fluid in the outlet of the sand pack during different nanofluid injections was found to be water in oil emulsions, with 30 vol% water content. The microscopic analysis performed on these emulsions revealed that they consisted of very small water droplets with a high stability. The viscosity measurements of the prepared water/oil 30/70 vol% emulsions disclosed that those emulsions containing nanocomposites in their water phase presented higher viscosity than that of Fe The interfacial viscosity measurements also showed that the presence of NPs in the water phase adsorb more asphaltene molecules as deploying at the oil/water interface. The presence of asphaltene molecules at the interface can also form and stabilize the emulsions. The analysis of asphaltene adsorption onto the surfaces of NPs and synthesized nanocomposites confirmed the highest surface adsorption for Fe The authors would like to thank the National Iranian Oil Company (NIOC) for providing crude oil and the related information.  Colloidal Instability Index Distilled Water Enhanced Oil Recovery Formation Water Interfacial Tension Near-infrared Nanoparticles Original Oil in Place Pore Volume Field Emission Scanning Electron Microscopy Specific Surface Area Seawater Tetraethyl Orthosilicate X-ray Diffraction The following is the supplementary data to this article: Supplementary data to this article can be found online at