Arsenic is one of the most dangerous inorganic pollutants and thus a penalty element in many base metal concentrates. Arsenic removal in sulphide flotation has been studied extensively with various approaches, including pre-oxidation of flotation pulp, Eh control during flotation and the use of selective depressants/collectors. Pre-oxidation of flotation pulp using oxidizing agents or aeration conditioning represents a simple approach in arsenic removal and was found effective in many cases. Selective flotation of arsenic minerals through Eh control has made significant advances in recent years with promising results achieved. In addition, various depressants and collectors have also been studied in arsenic removal. In this communication, the various approaches used in selective flotation of arsenic minerals are reviewed with emphasis on the development in recent years.Arsenic is one of the most dangerous inorganic pollutants, causing environmental and health emergencies in several areas of the world ( Oxidization of arsenic minerals is of critical importance in understanding their flotation behavior. In aqueous solutions, enargite (Cu The oxidation rate of arsenic minerals and non-arsenic minerals has been compared in a series of papers to explain the selective flotation of arsenic minerals from other sulfide minerals. According to According to Arsenic minerals are readily floatable using xanthates as collectors. Different adsorption mechanisms of xanthates on arsenic minerals have been proposed. For realgar (AsS), orpiment (As For enargite, however, a totally different adsorption mechanism for xanthates was proposed. Kantar The formation of a monovalent copper xanthate and dixanthogen on the mineral surface was confirmed by In addition to the adsorption of collectors, other factors such as grinding medium and metal cations in flotation pulp also significantly affect the flotation behavior of arsenic minerals. Copper activation was found effective on cobalt arsenide, arsenopyrite ( Surprisingly, copper depression was also reported for the flotation of arsenic minerals. The oxidation of minerals plays an important role in sulfide flotation and the hydrophilic behavior of most sulfide minerals is attributed to the presence of an oxide or hydroxide layer, which prevents the adsorption of xanthates on sulfide surfaces. Pre-oxidation of flotation pulp has been used in a number of studies to achieve selective flotation of arsenic minerals. In the literature, enargite and tennantite are often floated while non-arsenic minerals are selectively oxidized. According to As mentioned above, in the case of enargite and tennantite removal, pre-oxidation was used to selectively oxidize non-arsenic minerals, while enargite and tennantite were floated due to their strong resistance to oxidation. In the case of gersdorffite (NiAsS), however, pre-oxidation with hydrogen peroxide was reported to enhance the depression of gersdorffite in the flotation of Garson Ni–Cu ore using magnesia mixture or TSS (the combination of triethylenetetramine and sodium sulfite) as depressants ( In addition to the use of chemicals, aeration conditioning was also found effective in pre-oxidation. Using relatively pure arsenopyrite, The flotation of enargite is strongly E Interestingly, the strong depression of enargite at E The strong E Despite the disagreements on the effect of E In a single mineral study, In addition to enargite, the removal of other arsenic minerals has also been studied. E   Some conventional depressants in sulfide flotation have also been reported as effective depressants in arsenic rejection. For example, Unsatisfied with existing reagents, In addition to depressants, selective collectors were also used to remove arsenic minerals in sulfide flotation. Both cationic and anionic collectors have been studied in arsenopyrite–pyrite separation. For cobalt-bearing arsenic minerals, such as erythrite, smolyaninovite and cobaltite, nitroso-naphthol based collectors were found to be selective collectors because of the formation of the extremely stable cobaltic complex ( Selective flotation of arsenic minerals can be achieved through pre-oxidation of flotation pulp, E