The purpose of this study is twofold: first, to determine the appropriate bridging liquid, pH, stirring speed and dispersant for hydrophobic flocculation of coal. Kerosene, n-heptane, benzole and n-hexane were used as bridging liquids. The coal suspension could be flocculated better by kerosene compared to the other bridging liquids at natural pH value of coal. From the experiments carried out to determine the effect of stirring speed on the hydrophobic flocculation of coal suspension, it was found that a stirring speed of 750rpm was required to achieve the maximum combustible recovery and minimum ash content values of flocculated coal particles. The effects of sodium silicate, sodium hexametaphosphate, sodium phosphate and sodium pyrophosphate used as inorganic dispersants on the hydrophobic flocculation of coal were also studied. Sodium silicate was more effective than the other dispersants in the presence of kerosene. The best results were obtained with a concentration of 1g/dm3 sodium silicate and 4g/dm3 concentration of kerosene. It was determined that a clean coal having an ash content of 10.33% with a combustible recovery of 89.54%. The second fold of study is the Box–Wilson experimental design method and it was employed to evaluate the effects of important variables such as bridging liquid concentration (kerosene), dispersant (sodium silicate) concentration and stirring speed on the hydrophobic flocculation of coal. Response function coefficients were determined by the regression analysis of experimental data and the predictions were found to be in good agreement with the experimental results. Similar to the results of the first fold of experimental studies, the optimum kerosene concentration, sodium silicate concentration and stirring speed were determined as 4g/dm3, 1g/dm3 and 750rpm, respectively, when considering combustible recovery and ash content.Modern mining methods such as the cleaning processes and the mechanization in coal mining increase the fine coal particle concentration continuously. These fine coal particles cause several problems in dewatering, drying, transportation and storage. Also, significant amounts of fine coals are lost in the waste stream, which leads to loss of valuable energy and considerable environmental problems. Therefore, the mineral matter must be removed from these fine coals. Because of the losses of valuable minerals in the fine size range, there is interest in devising new processes and in improving the existing processes for the recovery of fine particles. Flotation is the most common process used to beneficiate valuable minerals but it is not very effective for fine particles Hydrophobic flocculation can be greatly improved by the addition of nonpolar oil. Previous studies have found that nonpolar oil enhancement of hydrophobic flocculation occurred from two aspects. One is to form oil films on hydrophobic particles to increase the degree of hydrophobization; another is to promote aggregation by bridging the particles The effect of nonpolar oil on hydrophobic flocculation is generally associated with oil characteristics (density and viscosity). Numerous studies are shown that only the oils of medium-density such as kerosene and diesel are appropriate for the purpose. Low-density oils have insufficient viscosity to pull hydrophobic particles together, and high density oils are too viscous to be dispersed sufficiently well in slurry to wet particles and cause flocculation or agglomeration. However, higher viscosity oils give rise to stronger adhesion forces, so that they can be a good choice for a special case if a very intensive conditioning is subjected to the slurry and proper emulsifier is used In this work, the effects of bridging liquids on hydrophobic flocculation of coal were studied. Bridging liquid concentration, pH, stirring speed, dispersant type and concentration was investigated for this purpose. On the other hand, the Box–Wilson experimental design method was used in order to investigate the effects of important variables on combustible recovery and ash content on hydrophobic flocculation of coal sample taken from Ilgin—Konya. This experimental design is a response surface method as an alternative to conventional methods. It is used for evaluation of a dependent variable as functions of independent variables. The oil concentration, dispersant concentration and stirring speed were considered as independent variables and, combustible recovery and ash content were considered as dependent variables in the Box–Wilson statistical experimental design method. The coal sample was obtained from TKI Ilgin coal basin in Turkey. The sample was milled in a steel ball mill and sieved to < The experiments were carried out in a 400 Experimental design is widely used for controlling the effects of parameters in many processes. Its usage decreases number of experiments, using time and material resources. Furthermore, the analysis performed on the results is easily realized and experimental errors are minimized. Statistical methods measure the effects of change in operating variables and their mutual interactions on process through experimental design way In a system involving three significant independent variables X   The variation of combustible recovery and ash content of coal with stirring speed is given in  Experimental data were used for determining the response function (Eq. The predicted values of ash content and combustible recovery were determined by the response function with the obtained coefficients. The experimental results and the predicted values are given in In order to determine the effect of kerosene concentration on hydrophobic flocculation of coal at a sodium silicate concentration of 1 Variations of ash content and combustible recovery on hydrophobic flocculation of coal with kerosene concentration at different sodium silicate concentrations are shown in The effect of sodium silicate concentration on hydrophobic flocculation of coal at different stirring speeds, but at constant kerosene concentration is given in The effect of sodium silicate concentration on hydrophobic flocculation of coal at different kerosene concentrations, but at constant stirring speed is given in The effect of stirring speed on ash content and combustible recovery in the presence of 1  The conclusions obtained from this study are as follows: Kerosene, n-heptane, benzole and n-hexane were used on hydrophobic flocculation of coal as bridging liquid. While the combustible recovery of flocculated coal slightly increased up to a certain concentration of bridging liquid, the ash content sharply decreased. However, they had low bridging properties at high concentrations. Consequently, a clean coal having an ash content of 11.54% with a combustible recovery of 91.20% was determined with kerosene. The best combustible recovery and ash content results were obtained at natural pH value of coal. At higher pH values, the flocculation ability of coal particles decreased due to increasing the negative potential of coal. A value of 750 Sodium hexametaphosphate, sodium phosphate and sodium pyrophosphate as dispersants were not greatly effective on hydrophobic flocculation of coal. However, the optimum results were obtained at 1 The Box–Wilson statistical experimental design method was seen to be applicable to evaluate the effects of important variables on the combustible recovery and ash content of flocculated product in hydrophobic flocculation of coal. Response function predictions determined by regression analysis were in good agreement with the experimental results. While the combustible recovery increased with increasing kerosene concentration up to 4 The combustible recovery increased very slightly at a particular concentration of sodium silicate at low stirring speeds (500 and 750 The combustible recovery increased and the ash content of the product decreased with an increase in stirring speed up to 750 Considering combustible recovery and ash content, the optimum kerosene concentration, sodium silicate concentration and stirring speed were determined as 4