Mode-I fracture toughness (FT) is an important property to model fracture propagation in rocks and it has wide application in a plethora of rock mechanics problems such as hydraulic fracturing design, tunneling, geothermal energy extraction, CO2 sequestration, blasting and drilling activities, well-bore stability analysis etc. Determination of fracture toughness from different individual index geomechanical properties is an ongoing research area. Multiple past research have established simple regression relations between FT and individual mechanical parameters with various degree of success. But these were found to be rock and site specific and lack wide acceptance. In this paper, multiple regression analysis, and three types of soft computing methods (e.g. artificial neural network, fuzzy inference system, and adaptive neuro-fuzzy inference system) have been employed to predict mode-I fracture toughness from a set of common geomechanical properties. Based on Pearson’s correlation coefficient, three index geomechanical properties, namely, tensile strength, P-wave velocity, and S-wave velocity were chosen to estimate the mode-I FT. As the results suggest, a single model is sufficient to estimate FT in all the sedimentary and crystalline rocks. Such model is capable of predicting fracture toughness irrespective of strength or compositional heterogeneity that is encountered in field. Statistical analysis of the predictions using correlation coefficient (R2), root mean square error (RMSE), mean absolute percentage error (MAPE), and variance accounted for (VAF) show that all the soft computing methods performed better than the multiple regression models. However, among the soft computing methods, adaptive neuro-fuzzy inference system, which incorporates elements of both the artificial neural network and fuzzy inference system, constructs the best model for prediction. This is the first ever reported instance, where soft computing has been used to predict mode-I fracture toughness of dry rocks from the mechanical properties, and the results confirmed that this is an easier, efficient but highly accurate tool for prediction.Fracture toughness (FT) of the rocks is one of the most important index properties which dictate how a fracture will propagate during hydraulic fracturing, rock blast, tunneling, caving etc. Therefore, a good understanding of FT is very important for successful design, implementation and execution of reservoir geomechanics, mining engineering, and civil engineering projects. Under different types of loading, rock can fail in the following modes – mode-I, mixed-mode, and mode-II. Among them mode-I, which is a pure tensile-opening mode fracture is most prevalent in rock mechanics. Therefore, it is important to quantify mode-I fracture toughness of any rock that is intended to be fractured. Due to its importance, a lot of research efforts have been employed in last thirty years to accurately measure this quantity in lab and field. International Society for Rock Mechanics (ISRM) has suggested four different methods to calculate fracture toughness in laboratory – short rod specimen method Past research have shown that mode-I fracture toughness of different sedimentary and crystalline rocks correlate well with the compressive and tensile strength The fracture toughness and mechanical properties of different sedimentary and crystalline rocks used in the present analysis were collected from various references like Zhixi et al. Among the four methods suggested by ISRM to measure the fracture toughness of the rocks, semi-circular bend (SCB) specimen in three-point bend (TPB) setup has recently gained wide popularity among the researchers To prepare specimens for this experiments, first cores were retrieved from the rock blocks using a diamond core bit. They were then dried at the room temperature for 72 h and checked for artificial cracks. Undamaged cores were then separated and classified into two groups. First group was utilized to prepare specimens for tensile and ultrasonic velocity tests. Second group of cores was then split axially into halves. In each semi-circular parts, a thin notch was introduced at the middle of the flat side, parallel to the diameter. The notch length to radius ratio was maintained at 0.5. The TPB setup is loaded until the SCB specimen fails under compression. A constant loading rate of 0.2 mm/min was maintained to avoid accidental impact on the specimen. Several precautions were undertaken during the experiments to ensure valid and successful tests. The compressive load and displacement were noted throughout the course of experiment. After each tests, the fracture plane was investigated to ensure that fracture plane has not deviated much from the notch plane. Parallelism between the notch-plane and fracture-plane confirms that the specimen failed only under tensile stress and no shear stress was involved. The fracture toughness of a SCB specimen is calculated as:   Y′ = non-dimensional stress intensity factor, P a = notch length, R = Radius of the specimen, and B = thickness of the specimen For mode-I FT calculation Y′ is calculated as – And, Past investigations confirmed that mode-I FT can be correlated with individual geomechanical and physical properties with different degrees of confidence. A list of such correlations are shown in In rock mechanics, MRA has been used extensively to establish predictive models among different relevant parameters. The advantage of MRA over simple regression analysis is that, it considers more than one independent variable in the model. Therefore, it can accommodate and reflect control of multiple index properties on the behavior of the independent property. Thus the whole system is better described with higher degree of confidence than the simple regression model between two parameters. The relation between a single independent variable (y) an a set of dependent variables (x The equation proposed to predict mode-I FT from the mechanical properties is given below: The relevant regression statistics of the above is shown in ANN is a soft computing method, inspired by the biological neural networks of human brain. It uses massively parallel processing units, called ‘neurons’, distributed in multiple, interconnected layers, to solve a variety of challenging computational problems. Similar to human neurons, this network also possesses the characteristics of massive parallelism, fast and low energy computation, learning ability, generalization capability, adaptivity, and fault tolerance ANN has been used regularly in last twenty-five years to predict different rock mechanics related parameters. Zang et al. In this study, an ANN structure with a single input layer, single hidden layer, and a single output layer was chosen for data analysis. Sonmez and Gokceoglu suggested that number of neurons must be kept at minimum Fuzzy logic and fuzzy inference system were first introduced by Zadeh in 1965 Three types of FIS are normally used in science and engineering problems: Mamdani system The present Mamdani FIS model has three input parameters and one output. Baglio et al. Adaptive neuro-fuzzy inference system (ANFIS) was first proposed by Jang Based on the model rules and structure of the consequent part, four kinds of fuzzy inferences have been proposed so far: fuzzy rational models In the present study, the ANFIS model contains five layers, and each layer has several neurons. The Sugeno-type FIS was employed in the ANFIS structure. All the inputs and output membership functions were classified in five linguistic variables (very weak/slow to very strong/fast). The FIS structure was developed using grid partitioning method. Triangular input, and constant output membership functions were used. Hybrid learning method was chosen to estimate premise and consequent parameters. This algorithm splits learning process in two stages (a) the adaptation of learning weight, and (b) adaptation of the nonlinear membership function A generalized structure and working of a five-layered ANFIS structure with two inputs (x and y) and one output (z) has been explained in Layer 1: Every node in this layer is an adaptive note with node function: Layer 2: Output at this layer is the product of all incoming signals. Each node output is the firing strength of a rule. Layer 3: The Layer 4: Every node i in this layer is an adaptive node with node function:  Layer 5: All the nodes in this layer are fixed node, and it computes the final output as the summation of all the incoming inputs: Mode-I fracture toughness of different crystalline and sedimentary rocks were predicted using multiple regression analysis, artificial neural network, fuzzy inference system (Mamdani type), and adaptive neuro-fuzzy inference system. The predicted FT values have been plotted against the measured FT values in Further, the coefficient of determination of the best fitted line was also calculated for each of the predicted vs measured plots. This coefficient which is the ratio of explained variation to the total variation of the data points, gives a measure of the spread of data and relation between the predicted and measured values. Higher value indicates better correlation and less randomly spread points. To compare the performances of the models, key statistical parameters, such as Root Mean Square Error (RMSE), Variance Accounted For (VAF), and Mean Absolute Percentage Error (MAPE) were compared. RMSE represent the standard deviation of the residuals. By portraying the spread of the residuals it indicates how close the data are to the line of best fit. VAF signifies how much spread of the data has been considered in the model building and results. MAPE is a quantitative representation of the accuracy of prediction and expressed in percentage. These parameters are calculated as following: Model performances in terms of the statistical values are shown in Although, soft computing methods are attractive options for speedy prediction and indirect measurement, but the choice of the model requires some additional considerations. Development and selection of the model must be done depending on the number of training data point available, availability of the computational power, and required degree of accuracy. Unfortunately due to the complexities associated with rock mechanics experiments, large data set is often not readily available for most of the soft-computing analysis. Therefore, though successful, but results from such analysis must be considered preliminary, and generalization can only be made after models are tested with a larger quantity of data. In case of relatively small dataset, validation should be done either with a separate dataset or by performing k-fold cross-validation Empirical equations to predict mode-I fracture toughness from index geomechanical properties often fail due to the rock type heterogeneity and application of diverse measurement techniques. In the present research we proposed soft-computing models to circumnavigate these issues and to develop a more accurate and universally applicable prediction model. Analysis indicate that simple properties such as tensile strength, P-wave velocity, and S-wave velocity are enough to build reliable prediction models. Statistical investigations show that all the soft-computing models perform better than the conventional empirical approach. However, ANFIS is particularly robust to provide consistent and highly accurate results. This research confirms that, instead of time consuming and complex measurement of mode-I fracture toughness in the laboratory, soft computing can be employed to predict such properties faster and in more economical way. To the best of the authors’ knowledge, this is the first such effort to utilize soft computing method for rock fracture toughness prediction. However, it should be noted that creation of soft computing models require input of a large dataset. Unfortunately due to the complexities associated with rock mechanics experiments, large data set is often not readily available for most of the soft-computing analysis. Therefore, though successful, but results from such analysis must be considered preliminary, and generalization can only be made after models are tested with a larger quantity of data.