Background
                  The antibacterial photodynamic therapy (aPDT) has been used in dentistry against oral microorganisms because of its excellent biocide effect. However, for carious lesions applications, there is little evidence that this therapy is safe for the pulp tissue.
               
                  Objective
                  This study evaluates the effects of an aPDT protocol on human pulp cells in vitro.
                  
               
                  Methods
                  Pulp cells isolated from dental pulp were exposed to an aPDT protocol associating methylene blue (MB) at concentrations of 0.0125, 0.025 and 0.050mg/ml and red laser irradiation using a continuous-wave indium-gallium-aluminum-phosphide (InGaAlP) diode laser (λ
                     =660nm, 40mW, 2.4J, 60J/cm2 for 1min). Pre-irradiation time was 5min for each MB concentration. Cell viability was determined by MTT assay and activity of alkaline phosphatase was assessed by BCIP-NBT assay. Type of aPDT-induced cell death was assessed by flow cytometry. Data was statistically compared (ANOVA followed by Tukey’ or Bonferroni's post hoc tests).
               
                  Results
                  aPDT was able to kill pulp cells in a dye concentration-dependent manner. The cellular viability was significantly reduced when used MB at 0.025 or 0.050mg/ml concentrations (p
                     <0.0001). At these concentrations, aPDT-induced cell death occurred mostly by necrosis. Alkaline phosphatase activity was significantly reduced in all experimental groups (p<0.001). Pulp cells showed suitable viability when MB at 0.0125mg/ml was exposed to laser irradiation.
               
                  Conclusions
                  aPDT with MB at 0.0125mg/ml may represent a low-risk therapy for restorative dentistry applications. aPDT protocol using concentrations above 0.025mg/ml of MB associating red laser irradiation may be harmful for dental pulp cells.The treatment of carious lesions requires the stoppage of the disease progress by the mechanical removal of the infected dentin Several studies have shown the effectiveness of aPDT against cariogenic microorganisms in biofilms, cell suspensions and even in dentin tissue, associating different dyes and light sources Ten impacted third molars were extracted for orthodontic purposes from healthy patients (aged 15–21 years). The project was approved by the Universidade Federal de Minas Gerais Ethics Committee (Process Number 229/10). The teeth were collected in carrier medium DMEM (Sigma–Aldrich, St Louis, MO, USA) supplemented with 20% fetal bovine serum (GIBCO/Invitrogen, Grand Island, NY, USA), 1% penicillin, 1% streptomycin and 0.2% fungizone. All teeth were free from cracks and cervical lesions. Under a laminar-flow hood, teeth were cracked open with two forceps and the coronary pulps removed. Minced pulp tissues were digested into 3 A stock aqueous solution of 0.050 Pulp cells were seeded at a density of 1.5 Mitochondrial cell activity was assessed by using the 3-(4,5-dimethylthiazol-2-yl)-diphenyltetrazolium bromide (MTT) microculture tetrazolium assay (Invitrogen/Vybrant MTT, Molecular Probes, Eugene, OR, USA) according to the manufacturer's instructions. The absorbance value corresponding to untreated cells receiving no treatment was considered 100%. Cell survival was calculated as the percentage of the dye accumulated in the experimental groups in relation to untreated cells Apoptotic and necrotic cells measurements were assessed by flow cytometry using the Alexa Fluor 488 annexin V/Dead Cell Apoptosis Kit (Invitrogen, Molecular Probes, Eugene, OR, USA) according to the manufacturer's protocol. Annexin-V binds to phosphatidylserine, which is translocated from inner to the outer leaflet of the plasma membrane in the early stages of apoptosis. Propidium iodide (PId) is membrane impermeant and therefore does not enter viable cells but stains dead cells binding tightly to the nucleic acids. Briefly, the cells were harvested and washed with cold PBS. The supernatant was discarded; the cells were counted and resuspended in 100 Flow cytometric measurements were performed on FACScan instrument (Becton Dickinson, Mountain View, CA). The Cell-Quest software package was used in both data acquisition and analysis. A total of 10.000 events were acquired for each preparation. The results were expressed as percentage of positive cells within the selected gate presenting bimodal distribution. Alkaline phosphatase (ALP) activity was assessed using BCIP (5-bromo-4-chloro-3′-indolyphosphate p-toluidine Salt) and NBT (Nitro-Blue Tetrazolium Chloride) solutions (Invitrogen/Zymed). The cells were washed with sterile PBS and 60 Each experiment included eight independent groups (no light/no MB – untreated cells; only MB at 0.0125 The results of cell viability of dental pulp cells submitted to solely red laser irradiation or solely MB are shown in Data from aPDT groups are shown in  Comparing the type of cell death between all groups and between all periods of evaluation, it was observed that the amount of apoptotic cells was similar between all groups despite the experimental time. On the other hand, the amount of necrotic cells was significantly higher for 0.050 Considering ALP, all three groups showed significantly low levels of enzyme activity ( A great variety of aPDT protocols using methylene blue as a photosensitizer have been developed and successfully tested against cariogenic microorganisms. However, to the best of our knowledge, no previous studies examined the effects of aPDT associating phenothiazine dyes directly on human primary pulp cells, which can be indirectly affected by the therapy. Thus, it is important to investigate which would be the possible effects of aPDT in these cells prior to any clinical trial. In this way, this study searched for analyzing the effects of aPDT on cell viability, alkaline phosphatase activity and cell death type using different concentrations of MB. Our results showed that cell death increases proportionally to the MB concentration. Moreover, the concentration of MB also determines the cell death type in function of the experimental time. The aPDT protocol was chosen based on a previous study that found antimicrobial activity of aPDT against suspensions of The analysis of cell viability showed that the laser irradiation had no effect on cell viability. The MB, when applied in the lower concentrations (0.0125 and 0.025 A recent study performed aPDT mediated by aluminum-chloride-phthalocyanine (AlClPc) entrapped in cationic liposome and red laser as an adjuvant technique to decrease cavity contamination prior to restorative procedures The minimal MB concentration tested (0.0125 Methylene blue is considered a nontoxic dye Two cell death types were observed in the present study. Apoptotic cells were present in all experiment groups during whole experimental time, including the control. Moreover, the amount of apoptotic amongst the groups was similar. Thus, one can infer that this cell death could occur as result of physiological response to the cell handling. The amount of necrotic cells increased with the intensity of the insult and with time. The necrotic cell death profile was mostly observed after aPDT associating MB at 0.025 It was concluded that aPDT associating MB at low concentration (0.0125 This investigation was supported in part by