The strength development of 1:1 mixes of clinker and blast furnace slag with varying fineness of components from 3000 to 6000 cm2/g has been studied. Overall results indicate that in manufacturing blast furnace slag cement (BFSC), it is not only the fineness of the clinker–slag mix but also of the individual components which govern the choice of the mix composition for a desired strength.Recently, there has been a growing trend for the use of supplementary cementitious materials, whether natural, waste, or by-products, in the production of composite cements because of ecological, economical, and diversified product quality reasons. Slag, a by-product of the transformation of iron ore into pig-iron in a blast furnace, is one of these materials whose use in cement manufacture goes to as far back as 1880 One of the major determinants of cement quality is its fineness. It is well known that the compressive strength of cement increases with fineness, and that cements with a narrow-size distribution have higher strength than those with a wide one Traditionally, blast furnace slag cement (BFSC) has been produced by intergrinding cement clinker with slag in tube mills When separate grinding is practiced, a question must be asked, “Which fineness the components should be ground to compensate for the lower reactivity of slag ?” At first sight it seems logical to grind clinker finer because of its higher grindability. On the other hand, it is claimed that for the same incremental increase in fineness, slag gives higher strength development compared to clinker In this work, the effect of components fineness on the strength development of BFSC is investigated, also taking the specific energy consumption into consideration. Chemical analysis of clinker and slag samples received from Oysa-Iskenderun cement grinding plant is given in Results of Bond grindability tests conducted on the individual components and on the mix having 50% slag are given in Batch grinding tests were carried out in a standard Bond mill. Minus 3 mm feed materials, clinker and slag, were ground separately under standard mill operating conditions until they reached the desired Blaine specific surface area levels, namely 3000, 4000, 5000, and 6000 cm Specific energy consumption for each Blaine level was measured by a wattmeter placed in the circuit. The measured energy values were extremely high for products having 5000 and 6000 cm 2-, 7-, and 28-day compressive strengths, initial setting time, normal consistencies, and soundness values of the cements with 50% slag by weight were determined in accordance with European Standards, EN196. All the cements contain 5% gypsum as set retarder. In EN196, compresssive strength of cements is determined on prismatic mortar specimens (40×40×160 mm) with 1:2:6 water/cement/standard sand ratio. After applying prescribed mixing and moulding procedure, mortar specimens are cured at 20±1 °C and more than 90% relative humidity in moulds for 24 h. Then specimens are demoulded and cured under water with 20±1 °C temperature starts. Water curing continues until 2, 7, and 28 days after mixing cements with water. For normal consistency and setting time, Vicat apparatus is used in EN196. According to the procedure, a trial cement/water mixture is prepared in a standard manner and placed in the mould. Then, a plunger of the apparatus (10 mm in diameter) is brought into contact with the top surface of the cement paste and released. The plunger has a standard weight and its penetration into the paste determines the normal consistency of cement. The water/cement ratio at which the plunger penetrates the paste to a point 5±1 mm from the bottom is recorded as normal consistency. For the determination of setting time, cement paste at normal consistency is used and penetration of standard needle of the Vicat apparatus into the paste is measured regularly with time. The time period (from mixing cement with water) required for needle penetration to a point 4±1 mm from the bottom is determined as the initial setting time of a cement. Soundness of a cement is measured by using Le Chatelier moulds. Cement pastes at normal consistency are placed in the mould and cured under water with 20±1 °C for 24 h. Then the sample with mould is boiled for 3 h. After boiling and cooling, expansion of the sample with the help of rods attached to the mould is measured as soundness value. The physical properties, normal consistency, Le Chatelier soundness, and initial setting times as per EN196 are given in Initial setting times for BFSC are higher than the initial setting time of the control cement as expected. Soundness figures are also in conformity with the standard. The strength development of 1:1 mixes of clinker and slag with varying fineness of components is given in The figures indicate that numerous alternative fineness combinations are possible in order to produce a mix with certain strength. In other words, following a path of an iso-strength curve, there are many different combinations of component fineness for obtaining the same strength. Likewise, for the same mix fineness (i.e., weighted mean of the component fineness), which is represented by the diagonal parallel lines on the figures, there are numerous strength values depending on the fineness levels of the components comprising the mix. On the figures, only the lines representing 3500, 4000, 4500, 5000, and 5500 cm To validate this conclusion on the efficiency of regulating 2-day strength by clinker fineness, numerical data in The preference of increasing the clinker fineness for increasing 2-day strength coincides with the consideration of cost effectiveness. As given in As seen in Iso-strength curves for 28 days given in A regression program was used to determine the best regression for BFSC strength as a function of specific surface area of individual components in the mixes. The correlations could be expressed by the following equations for 2-, 7-, and 28-day strengths. As seen from the correlations, the regression equation predicts better results for the longer curing ages. The original idea was to include in the study the cost effectiveness also of the preparation of the mixes having the same specific surface area from differing component fineness. Therefore, energy consumption in separate grinding of clinker and slag to different fineness was either measured or calculated from size analysis results as explained earlier. However, the results were not highly meaningful due to heavy coating of materials on balls and on mill inside the surface and also due to agglomeration of particles above the 4000-cm Based on the results obtained below, the given general conclusions can be drawn: When manufacturing blended cements, it is not only the fineness of the mix but also of the individual components which govern the choice of the mix composition for a desired strength. In manufacturing BFSC, grinding clinker component to a higher fineness should be practiced, as it is more effective in regulating the strength and it is also more cost-effective. Cost effectiveness point should further be investigated in more detail for the final choice of the mix composition, preferably with varying slag additions.