This work studies the influences of both surface-finishing forms and cement-filling on the durability of dimension limestone in cold regions. Freeze–thaw cycles, aqueous saline solution and their interactions with surface-finishing forms and cement-filling on stones were investigated for two types of porous limestone, Caribbean and Pewter Blend. Both deionised water and saline water composed of 20% NaCl by weight were used, and 28 freeze–thaw cycles were applied to the samples. The change in dry weight, porosity, and Böhme abrasion loss value was obtained for all test samples. It was observed that two types of porous limestone with cement-filling and different types of surface-finishing were influenced to different extents by freeze–thaw and salt. Experiments showed that stones to be used outdoors in cold regions should have relatively low initial porosity and that they should be fine-finished and cement-filled; these modifications to the stones will maximise the benefit received from the stones.The development of design tools for the assessment of risk from frost and salt decay is important because the freezing and thawing of porous stone materials represents a significant challenge in the design and construction of building enclosures in cold regions such as Canada, Finland and Russia. This challenge also exists for high-altitude regions of some countries such as northern regions of America and eastern regions of Turkey. Porous limestone are processed and marketed as either “unfilled” or “filled”. To provide structural integrity, and thus a uniform surface, the pores on the surface of the stones are filled with filling material such as cement, epoxy, mastic or polyester resins. Alternatively, different surface-finishing forms such as saw–cut (as-sawn), honed, matte, fine-polished, brushed or antique (tumbled) are applicable to natural building stones. In cold regions, two significant determinants of damage are freeze–thaw cycles and salt exposure. At low temperatures, when porous stone is frozen, water stored in micropores undergoes an expansion of 9% in volume ( Salt is known to be one of the most destructive agents for porous stones ( Porosity is an essential parameter for ornamental stone deterioration. Stone properties, including the initial porosity, are significant factors leading to rock failure in cold regions ( Outdoor stone flooring damage depends on the daily temperature changes, stone type, material properties and salt usage in icy weather conditions. Many studies have been carried out using experimental laboratory simulations to assess stone durability against freeze–thaw and salt weathering effects. The common procedures used in these studies include the use of NaSO However, a study considering the product characteristics of stones and the medium conditions in which they are used, thus aiming at extending the lifetime of the porous stones to be used in cold outdoor conditions, has not been conducted yet. In this study, the effects of surface-finishing forms and cement-filling on the deterioration of porous stones were investigated for cold regions. To realistically simulate the media in which these stones are used, in contradistinction to the previous studies, NaCl (aqueous saline solution) was used for the thaw processes. NaCl was chosen because it is the agent used exclusively in practice. Two commercially available porous limestone, Caribbean and Pewter Blend ( In the study, two techniques were applied depending on the liquid used in thawing, both deionised water and saline solution. The stone samples were prepared from two different porous limestone: Caribbean limestone extracted in Manisa and the Pewter Blend extracted in Afyon, Turkey. Physical properties such as changes in dry weight and porosity are highly important parameters in certain application areas, depending on climate. Additionally, the Böhme abrasion loss value has become a universally accepted measure of quality of stones used for flooring applications. All these characteristics are important input parameters for the estimation of support forces in the filling and fixing systems of flooring, as the parameters affect the stone strength and failure depending on the climatic and environmental conditions. The laboratory measurements of the samples included dry weight, open porosity and Böhme abrasion loss value before and after the accelerated weathering tests. In determining initial physical properties such as real density and total porosity, the pycnometer technique was used. For open porosity changes in accelerated weathering tests, the saturation technique was applied using cube samples 70 We performed accelerated ageing tests to quantify the level of deterioration in the Caribbean and Pewter Blend. As-sawn, honed, fine-polished, cement-filled as-sawn, cement-filled honed and cement-filled fine-polished specimens were prepared as surface-finishing forms ( Twelve powder samples of 10 After the ageing tests, cross-sections were also examined and photographed under the scanning electron microscope (Jeol–Jsm 6060 SEM–EDX). A polarised microscope, Olympus BX41TF model, was used for the petrographic analyses of the tested samples. The petrographic analyses were executed according to the methods suggested by EN 12407 ( For petrographical identification, cross-sections of the Caribbean and Pewter Blend were studied under a polarising optical microscope before the ageing tests were conducted. The Caribbean stone was observed to be laminated carbonate mudstone that was partly recrystallised. The pores were filled with sparite, and local silicification was also observed through the pores. The colour was locally reddish because of iron oxidation. The original texture of the Pewter Blend could not be determined due to intense recrystallisation. Local silicification was also observed throughout the pores of the stone. The elemental analyses, obtained from inductive coupled plasma mass spectroscopy (ICP-MS), are given in In practice, building stones are subject to the impacts of freeze–thaw cycles and salt exposure. They are the most common destructive agents for porous stones. Several studies have already analysed the influence of the freeze–thaw cycles and salt on the durability and deterioration of stones ( However, the influence of freeze–thaw cycles and salt exposure on stones that have different surface-finishing forms that are filled or unfilled are still unknown and have not been studied. Therefore, the purpose of this study was to thoroughly investigate the effects of freeze–thaw cycles and salt exposure on surface-finishing forms and cement-filling to gain a better understanding of these factors on stone durability. This information can be used to improve the sustainability of stone consumption in the construction industry. In this study, accelerated weathering tests were performed on unfilled and cement-filled samples that had as-sawn, honed, and fine-polished surface finishing. The prepared cement-filling material consisted of 35% cement, 15% kaolin, and 50% water by weight, a formulation that simulates the composition of commercial treatments. The cement-filling was manually applied on all surfaces of the samples. Except for the as-sawn samples, grinding was also done manually. Grid abrasive types 90–120–180–220 and 90–120–180–220–280–320–360–480–600–800 were used for honing and fine-polishing, respectively. After effect of freeze–thaw cycles on dry weight, porosity and the Böhme abrasion loss value was determined for unfilled and cement-filled samples with different surface- finishing forms. At the end of the 28th cycle, all specimens were dried in an oven for 24 Surface-finishing forms and/or cement-filling were determined to have been effective in freeze–thaw processes. As seen in As expected, porosity values increased in all samples ( As seen in Cement-filling was determined to reduce the effects of freeze–thaw cycles and salt in aged samples. The ratio of porosity changes decreased as the surface roughness did. Porosity changes in unfilled samples thawed in saline solution were observed to have increased more than those in samples thawed in deionised water. However, in cement-filled samples, deionised water affected the changes in porosity more than saline solution did. The reason for this difference in the effect of saline solution and deionised water on filled and unfilled samples is thought to be due to differences in the penetration capability of deionised water in the samples. It was observed that the salt crystals could not advance through the filled stones because the salt crystals became trapped in the pores on the surfaces of stones as well as between the contours of the gaps and cement-filling ( Variations of the Böhme abrasion loss values after freeze–thaw tests are presented in Similar to the changes in dry weights and porosity values, the maximum increase in the Böhme abrasion loss value was observed in the unfilled as-sawn samples. The highest losses in abrasion resistances were in the Caribbean unfilled as-sawn samples, in which the loss was 2.49% for thawing cycles in both deionised and saline waters. The loss in abrasion resistance was 5.13% for thawing cycles in saline solution in the Pewter Blend unfilled as-sawn samples. On the other hand, the least loss in abrasion resistance was observed in the cement-filled fine-polished samples (1.06% for Caribbean thawed both in deionised and saline waters and 4.15% for Pewter Blend thawed in deionised water) ( As shown in In this paper, freeze–thaw-induced changes in the engineering properties of two porous limestone that had different surface-finishing forms and that were cement-filled were studied for two different thaw techniques, deionised water and aqueous saline solution, 20% salt by weight. Dry weight, porosity and Böhme abrasion loss values of both Caribbean and Pewter Blend were found to have been affected by ageing tests. However, the Böhme abrasion loss value, compared to the other two parameters, was not a distinctive parameter good enough to compare the ageing techniques implemented in the study. The porosity was determined to be an important factor in stone deterioration because the cavities constituting porosity reduced the integrity of the material. Pewter Blend (with higher initial porosity than Caribbean) was affected more significantly by the ageing processes. As a result, Pewter Blend limestone was found to be less resistant to salt activity than Caribbean limestone. Analyses of the experimental data have shown that the surface roughness and cement-filling have an important role on the actions of freeze–thaw and salt on porous limestone. Therefore, in cold regions, for projects in which porous limestone is used for flooring, the use of stones that are filled and that have low surface roughness and low porosity should be preferred. In this study, the effects of surface-finishing forms and cement-filling on dry weights, porosities and Böhme abrasion loss values of two types of porous limestone that were exposed to freeze–thaw tests were investigated experimentally. The changes in these properties were determined for samples that were exposed to 28 freeze–thaw cycles in both deionised water and in a saline solution of 20% NaCl by weight, at temperatures between − The dry weights of the samples thawed in deionised water were determined to have decreased, whereas those of the samples thawed in saline solution increased. Stones that had a higher initial porosity were determined to be less resistant to deterioration. A clear relationship between Böhme abrasion loss values and surface-finishing forms and between Böhme abrasion loss values and cement-filling processes could not be determined after freeze–thaw tests. Therefore, these tests are not suggested for the assessment of stone quality with respect to Böhme abrasion loss values in cold regions. The influence of freeze–thaw cycles and salt on the ageing of the stones decreased as the surface roughness decreased. Cement-filling also decreased the effects of freeze–thaw cycles and salt on porous limestone. The relationship between surface-finishing forms (surface roughness), cement-filling and freeze–thaw cycles was found to be extremely important for the deterioration of the stones. As a result, stones scheduled for outdoor use in cold regions should be filled, have as low surface roughness, and have as little porosity as possible. The authors would like to thank Bilgehan Uysal, Gökcen Aktaş and their colleagues in Reisoğlu Marble Co. for their courteous contributions in providing the specimens. The authors are also grateful to Dr. Bilal Sarı for his valuable help in conducting the cross-sections.