Simply put, desalination (or desalinization) is the process of extracting fresh, potable water from saline water. The latter can be seawater or saline groundwater (referred to as brackish water). This separation of salt and water is typically achieved via two main technology streams: thermal and membrane-based desalination. The former involves boiling the saline water, then condensing and recovering the salt-free vapor, while the latter employs a membrane barrier that allows either the water or salt to pass through selectively. Reverse osmosis (RO) and electrodialysis are examples of the former and latter membrane types, respectively. Both thermal and membrane-based desalination technologies are energy intensive. A seawater RO plant, the most energy efficient desalination technology today, consumes an average of 4 It is no surprise then that the birth place of utility-scale, large desalination plants is the Middle East, specifically, the oil producing Arabian Gulf countries (also known as Gulf Cooperation Council (GCC) countries). Reliance on desalination for potable water supply in some GCC countries has grown so much, it now constitutes more than 90% of total potable water supply in those countries. This by no means suggests that desalination is uniquely a Middle Eastern phenomenon. The United States, Spain, China, Australia, and Singapore are just examples of countries with a strongly growing desalination portfolio. In fact, over the last 20 years, the total global desalination capacity has increased by more than 15-fold. This tremendous growth was accompanied by a plethora of exciting innovations that helped improve the energy efficiency and cut the cost of desalination. New membranes, energy recovery devices, and effective pre-treatment technologies are examples of those innovations. While these developments helped make desalination much more affordable than it used to be 30 years ago, it is still not a sustainable choice for all. Today’s desalinated water cost of USD $0.5–0.7/m The last decade has witnessed a surge of emerging processes and concepts that were hoped to become sustainable alternatives for “traditional” desalination. These range from innovative, exploratory prototypes, such as moisture harvesting from ambient air, to the closer-to-market solar-powered RO. There is no single metric against which the viability of all these emerging processes can be assessed. What we can have instead is an understanding of the issues of concern and how they apply vis-à-vis Finally, I would like to express my sincere thanks and gratitude to the chapter authors of this book. This project would not have happened without their wonderful contributions. Their generosity in offering their valuable time and expertise, and in meeting all the deadlines despite their busy schedules, culminated in the successful publication of this book. I now leave it in the hands of the reader to dive in!