Complete articular distal femur fractures can provide challenges for internal fixation due to metaphyseal comminution, intra-articular involvement, osteoporotic bone, and unopposed muscle forces. While the use of lateral locked plating has improved the ability to treat these fractures, recent reports have indicated a high rate of complications using this fixation method, including nonunion rates ranging from 10%-20%. Several biomechanical studies have demonstrated superior results of retrograde intramedullary nails compared to lateral locked plating. To address the unsatisfactory results using lateral locked plating for complete articular distal femur fractures, we have shifted toward stabilization of these injuries with retrograde intramedullary nails augmented with independent screw fixation for the articular injury. Our early clinic results have been promising with regards to maintaining anatomical alignment without loss of fixation. Future long-term outcome studies will be necessary to further assess the success of this treatment method for these difficult injuries.Distal femur fractures represent approximately 0.5% of all fractures and have reported incidences ranging from 4.5/100,000/year to 8.7/100,000/year. Complete articular distal femur fractures (Arbeitsgemeinschaft für Osteosynthesefragen and/or Orthopaedic Trauma Association [AO and/or OTA] 33C While early results with lateral locking plates for distal femur fractures were promising, Biomechanical studies have demonstrated favorable results for retrograde intramedullary nails compared to fixed-angled plates in stabilizing distal femur fractures. Following a clinical evaluation of the patient with a history and physical exam, standard imaging should consist of anteroposterior (AP) and lateral radiographs of the injured femur and knee in addition to a computed tomography (CT) scan of the distal femur. The radiographs, cross sectional axial, coronal, and sagittal CT images, and surface-rendered CT images of the articular and metaphyseal components of the fracture are then scrutinized to identify all fracture fragments and planes to plan reduction and fixation sequencing and techniques ( The patient is positioned supine on a radiolucent operating table with a small bump placed under the ipsilateral flank. A radiographic rotational profile of the contralateral, uninjured femur is obtained with a perfect lateral of the knee followed by a 90° AP view of the hip, and the profile of the lesser trochanter is noted. If any difficulty discerning femoral length is anticipated, fluoroscopic images of the uninjured femur should be obtained with an overlying radiographic ruler. The injured flank and lower extremity are prepped and draped in the standard fashion. A radiolucent triangle is positioned under the knee and thigh to promote knee flexion and aid in lateral fluoroscopic imaging. A 15-cm longitudinal incision is made anteriorly over the knee from the tibial tubercle to approximately 5-cm proximal to the superior pole of the patella. A lateral or medial parapatellar arthrotomy is performed, depending on the injury characteristics and need to access particular regions of the articular surface. The patella is translated laterally or medially to visualize the complete articular surface, and fracture hematoma is debrided. Reduction of the articular surface is performed with pointed reduction forceps. For smaller osteochondral fragments, Kirschner wires or Steinmann pins can be used as manipulative reduction aids prior to reduction clamp application. The articular reduction can be provisionally held in position using multiple interfragmentary Steinmann pins in addition to the reduction forceps during the nailing portion of the procedure ( Once the articular reduction has been obtained and stabilized, attention is turned toward reduction of the articular block to the intact shaft with the goal to restore length, alignment, and rotation. If a reliable metaphyseal cortical reduction can be obtained, this can assist with restoration of this relationship ( Under direct visualization, the optimal starting point for a retrograde femoral nail is obtained by placing the tip of the guidewire in the center of the intercondylar sulcus and approximately 1cm anterior to the femoral origin of the posterior cruciate ligament. The nail is passed over the guidewire and seated so that the distal aspect of the nail is below the chondral surface and flush with the subchondral bone. The distal interlock screws are then placed using the insertion jig attached to the nail. An assessment of femur length, alignment, and rotation is performed compared to the contralateral side. The proximal interlock screws are placed using a “perfect circles” technique. If the articular reduction was temporized with Steinmann pins, lag screws are used to obtain definitive fixation of all articular fragments, taking care to countersink screws that are used in the trochlea to stabilize coronal articular fracture planes. Once all articular fragments have been stabilized, clamps and temporizing pins are removed for final fluoroscopic radiographs. The knee is taken through flexion and extension to ensure the stability of the articular reduction and no implants will impede knee function. Placement of drains and closure are performed in the standard fashion per the preference of the treating surgeon. Once the surgical drapes are removed, a clinical exam of femoral length, alignment, and rotation are performed comparing the operative side to the contralateral side. In addition, final radiographic images of the affected femur and knee and an anteroposterior view of bilateral knees are obtained to ensure adequate restoration of coronal plane alignment ( Postoperatively, patients are restricted to nonweight bearing or touch-down weight bearing on the lower extremity and are encouraged to perform early active, active-assisted, and gentle passive knee range of motion exercises as tolerated. Rehabilitation is focused on isometric exercises to maintain strength and flexibility of the quadriceps, hamstrings, hip flexors, and hip extensors. At 8-12 weeks from surgery, patients are allowed to progress their weight bearing as tolerated. From December 2016 to January 2018, 17 patients underwent retrograde intramedullary nailing for complete articular distal femur fractures. All patients had injury radiographs and preoperative CT scan to further assess the intra-articular fracture patterns. Mean patient age was 50years (range 28-71). Ten patients were female and 7 were male. Eleven patients sustained their injuries during motor vehicle collisions, and the remaining 6 had falls from standing height. AO and/or OTA classification of the fractures included one 33-C1, ten 33-C2, and six 33-C3. Coronal and sagittal distal femoral alignments were assessed on postoperative radiographs by measuring the anatomical lateral distal femoral angle (aLDFA) and anatomical posterior distal femoral angle (aPDFA). A malreduction was considered any measurement outside the normal values of 79 Despite advances with the use of lateral locked plating for distal femur fractures, complication rates remain high. Ricci et al. analyzed a large cohort of 335 cases of distal femur fractures treated with locked plate fixation and reported 19% required reoperations to promote union, 5% had deep infections, and 7% had implant failures. Multiple studies have been attempted to identify risk factors for nonunion and implant failure following locked plating of distal femur fractures. These risk factors have included obesity, open fractures, diabetes, smoking, infection, shorter plate length, locking mechanism, medial comminution, and plate material. Biomechanical studies comparing locked plating to intramedullary nails have demonstrated improved construct stiffness and higher fatigue strength than locked plating. In our cohort of patients with early clinical follow-up, our results support these positive outcomes using this fixation strategy for complete articular fractures of the distal femur. Intramedullary nailing of these injuries may also have potential problems, including iatrogenic comminution, inability to place sufficient fixation for the articular fractures, and insufficient fixation overall, which may require plate augmentation. Nonetheless, we believe that the intramedullary nail fixation construct has the potential for improved long-terms outcomes compared to locked plating due to improved biomechanical properties. As opposed to a load-bearing laterally-based plate, an intramedullary nail is load-sharing and provides fixation in line with the anatomical axis of the femur, which is especially important in cases of medial comminution and bone loss. In addition, the surgical exposure for intramedullary nailing is less extensive and localized mainly to the articular surface, as opposed to the need to expose the lateral femur for plate application. This may have implications for preservation of the osseous blood supply and can also be particularly advantageous in obese individuals ( Treatment of complete articular distal femur fractures with retrograde intramedullary nailing with augmented articular screw fixation has resulted in favorable early radiographic and clinical outcomes in our initial series of patients and has the potential to improve the inferior outcomes associated with lateral locked plating.