Microstructural observation of chrome layers prepared by various pulse plating were studied and correlated with the wear properties. The chrome was electrodeposited from an electrolyte bath containing 500 g l−1 of chromic acid, 10 g l−1 of sulfuric acid and 10–20 mg l−1 of methane sulfuric acid at a direct current density of 1.6 mA mm−2 and a pulse current of 6.2 mA mm−2 with on/off time of 2–60 ms. Flake-shaped nodules were formed after pulse plating, the size of which at an equal on/off time ratio increased with increasing on/off time ratio. A shorter off- than on-time led to larger nodules. The deposition rate of chrome with an equal on/off time ratio increased with the value of the on/off time. The chrome growth kinetics determining the nodule size and shape significantly depends on the value of the on/off time ratio. Microstructural observations using transmission electron microscopy and scanning electron microscopy, as well as microhardness measurements, revealed that the reduction in wear resistance of the chrome deposited by pulse plating compared to that deposited by DC plating resulted from an increase in residual stress relief and the formation of large flake-shaped nodules during the off-time.Since the characteristics of thin deposited layers are significantly dependent upon the microstructure, there have been many studies on control of the microstructure of these layers by changing plating conditions, such as bath chemistry and current type Annealed copper sheets with dimensions of 80×80×5 mm The chrome thickness was determined by optical observations of cross-sections of the layers, which were polished with emery paper and 0.3-μm diamond paste after cold mounting. Knoop microhardness testing was conducted on polished cross-sectional areas of the chrome deposits at 100 g (Micromet-3). Wear testing was performed with a Taber wear tester, which measures the weight loss after chrome layers were abrasively worn by a rotating wear material  In the case of pulse plating, the current waveform is defined by the amplitude and the on/off time of the wave. Since the amplitude and on/off time during pulse plating influence a double layer in front of the substrate, the chrome deposition rate depends on the current waveform. The effect of current waveform and density on the nodule shape can be explained in terms of the chrome deposition kinetics. The electrodeposition process during pulse plating includes six steps: ion diffusion in front of the substrate; the charge-transfer reaction; adatom formation; surface diffusion and growth; and stress and ion relief during the off-time. Ion diffusion in front of the substrate induces concentration polarization during plating. After the charge-transfer reaction, adatoms are present on the substrate surface and move towards growth sites by surface diffusion. A high surface-diffusion rate, low population of adatoms and low overpotential are factors enhancing the build-up of crystals already formed, while conversely, a low surface-diffusion rate, high population of adatoms and high overpotential on the surface enhance the nucleation rate. Since concentration polarization in front of electrode during the off-time tends to be reduced, as well as the residual stress in deposits, unstable adatoms are released from the surface of the substrate. In this study, the peak potential during pulse plating was constant and the on/off time was changed.  Although wear resistance is not exactly proportional to the microhardness value, it is expected that the relative microhardness of the deposited thin layer follows the same trend as the wear resistance.  The nodule size of deposits prepared by direct current plating increased with current density. A finer grain size resulted from an increased deposition rate. Chrome growth kinetics determined the nodule size and grain size within the nodule. Flake-shaped nodules were formed after pulse plating, the size of which at an equal on/off time ratio increased with increasing on/off duration time. A shorter off- than on-time led to larger nodules and a longer off- than on-time led to smaller nodules. The microhardness of chrome deposited by direct current plating in a modified Sargent bath was 970 Knoop with a 100-g load; however, the microhardness values at an equal ratio for on/off time decreased with the duration of the on/off time. The Knoop microhardness values determined with a 100-g load were 517.3, 488.1, 464.7, 457.4, 371.7, 505.1 and 360.2 for on/off times of 60:60, 40:40, 30:30, 15:15, 5:5, 40:20 and 2:4 ms, respectively. Wear resistance of the chrome deposited by pulse plating decreased with the duration of the on/off time. TEM and SEM observations and microhardness measurements support the observation that the reduction in wear resistance of the pulse-plated chrome layer compared to DC-plated chrome results from an increase in stress relief during the off-time and the greater size of the flake-shaped nodules. The authors are grateful to MOST for their financial support. One of authors thanks the '99 Sunmoon University Foundation for support.