The Schmidt hammer has been commonly used device for hardness determination and for predicting the unconfined compressive strength and other mechanical properties of rocks, due to the fact that it is a quick, easy, inexpensive and non-destructive testing method. Testing is most commonly performed following the ISRM and ASTM standards. The effect of sample size for a consistent hardness value has not been well defined in previous works. ISRM [Rock characterization testing and monitoring ISRM suggested methods, suggested methods for determining hardness and abrasiveness of rocks, Part 3. Oxford: Pergamon; 1981. p. 101–3] suggested that block edge length should have at least 6cm, while ASTM [Standard test method for determination of rock hardness by Rebound Hammer Method, D5873-05, 2005] indicated at least 15cm. In this study, in order to analyze the effect of sample size on Schmidt rebound hardness (SRH) property of rocks, rock samples were collected from eight locations. Cubic samples having different edge dimensions of 6, 7, 8, 10, 12 and 15cm were prepared. In the laboratory, Schmidt hammer tests were conducted according to the suggested procedure by ISRM (1981) together with different methods of recording SRH. By evaluating the measured data, it is showed that the size of the cubic samples significantly affects the SRH values. Edge dimension of the cubic block should be at least 11cm for determining a consistent hardness value. An equation predicting the consistent hardness value from samples smaller than 11cm was also suggested.Hardness is one of the characteristics of rocks showing its resistance to permanent deformation. Several factors control the hardness of rock materials, e.g. mineral composition, cementing material and density. Various methods are employed to assess the surface hardness of rocks in engineering applications such as Shore hardness, Mohs and Schmidt rebound hardness (SRH). SRH is the most commonly used one for over half a century. The SRH was originally developed to test the surface rebound hardness of concrete There is a huge amount of work related to SRH. Most of these studies establish relations between hardness and the other parameters for rocks. One of the reasons behind equations developed for predicting the rock strength parameters from SRH measurement is the dimensions of the rock samples. Therefore, this study investigates how important the size of sample on the consistent hardness value determination. The Schmidt hammer has been used in rock mechanics practice since the early 1960s as an index test SRH method has been used for a variety of specific applications. Among these, as explained by Goktan and Gunes Sumner and Nel In the literature, it was found that the effect of various sample sizes for a consistent SRH value determination has not been investigated. ISRM Different methods of recording SRH value have been suggested by ISRM and various researchers. The recommended Schmidt hammer test procedures used in this study are summarized below:     In order to analyze the effect of sample size on the SRH values of rocks, eight different rock types collected from various locations of Turkey were studied. Name, type and origin of the tested rocks are given in Test methods explained in the previous section, which are ISRM For presenting the variations in hardness characteristics from Schmidt hammer test results, SRH values against sample size were plotted for all rocks. The average hardness of the rock samples according to different Schmidt hammer rebound techniques are presented in In addition to laboratory measurements, field measurements were also made on large blocks of eight different rocks to check the correctness of critical size, 11 The measured SRH values of samples of 12 For each rock type, the relation between SRH and edge dimension of sample was statistically analyzed up to the point where the sample size reached a critical value of 11 As a result, the relation between the estimated In this paper, the research findings of an analysis for determining the optimum sample size were presented based on the laboratory and field investigations. A new sample edge dimension is proposed to optimise the sample size in SRH test applications. This is basically related to assessing the SRH depending on increasing sample size as a dimension factor of rocks. By analysing the Schmidt hardness values of rocks measured in the laboratory, the optimum edge dimension of cubic sample is found to be 11