Tailing dam failures result in irreversible environmental impacts and cause fatalities. In recent years the mechanical behaviour of tailing geo-materials has received more attention by the geomechanics and engineering geology communities in an attempt to understand better their behaviour in the light of designing safer tailing dams. In this study, the mechanical behaviour of a gold tailing from Brazil is thoroughly investigated by conducting a series of compression and shearing tests as well as dynamic element tests. Fabric effects from the sample preparation method, the susceptibility to liquefaction and the possibility of any transitional behaviour are presented and discussed within a soil mechanics framework. Comparisons are made between the present gold tailing and previously published data on other tailings, giving a general view of the mechanics of tailings and the effects of grading. The results show that for this tailing the rate of convergence for different initial densities to the normal compression line is slow, and so the depositional density would affect the volume to far higher stresses than the material would be expected to experience in-situ. For this tailing any fabric effects from the sample preparation method were found to be very small to negligible with respect to small-strain behaviour and critical state behaviour. For different tailings, even if the particle sizes may cover a wide range, the susceptibility to static liquefaction, as determined by the location of the horizontal asymptote of the critical state line in the specific volume-log stress plane, shows no consistent variation. So it can be concluded that neither the pond nor the upper beach tailings are more susceptible.Tailings are the by-products after the mining processes to extract the valuable fractions from ores. The mineralogies, gradings and particle morphologies of tailings vary a lot due to the different composition of the parent ores as well as the different extraction processes they undergo. The most common method to dispose of the tailings is impounding a slurried material within a tailings dam, usually being built with the coarser disposal products. Due to the relatively small particle size and high water content, tailings materials often have a high risk of failure due to liquefaction, caused by either static or seismic loading. Even when the tailings liquefaction is not directly responsible for the initial failure, it can exacerbate a failure because its loss of strength causes it to apply a large hydrostatic force to the dam (e.g. In this work, detailed laboratory tests were designed to investigate the mechanical behaviour of a silt-sized gold tailing. Comparisons are then made between the present results and reported data in the literature on different tailings to obtain a general view of their behaviour, covering a broader range of mineralogies, particle characteristics and types of tailing materials. The analysis/comparisons are made within a soil mechanics framework. Emphasis is given to the compression and shearing behaviour, static liquefaction, the possible occurrence of transitional behaviour (as defined by e.g. A silt-sized (gold) tailing material, collected from the Fazenda Brasileira disposal plant in Northeast Brazil, was tested in the study in its “natural” or in-situ grading. The grading curve of the soil is given in The parent ore vein is located within the Rio Itapicurú Greenstone Belt (RIGB). Gold, which is present in a very small percentage, is the benefited ore in the vein, with gangue minerals predominately of quartz, albite, chlorite and sulphides. Ore-dressing, such as crushing and grinding, is done first to expose the beneficial minerals for metallurgical extraction, in which the gold is extracted chemically through a heap leaching system. Several methods for hydraulically placing gold tailings are used: the cyclone system, the spigot system, and even (occasionally) open-end discharge behind the containment wall. The sequence of placement changes continuously using one or other of the downstream, centreline or upstream placement techniques. X-ray diffraction (XRD_D8 Advance) analysis (see A series of oedometer and triaxial tests was conducted on the gold tailing (summarized in A number of samples was also prepared and tested with bender elements inserted in a Based on the oedometer test results in The stress-strain behaviour of the gold tailing under drained and undrained conditions is shown in The stress paths are shown in The shearing paths together with the 1D-NCL of the gold tailing are shown in The CSL is curved, and at lower stress levels it is relatively flat while at higher stress levels it tends to be parallel to the 1D-NCL. This curved critical state line gives rise to a changing susceptibility to liquefaction as the stress level increases, similarly to The particle size distributions of the gold tailing samples before and after shearing at 6 MPa are shown in Normalised shearing stress paths are illustrated in From the bender element tests ( In  Scanning Electron Microscope (SEM) images were taken, using an Environmental SEM (FEI/Philips XL30 ESEM-FEG), to investigate the fabric of slurry and wet compacted samples ( The results presented in this study are now compared with the study of  Comparisons are now made across a wider range of tailings from different locations and parent rocks that have been reported in the literature, although the number of such detailed studies is very limited ( One key difference is that the gradings of the Stava fluorite tailing of    The horizontal asymptote of the CSL is assumed to define the specific volume above which full static liquefaction must occur on undrained loading. These values (v A detailed study of the mechanics of a gold tailing from Brazil found that the one-dimensional compression paths converged slowly and at 7 MPa vertical stress a unique NCL could still not be defined and so the material might be said to be slightly transitional or slowly convergent. Different sample preparation methods gave very similar rates of convergence, and so they had little effect on the compression behaviour. At 20 MPa vertical stress level, the compression curves finally converged. In shearing a unique CSL can be defined at much lower stress levels than were required to bring about convergence in compression, which implies that the differences of initial specific volume that can only arise from differences of fabric are more easily erased by shearing than by compression. Through comparing the elastic shear moduli and also the critical states of samples prepared by different methods, it was found that any fabric effects from the sample preparation method were negligible at both smaller and larger strain levels. Comparing the results with the study of Comparing a variety of different tailings, it is found that neither the D The boundary specific volumes for different tailings do not change that much, given the large grading differences, but they do slightly decrease and increase again with the increasing f  one-dimensional normal compression line compression index critical state line coefficient of uniformity coefficient of curvature mean particle size fractal dimension void ratio fines content shear modulus specific gravity of soil particles gradient of v stress ratio at critical state normal compression line mean effective stress mean effective stress the sample sheared from. deviatoric stress state boundary surface steady state line specific volume initial specific volume horizontal asymptote of the CSL maximum specific volume minimum specific volume initial water content change of pore water pressure maximum vertical stress diameter of sample angle of shearing resistance at critical state state parameter The work described in this paper was fully supported by a grant from the