Platinum, a DSA (dimensionally stable anode) mesh and gold electrodes were investigated for use as redox potential sensors for the Outokumpu HydroCopper™ process. The redox potential was measured in a standard HydroCopper™ solution with constant pH, temperature and sodium chloride concentration. The concentration of cupric ions was varied in the range 0–40 g/dm3.
                  The redox potential was observed to increase logarithmically with increasing cupric ion concentration and to decrease linearly with time. Platinum and DSA-type electrodes were found to be electrochemically inert and allowed the measurement of the redox potential. With the gold the corrosion potential of the electrode was measured.HydroCopper™ is a chloride based hydrometallurgical process for producing copper from the mineral chalcopyrite (CuFeS Redox potential and pH measurements are used to monitor the leaching process in three reaction stages. In the first leaching stage cupric ions are reduced by fresh concentrate. In the second leaching stage there is maximum air oxidation and leaching rate. Too high a rate of oxidation can cause an increase in the pH, which results in the precipitation of copper hydroxychloride, which must be avoided. In the third leaching stage a high redox potential is maintained ( In this paper platinum and a DSA-type mesh were investigated for use as sensors for monitoring the HydroCopper™ process. These materials were not expected to dissolve. The response of gold was measured for comparison purposes. Gold has also a limited reactivity and high nobility, but is dissolved in the presence of a strong oxidant and chloride ions. The redox potential and corrosion rates were measured in the laboratory under HydroCopper™ process conditions and the results were compared with the Nernst equation. In In sodium chloride solutions, cupric and cuprous ions form chloro-complexes and these complexes can react electrochemically. The proposed complexes, calculated with The electrochemical principle of the dissolution process is shown in The proportion of redox pair components Cu The Cu The electrochemical behaviour of the electrode materials was investigated in a strong cupric chloride solution. The redox potentials of all the electrodes were measured. Kinetic measurements were made only on the gold electrode. The copper containing solutions were made freshly before each experiment by dissolving 280 g NaCl in 1 dm The concentration of Cu During measurement, the temperature was varied between 80 and 95 °C and thermostated to ±0.5 °C by a circulating water bath. The solutions were stirred with a magnetic stirrer. Gas purging was also used with Cu The test electrodes used in the redox measurements were the following: Gold disc electrode, diameter 4.4 mm (Outokumpu Research Center, Pori, Finland) Platinum electrode, 50×62 mm PSC201 DSA-type anode, Ti mesh coated with IrO The gold electrode was polished with wetted 1200 grade sandpaper, rinsed with ethanol and dried using a hair dryer to avoid oxidation of the surface. The platinum electrode was pickled with 65% nitric acid before each measurement. The DSA-type electrode was used as received. DSA-type coated anodes are widely used in several industrial electrochemical processes ( A schematic diagram of the test system is shown in In The redox potentials measured with different cupric concentrations are shown in In the HydroCopper™ process, dissolution of the chalcopyrite raw material consumes cupric ions. The potential of the gold electrode did not change with time, as shown in When measuring the redox potential of a surface, a charge transfer reaction is needed, but the electrode surface should not react. Typical materials for redox electrodes are platinum and gold. For homogeneous metal electrodes e.g. platinum and gold, the whole surface is active. For the PSC201 mesh electrode the surface has distinct active sites, but the inert oxide can also have an effect on the redox potential. In the case where the electrode is not stable in the electrolyte, e.g. it dissolves, the potential measured is not the redox potential of the electrolyte system but the corrosion potential of the electrode material. No dissolution of the PSC201 mesh or the platinum electrode was observed under these conditions. Titanium is the only metallic construction material that can withstand the corrosive HydroCopper™ conditions, for this reason, the equipment of the HydroCopper™ demonstration plant is constructed primarily from fibreglass reinforced plastic (FRP). Tantalum has similar corrosion resistance to titanium and therefore an inert oxide material such the as tantalum oxide coating on the PSC201 mesh should not dissolve under HydroCopper™ conditions. It is concluded that both the PSC201 mesh and platinum electrodes are suitable for measuring the redox potential under industrial HydroCopper™ conditions. The gold electrode was found to dissolve and therefore measured the gold corrosion potential and not the redox potential and is unsuitable for this type of measurement. R.v.B. and N.J. thank the Outokumpu Foundation for funding. We thank Permascand AB for the DSA-type electrodes.