Accumulating evidence suggests that Wnt/β-catenin signaling plays a central role in controlling bone mass. We previously reported that constitutive activation of β-catenin (CA-β-catenin) in osteoblasts potentially has side effects on the bone growth and bone remodeling process, although it could increase bone mass. The present study aimed to observe the effects of osteoblastic CA-β-catenin on bone quality and to investigate possible mechanisms of these effects. It was found that CA-β-catenin mice exhibited lower mineralization levels and disorganized collagen in long bones as confirmed by von Kossa staining and sirius red staining, respectively. Also, bone strength decreased significantly in CA-β-catenin mice. Then the effect of CA-β-catenin on biological functions of osteoblasts were investigated and it was found that the expression levels of osteocalcin, a marker for the late differentiation of osteoblasts, decreased in CA-β-catenin mice, while the expression levels of osterix and alkaline phosphatase, two markers for the early differentiation of osteoblasts, increased in CA-β-catenin mice. Furthermore, higher proliferation rate were revealed in osteoblasts that were isolated from CA-β-catenin mice. The Real-time PCR and western blot examination found that the expression level of c-myc and cyclin D1, two G1 progression-related molecules, increased in osteoblasts that were isolated from the CA-β-catenin mice, and the expression levels of CDK14 and cyclin Y, two mitotic-related molecules that can accelerate cells entering into S and G2/M phases, increased in osteoblasts that were isolated from the CA-β-catenin mice. In summary, osteoblastic CA-β-catenin kept osteoblasts in high proliferative state and impaired the terminal osteoblast differentiation, and this led to changed bone structure and decreased bone strength.The evolutionarily conserved Wnt signaling pathway consists of the canonical Wnt/β-catenin and non-canonical pathway; these pathways play important roles in many physiological and pathological processes, such as tumorigenesis and the biological functions of various types of stem cells However, some studies reported that the level of Wnt/β-catenin signaling should be precisely controlled to ensure its normal function More recently, an increasing number of studies showed that the function of Wnt/β-catenin signaling is stage dependent and should be finely tuned to ensure its precise control of bone mass and bone remodeling All animal procedures were approved by the Institutional Animal Care and Use Committee of Daping Hospital, Third Military Medical University, P. R. China. All methods were carried out in accordance with approved guidelines of the Institutional. Mice expressing the TM-inducible Cre fusion protein, Cre-ER™ under the control of the 3.2-kb mouse pro-collagen 1 promoter (3.2 Four weeks after birth, 5′-bromo-2-deoxyuridine (BrdU, Sigma, Ireland) was administered at a dose of 10 IHC was performed as previously described TUNEL was performed according to the manufacturer's instructions (Roche, Basel, Switzerland) and quantified using the same method as described for immunohistochemistry. Prepared sections were stained with Weigert's hematoxylin for 8 von Kossa staining was employed to monitor the mineralization ability of bone. Prepared sections were stained with Silver Nitrate solution, then expose the slides to strong light till mineralized bone turns black. This usually takes 30 Tibia were used for mechanical strength in a four-point bending test using a BOSE ElectroForce ELF 3200 computer-controlled testing machine, which has a force resolution of 0.05 N. During the test, each tibia was placed horizontally on two lower supports that were 6.5 Osteoblasts were isolated from the long bones of 4-week-old CA-β-catenin or control mice, according to previously reported protocols RNA was isolated from cultured osteoblasts using TRIzol reagent (Invitrogen) according to the manufacturer's instructions. Then, real-time PCR with the SYBR green detection method was used to examine the β-catenin Alizarin red staining was employed to monitor the mineralization ability of the isolated osteoblasts. Briefly, passaged osteoblasts were cultured for 3 days. Then, osteogenic differentiation medium (DMEM supplemented with 10% FBS, 100 The cultured osteoblasts were harvested by centrifugation, and the cell pellets were collected. The total protein was extracted using cell lysis buffer for western（Beyotime）according to the manufacturer's instructions. After the protein concentrations were determined, the samples were separated via 15% sodium dodecyl sulfate polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis (SDS-PAGE). The protein was then transferred onto polyvinyl difluoride (PVDF) membranes using the Trans-Blot Semi-Dry Transfer Cell (Bio-Rad) and blocked in 5% skim milk. The membranes were probed with anti-β-catenin, c-myc, cyclin Y, cyclin D1, CDK14, Bax and Bcl-2 rabbit polyclonal antibodies followed by biotinylated goat anti-rabbit IgG (Boster, Wuhan, China; diluted to a concentration of 10 BrdU was added to the culture medium at a dose of 10 The cultured osteoblasts cells were digested with trypsin, carefully collected, washed twice with cold phosphate-buffered saline (PBS), and then fixed in 70% ethanol overnight at −20 All of the data were expressed as means±standard deviation. Statistical significance was evaluated with one-way analysis of variance (ANOVA) using the SPSS 11.0 software. Data were considered significant at After β-catenin was stabilized in osteoblasts, massive bone mass formed in bone marrow cavity of long bones as previously reported (data not shown) Mechanically, it was revealed that bone strength decreased significantly in CA-β-catenin mice, as shown by decreases in the ultimate load and stiffness ( Cell proliferation and death synergistically control the cell number. Compared with control mice, the number of BrdU-positive osteoblasts in the CA-β-catenin mice was increased, whereas the TUNNEL-positive osteoblasts in the CA-β-catenin mice were reduced ( We then investigated the mechanisms for the highly proliferative state of osteoblasts in the CA-β-catenin mice. Cell cycle analysis revealed that more osteoblasts that were isolated from the CA-β-catenin mice were captured in the S and G2/M stages when compared with the control mice(( Osterix and alkaline phosphatase are two markers for the early differentiation of osteoblasts Taken together, these data indicated that osteoblasts were maintained in a highly proliferative state in the CA-β-catenin mice and that increased expression of G1 progression-related genes (c-myc and cyclin D1) and mitotic-related genes (CDK14 and cyclin Y) contributed to this change; and terminal osteoblasts differentiation was impaired in the CA-β-catenin mice. Bone mass is adjusted by two main processes, namely, bone formation and bone resorption; these processes involve three main types of cells in bone: osteoblasts, osteoclasts and osteocytes. Osteoblasts play an important role in controlling bone mass because they are the main cells responsible for bone formation; they also play a pivotal role in regulating osteoclast genesis and function Bone quality is controlled by the intrinsic properties of bone material and structure. Material properties primarily refer to the degree of mineralization and collagen characteristics, and structural properties mainly refer to the diameter and thickness of the cortices and trabecular bone mass Another finding of the present study is that osteoblasts were maintained in a highly proliferative state when β-catenin was constitutively activated, and increased expression of G1 progression-related genes (c-myc and cyclin D1) and mitotic-related genes (CDK14 and cyclin Y) contributed to these changes. This finding is consistent with previous reports that β-catenin/Tcf-Lef complex accumulation in the nucleus could promote cell cycle progression and proliferation by up-regulating G1 progression-related genes and mitotic-related genes In summary, the present study revealed that the constitutive activation of β-catenin in osteoblasts could increase cancellous bone mass; however, the activation also had adverse effects on bone structure and strength. The osteoblasts of CA-β-catenin mice kept in high proliferative state and impaired the terminal osteoblast differentiation might be the possible mechanism. These adverse effects should be addressed before the adoption of any therapeutic clinical application involving adjustment of the Wnt/β-catenin signaling pathway. All authors report no conflicts of interest. This work was funded by