This work evaluates the feasibility of incorporating electric arc furnace dust (EAFD), as filler in a polymer matrix, to obtain a moldable heavyweight sheet, useful for acoustic insulation in automotive industry. For this purpose EAFD from a steel factory that manufactures high quality steels, was characterized and different formulations of composites were prepared. Physical and mechanical properties, as well as fire behaviour were tested and compared with a polymer composite compounded with common mineral fillers. Optimum formulation with 25% EAFD fulfils the RoHs Directive used by automotive industry to regulate heavy metals content. Leaching test was also performed on prepared composites to classify the material after use.Electric arc furnace dust due to its physical and chemical properties (content of heavy metals and metalloids and their leaching potential), is categorized as hazardous waste in most of the industrialized countries and classified by the European Waste Catalogue (EWC) as hazardous residue being necessary its treatment previous the final disposal. Recycling possibilities of EAFD are widely described through pyro and hydrometallurgical processes EAFD is mainly composed of metal oxides and it has therefore a high density. This fact, together with a particle size below 10 microns and a low specific surface area, make this waste interesting as a polymer filler to obtain a heavyweight sheet useful as acoustic insulator in automotive industry. Automotive manufacturers use different strategies to achieve an effective acoustic insulation inside the car. The use of heavy moldable layers of polymer based composites is an extended solution applied by the industry to produce many important components of the car. Most of the reported formulations are based on thermoplastic rubbers blends such as EPDM, EVA, LLDPE highly filled (above 60 Electrical arc furnace dust used in this study has been generated in a steel factory that manufactures high quality steels and has been selected because of its chemical composition. The factory raw material is strictly chosen avoiding galvanized steel, hence the resulting EAFD has lower zinc, lead and arsenic contents compared with EAFD from carbon steel factories. The presence of high amounts of elements such as lead, chromium, cadmium or mercury in the EAFD from carbon steel industries would make impossible its use as polymer filler because products obtained thereof will overpass the limits of RoHs Directive required for automotive components The main goal of this study is the preparation of several composites varying the EAFD amount added in order to compare their mechanical properties and fire behaviour with a reference formulation. Moreover, to assess the heavy metal leaching potential, leaching test was made to evaluate the stabilization of this waste into the polymer matrix. To evaluate the EAFD composition a sample of 5 Density and specific surface area were determined by a He picnometer and the single point BET method, respectively. Particle size distribution was determined by light scattering with Beckman Coulter LS 13 320 equipment. A commercial composite formulation was prepared using commercial grades of barite (BaSO Samples were compounded in a plastic mixer with rotor speed of 55 A homogeneous heavyweight sheet of 2 X-ray fluorescence was performed on PA50 sample previously calcined at 1100 Density of composites was calculated by determining mass and volume of the specimens. Tensile tests were carried out in an Instron 4301 tensile testing machine at a speed of 100 Thermal stability was evaluated by means of thermogravimetric analysis with a TGA-SDTA 851e/SF/1100 from Mettler Toledo. The assays were performed from 30 The fire behaviour was evaluated using the limiting oxygen index test (LOI) according to ISO 4589 Fogging Index (F), measures the emission of volatile substances under the effect of heat, which can form layers of condensed volatiles mainly on the windscreen and rear window that can reduce visibility. The term fogging is employed in this sector to describe the condensation of volatile elements inside a car. Fogging Index gives the percentage of reflectance loss measured on a glass plate at 60 Stabilization of EAFD by compounding it with a polymer matrix has been evaluated by a leaching test of the prepared composites. On the one hand, leaching tests following the standard EN 12457-2 The result of X-ray fluorescence semiquantitative analysis for EAFD is listed in EAFD was observed by SEM (Scanning Electron Microscopy). As it is shown in The elevate value of density is explained by the presence of iron oxides with values around 5 The elemental composition for PA50 sample obtained by X-ray fluorescence is depicted in The density of prepared composites does not differ significantly from the reference material ( The results of the mechanical properties both for machine direction (MD) and transverse direction (TD) samples are summarized in Elongation for TD samples increases to some extent in samples containing both EAFD and BaSO The thermoforming was performed between 80 As it can be observed in the TGA depicted in Besides mechanical properties, For sample PA50, the result obtained of emission of organic substances, at 100 In The analysis of the leachate from PA100, PA50, PA40 and PA0 samples, can be observed in The composite PA100, containing the highest EAFD concentration, cannot be considered inert because of the concentration of chromium and arsenic present in the leachate. Moreover, this composite formulation does not fulfill the RoHs Directive related to metals content and hence has been ruled out of the study. The composite PA50 is classified as non-special, because Cr and As values are lower than the non-special limit values, whereas PA40 composite has the same classification but because of Cr content. Taking into account EAFD may has some variability in its composition, PA40 composition is considered the most suitable for this purpose as it also complies with the RoHs Directive used in the industry. It is feasible to introduce EAFD into a polymer matrix to obtain homogeneous moldable heavyweight sheets. The composite characterization shows that they fulfill the required basic properties of to be molded as heavyweight sheet. EAFD can be used as an addition to polymer matrix without apparent loss in most of their properties. The chemical characterization of the obtained composites reveals that PA50 and PA40 formulations comply with RoHs Directive and can be considered after use, as non-special residue according to European Waste Catalogue. Authors want to acknowledge the collaboration of PROTA, S.A. and Metalogenia, S.A. enterprises.