The separation of scheelite and calcite by froth flotation is difficulty as these two minerals have similar physicochemical characteristics. To solve this problem, the role of carboxymethyl chitosan in the flotation separation of scheelite from calcite has been studied and the depression mechanism has been discussed. Micro-flotation tests show that carboxymethyl chitosan has strong depression effect on calcite and the depression effect decreased with the increase of pH. However, its depression effect on scheelite is weak. A concentrate with WO3 grade of 65.21% and WO3 recovery of 77.48% can be achieved in the mixed minerals flotation when carboxymethyl chitosan was used. The adsorption tests show that carboxymethyl chitosan has adsorbed on the calcite surface and the adsorption amount increased with the increase of added amount. The adsorption mechanism of carboxymethyl chitosan on calcite surface was analyzed through the X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS) tests and the results revealed that carboxymethyl chitosan adsorbed on calcite surface mainly through chemical interaction.China is the main producers of tungsten in the world. With the development of economy, the wolframite resources which can be utilized easily by gravity method almost depleted, the utilization of refractory scheelite resources becomes very important. The Shizhuyuan mine is located in Hunan province. The main valuable mineral in the Shizhuyuan ore is scheelite and the gangue minerals are mainly calcite and fluorite. Scheelite is hard to be separated from other calcium minerals by flotation techniques. The commonly used collectors in the flotation separation of scheelite from calcic gangue minerals are generally fatty acids or fatty acid derivatives Chitosan is a natural cationic polysaccharide that shows many advantages over artificial materials and carboxymethylation is one of the most widely-studied modifications for chitosan. In addition to these advantages that are inherited from the parent chitosan, carboxymethyl chitosan also possesses good solubility and amphoteric properties. Both chitosan and carboxymethyl chitosan have been used in mineral flotation The scheelite and calcite samples were purchased from Geological Specimen Factory of Zhejiang University. The minerals were separately crushed and hand-picked to obtain high purity samples. The scheelite sample was then further purified by shaking table. X-ray diffraction measurements showed that there were no other tungsten minerals in scheelite and trace silicate in calcite ( According to The sample of sodium oleate (NaOl) and carboxymethyl chitosan (MW 150,000–200,000, degree of deacetylation >75%, degree of carboxylation ≥60%. The structure of carboxymethyl chitosan is shown in Micro-flotation tests of single minerals and artificially mixed minerals were both conducted to evaluate the ability of carboxymethyl chitosan as a selective depressant in the flotation separation of scheelite and calcite. All the micro-flotation tests were conducted in a XFGC flotation machine with a 50 In single mineral flotation test, 2 In mixed minerals flotation, the flotation feed sample was a mixture of scheelite and calcite, and the flotation procedure was the same as the single mineral flotation test. After flotation, the concentrate and tailings were collected, dried, weighed, and assayed for WO The total organic carbon method (TOC) was used to measure the adsorption amount of carboxymethyl chitosan on calcite. 1 For the XPS tests, 1 The flotation recovery of scheelite and calcite at different pH using NaOl as collector were studied and the result is shown in When the pulp pH was kept at 7 and the collector concentration was fixed at 1.2 The effect of pH on the flotation behavior of scheelite and calcite was shown in According to the single mineral micro-flotation tests of scheelite and calcite, the recovery difference of scheelite and calcite is the largest at pH 7 when carboxymethyl chitosan is used as depressant. So the separation of the two minerals was studied at pH 7 using different dosages of carboxymethyl chitosan and the best results achieved are shown in  X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy tests were performed to study the adsorption mechanism of carboxymethyl chitosan on calcite. The XPS spectrum of N 1s, Ca 2p were collected on calcite before and after interacted with carboxymethyl chitosan. The narrow scans of N 1s were shown in  Carboxymethyl chitosan was used in the flotation separation of scheelite from calcite with NaOL as collector. In single mineral flotation with NaOl as a collector, carboxymethyl chitosan (30 The authors declare no conflicts of interest. The authors acknowledge the support of