This paper presents a mechanical model for cone bolts by analysing the cone anchorage function as a wedge-style mechanical anchor. Analytical and numerical methods were employed. The failure of a cone bolt commences with a series of partial shear failure through the grout around the cone, followed by bolt slipping as the actual bearing angle of the bolt decreases to a small value. The theoretical prediction is in good agreement with experimental data in the literature. The effect of the cone’s geometric face angle was also analysed with respect to the bond strength.Rockbolts have been widely used in civil and mining engineering applications as support and reinforcement for surrounding rock. In underground construction, the major functions of rock support can be classified as either reinforcing, retaining, or holding under static loading A cone bolt is an anchorage whose internal fixture is similar to a wedge The supporting effect of cone bolts has been studied by many researchers. The concept of cone bolts was developed in South Africa Previous studies show that the load transfer mechanism of cone bolts is different to that of conventional rockbolts. However, the cone’s function as a wedge-style anchor has not yet been clearly delineated. This paper provides an analytical approach for the load transfer mechanisms of cone bolts subject to tensile loads. The deformational behaviour of the cone’s surrounding material is formulated and the supporting effect of a cone bolt with a small conical angle is specifically considered. The validity of the proposed theory is also scrutinised using experimental data in the literature. A cone bolt subject to a tensile load, as shown in In this paper, the axial displacement of the cone bolt is presumed to generate confinement for the cone. In addition, for simplification, the initial average confining pressure around the cone surface, To evaluate the interaction between the cone and the surrounding medium, the radial deformational behaviour caused by the pullout load has to be evaluated. Based on the elasticity theory and plane strain analysis, for the axisymmetric problem shown in       For a cone bolt, since only the conical section expands the borehole while slippage occurs, the confining pressure generated by the axial load should concentrate around the conical section of the bolt, as shown in For engineering purposes, the radial stiffness of the surrounding medium of a cone bolt with known geometry can be easily found using numerical methods. For instance, It should be noted that only the elastic properties of the grout material are taken into account in Eq. In this paper, in order to identify one common failure mode, a cone bolt with a 90° face angle is first studied using the stress analysis method. The pullout stages with respect to the sequence of the partial shearing-off of the grout and the corresponding load-displacement curve of the bolt are studied analytically. The validity of the developed theory is examined by comparing the calculated results to experimental data in the literature. Subsequently, the developed mechanical model is applied to cone bolts with face angles less than 90°, and the results generated are also compared to experimental measurements. Development of the mechanical model is based on the deformational process of a cone bolt subject to a tensile load. The initial failure of the grout around the cone is analysed in stage 1. The subsequent failure of the grout apex being sheared off is formulated in stage 2 until the face angle of the cone section reaches a small value, Whenever an axial load,    For pullout failure of cone bolts with a large face angle, experimental studies    The axial stress to cause the failure can be expressed as:     Substituting Eq. After the initial failure, the cone slips along the bearing angle As the cone slips, it is also known that:     Combining Eqs. Substituting Eq. In this procedure, the radial displacement of the grouting material around the cone can be estimated using Eq. Since slippage occurs along Hence, the axial displacement can be represented by Eq. As axial load increases beyond the equilibrium state formulated in stage 1, the cone section slips along the direction of the bearing angle As slippage is still along bearing angle Combine Eqs. Eq. This indicates that the grouting material is sheared off at an angle approximately half of the previous one. This estimation is acceptable for engineering purposes. Accordingly, After the grout is sheared off along the second bearing angle While the cone slips along bearing angle This stage is a repetition of the failure process of stage 2 but occurs at a smaller failure angle, For most geo-materials, grout shearing-off failure could only occur twice or three times as the next theoretical failure angle would be very close to the last one. For example, for a grout with a peak internal frictional angle of 22°, which is common for the 0.4 The resistance involved in cone slipping at a small bearing angle and the associated expansion of the surrounding medium is assumed to have two components: friction and cone geometry related resistance. For the frictional component, the effect of the cone shape can be ignored; There is no simple analytical model to estimate the axial resistance of a frictionless cone passing through a borehole. The formula based on the elasticity theory may overestimate the actual resistance but the calculation can be expected to be convoluted if plastic deformation of the process is considered. In this paper, the numerical method is employed to combat this problem. As there is no subsequent material failure, and the contact is perfectly smooth, a computer model can be easily constructed with adequate accuracy using a range of commercial software. Kilic et al. According to the developed model, it is found that: Using Eq. The radial stiffness is estimated using Eq. Hence, by Eq. These are the calculated results for a 90° cone bolt in stage 1, as shown in In stage 2, as it is known that the next failure angle ( The confining pressure just before failure occurs at angle In this process, using Eqs. Δ After failure occurs, the confining pressure will be redistributed around the new slip surface as determined by Eq. Due to the development of radial displacement along Accordingly, the radial and axial displacements developed in this process can be calculated as: Δ The corresponding pullout profile is shown in Using the same calculations, it can be found that when To reach the final equilibrium state: Δ As the last failure angle is 8.5°, it is presumed that no grout can be sheared off from then on. Consequently, the subsequent anchorage strength can be treated as consisting of a frictional component of The calculations presented have been repeated using Furthermore, the theoretical average confining pressure generated around the cone and the corresponding axial load in the whole process is illustrated in The theoretical prediction of the axial load on the bolt is approximately 11% lower than the measurement made in Compared to the concept proposed in Also, the theoretical elastic displacement can be determined by:     Therefore, the elastic stiffness, According to the mechanical model developed in this paper, both the frictional resistance and the cone geometric resistance should be constant after the yield point, but experimental results The dashed line in For a cone bolt with a geometric face angle γ, the axial load needed to cause slipping along the steel-grout interface can be obtained with Eq. Let  If the cone bolt face angle is less than 73°, however, the first failure of the bolt occurs at the cone-grout interface. In this case, the axial load induced cone-grout interface failure can be calculated by Eq.  In this paper, the interaction between the cone bolt and the surrounding medium is investigated analytically. A simple model for the radial stiffness of a cone bolt subject to tensile loads is first proposed. The deformational process of a cone bolt subject to tensile loads is identified as a series of shearing-off of the grouting material at a bearing angle that is half of the previous one. For each loading stage, the analytical expression of the pullout profile is derived based on Mohr-Coulomb material properties. Accordingly, the role of the geometric face angle of the bolt in bolting mechanisms has been studied quantitatively. For a cone bolt with a small bearing angle, the axial resistance has been identified as a combination of friction and cavity expansion. The predicted axial load is compared to experimental data in the literature, and adequate agreement is demonstrated. The developed theory elucidates the roles of the cone geometry, the bolting conditions and the material properties of the system in load transfer mechanisms. It provides an analytical approach for engineers to predict load-displacement curves of cone bolts and guide the design of their projects. This research was supported by the open project of