Objective: Our aims were to investigate the pulp biocompatibility of Fuji IX, a glass ionomer cement (GIC) used as a restorative material in cavities prepared in rat's upper molars, and to assess the value of this in vivo model for testing dental biomaterials.
                  
                     Method: Half-moon class V-like cavities were drilled on the mesial aspect of 26 rat upper first molars. Half of the experimental rats whose molars were restored with the GIC were killed after 8days and the second half after 30days. They were compared with two control groups, also submitted to cavity preparation, but with cavities left unfilled. Again, half of the control rats were killed at 8 days and the second half after 30days. Following intracardiac perfusion with the fixative solution, the specimens were processed to histologic procedures.
                  
                     Results: After 8days, in both groups a few inflammatory cells were observed. The odontoblastic layer was disrupted and dilated blood vessels were seen in the pulp area related to the cut tubules. The experimental group displayed a moderate inflammatory reaction whereas only a slight reaction was detected in the control group. In few teeth, bacteria were visualized in dentine tubules beneath the GIC restoration. Such colonies were not observed in unfilled molars.
                  After 30days, in both groups, the pulp tissue recovered and displayed a normal appearance. Disruptions of the odontoblast layer were not visible anymore. Bacteria penetration into dentine tubules was reduced compared with the 8-day situation. A thick layer of reparative osteodentine was formed. However no difference in thickness was detected between the experimental and control groups, supporting that the formation of reparative dentine is not impaired. Irregular mineralizations including calcospherites were induced by the GIC.
                  
                     Conclusions: This study demonstrates that, despite small alterations in the mineralization processes, the GIC Fuji IX has a good biocompatibility and does not induce any harmful effect on pulp cells.Continuous development of new materials provides a wide range of biomaterials appropriate to various clinical conditions in dentistry. Despite all the improvements, there is still a need for a biomaterial which possesses high biocompatibility, antimicrobial effects and good mechanical properties. Among the recently developed materials, glass ionomer cements (GIC) have gained popularity since their conception in 1972 In order to maintain pulp vitality, a restorative material should be non toxic and provide a long-term hermetic seal against bacterial penetration Due to their inherent antimicrobial Although there are numerous studies demonstrating the biocompatibility of glass ionomer cements with pulp tissue The objective of this study was to evaluate the pulp reaction to a glass ionomer cement. Fuji IX, encapsulated conventional glass ionomer restorative material, (batch number 021260) provided by the GC Corporation (Tokyo, Japan) was used in this study. A total of 26 non-carious upper first molars were used for this investigation. Therefore, 13 Sprague Dawley rats (aged 7–8 The 26 cavities were distributed into four groups. Four and five non-restored cavities were used as control groups, at 8 and 30 Anaesthetized rats were killed by an intracardiac perfusion with a paraformaldehyde/glutaraldehyde solution buffered with sodium cacodylate 0.1 Evaluation was then made at 8 and 30 Morphometric analysis (Morphomat 20, ZEISS, West Germany) was employed to determine the remaining dentine thickness, cavity length and reparative dentine thickness. Measurement of the remaining dentine thickness was made from the deepest part of the cavity to the calciotraumatic line, through the direction of dentinal tubules. The cavity length of each tooth was then measured along the cavity walls and floor from the same sections chosen to evaluate the remaining dentine thinkness. As a final evaluation, the thickness of reparative dentine was measured as a distance between the calciotraumatic line and the lateral wall of pulp chamber, in the areas related to cavity preparation. The non-parametric Kruskal and Wallis and Mann and Whitney statistical tests were used in order to evaluate the significance of the observation. Morphometric evaluations indicate that the average depth of all cavities was less than 0.5  At day-8 after cavity preparation, both non-restored and experimental groups generally demonstrated a disruption of the odontoblast layer in areas corresponding to the cut dentinal tubules. The only exceptions were two experimental pulps which displayed a normal, undisturbed odontoblastic layer. Enlarged blood vessels and capillaries were seen in the pulp areas related to the cavity preparation. The non-restored control group displayed slight inflammation in three pulps and no reaction in one pulp ( Six of eight experimental pulps exhibited no or slight inflammatory response without bacteria in cavities ( Eight days after the preparation, it was difficult to evaluate the presence or absence of osteodentine. However, osteodentine formation occurred in one of four controls and four of eight experimental pulps. Most pulps returned to their normal appearance in both control and experimental groups. Resolution of blood vessel dilatation and odontoblast reorganization were observed next to the thick reparative dentin ( Following an initial deposition of disorganized dentin, reparative dentin related to areas where the dentine tubules were open during the cavity preparation, displayed variable and irregular tubule orientation. This was followed by a more regular pattern of dentine deposition ( Our results provide evidence that Fuji IX, a glass ionomer cement used in an in vivo model, the rat upper molar, induces weak to moderate pulp reactions and therefore displays acceptable biocompatibility. The protocol used in the course of this investigation allows to characterize: (1) the effects of cavity preparation, mostly detected in the 8-day control and experimental groups; (2) the incidence of self-repair processes on pulp healing; and (3) the specificity of the rat molar. Discrimination between these parameters and what is resulting from the biomaterial which was used is a crucial point, mostly answered by the analysis of the 30-day experimental group, evaluation of the biological response to the biomaterial being the main goal of such in vivo investigations. Rats provide a convenient animal model for testing the biocompatibility of restorative materials as it has been shown in several previous studies Because in the course of this investigation an experimental group alone was compared with a negative control, it is too early to conclude that the rat upper molar provides a suitable in vivo model for testing biomaterials. There is still a need for a positive group. The preparation of cavities without undercut provides certainly great advantages. However, this implies that only adhesive biomaterials can be evaluated, a requisite which restricts or even prevent the inclusion of positive control. The response of control and experimental 8-day groups was more confined to the disrupted odontoblastic layer and pulp proper beneath the corresponding cut tubules. However, in both 30-day groups, the palissade-like appearance of odontoblast cell bodies was restored. It is now well documented that odontoblasts are post-mitotic cells Osteodentine or reparative dentine formation were seen in the two 30-day groups, separated from the dentine by a calciotraumatic line. Hence, they appear to be mostly self-repair constructions. Osteodentine is frequently found in rodent pulps, either during the early formation of the tooth As a first point, the reparative dentine thickness scored after 30 As a second point, since no statistical difference in reparative dentine thickness was found between the control and experimental groups, this implicates that cell recruitment, synthetic activity and secretion were not stimulated nor inhibited by the glass ionomer cement at least in this model. This acceptable evidence that odontoblasts or odontoblast-like cells keep all their potentialities for reparative dentine formation and that the GIC does not alter this function. In addition, in the 30-day experimental group, we noted the presence of non-mineralized areas beneath the cut tubules, surrounded by normal reparative dentine. Irregular dentine formation, calcospherites were also observed. Despite an overall acceptable behaviour, the GIC induces also slight alterations of dentine mineralization. In this context, some studies have shown the inhibition of predentine mineralization when tested with glass ionomer cements The operative trauma explained the initial slight inflammatory response of both control and experimental groups at 8 Despite minor alterations, mostly related to reparative dentine formation and mineralization, the biocompatibility of Fuji IX, a glass ionomer cement, is demonstrated in this in vivo model. This research was conducted in the Laboratory “Biologie et Physiopathologie Crânio-Faciales”, Faculté de Chirurgie Dentaire, Université René Descartes-Paris V, 1 rue Maurice Arnoux, 92120 Montrouge, France. Ngampis Six was supported by the collaborative research fund from Prince of Songkla University, Thailand. The authors wish to thank Dr Adrien Six for his assistance in statistical analysis and language improving. Dr Frank Decup is acknowledged for his help in the preparation of the animals.