The present work describes a study of the separation of rare earth elements (REE) from heavy REE concentrate through solvent extraction. Seven extractants were investigated: three organophosphorus acids (DEHPA, IONQUEST®801 and CYANEX®272), a mixture of DEHPA/TOPO (neutral ester) and three amines (ALAMINE®336, ALIQUAT®336 and PRIMENE®JM-T). The organophosphorus extractants were investigated in hydrochloric and sulphuric media whereas the amines performance was assessed in a sulphuric medium. The variables investigated were: concentration of the extractant agent, aqueous phase acidity, aqueous/organic volumetric ratio, contact time, stripping agent concentration (hydrochloric acid solution) and the selective stripping step. In the extraction step, the best separation factors for the adjacent elements were obtained with DEHPA and IONQUEST 801. For 1.0molL−1 DEHPA in an initial acidity of 0.3molL−1 H+, the separation factor was 2.5 Tb/Dy, 2.1 Dy/Ho, 1.9 Ho/Er, 2.0 Ho/Y and 1.1 Y/Er; for 1molL−1 IONQUEST 801 in 0.3molL−1 of H+ it was 2.7 Tb/Dy, 2.4 Dy/Ho, 2.1 Ho/Er, 2.1 Ho/Y e 1.5 Y/Er. The study concluded that for the extractants investigated, IONQUEST 801 is the most indicated for the separation of heavy REE because it has lower affinity with the REE compared to the affinity of DEPHA/REE, which makes the strip of the REE from Ionquest 801 easier than from DEHPA. Moreover, the number of stages necessary for the stripping of the REE from IONQUEST 801 is much lower than that observed when DEPHA is employed.The rare earth elements (REE) are important in many fields of advanced materials science and their application in material industries has increased significantly. As result their separation and purification have gained considerable importance in the last decades in order to meet demands. Studies into solvent extraction of individual REE have been extensively carried out with the use of various extractants in different media, however, only relatively few investigations are practical considering industrial application ( It usually takes a considerable number of separation stages in a counter-current circuit mode to produce a highly purified REE. The efficiency of the extraction of the REE by organophosphorus extractants like DEHPA and IONQUEST 801 follows the order: La In all studies cited before, the authors investigated the separation factor in the extraction step. The separation of the REE occurs in the association of the extraction and scrubbing steps. The aim of this work is to determine the best conditions to separate the heavy REE with determination of the separation factors in steps of extraction and stripping. The process variables such as feed acidity, REE concentration, phase ratio, contact time, extractant concentration and selective Tb stripping as well as the stripping conditions of the other heavy REE have been optimized in a batch scale. Commercial extractants and organic solvents were used without any further purification. The extractants DEHPA – 97 The sulphuric and hydrochloric acids (H The effect of seven extractant agents on the rare earth separation factor was investigated: three organophosphorus acids (DEHPA, IONQUEST Extraction, selective stripping and stripping experiments were carried out in a 150 The concentration of the extractants used was 1.0 Considering that the organophosphorus extractants extract cationic species, while the amines extract anionic and neutral species ( Under the experimental conditions used, the CYANEX 272 appeared less efficient than DEHPA and IONQUEST 801. In the sulphuric medium, the REE metals extraction was achieved only when PRIMENE JM-T was used; ALAMINE 336 and ALIQUAT 336 did not prove efficient. The separation factor (SF), defined as the ratio of the distribution coefficient between different metals ( In metal separations, the separation factor is often more important than the extraction coefficient itself. The best separation factors were obtained when DHEPA and IONQUEST 801 were used. Considering that the RE solubility in a hydrochloric medium is much higher than in sulphuric medium and the fact that the behaviour of the extractants DHEPA and IONQUEST 801 is slightly better in hydrochloric medium than in sulphuric medium, the investigation of the other variables involved in the extraction step was carried out with DHEPA and IONQUEST 801 in a hydrochloric medium. The acidity of the aqueous solution is an important variable in the metals separation. After choosing the extractant and the medium, the influence of the aqueous phase acidity on the REE separation was investigated. The effect of the H According to In accordance with The concentration of DEHPA and IONQUEST 801 were investigated at the interval between 0.5 and 2.0 No significant variation in the separation factor was observed for the adjacent REEs in the intervals investigated. However when DEHPA was used, the viscosity of the solvent increased significantly as the RE/extractant relation rose, resulting in a more difficult separation of the organic and aqueous phases; which does not occur with IONQUEST 801. In accordance with literature, the extraction of RE elements through DEHPA as well as by IONQUEST occurs according to Eq. Considering the molecular mass of each element, and its content in the hydrochloric liquor, the molecular mass average obtained through weighted arithmetic average is equal to 112 The effect of the contact time on REE extraction with DEHPA and IONQUEST 801 both in a concentration of 1.0 The stripping experiments were carried out with a hydrochloric acid solution having its concentration investigated between 0.5 The experiments that were carried out with a low concentration of HCl aimed at investigating the removal of the Tb extracted, considering the selective stripping step in the continuous circuit. The results attained are presented in As depicted in The organophosphorus reagents extract heavy REE rather than the light ones, however, all REE in solution are extracted in some different proportions. The terbium extracted can be stripped selectively from the organic phase through the introduction of a selective stripping step in the solvent extraction circuit. The stripping experiments showed that Tb can be removed from the organic phase in low hydrochloric acid concentrations ( According to Considering the continuous experiments and making an association between the extraction and selective stripping, the separation factor of Tb/Dy obtained for the RE – DEHPA system was about 4.8 whereas for the RE – IONQUEST the Tb/Dy separation factor was about 5.6 ( The number of stages in the selective stripping step was also estimated through experiments carried out in order to remove all the Tb from the loaded organic. Seven successive experiments were done with the loaded DEHPA and IONQUEST using 0.5 The REE stripping isotherms (equilibrium curves) were constructed and the McCabe–Thiele diagram for the IONQUEST system was drawn to determine the theoretical number of stages and the volumetric feed ratio of the liquor and solvent for the continuous experiments. The equilibrium curves were drawn according to the successive contact technique by using 5.0 The isotherm curves presented in Considering the extractants investigated, DEHPA and IONQUEST The authors would like to thank FAPEMIG, CNPq, CAPES and FINEP for the financial support and the technical body of CDTN that participated of the execution of this work, specially: José dos Santos J. Pereira, Liliane P. Tavares and Luiz Carlos da Silva.