Background
                  This study aimed to classify the pathomorphology of impacted proximal humeral fractures according to the control volume theory, with the intention to introduce a severity index to support surgeons in decision making.
               
                  Methods
                  In total, 50 proximal humeral fractures were randomly selected from 200 medical records of adult patients treated from 2009 to 2016. Four nonindependent observers used 2 different imaging modalities (computed tomography scans plus volume rendering; 3D model) to test the classification reliability. A fracture classification system was created according to the control volume theory to provide simple and understandable patterns that would help surgeons make quick assessments. The impacted fractures table was generated based on an evaluation of the calcar condition, determined by the impairment of a defined volumetric area under the cephalic cup and the humeral head malposition. In addition to the main fracture pattern, the comminution degree (low, medium, high), providing important information on fracture severity, could also be evaluated.
               
                  Results
                  From 3D imaging, the inter- and intraobserver reliability revealed a k value (95% confidence interval) of 0.55 (0.50-0.60) and 0.91 (0.79-1.00), respectively, for the pattern code, and 0.52 (0.43-0.76) and 0.91 (0.56-0.96), respectively, for the comminution degree.
               
                  Conclusions
                  The new classification provides a useful synoptic framework for identifying complex fracture patterns. It can provide the surgeon with useful information for fracture analysis and may represent a good starting point for an automated system.Ideally, a fracture classification should be relevant, reliable, reproducible, logical, useful, and not a form of abstract memory testing. Assistance with image interpretation, which is the starting point of classification, can therefore provide considerable insight from an applicative clinical perspective. Recent advances in artificial intelligence, particularly in neural networks, have shown important results and offer promising applications in the medical imaging field. Although there is extensive literature on PHF, the foundation remains insufficient for a complex mathematical model to be developed as a clinically useful tool for surgeons. In a recent study, Russo et al We believe that this theory can provide a starting point for the creation of a complex mathematical model that can serve as a basis for intelligent systems to assist in image interpretation. Nevertheless, the transition from the CV theory to an automated system, that exploits the principles of the theory to identify fracture patterns precisely, is not so immediate. Therefore, we consider it necessary to create a classification that, on the one hand, may be the beginning of an automated system and, on the other hand, can provide the surgeon with useful information for fracture analysis. The main aim of this study is to present a new classification system for proximal impacted humeral fractures based on the CV theory, organized according to a severity concept among the different fracture patterns. The second aim of the current study is to introduce an assessment of the comminution degree as additional information on the CV conditions and fracture severity. Both aims are functional to the future development of an automated system to assist the surgeon in both the image interpretation and the choice of the most appropriate treatment. A relevant aspect of CV theory is to have demonstrated the pathologic link between the partial or total modification of the area and the relative displacement of the humeral head. Furthermore, there are some critical and questionable points of this theoretical assumption that the scientific community should consider. First, the α and β planes, used conventionally as a spatial reference system to delimit the CV, could become a new common reference for locating the most significant fracture lines. Secondly, accurate topographic evaluation of CV loss that can serve to justify the displacement of the humeral head analytically is difficult to calculate without the help of specific researchers. Thirdly, the high variability of fracture morphology could lead to a similar head displacement with equivalent CV loss, but that is associated with different severity due to high comminution or different topographical involvement. The requirement for this methodology started with the CV theory and continues with a classification system that enriches it with useful information for the surgeon that the CV theory cannot provide. By defining a comminution degree of a bony part, it is possible to evaluate the CV condition from another point of view. In their studies, Beardsley et al The loading rate, patient age, and bone quality all affect the bone energy-absorption capacity. The study used a standardized protocol to retrospectively include the computed tomography (CT) scans of 200 consecutive acute PHFs in adults treated surgically from 2009 to 2016 by a senior surgeon (R.R.). The exclusion criteria were patients aged less than 18 years, with pathologic fractures, isolated tuberosity fractures, dislocations fractures, nonarticular fractures, and those with nonimpacted fractures. From these 200 records, 50 were selected by simple randomization to test the reliability of the new classification system, using different imaging modalities. CT images were obtained using a 64-slice Somatom Sensation 64 CT scanner (Siemens, Erlangen, Germany) with a slice thickness of 0.6 mm. Axial, oblique coronal, and oblique sagittal images adapted to the plane of the shoulder were generated, and 3D volume rendering (VR) and 3D model reconstructions were obtained for all patients. Malposition of the humeral head and the calcar conditions, defined by the impairment of the α and β planes, were used to generate the impacted fractures table ( The column criterion was head positions (malpositions) on the coronal plane, with reference to the positions defined by the CV theory: neutral valgus varus. The study of the CV provided important and precise aspects on how the humeral head could impact the underlying trabecular structures. This study clarified that the head, in addition to moving in the varus or valgus position, could also remain in a neutral position, findings that were likely to influence some therapeutic decisions. The Row criterion is shown in The cross between the 2 criteria generated an identification code for fracture patterns, as described in The code of the “impacted fractures table” could be completed, if required, with the addition of the superscript “+” symbol to indicate the presence of the head split that completed the pathomorphologic analysis of the fracture. The input variables of the table were sorted according to a criterion of increasing severity from left to right for the rows, and from top to bottom for the columns (red arrows in In addition to the main fracture pattern, it is possible to evaluate a CV comminution degree (low, medium, high) to provide additional information and make the classification itself more complete. The comminution constitutes direct information on the technical demand of fracture repair This additional indication was determined starting from the comminution level of the CV parts (calcar in the medial zone; lesser and greater tuberosities in the lateral zone). The comminution levels of a single part are shown in A first evaluation must be made on the medial zone (calcar) where the comminution has a greater weight in the total bone loss of the CV. The comminution of the lateral zone, determined by the sum of the comminution level of the lesser tuberosity (Lt) and greater tuberosity (Gt), will complete the analysis and provide the final value (low, medium, high) ( In total, 50 fractures were selected by simple randomization to test the reliability of the new classification system, using CT images and VR and a 3D model. The observed fractures concerned 30 women and 20 men, with 33 right shoulders and 17 left. The average age was 62 years (minimum, 18 years; maximum, 90 years). Four orthopedic surgeons from a single department (R.R., A.G., S.V., G.D.R.) were asked to classify the 50 fractures using the new classification system. The examiners evaluated the 50 fractures twice independently and were not permitted to compare results. In the first evaluation, the examiners only had access to the tomographic images and the VR of the patients; in the second evaluation, they had only the 3D model of the fractures available. The 3D model was obtained with the aid of engineers who processed the tomography data through the software Mimics (Materialize, Belgium). It is worth noting that the 3D model allows the fragments to be moved, unlike the VR that generates a 3D view of the fracture but does not allow interaction with it. The 50 fractures were presented to the examiners at each evaluation in a different order (simple randomization) and anonymized to avoid patient memorization. All examiners knew the CV theory, and by comparing the examiners’ evaluations, the interobserver reliability of the new classification system was determined. The intraobserver reliability was obtained by 1 observer (R.R.) who repeated the evaluation on the 50 fractures after a 4-month interval with the order of the anonymized fractures randomly switched. Randolph’s The “impacted fractures table” and the “comminution table” ( The evaluation of the agreement on the pattern code of the “impacted fractures table” and on the CV comminution was reported. In the interobserver analysis, the pattern code had a moderate agreement with both the CT + VR imaging modality ( The agreement values on the head position, fracture planes, and head split showed the influence of these criteria on the pattern code agreement. The head position had the least agreement ( The head split had the highest agreement (CT + VR: It is worth noting that the 3D imaging modality provided a greater agreement than the use of CT and VR in all cases. The interobserver agreement after 4 months was New innovative technologies to support orthopedic medicine are becoming valuable aids to improve and facilitate the performance of physicians, making them more precise, safer, and with better patient outcomes. Computer-assisted surgeries, augmented reality, 3D printing, artificial intelligence systems for diagnostic imaging, and many other futuristic applications are becoming more current. There is currently no recognized limit threshold above which an interobserver reliability analysis is considered acceptable. Landis and Koch Obviously within the single study, the higher the The results of the inter- and intraobserver analysis of the proposed classification system, interpreted with the Landis and Koch intervals, showed a moderate to substantial level of agreement with a clear positive trend when using the 3D imaging modality. We consider these results satisfactory and able to attest to the reliability and suitability of the classification. The new proposed classification, relying on the CV theory, has a solid rational basis for understanding and justifying the pathologic displacements assumed by the humeral head in impacted fractures. This classification also provides additional information (calcar condition, severity concept, and comminution level) that can be very useful in clinical practice, making further steps toward a correct diagnostic-therapeutic process ( The identification of the α and β planes enables the understanding of the volumetric fracture configuration and defines how the CV, and in particular the calcar, is linked to the head. A fractured calcar completely on the α plane presents a greater risk of necrosis of the humeral head compared with a calcar fractured only on the β plane. Regarding the tuberosities, we considered the lesser and greater tuberosities within the lateral zone of the CV and not as single parts; this was because we were not interested in the distinction in fracture parts but in a volumetric classification model. Indeed, the CV theory suggests that a humeral head in a valgus position is connected to the involvement of the lateral zone of the CV, and therefore of the tuberosities. Instead, the medial part is generally less involved, also in terms of displacement, and represents a hinge point that is either more or less stable according to the calcar loss. However, the fracture morphology can be very varied and has a decisive weight in the therapeutic choice. We believe that it was appropriate to include an assessment of comminution in the classification system to further differentiate fractures that had the same main fracture pattern but were morphologically very different, and therefore had different possible therapeutic indications. For example, a In another example, a There are also some limitations to our method of classification. First, this classification only covers impacted fractures, although conceptually it is possible to extend it in the future. Second, the number of studied cases is relatively small, and no comparison has been made with other classifications. Third, the expert surgeon (R.R.) and the evaluators come from a single department, which is likely to have influenced the way in which the fractures were assessed. In the described classification system, the presence of many fracture features can be considered a strength, but these can also affect the interobserver and intraobserver classification reliability. However, the classification reliability has a secondary relevance regarding the purposes of our classification system. Indeed, we propose the use of the classification system as another step for an automation system that will enable immediate identification of the fracture pattern. Future plans will concern the validation of this classification in a clinical setting. This study outlines a new classification system for proximal humeral impacted fractures based on the CV theory. In this classification, the definition and introduction of a severity concept, accompanied by information on the CV comminution, are the principles used to create a suitable diagnostic-therapeutic process. The results of our reliability analyses were satisfactory, in particular those of the 3D diagnostic imaging, attesting to the reliability and suitability of the classification. The impacted PFH classification can provide the surgeon with useful information for fracture analysis, and can provide a basis for the generation of an automated system. A synoptic framework can help the surgeon to identify the fracture patterns more easily, and the 3D imaging modality improves the agreement values. This in accordance with Neer’s R. Russo, F. Fiorentino, and L. R. Pietroluongo are cofounders in an innovative startup: E-Lisa srl. The company is focused on R&D, consultancy, and formation in the orthopedic and trauma fields. The authors wish to confirm that there are conflicts of interest associated with this publication but there has been no financial support.