Fifty-three adults sustaining intracapsular femoral neck fractures (subcapital 38 and transcervical 15) with osteoporosis were treated primarily by osteosynthesis with valgus intertrochanteric osteotomy. Final evaluation was done in 50 patients (1 patient died and 2 lost to follow up, were not considered). Union was achieved in 47 (94%) patients in an average period of 12.2 weeks (range 10–18 weeks) with 100% union at osteotomy site. An axial collapse between 2 and 14mm was observed in 74% of patients at the fracture site. Average neck shaft angle achieved was 141°. Retroversion of the femoral head was seen in 28% of patients postoperatively, but none demonstrated a further posterior tilt of proximal femoral fragment, thus preventing implant cut through. One of the four patients with avascular necrosis of the femoral head exhibited late segmental collapse between 98 and 171 weeks. Final results were excellent to good in 76% of patients (average hip score 92), fair in 18% (average Harris hip score 73) and poor in 6% (average Harris hip score 30). Deep infection in 2%, superficial infection in 4%, implant penetration into the joint in 4%, limb length discrepancy in 6% and external rotation in 68% were other complications. Primary osteosynthesis with valgus intertrochanteric osteotomy is a dependable procedure to provide stable fixation in fresh fractures of the neck of femur with osteoporosis. The potential benefit of retaining a viable biologic joint justifies the usefulness of this procedure.Once termed “the unsolved fracture” due to the difficulties in management, the treatment of displaced intracapsular fracture of the neck of the femur still causes a dilemma. Osteoporosis is considered an important causative factor both in its etiopathogenesis and in the marked posterior comminution present in these fractures. It decreases the quality of internal fixation causing redisplacement of the fracture secondary to its poor hold. Various types of osteotomies have been advocated for treatment of fractures of the neck of the femur. From 1990 to 1998, a total of 53 adults (32 males and 21 females) with displaced intracapsular femoral neck fractures and osteoporosis (38 subcapital and 15 transcervical) were selected for osteosynthesis and primary valgus intertrochanteric osteotomy. The selection of the patients in the present study has been as per the following criteria: Trivial injury. Osteoporosis as evident by Singh’s index Patient actively mobile; no serious medical disease, general debility or associated significant knee joint deformity. One hundred and thirty-two patients not fulfilling the above mentioned criteria in the same age group and the period of study were excluded from the present study. The study patients average age was 55.6 years (range 50–70 years) and the interval between injury and osteosynthesis ranged from 3 to 30 days. Forty-four (82.8%) patients were sedentary workers and sustained fracture after a trivial trauma where as 9 (17.2%) patients were non-committal about the degree of trauma. In 36 (68%) patients, the left side was involved, whereas in 17 (32%) patients the right hip was involved. One patient had previously been treated with McMurray’s osteotomy for an intra-capsular femoral neck fracture of the opposite hip 20 years previously. Similarly three other patients had sustained fracture of the wrist or leg bones due to trivial trauma in the past. On the basis of anatomical location 38 (72%) patients had subcapital and 15 (28%) trans-cervical fractures. According to Pauwel’s Surgery was performed on an ordinary operation table without the help of an image intensifier. Osteosynthesis and primary valgus intertrochanteric osteotomy was carried out through a modified Watson Jones approach using a 120° double angle blade plate. The capsule was divided in each patient to achieve reduction under direct vision and to facilitate the seating of the blade in the inferior quadrant of the head of the femur. Before performing the intertrochanteric osteotomy, the femoral head was stabilised with a partially threaded 6.5 Presence of bridging traveculae of bone crossing the osteotomy. Consolidation and obliteration of the osteotomy site. No displacement. The protocol had been approved by the Ethical Committee of the Institution. All patients gave their consent after receiving appropriate information. Patients were followed at intervals of 6, 12, 24, 48, 75 and 100 weeks for the initial 2 years and once a year subsequently. One patient died after 6 months of surgery due to myocardial infarct and two patients were lost to subsequent follow up after 8 months. These patients were not considered for final evaluation of results. Therefore, 50 patients were followed clinically by Harris hip score, The patients were followed for an average period of 8.2 years (range 3–12 years). As per Singh’s index, 16 (32%) patients exhibited grade II osteoporosis, 24 (48%) had grade III osteoporotic changes and 10 (20%) had grade IV osteoporosis. Forty-seven (94%) patients showed union at the fracture site within an average of 12.2 weeks (range 10–18 weeks). Radiological union of the osteotomy site was observed in all the 50 (100%) patients within an average period of 7.2 weeks (range 6–8 weeks). Three (6%) patients developed non-union. In one patient, this was because of failure to valgise the head of femur adequately; in the second patient, the blade was partly out of the femoral head and the procedure was repeated to correctly place it in the inferior quadrant of the head of the femur. However, GirdleStone arthroplasty was subsequently undertaken in this patient because of deep infection. In the third patient, the blade penetrated the hip joint due to excessive collapse at the fracture site. The double angle blade plate was replaced with two cancellous screws after 132 weeks, which finally cut through to leave the femoral neck fracture un-united. The first and the last patients were subsequently treated with total hip arthroplasty. The osteosynthesis and osteotomy was considered stable when: There was no further comminution during osteosynthesis. The tip of the blade was seated in the inferior quadrant of the femoral head. The femoral head could be buttressed by the oblique distal limb of the osteotomy. The shoulder of the blade plate contained a minimum of 1.5 Stable fixation could be achieved in 36 (72%) patients with the 120° double angle blade plate and a 6.5 The average neck-shaft angle was 141° in the present study. The minimum neck-shaft angle was 120° and the maximum was 150°. An intertrochanteric wedge of 20–30° was removed in 80% of the patients where as in 20% of the patients, a wedge of 10–20° was resected to valgise the femoral head. In 21 (42%) patients, the blade was seated in the posterior and inferior quadrant; in 20 (40%) patients in the central and inferior quadrant; and in the anterior and inferior quadrant in 9 (18%) patients. In 18 (36%) patients, lateralisation of the distal osteotomy fragment was done. Axial collapse between 2–5 Four (8%) patients developed radiological signs of avascular necrosis. One patient exhibited radiological signs of avascular necrosis between 98 and 171 weeks resulting in antero-superior segmental collapse of the femoral head ( Range of movements at the hip joint observed in the series are shown in Thirty-eight (76%) patients had an average Harris hip score of 92 and were graded as good to excellent result ( Femoral neck fractures can be divided into those occurring in younger patients from high energy trauma and those in older patients that typically occur from low energy mechanisms. In any of the patients with a femoral neck fracture, regardless of age, the most common reason for failure of internal fixation is an inadequate reduction closely followed by inadequate fixation. The bone quality of an older patient plays an extremely important role in the success or failure of internal fixation outcomes. A recent meta-analysis of 106 reports of the treatment of femoral neck fractures suggested that non-union may occur in a third of patients treated with internal fixation alone, with higher rates in displaced or vertical fractures. Pauwel It overcomes the shear forces and converts them to compression forces by placing the fracture site perpendicular to the resultant force. It buttresses the head of femur from below and improves the stability provided by the internal fixation device. Our results validate this contention in that even in severe osteoporosis a union rate of 94% was observed. Osteosynthesis with an appropriate blade length of the implant in its optimum position in the femoral head, supplemented by the buttressing effect of the distal osteotomy fragment maintained co-aptation and immobilisation of the fragments during the time required for bony union and provided a high degree of stability. We therefore, had no implant failure or anteroposterior implant cut through in any of the patients presenting with grades II and III osteoporosis. Further, none of the 14 patients with an 8–10° postoperative retroversion of the femoral head exhibited a further significant posterior tilt at the fracture site till the fracture united. The inter-trochanteric osteotomy seems to have the advantage of achieving and maintaining stability both in the coronal as well as sagittal plane. Garden The changes in the trabecular pattern of the upper end of the femur has been universally used as an index for diagnosing and grading of osteoporosis. The average age at the time of fracture in the present series is less when compared to western literature. In a study on osteoporosis in Indian patients, Sankaran A union rate of 94% in our series of 50 patients compares favourably with the only other study done by Rinaldi et al. Avascular necrosis of the femoral head is a known complication of displaced femoral neck fractures. The present study comprised of fractures of recent onset, therefore no bone scan study was undertaken preoperatively. Only 4 (8%) of our 50 patients had radiologically evident avascular necrosis postoperatively, however, all had good functional results. One of these four patients with late segmental collapse of the femoral head exhibited signs of osteoarthrosis, but it did not affect the final outcome ( Rinaldi et al. Osteosynthesis with valgus intertrochanteric osteotomy gives adequate, stable fixation. The osteotomy may have a biological role in revascularisation of an ischaemic femoral head. Our contention is also validated by Catto A retroversion of 8–10° of the femoral head observed postoperatively in 14 cases however did not affect the good functional results. The procedure of valgus osteotomy resulted in an increase of abduction of the operated hip (total range 35–45°) as compared to opposite normal hip. The external rotation deformity between 5 and 12° in 68% of our patients helped them sitting cross-leg, “common position in Asian society/position of prayer”. This avoidable deformity has also been reported by Hermichen et al. In the present series, 3 of 50 patients with neck shaft angle of 150° had moderate limp. The 120° double angle blade plate prevents medialisation of the distal osteotomy fragment. Further, lateralisation of the distal fragment restores hip joint offset and the abductor lever arm mechanism. We have observed that excision of a wedge of 20–30° in 80% of the patients causes no significant limb length discrepancy. It explains why most of our patients retained a near normal neck length and exhibited a near normal gait. Zinghi et al., Parker The procedure of osteosynthesis with valgus intertrochanteric osteotomy in fresh femoral neck fractures is easy to perform. The availability of image intensification has made the procedure simple and biological. We performed the surgery through modified a Watson Jones approach because radiological assistance was not available to us. Preoperative planning is useful in selecting an appropriate implant, and overcoming the errors. In conclusion, valgus osteotomy with osteosynthesis gives good long term results in primary management of displaced intracapsular femoral neck fractures with osteoporosis in adults. It achieves mechanically stable fixation and combats the deforming forces at the fracture site. In spite of segmental collapse of the femoral head and osteoarthrosis, patients may have a good functional outcome. The potential benefit of retaining a viable biologic joint justifies the usefulness of this procedure.