Proximal humeral fractures are common and increasing in incidence. The majority of undisplaced injuries can be treated conservatively but the optimal management of displaced three and four part fractures remains debatable. Hemiarthroplasty is typically used for fractures that cannot be reliably reconstructed using locking plates or where there is evidence that the blood supply to the head has been significantly compromised.
                  This article focuses on the surgical technique of hemiarthroplasty and highlights the key principles necessary to achieve an optimal outcome. Finally, the option of reverse shoulder arthroplasty for the treatment of proximal humeral fractures is briefly discussed.Proximal humeral fractures are the third most common appendicular fracture in the elderly, after fracture of the hip and distal radius, and account for 4%–5% of all fractures. Neer, in 1955, described the first case series of articular replacement for humeral head fractures after experiencing unsatisfactory results from the alternative management options. In deciding whether hemiarthroplasty is the correct surgical option, both patient and fracture factors must be considered. An accurate pre-operative history and examination provides important information regarding the patient's premorbid level of function and their likely ability to participate fully in the rehabilitation process. Patients with multiple medical co-morbidities and those who are unable to comply with post-operative physiotherapy have worse functional outcomes. Hemiarthroplasty is a technically demanding procedure. The objectives of surgery are to anatomically reconstruct the proximal humerus ensuring correct retroversion, prosthesis height and establishing secure tuberosity fixation. Failure to achieve these goals has been shown to adversely affect clinical outcome. Standard radiographs, including an anteroposterior ( Having decided to perform a hemiarthroplasty the surgeon should have available a fracture-specific implant and be familiar with the relevant surgical technique. The features of such implants can include modularity of the stem and head, proximal porous coating for tuberosity ingrowth and multiple holes for secure tuberosity fixation ( Following general anaesthetic and inter-scalene block the patient is placed in the beach chair position at 30–45 degrees. The patient should be moved towards the edge of the table on the operative side to allow the draped arm to be moved freely during surgery. A deltopectoral approach is used. The incision begins at the level of the clavicle and passes inferiorly, just lateral to the coracoid process, ending at the insertion of the deltoid ( The fracture line between the tuberosities typically extends just posterior to the bicipital groove. localization of the biceps tendon is crucial in identifying the tuberosities, which are mobilized by releasing the rotator interval and coracohumeral ligament. Heavy sutures are placed at the bone–tendon interface of both tuberosities for traction and later reconstruction ( The humeral shaft is delivered into the wound by extending, adducting and externally rotating the humerus. The canal is then sequentially and gently reamed by hand until cortical contact is made to determine the appropriate sized prosthesis ( Proximal humeral retroversion is, on average, 30 degrees (range 10–50 degrees), A version alignment rod attached to the insertion handle using the forearm as a reference point ( The anterior fin of the implant typically lines up with the proximal aspect of the bicipital groove and the lateral fin is positioned around 8 mm posterior to the groove. A less accurate method is to externally rotate the forearm 30 degrees and position the humeral head facing directly medially. A final simple check is to ensure that with the shoulder reduced the humeral head faces directly across from the glenoid with the arm in the neutral position. Incorrect humeral height has been shown to impair shoulder function. Over-lengthening may result in tuberosity detachment, rotator cuff failure and impingement, whereas shortening reduces the length and tension of the deltoid muscle, impairing its function. Positioning the medial collar of the implant on the medial calcar provides an easy and accurate way, though in the presence of calcar and metaphyseal comminution alternative methods are required. Typically the top of the greater tuberosity should sit 8–10 mm below the top of the humeral head. The distance of the superior border of the pectoralis major tendon to the highest point of the humeral head can be used as a guide: cadaveric studies have shown that on average this distance is 5.6 cm. Fluoroscopy can also be used to check both implant size and positioning ( The final part of the procedure involves reconstruction of the tuberosities around the prosthesis. This is arguably the most crucial component of the operation, as tuberosity malposition and malunion has been identified as the most common and significant cause of functional failure. A variety of methods have been described, though all aim to secure the tuberosities to the implant, to the shaft of the humerus and finally to themselves. The authors recommend a total of five heavy non-absorbable sutures, which are passed initially, tagged and finally tied in sequence: The suture that passes through the hole in the medial neck of the prosthesis is passed through the greater and lesser tuberosities at the bone–tendon interface. This acts as a cerclage to fix the tuberosities to the implant. Two sutures are then passed through the greater tuberosity tendon interface, the holes in the fin of the prosthesis and then continue through the lesser tuberosity tendon interface at the respective level. These provide further horizontal tuberosity fixation. Vertical fixation is achieved Cancellous bone harvested from the humeral head can be used as bone graft if necessary and the sutures are then tied sequentially to secure the tuberosities in a reduced position ( Close physiotherapy supervision is essential to optimize the clinical outcome. There is good evidence to show that shoulder hemiarthroplasty is an effective pain-relieving operation for proximal humeral fractures, The main reported complications of hemiarthroplasty include tuberosity non-union (11%), heterotopic ossification (9%), proximal migration of the prosthesis (6.8%), infection (2%) and nerve injury. The semiconstrained design of reverse shoulder prostheses, with a fixed and medialized centre of rotation, improves the torque of the deltoid enabling elevation of the arm in the absence of a functional rotator cuff. The proposed advantages of reverse shoulder arthroplasty relate to the fact that functional outcomes are not as reliant on tuberosity healing and therefore it may provide a more predictable outcome. In summary, current indications for reverse arthroplasty include elderly patients who are at high risk of tuberosity non-union, and those with rotator cuff deficiency. Currently the optimal treatment for three and four part fractures of the proximal humerus remains controversial. Hemiarthroplasty is used in fractures that are deemed not to be reconstructable or where the blood supply to the humeral head is deemed to be significantly compromised. To achieve the best functional outcome, the surgeon should adhere to three keys surgical points; restoring the correct humeral height, retroversion and secure anatomic positioning of the tuberosities. The role of reverse shoulder arthroplasty in the treatment of these fractures remains controversial and has yet to be fully defined.