The true fundamental trends of the different phase transformation steps (Fe2O3–Fe3O4–FeO–Fe) during iron oxide reduction process are necessary requested. Both of the macroscopic and microscopic changes during these steps have a direct bearing on the overall reduction kinetics. Magnetite single crystals were isothermally reduced in pure hydrogen at 900–1100°C. The oxygen weight loss during reduction process was recorded as a function of time. The magnetite samples and its reduction products were characterized by X-ray diffraction analysis, reflected light microscope, scanning electron microscope and vibrating sample magnetometer to reveal the effect of hydrogen reduction at different temperatures on reduction behavior, composition, microstructure and magnetic properties of the produced samples. The reduction rate increases with reaction temperature. The reduction at 900 and 950°C was stopped at 83 and 89% extent, respectively. Depending on the kinetics obtained data from reduction process, the reduction rate was found to be controlled by the solid-state diffusion mechanism. The magnetic characterizations of the reduced magnetite at 900–1100°C were measured whereas the magnetization value increased from 114.1 to 132.1emu/g with increasing temperature. Magnetite single crystal was partially reduced at 20, 40, 60, and 80%, its magnetic properties was found to be dependent on the morphology, core–shell like structure is formed at 40% reduction extent.The reduction of iron oxides is one of the most frequently studied topics in extractive metallurgy. The countercurrent heat and mass transfer techniques used in the reduction of iron ores in blast furnace, direct reduction, and smelting reduction processes result in a series of stepwise reduction reaction (hematite–magnetite–wüstite–iron). It is important to note that the structural and morphological changes occurring at each of these stages caused by lattice construction and destruction of the primary texture. These changes on the macroscopic and microscopic scales have a direct bearing on the overall reduction kinetics. Also, clarifying the morphological aspects is necessary to explain different phenomena such as phase nucleation, movement of the reduction front, formation of texture discontinuities, pores and cracks. As mentioned previously, detailed knowledge of the mechanism and kinetics of iron oxide reduction processes constitutes the main point in the modeling of these processes in metallurgy. Also it is clear however that the prediction of the final properties of the produced iron cannot be attempted without a clear understanding of the mechanisms of individual phase transformations and the important parameters controlling these processes. However, using single crystal is very helpful to derive the true fundamental trends of the different phase transformation steps. So this study is carried out to investigate the morphological changes during the magnetite–iron gaseous reduction process using magnetite single crystal. Also it was handled to provide detailed information on the structure of iron/iron oxide interface during the reduction and to deduce the growth mechanism, which are operative. It is well known that magnetite ores are used in ironmaking process whereas the magnetite concentrates are used for making iron powder on a commercial scale. Evans and co-workers The magnetite reduction by hydrogen at 1173 and 1423 Caceres and Behbehani Superparamagnetic particles have been widely studied and used in biomedicine and biotechnology as contrast agent in magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) and as drug carriers for magnetically guided drug delivery Single crystals magnetite has octahedral shape structure of weight about 1 The annealed magnetite specimens were reduced with pure hydrogen gas at 900–1100 The reduction behavior of magnetite single crystals at 900–1100 The XRD pattern of magnetite samples before and after reduction at 900 and 1000 The microstructure of magnetite sample reduced at 900 and 1100 The mechanisms of reduction process of annealed compacts were investigated using the values of the apparent activation energy which can be calculated from the Arrhenius equation; The relationships between the logarithm of the rate of reduction (d The microstructure of 30% reduced magnetite at 1000 On the other hand, the photomicrographs of 80% reduced samples at 1000 The magnetic characterization of the sample was carried out in a vibrating sample magnetometer. Coercivity field (Hc) and saturation magnetization (Bs) values were obtained from the hysteresis loops registered at room temperature with a maximum applied field and the corresponding hystersis loops are shown in After 40% reduction ( Magnetic properties of the reduced magnetic single crystal were also studied as a function of temperature (900–1000 The measured magnetic properties data shows that the produced metallic iron or partially reduced samples could be successfully used widely as a superparamagnetic particles in biomedicine and biotechnology as contrast agent in magnetic resonance imaging and as drug carriers for magnetically guided drug delivery.  Reduction rate of magnetite single crystals at the initial and final reaction stages increased with increasing reaction temperature from 900 to 1100 The obtained kinetics data indicated that the reduction rate is controlled by the solid-state diffusion mechanism. The magnetic characterizations of the reduced magnetite at 900–1100 Magnetite single crystal was partially reduced at 20, 40, 60, and 80%, its magnetic properties was found to be dependent on the morphology, core–shell like structure is formed at 40% reduction extent. By increasing the reduction extent from 20 to 80%, the Hc values decreased from 51.3 to 21.3 The measured magnetic properties data shows that the produced metallic iron or partially reduced samples could be successfully used widely as a superparamagnetic particles in biomedicine and biotechnology as contrast agent in magnetic resonance imaging and as drug carriers for magnetically guided drug delivery.