Periprosthetic fractures are typically defined as fractures occurring adjacent to a total joint arthroplasty. However, fractures may occur adjacent to a previous internal fixation device used to treat a prior fracture in the same patient, or between implants (the interprosthetic fracture). All of these injuries tend to occur in frail patients with severe osteopenia, and therefore are very challenging to treat. This article provides a brief but thorough review of the current state of the art regarding the treatment of these challenging problems.Periprosthetic fractures represent a heterogeneous set of injuries and circumstances, and are one of the most challenging problems for the orthopedist to manage. Their optimum care requires a multidisciplinary team that can attend to all of the medical and rehabilitation needs of the patient with such an injury, as these fractures typically occur in very frail patients with complex comorbidities and social problems. One has to address not only the fracture, but consider how to deal with the associated arthroplasty, the patient’s (and the family’s) expectations for return-to-function, and do so in a way that minimizes the risk of complications. Periprosthetic fractures, by definition, occur adjacent to an arthroplasty that in many cases limits options for fixation. For femoral fractures about a total hip arthroplasty (THA) stem, the greatest challenge is in getting stable diaphyseal fixation about the intramedullary femoral stem. The femoral component of a THA fills the medullary canal and makes intramedullary nailing of the femur impossible as a form of fixation, and makes plate fixation a challenge. THA stems may be cemented or uncemented, and each presents different challenges for fixation. For distal femoral fracture near a total knee arthroplasty (TKA), the femoral component of the TKA may have a stem, lugs, and/or a “box” (if posterior stabilized) that fill some of the metaphyseal bone, reducing the volume of bone available for fixation and limiting screw trajectories. Finally, periarticular stress-shielding reduces local bone mineral density and contributes to greater fracture comminution, which also increases the difficulty of fracture fixation. Several methods of fracture fixation can be used for periprosthetic fractures, including non-locking plates, locking plates, hybrid plates that accommodate both locked and non-locking screws, so-called cable-plates that facilitate the use of cerclage cables, and strut grafts, which may be used alone or in addition to a plate. The optimal method of periprosthetic fracture fixation remains undefined. Dennis et al. used a biomechanical model to evaluate the fixation stability of five methods of fracture fixation New plate designs exist that are designed specifically for use in periprosthetic fractures and which facilitate off-axis screw placement. Tangential, or off-axis screws, not only allow one to “miss” an implant in the center of the medullary canal, but engage a greater thickness of cortical bone than a unicortical screw aimed at the medullary canal, and therefore may be more rigid. The biomechanical performance of two such constructs was studied by Lewis et al, who compared five methods of fixation in a series of 30 synthetic composite femurs with cemented femoral stems The clinical outcome of locking plates in distal femoral fractures as reported in the literature appears to be mixed. Some series report high complications rates Overall, 40% of the patients experienced complications, including 20% who’s fractures failed to unite. The constructs used in the healed fractures were more flexible, with more empty screws holes in the fractures that healed, and patients treated with titanium plates were more likely to heal than those with stainless steel plates With the recognition of construct stiffness being important in callus formation and fracture healing, a number of methods are being proposed that increase the flexibility of fixation. These include using longer plates with fewer screws, titanium rather than stainless steel, and methods such as far-cortical locking As in other areas of surgery, there may be benefits to stabilizing periprosthetic fractures using minimally-invasive techniques. In order to facilitate that, methods and tools that facilitate minimally-invasive fracture reduction must be developed. Secondly, these patients are at risk for further fracture, and one must always consider how to prevent the next fracture. For this reason, extramedullary constructs that span and will protect the entire femur are needed for these patients. Finally, given how medically frail these patients are, methods to “boost” the biologic response to a fracture in these patients would be of obvious benefit. Other questions that remain include: What is the current role for cerclage fixation? Is cerclage helpful for fracture reduction? For fixation? What is current role for allograft struts? Do such struts improve stability or fracture healing with current fixation devices? Do the biomechanical advantages of strut grafts demonstrated in the lab confer real clinical benefits, and do these benefits outweigh the costs (real and biologic)? What is the optimum fixation construct for different clinical situations? AHS discloses the following relationships. He reports serving as a consultant to Acumed, Conventus Orthopaedics and Alexion; stock ownership in Epix Orthopaedics, Conventus Orthopaedics and ActivOrtho; patent applications/registrations with Acumed and having received royalties from Smith & Nephew. The authors of this manuscript express their thanks to the Osteosynthesis and Trauma Care Foundation for the sponsorship of the publication of this Supplement in Injury.