Background
                  Computed tomography (CT) scan and X-ray study on consolidation time of C2 neural arch fractures treated conservatively were examined.
               
                  Methods
                  A prospective study was undertaken: 28 conservatively treated fractures of the neural arch of the axis (11 hanged-man type I, 5 type II, and 12 miscellaneous fractures) were monitored during the period of orthosis by means of CT scan and plain X-rays performed on admission, and then at intervals between 2 and 120 days afterward. In patients treated with a halo vest (20 cases), a CT scan of the skull was performed to make sure that the pins were correctly positioned and to evaluate the osteolytic processes at the pin–bone interface.
               
                  Results
                  Two patients died as a result of other severe brain or thoracoabdominal injuries, and the remaining 26 fractures healed in an average time of 109 days (range 90–120). The process of bone consolidation was documented in detail by CT, which showed how the newly formed osteofibrous tissue (iso-hypodense) progressively filled the interfragmentary space. In 2 cases of cranial pin loosening, CT demonstrated an osteolytic rim at the interface, which prompted early removal of the halo system. At clinical follow-up (mean 32 months; range 24–84), functional status was evaluated: all of the patients were neurologically intact with the exception of one, who presented with persistent paresthesias. The most frequent disturbance was cervical pain (12 cases, 46%).
               
                  Conclusions
                  CT with two- and three-dimensional reconstructed images has been shown to be the most reliable method for clarifying the evolution of bone consolidation and to show any osteolytic processes at the pin–bone interface during halo vest immobilization. Follow-up results of our series suggest that surgical treatment would not have improved the quality of life in these patients.Radiological assessment of cervical spine fractures requires direct X-rays ( We describe a prospective series of 28 fractures of the neural arch of the axis that were treated conservatively and evaluated by means of serial CT scan during and at the end of treatment. We devised a radiological study for optimal definition of treatment, consolidation times, and recovery of cervical spine stability. Functional outcome was also evaluated. Thirty fractures of the neural arch of the axis, excluding lesions associated with rheumatoid arthritis or congenital abnormalities, were treated in our departments between 1995 and 2004. On admission, all fractures were evaluated clinically and by emergency cervical radiography in three projections, as well as by CT scan and MRI. Cases were selected according to the Effendi classification ( Moreover, these classification criteria also were integrated with radiographic measurements of the angle and displacement of C2-C3 according to the method described by Francis et al. ( Treatment consisted of a halo vest type of orthosis, sternal occipital mandibular immobilizer (SOMI), or a rigid plastic thoracolumbar orthosis with occipitomandibular immobilizer (OCTLo); the latter was used when there were associated nonneurological low thoracic or lumbar spine fractures. Treatment in orthosis was estimated to be necessary for 16 weeks. Treatment in halo vest was based on the application of the plastic orthosis connected to the ring, in which 4 sharp-tipped pins were tightened using a torque screwdriver at 9 Nm (8 inch-pounds), without ever retightening them throughout the halo application period. Removal of all types of orthosis was always followed by a 30-day period wearing a semirigid collar, together with progressive rehabilitation for functional recovery. In We applied a halo vest in 20 cases (71.4%). In 2 of these (cases 1 and 9), which had a grade 2, type IIB fracture, reduction to grade 1 was achieved by means of halo traction. A SOMI was applied in 6 cases (21.4%), and an OCTLo in 2 (7.2%). Three of the patients treated by SOMI had a type I fracture without displacement and/or angulation, and were thus considered to have a minimal risk of loss of alignment, whereas the other 3 had lesions for which halo treatment was indicated but had been refused. Two patients (cases 16 and 19) died 7 and 16 days after admission, respectively, as a result of the severe brain and medullary lesions accompanying the thoracoabdominal trauma. The steps adopted for controlling evolution of the fracture ( Clinical follow-up (mean 32 months; range 24–84) took into consideration the functional status of the cervical spine (active articulation evaluated in flexion-extension, left and right rotation; we took into consideration the static position of the neck at 0° and maximum articulation at 90° in the four dynamic phases, distinguishing in mild articular limitation (loss of <30°), moderate (from 30° and 60°) and severe (loss >90°), the presence of pain, vertigo, headache, and any eventual neurological disorders. Excluding the 2 patients who died of severe craniospinal lesions, in the 26 cases treated conservatively and assessed at long-term follow-up, the mean time of consolidation was 109.6 days (range 90–120). The radiological characteristics of consolidation were disappearance of the fracture line and interfragmentary space, due to interposition of the neoformed bone. At 30-day control, CT scan excluded significant loss of alignment in all cases, also demonstrating initial signs of fusion in 3 cases (11.5%). At 60-day control, the consolidation process was still incomplete, but documented in all cases, particularly on axial scans, by the presence of tissue that was iso-hypodense in comparison with the bone. This tissue partially filled the interfragmentary space and formed interfragmentary bridges in 10 cases (38.5%) ( Of the 20 cases treated by halo vest, 3 (16.7%) had halo-related complications during the first 2 months of treatment: in 2 cases there was loosening of the pins; in the other case, the patient did not tolerate this type of orthosis. In all 3 patients, the halo vest was replaced by a SOMI. The 2 cases of pin loosening were attributed to skull bone rearrangement at the interface as documented by CT scan ( Neurological disorders were present in 8 cases (28.6%) before beginning treatment. Monolateral or bilateral paresthesia affected 6 single C2 fractures. Paraplegia occurred in 2 cases in which the severe neurological deficit was attributable to the low cervical fracture: both patients died within the first 2 weeks of treatment. At clinical follow-up, 9 patients (34.6%) were symptom-free; 12 patients (46.2%) had cervical pain, associated with vertigo and/or persistent headache in 10 (38.5%) and/or slight articular limitation in 7 (26.9%). Three patients (11.5%) had moderate articular limitation, whereas in case 7 (3.8%), there was a severe limitation of rotation caused by monolateral articular fusion at C1-C2. The patients with paresthesias showed a complete regression of symptoms, with the exception of case 4, in which the symptoms improved but did not disappear. These findings appear practically identical to those obtained in surgical series of similar pathologies ( The evaluation of patients with cervical spine trauma has noticeably evolved over the past 2 decades. CT has been advocated as an adjunct to radiographic criteria for the assessment of acute cervical spine injury ( On the basis of the data acquired from a review of the literature regarding cervical spine fractures spanning a 10-year period ( In our experience, CT investigation performed on admission, when integrated by two- and three-dimensional reconstructed images, gives a clear picture of the morphology of the axis injury and visualizes in detail the course of the fracture line. It also detects any associated lesions of the adjacent vertebrae not visible on plain X-ray films. Furthermore, as described in previous studies ( During treatment, by alternatively performing CT scans and plain X-rays, it was possible to monitor the efficacy of immobilization in relation to the stability of alignment. CT also permitted evaluation of any mobilization of bone fragments and the evolution of the consolidation process. In the future, it is likely that other radiological techniques can be used, given the continual improvements in the evaluation of the bone callus by dual-energy X-ray absorptiometry or quantitative computer tomography ( The halo vest, which is known to have a better immobilization capacity with respect to other systems of orthosis ( We agree with Garfin and Ibrahim ( This CT evidence of bone rearrangement explains why late retightening of the pins would not have been efficacious and might, on the other hand, have resulted in penetration of an already-weakened skull. For this reason, in cases in which instability of the pin and bone rearrangement were evident at the bone–metal interface, we preferred removal of the unstable pin and insertion of a new one at a different site. Transient local infections of the soft tissues around the pins were resolved by rinsing with hydrogen peroxide, and none of the cases presented endocranial penetration. In the cases in which the halo was removed early and replaced by a SOMI, the final consolidation of the fracture was not compromised because halo vest immobilization had been maintained for a sufficiently long period. Consolidation times did not show significant differences between patients of different ages, similar to that previously observed for odontoid fractures ( At the end of treatment and after a period of functional rehabilitation, the stability of the cervical spine was evaluated by means of dynamic X-rays: in 1 case (case 3), there was a C2-C3 listhesis that increased by 1 mm in extension and by 2 mm in flexion, without significantly compromising stability. Clinical follow-up did not reveal any severe functional limitations, apart from 1 patient who presented a monolateral block in rotation (case 7). Cervical pain was present in about 45% of patients, and was correlated to the persistence of muscle contraction. Symptoms disappeared after medical treatment and were less severe in patients who periodically underwent cycles of physiotherapy. To conclude, we agree with the indications for treatment drawn from the series reported in the literature ( Surgery is necessary for type III lesions otherwise not reducible and/or in those accompanied by pseudoarthrosis ( We do not endorse the indications established by Daffner et al. ( The serial CT investigation has clarified the pathomorphological and biomechanical aspects of the fracture. During the early phase, it demonstrated correct positioning of the orthosis, and subsequently allowed step-by-step monitoring of the various stages of consolidation as well as the hold of the cranial pins in patients treated by halo vest. In a selected group of fractures of the neural arch of the axis, conservative treatment guarantees good long-term results, comparable to those of surgical outcome. The orthosis of choice for the best possible immobilization is the halo cast, although in some cases a less rigid system can be used, depending on how the patient tolerates it, particularly older patients. On the basis of this study on recently diagnosed fractures of the arch of the axis, we recommend a control CT with multiplanar reconstruction at day 120, at the time of orthosis removal, and a dynamic X-ray of the cervical spine 120 days thereafter to test any limitation in mobility. A cranial CT with bone window may be useful in those cases in which pin loosening is seen.