At several mineral exploration drilling sites in Australia, weakly consolidated formations mainly consist of sand particles that are poorly bonded by cementing agents such as clay, iron oxide cement or calcite. These formations are being encountered when drilling boreholes to the depth of up to 200 m. To study the behaviour of these materials, thick-walled hollow cylinder (TWHC) and solid cylindrical synthetic specimens were designed and prepared by adding Portland cement and water to sand grains. The effects of different parameters such as water and cement contents, grain size distribution and mixture curing time on the characteristics of the samples were studied to identify the mixture closely resembling the formation at the drilling site. The Hoek triaxial cell was modified to allow the visual monitoring of grain debonding and borehole breakout processes during the laboratory tests. The results showed the significance of real-time visual monitoring in determining the initiation of the borehole breakout. The size-scale effect study on TWHC specimens revealed that with the increasing borehole size, the ductility of the specimen decreases, however, the axial and lateral stiffnesses of the TWHC specimen remain unchanged. Under different confining pressures the lateral strain at the initiation point of borehole breakout is considerably lower in a larger size borehole (20 mm) compared to that in a smaller one (10 mm). Also, it was observed that the level of peak strength increment in TWHC specimens decreases with the increasing confining pressure.Borehole stability analysis is an important issue for researchers in the field of geotechnical, mining and petroleum engineering. Several borehole instability problems during or after the completion of drilling have been reported by a number of exploration companies in Australia. Many of these problems were reported in drilling projects in poorly cemented sand formations at the depth of up to 200 m beneath the ground. The sand production problem, as it is known, has also been observed in weakly bonded sandstones where the debonding of sand grains can be triggered by fluid pressure and induced stresses leading to the failure of sandstone at the borehole wall ( In recent decades, a number of numerical and experimental studies have been conducted on borehole stability in different rock formations. Unconfined compressive strength triaxial and thick-walled hollow cylinder (TWHC) tests are two of the most useful laboratory experiments ( In this study, a series of newly designed laboratory tests involving real-time monitoring of the development of breakout in an unsupported borehole was conducted. The paper aims to provide a more accurate representation of the actual behaviour of poorly cemented sands, which will be invaluable in designing appropriate borehole support systems. The tests were conducted on specimens of poorly cemented sands prepared in laboratory and the effects of different mixture characteristics (i.e. proportion of sand, cement and water) on their mechanical behaviours were studied by conducting compression tests on solid and hollow cylindrical specimens. Exploration boreholes are usually drilled to uncover potential future mine sites. In many cases, drilling is undertaken through poorly cemented sand formations. Generally, the boreholes are 250–300 mm in diameter and 50–200 m in length, depending on the underground conditions in Australia. This study focuses on solid and TWHC laboratory test specimens based on disturbed samples collected from a problematic drilling site at Burra, South Australia. At this site the sediment above bedrock is heterogeneous, with the shallower layers composed of silt and fine sand and the deeper layers transition to dark grey plastic clay. The problematic, poorly cemented sandstone underlies this clayey layer and consists of sand particles with a weak cementation due to the presence of iron dioxide, clay and calcite ( To drill a borehole at this site, different drilling methods have been tried to minimise the risk of borehole failure. In some cases, drilling mud has been used to maintain an open borehole during drilling. However, to conduct further investigation, some boreholes need to remain open for several months after drilling. The air core drilling and reverse circulation drilling methods were used in these cases. These are dry drilling methods and have been conventionally applied to drilling through soft ground in Australia. The cuttings are conveyed to the surface and pass through the sample collection system from where they are collected. Drilling continues with the addition of rods to the top of the drill string. When the drilling string reaches the poorly cemented sand layer, the borehole may collapse if the bonding between sand particles is not strong enough to provide stability. According to the reports from drilling company, the main factors affecting borehole instability include the low strength of poorly cemented sands which cannot sustain the existing in-situ stress after drilling, and, in few cases, fluid flow due to a confined aquifer near the borehole collapse zone. Hollow cylinder specimens were first used in the early 20th century when the importance of adopting a realistic model was identified for an underground opening. The opening was located at a depth of 9.5 km and susceptible to collapse due to high in-situ stresses ( Depending on the thickness of a hollow cylinder specimen, stresses that develop in its wall due to the application of uniform stresses can be analysed by two different methods. In a TWHC specimen, the wall thickness, Laboratory test facilities that were used in the current experimental testing comprised the following components: Specimens that were both of a reasonable diameter and of a borehole wall thickness satisfying the TWHC theory condition (i.e. A servo-controlled axial loading system of 100 kN loading capacity with 0.1 N accuracy was used for applying vertical stress to the specimen. Although the Hoek cell was originally designed to apply high confining pressures to hard rock specimens, the hydraulic pressure gauge was modified to allow measuring the confining pressure at very low amounts. An automatic hydraulic machine was used in conjunction with a relief valve and a pressure gauge for applying and maintaining the external confining pressure. Since the maximum confining pressure adopted in the current tests was low (6 MPa), a pressure gauge with an accuracy of 0.01 MPa was used. The TWHC specimens, consisting of poorly cemented sands, cannot be retrieved from the cell after the destructive tests due to the development of a large number of macro- and micro-cracks and the debonding of sand particles. In addition, the specimen is attached to the membrane and completely crumbles when moved. Thus, it is not possible to retrieve poorly cemented sand specimens and investigate the failure mechanism of borehole after the test. To address this issue, the triaxial cell was modified to allow simultaneous capturing of the borehole failure mechanism and the process of sand grain debonding at each time step and at different stress paths. A micro-camera with a 225 pixel per inch (ppi) resolution was installed inside the hollow platen to record the process of sand debonding and borehole breakout. The micro-camera was connected to a personal computer to record the borehole conditions throughout the test. A 60-channel data acquisition system was connected to two additional personal computers for recording and storing data. Initially, three PVC moulds with a slot on the circumference were manufactured to prepare the specimens. However, during the compaction process, the body of the mould bulged and this deformation prevented the specimens from obtaining a uniform cylindrical shape. An additional problem was observed during de-moulding. Since the specimens were very weak, deformation of the mould to release the specimen imparted damage to it. To address this issue, steel moulds were designed and manufactured (  Two sets of cylindrical platens were manufactured from hardened steel and were hardened prior to crushing and lapping. The platens were designed using the finite element analysis software ABAQUS 6.11 and loading steps similar to those applied during test conditions were applied to the model ( Since the specimens were weak enough to simulate the poorly cemented sand at the drilling site, they were vulnerable to disturbance prior to loading. To avoid applying the weight of the triaxial cell to the specimen during the test, a wooden base was manufactured to support the weight of the triaxial cell. Thus, there was no need to apply an external pressure on the specimens to hold the triaxial set before transferring it to the loading machine. The cell was placed on the wooden base and the bottom hollow platen mounted by the loading machine manually ensured that it can move freely inside the Hoek cell. A thin black membrane was used at the end of the bottom hollow platen to ensure that the LED lights of the camera are not reflected during video recording. Both ends of the specimen were then levelled by applying a thin layer of dental paste and, after it had been set, lubricated with a special grease to reduce the friction between the platen and the specimen, thus limiting stress concentration and bedding error. During the setting of the dental paste, the specimen was wrapped in a plastic film to avoid excessive drying of its surface, which could result in the loosening of particles. After the dental paste had been set, precise measurements of the specimen's weight, height and diameter were taken at three different points by means of a calliper. Measuring the dental paste deformations at the top and bottom surfaces of the specimen during the test revealed that the dental paste could withstand, without any noticeable deformation, a force of up to 100 kN, which is far greater than the strength of the poorly cemented specimen. The results from the preliminary tests on the specimens without capping were not reproducible due to the significant inconsistency in the results. The top hollow platen was positioned on the specimen and two spherical platens were placed on top of it to ensure that the vertical stress was uniformly applied to the specimen. Pairs of axial and lateral strain gauges were used to measure local deformations on the specimen. Two linear-variable differential transformers (LVDTs) were installed between the top and bottom rams of the loading machine to measure axial displacement externally. Prior to the test, the upper machine ram was brought to the edge of the top platen to set the offsets and 5 N was applied to ensure the contact between the top ram and the hollow platen. The captured image of the micro-camera was checked to ensure that the focal length of the lens was on the middle of the specimen hole and the position of the LEDs was controlled to ensure the borehole illumination was suitable for recording. In the first stage of loading, the vertical and confining stresses were increased simultaneously up to a certain stress level, which simulates the hydrostatic condition on the specimen boundary. Then, in the second stage, the sample was subjected to vertical compression at a constant displacement rate of 0.07 mm/min. The effects of various strain rates (0.02–0.1 mm/min) were also examined. No significant change was observed in the strength and strain behaviours of the specimens within this strain range. Data were recorded at 0.5 s time intervals. As has been reported by various drilling companies, time is a key factor in predicting the borehole stability after drilling or when withdrawing the drilling rods from the borehole to change the drilling bit. The video capture software was synchronised with the data acquisition system to facilitate the observation of the sand particle debonding process in parallel with the stress and strain measurements. Several sets of synthetic mixtures of poorly cemented sands were prepared and tested with different cement-to-sand ratios (by weight), To determine typical grain size distributions, samples were collected from the depth of up to 100 m at the drilling site in Burra, South Australia, and sieve analyses were performed using ASTM C-136 calibrated sieves plus pan. The particle size distribution was found to be almost uniform fine grained. Based on these sieve analysis results, natural silica sands (99.6% of silica) of two different grain size ranges, closely resembling the ones at the drilling site, were selected for preparing the synthetic mixtures in the laboratory. For these sand grains, the mean diameter ( According to Portland cement type II (specific gravity For preparing poorly cemented sands in laboratory conditions, a wide range of A number of mixtures with different values of The cement content, Various curing times have been suggested in previous studies (e.g. In order to determine the properties of the mixture, various preliminary tests were conducted on solid and TWHC specimens. The results of these tests can be used to compare other drilling fields and ground conditions to those examined in the current study. Preparation of the mixture began with Based on the preliminary test results, foil strain gauges and external LVDTs were selected to measure the axial and lateral strains during triaxial testing. To identify the most suitable coating for poorly cemented sands, three specimens with the same characteristics were prepared. Four strain gauges were placed on each specimen with different underlining conditions (i.e. polymer, plastic bond, no lining). The results from the strain gauges using the plastic bond lining and the specimen without lining showed irregularities in the stress–strain diagrams, but the strain gauges placed on the polymer coating showed good and reproducible results and the cohesion of the polymer and specimen continued to be preserved after the test. Thus, polymer coating was deemed to be the best suited option for the subsequent triaxial testing. In addition, the strengthening effect of the polymer on the poorly cemented sand TWHC specimens was considered. Video recordings that were taken inside the borehole of the preliminary TWHC tests showed that the debonding of sand particles in the specimens initiated in the zone out of the applied polymer location (e.g. top and bottom sections of the borehole, see As mentioned above, two sets of sands, namely fine (0.125–0.355 mm) and coarse (0.425–1.4 mm) grained sands, were examined in this study. Three sets of UCS tests were performed on solid specimens with the same values of  It should be noted that increasing To study the effect of cement content ( From the UCS test results, the following trends can be observed: The maximum strength, The post-peak stress–strain trend of the specimens with lower values of The effect of Furthermore, the effect of water required for cement hydration was considered by increasing the water content in small increments within the range of 5%–12%, covering the dry, optimum, and wet sections of the optimum water diagram. Triaxial tests on solid specimens were performed to determine the shear failure properties of the specimens under different stress conditions.  Mohr–Coulomb criterion is one of the most commonly used failure criteria in borehole stability problems ( To explain the behaviour of the material by the Coulomb failure criterion, the cohesion, Lateral strain was measured during the triaxial tests on solid specimens to study the effect of confining pressure and cement content on the volumetric strain of the prepared specimens.  Triaxial tests on TWHC specimens were conducted to investigate the borehole breakout and failure properties of the synthetic specimens under different stress conditions. Real-time video recording helped to determine the initiation and direction of borehole breakout and to locate the sand debonding on the borehole wall. The main TWHC tests were conducted for three different cement contents (   As shown in Also, increasing the cement content by a small amount slightly increases the stiffness of the specimens for the same sample preparation and test condition. The results show that the confining pressure has a minimal effect on the stiffness as exhibited in the stress–strain curves. This result agrees with that of   As mentioned above, the TWHC specimens were prepared in two borehole sizes: 10 mm and 20 mm. The same process was adopted for the 20 mm borehole specimens, including grain size distribution, curing time, compaction force, and so on. Triaxial tests were performed on 20 mm borehole specimens for different In lateral direction, This study has examined the stability of boreholes in poorly cemented sand by a series of newly developed laboratory tests. It was observed that the strength of the poorly cemented sand specimens is largely influenced by the mould conditions. The real-time monitoring of preliminary tests on TWHC specimens showed that in the case of curing the specimens for less than 8 days ( The post-peak stress–strain behaviour of the specimens with lower Using the videos recorded during the preliminary test on TWHC specimens, the strengthening effect of the applied coating was investigated and it was found that the borehole breakout started in the area out of the section where polymer was applied. Solid specimens exhibited strain hardening behaviour and no peak strength was observed in their stress–strain diagram both in axial and lateral directions. Unlike the solid specimens, TWHC specimens did not exhibit strain hardening behaviour after the maximum strength was reached and the peak strength could be determined in the applied stress ranges. At lower confining pressures (i.e. 1 MPa and 2 MPa), solid specimens started contracting initially from the top and bottom sections and after 0.5%–0.6% of axial compression strain, it diverted to the lateral dilation. Increasing the confining pressure kept the specimen in contraction mode and dilation started with delay at a higher axial strain. For confining pressures of more than 2 MPa, specimens remained in contraction mode and never diverted to the dilatation until the maximum strength was reached. For the TWHC specimens with confining pressures higher than 4.5 MPa, the first stage of the test could not be completed and the borehole failed before the application of the deviatoric stress. Also, in the TWHC specimens the volumetric strain curve conjugated the axial strain axis at a higher magnitude which suggested that micro-cracks were formed on the borehole wall and sand grain dislocation took place in TWHC versus solid specimens to release the applied stresses. Based on the observations from the real-time camera recording, it can be stated that the transition from the volumetric strain contraction to the dilation occurred before the initiation of borehole breakout. The failure strength of the 20 mm borehole TWHC specimens was less than that of the 10 mm ones especially at higher confining pressures due to the size-scale effect. Also, ductility was less in 20 mm borehole specimens in comparison with that in the 10 mm ones. However, the stiffness in axial and lateral directions did not change with an increase in the borehole size. Also, it was observed that the lateral ductility significantly decreased in the specimens with larger borehole size. For further investigation on the behaviour of poorly cemented sands, it is suggested to upgrade the laboratory tests to polyaxial stress condition in order to simulate anisotropic horizontal in-situ stresses adjacent to a drilled borehole. The authors wish to confirm that there are no known conflicts of interest associated with this publication and there has been no significant financial support for this work that could have influenced its outcome. This work has been supported by the Deep Exploration Technologies Cooperative Research Centre whose activities are funded by the