Xanthate collectors have been industrially used for the flotation of pyrite in the gold mining industry because pyrite is the most common gold-bearing mineral. However, after reviewing the structure-activity relationship study of flotation collectors, the influence of hydrophobic groups on the flotation performance of collectors remains underexplored. In this paper, using density functional theory (DFT) method, the quantum chemical properties of xanthate derivatives ROC = SS- (R = ethyl, isobutyl or amyl) and their interactions with Fe3+, Fe(OH)2
                     +, Fe(OH)2+ and pyrite cluster were evaluated in the context of solvation effects. The flotation performance of substituted xanthates was experimentally investigated for a gold–pyrite ore. Based on the values of frontier orbital energies and electronic chemical potential, the flotation performance of the alkyl xanthates was predicted to be amyl xanthate > isobutyl xanthate > ethyl xanthate. The results showed that the direct chemisorption of the ferric hydroxo xanthates on the pyrite surfaces was thermodynamically possible. The flotation performance of the xanthate collectors matched with the theoretically predicted trend. This study could offer some theoretical insights into the mechanism of pyrite flotation and provide novel guidelines for rational selection/design of hydrophobic groups of flotation collectors.Flotation is one of the most important methods for the separation of valuable minerals from ores. In flotation practice, mineral particle surfaces can be modified by using activators, depressants, modifiers, and, most importantly, flotation collectors. Flotation collectors selectively adsorb on particle surfaces of valuable minerals, increasing hydrophobicity of valuable minerals. As a result, valuable minerals can attach to air bubbles and finally, bubble–particle aggregates are reported to the flotation concentrate. Therefore, flotation collectors play an important role in the recovery of valuable minerals. With the increase in rapid depletion of high grade and easy-to-process ores, the mineral industry has to face the great challenge for the efficient processing of refractory, low grade and highly disseminated ore deposits. In practical flotation separation, it is well-established that the application of a flotation collector with tailored structure could greatly improve selective flotation ( Since small changes in molecular structures of flotation collectors could potentially lead to drastic changes in the strength and selectivity of collector adsorption, structure–activity relationship is of great significance and can serve as an important method for rational design of flotation collectors ( Owing to the remarkable developments in computer power, new mathematics and robust computer programs during the recent decades, computational chemistry has been widely used for investigation of the physiochemical properties of chemical systems and reactions. Among various computational chemistry methods, density functional theory (DFT) has been typically used to study the electronic properties and atomic structure of various chemical systems with excellent computational accuracy and efficiency ( Molecular simulations in flotation research have been used to study collector–mineral interactions ( Apart from the above-mentioned theoretical studies, research attention has been also directed to the mineral cluster–collector interactions ( Since collector–mineral interactions take place on mineral surfaces, it is of great significance to elucidate the electronic structure and geometry of collectors and mineral surfaces. In real flotation, mineral surfaces have steps, terraces, kinks, impurities and defects with coordinatively unsaturated metal atoms. These features make mineral surfaces extremely difficult to characterize both experimentally and theoretically. Hence, in order to make the theoretical work on collector–mineral interactions more practical and computationally economic, a simple but rational model system should be introduced. Owing to its direct relevance to the active sites on real mineral surfaces, it is rational to hypothesize that mineral cluster models could potentially be used to study collector–mineral interactions, as evidenced by the previously published literature ( All calculations in this work were performed via Gaussian 09 software package ( The binding or interaction energies (Δ The reaction Gibbs free energy ΔG Here, To illustrate the effect of alkyl substituent on the chemical reactivity of xanthates collectors, electronic structure parameters, including electronic chemical potential (µ) ( The dipole moment is a useful descriptor for the van der Waals interaction between two chemical species ( The global electrophilicity index (ω) allows for the quantitative description of the electrophilic or nucleophilic nature of chemical species, physically denoting the tendency to accept electrons, which can be defined as ( Flotation experiments are performed in a 3L mechanically-agitated cell using a gold pyrite ore (Kalgoorlie Consolidated Gold Mine, Australia). The effect of grinding time on the mass of −150 µm size fraction is demonstrated in In each test, 1000 g of the ore sample was ground for 25 min in a mild steel rod mill with a particle size distribution of 80% passing 150 µm. Water was added to the flotation cell to achieve the pulp density of 30%. The pulp slurry was agitated at 900 rpm. Under natural pulp pH (about 8–8.5), the flotation pulp was conditioned sequentially with the analytical grade reagents: 40 g/t of CuSO4, 40 g/t of the collector (ethyl xanthate, amyl xanthate or isobutyl xanthate) and 10 g/t of MIBC. The flotation concentrates were collected separately at 30, 60, 120 and 240 s. The flowsheet of flotation is shown in The optimized structures of the xanthate anions at B3LYP/6-311+ G (d, p) level with the numbering scheme were displayed in To validate the accuracy of the computational method used in this work, the calculated structural parameters are compared with the experimentally observed values. For example, in the case of ethyl xanthate, the calculated values of r(C-S1) = 1.6959 and r(C-S2) = 1.7054 are in good agreement with the experimentally reported values of 1.67 and 1.70 ( It was found from In order to understand qualitatively the atomic contribution to the frontier molecular orbitals of the xanthate anions, the structures of the frontier molecular orbital were graphically presented in  According to the previously reported literature ( The negative values of the interaction energies, given in In order to investigate the effect of the hydrophobic group on the binding strength of the xanthate collectors toward pyrite, DFT method was applied to study the interaction of the xanthate collectors with the pyrite cluster model. The binding energies of the xanthate collectors with the pyrite cluster were computed and summarized in Generally, during the complex formation reaction, the total energy of chemical system would decrease. The generation of a stable complex usually results in a negative interaction energy. It means that the more negative, the binding energy, the more stable is the resulting complex and thus the higher selectivity of the collector toward the targeted metal or mineral. As shown in From The flotation recovery of pyrite as a function of time is displayed in Apart from the efficient adsorption of xanthate collectors on mineral surfaces, the hydrophobicity of collectors also plays significant roles in ensuring the flotation of valuable minerals. To describe the hydrophobic property of the xanthate collectors, the n-octanol/water partition coefficient (log P) of substituted xanthates has been calculated by the Bio-Loom software ( As mentioned above, the interaction energies of the alkyl xanthates with the pyrite cluster follow the trend of ethyl xanthate > amyl xanthate > isobutyl xanthate, which is different from the experimentally observed order, namely, amyl xanthate > isobutyl xanthate > ethyl xanthate. The great discrepancy between the theoretical prediction and experimental observation can be possibly attributed to the two major reasons: (i) the selected pyrite cluster model is too simple to be representative for the modelling of pyrite surfaces, and (ii) for certain series of collectors with the same minerophilic group, density functional theory (DFT) method may be incapable of fully describing the influence of non-polar group on their flotation performance, although it is well known that DFT can be used to evaluate the structure–activity relationship of non-polar groups ( In this paper, the physicochemical properties of substituted xanthates ROC = SS The S1 and S2 atoms in the functional group are the chemical reaction centre for the xanthate collectors. Based on the energy values of the electronic chemical potential and the highest occupied molecular orbital (HOMO), the flotation performance of substituted xanthates is theoretically predicted to be amyl xanthate > isobutyl xanthate > ethyl xanthate. Based on the interaction energies of the alkyl xanthates with Fe(OH) The collecting capacity of the alkyl xanthates for the flotation of a gold pyrite ore follows the order of amyl xanthate > isobutyl xanthate > ethyl xanthate, which is in agreement with the theoretically predicted trend and the ranking of hydrophobicity. Given that the trend of the interaction energies between the substituted xanthates and the pyrite cluster deviates greatly from the order of experimentally observed flotation performance, the tentative effort to the pyrite cluster model instead of real pyrite surfaces for the study of collector–mineral interaction seems to be unsuccessful. Considering that flotation system is inherently a multiphase and dynamic process, a more sophisticated and representative cluster model should be introduced, for which the relevant research findings would be published in the future. The authors would like to thank the