Operative problems in the application of femoral locking nails are frequently related to an unfavourable entry point at the greater trochanter. Especially in more distally located fractures the nail is forced to follow the cortex abutted medullary canal. A wrong defined entry point either in the medio-lateral or dorso-ventral direction inevitably leads to tension between nail and femur. Forceful insertion in this situation may cause disastrous iatrogenic comminution at the fracture side or additional fractures at the proximal femur. To avoid tension between nail and femur the best suited entry point must be defined according to the natural medullary cavity.
                  In 16 human cadaver femora, the natural medullary cavity was opened and after cleaning filled with a radio-opaque substance (barium sulphate). Twelve radiographs where taken from each bone starting with the anterior–posterior view and then turning the bone axially in steps of 15°. From these radiographs, the ideal entry point at the greater trochanter was calculated.
                  In 88% of the specimen the ideal entry point for a straight nail was found constantly at the medial border of the greater trochanter overlaying the tendinous insertion of the piriformis muscle. The axis of the medullary cavity was in average 2.1cm anterior to the dorsal border of the greater trochanter.
                  In a second step the ideal entry point for bend nails was calculated. According to this calculation a bend nail with a radius of 100cm needs an entry point 0.7mm anterior to the dorsal edge of the greater trochanter. Overlaying the hook like shape of the posterior part of the trochanter.Different measures are available to stabilise long bone fractures. From a biomechanical point of view the interlocking nail as an intramedullary technique is superior to the techniques of plating or external fixation. For a successful nailing technique however a detailed knowledge of the anatomical features is demanded. Of utmost interest is the choice of the correct entry point. It is not only dependent on the specific anatomical features of the bone. Form and stability of the used implant has to be taken into account. There are different opinions found in literature about the best suited entry point at the proximal part of the femur. Some authors prefer an entry point at the tip of the greater trochanter For this study the proximal end of the medullary cavity little distal to the lesser trochanter (“1” in Sixteen formalin–alcohol fixed adult femora (seven female and seven male bones) where taken out and cleaned from adherent soft tissues. In 15 cases the left femur was taken, in one case the right femur. The average age was 75.6 years (minimum 50 years, maximum 90 years). In the used material previous fractures or other bone deformities were excludes by clinical inspection and radiographs. To define the border between medullary canal and cortex more precisely a window was sawn out of the diaphysis and after cleaning the cavity of fat and blood clots the medullary cavity was filled with a radio-opaque substance (barium sulphate mixed with vaseline). After reassembling the femur a screw was fixed at the proximal and distal end of the bone ( The average length of the used specimen measured from the tip of greater trochanter to the joint surface of the lateral condyle was 43.3 In 14 of the evaluated 16 femora (88%) the central axis of the medullary canal was constantly located at the medial edge of the greater trochanter overlaying the tendinous insertion of the piriformis muscle ( The calculated entry point ( Despite the fact that many authors point on the great importance of a correct entry point in antegrade femoral nailing