Objective
                  To correlate interpedicular distance (IPD) with radiographic parameters, neurologic deficit, and posterior structures injury in patients with thoracolumbar burst fractures.
               
                  Methods
                  A total of 103 patients with a thoracolumbar burst fracture retrospectively reviewed. IPD was measured from the medial sclerotic areas of the pedicles on anteroposterior plain radiographs. Data on local kyphosis (LK), the ratio of anterior to posterior vertebral height (A/P ratio), loss of vertebral body height (LOVBH), spinal canal stenosis (SCS), neurologic status, and injuries to posterior structures (lamina, posterior ligamentous complex, and facet joint) were correlated with IPD using correlation analysis. Logistic regression analysis was used to determine the threshold of IPD predictive of neurologic deficit and posterior structure injury.
               
                  Results
                  Of the 103 patients, 98 (95.15%) presented with increased IPD, ranging from 1.41% to 41.53% (mean, 10.92 ± 3.37%). Regarding radiographic parameters, both LK and SCS were linearly correlated with IPD. There was a significant correlation between IPD and neurologic status; logistic regression analysis identified an IPD increase of >20% as an indicator of neurologic deficit. In addition, both facet joint injury and lamina fracture were associated with IPD, with an IPD increase >15% as an indicator of facet joint injury and an IPD increase >20% a predictor of lamina fracture.
               
                  Conclusions
                  Our results indicate that IPD is correlated with LK, SCS, neurologic status, facet joint injury, and lamina fracture. Our data demonstrate that IPD measured from plain radiographs is a reliable indicator for assessment of thoracolumbar burst fractures.The majority of spinal fractures occur in the thoracolumbar junction, and burst fractures account for 10%–20% of these injuries. The integrity of the posterior ligamentous complex (PLC) is an important factor in stability evaluation and treatment selection in thoracolumbar injury classification and severity score (TLICS), and patients with a thoracolumbar burst fracture who have a PLC injury and who undergo conservative treatment are at risk for progressive kyphosis. As a feature of burst fractures, increased interpedicular distance (IPD) results from axial trauma and allows for the invasion of fragments of the vertebral body into the spinal canal, producing compression on the neurologic contents. Therefore, in the present study, we aimed to identify the correlations of IPD with typical radiographic parameters, neurologic status, and posterior structures injury, including PLC, lamina, and facet joints, and provides insight into the diagnostic value of IPD in evaluating thoracolumbar burst fractures. This study was approved by the appropriate Institutional Review Board and was conducted according to the principles of the Declaration of Helsinki. The retrospective study cohort comprised 103 consecutive patients who presented to a level one trauma center with a thoracolumbar (T11–L2) burst fracture between June 2015 and October 2017. All included patients underwent plain radiography, computed tomography (CT) scans, and magnetic resonance imaging of the injured segments. Patients with a dislocation fracture, injury with congenital deformity or tumor, pathological or osteoporotic fracture, or fracture involving more than 1 segment were excluded. All parameters were measured by 2 observers using the Picture Archiving and Communication System (PACS) with an accuracy of 0.01 mm and 0.01 degrees. IPD was calculated based on measurement on anteroposterior plain radiographs ( In measurements of the midsagittal images ( MRI was performed within 48 hours of injury. The status of the PLC based on the MRI signal of the supraspinous ligament (SSL) and interspinous ligament (ISL) was evaluated by 3 experienced orthopedists and classified as intact, edema, or disrupted. Intact status was defined as no visible MRI signal change on T1 and T2 short-tau inversion recovery–weighted imaging, edema was defined as a hyperintensity without discontinuity, and disrupted was defined as discontinuity of a "black stripe" on T1 or T2 short-tau inversion recovery–weighted imaging ( Neurologic status was classified according to the American Spinal Injury Association (ASIA) impairment scale. For analysis, ASIA Scale categories of A and B were considered to represent severe neurological deficit; C and D, moderate neurologic deficit; E, no neurologic deficit. Mean and standard deviation values were calculated for all parameters. Continuous variables were analyzed using multivariance analysis of variance and the Student Patient demographic data are presented in A summary of radiographic parameters is displayed in Summaries of the correlation analyses are presented in Spearman correlation analysis showed significant positive correlations between IPD and neurologic status, lamina fracture, and facet joint capsule injury. There was no significant correlation between IPD and ISL or SSL injury ( Thoracolumbar burst fractures result from high-energy axial or compressive impact, and the typical burst fracture includes loss of vertebral body height, endplate comminution, and compromise of the spinal canal by the retropulsion of bone fragments. Widening of the interpedicular distance is another typical radiologic sign that aids in assessment of injury severity. Daffner et al. Plain radiographs remain the first step in assessing the severity of vertebral fracture in emergency diagnosis and management, and IPD can be easily and reliably measured. Bensch et al. In consideration of the importance of neurologic status in the evaluation of burst fractures, various studies have noted to the relationship between spinal canal compromise and neurologic status. Meves et al. Furthermore, the integrity of the posterior structure plays an important role in limiting excessive motion. Vaccaro et al. Previous studies have focused on the relationship between radiographic signs and PLC injury. Gehweiler et al. This study has some limitations. The number of patients included was relatively small, and the cohort included mainly severe acute cases. Other, slight fractures that were treated with a conservative method or without MRI were not examined. In addition, although MRI is associated with moderate specificity and sensitivity in defining PLC injury, it may lead to variance compared with intraoperative observation. Our findings provide insight into the correlation between IPD measured from plain radiographs and the evaluation of stability in thoracolumbar burst fractures. IPD was significantly correlated with LK, LOVBH, SCS, neurologic status, lamina fracture and facet joint injury, but not with ISL and SSL injury. In addition, an IPD increase of >15% was an indicator of facet joint injury and an increase of >20% was an indicator of neurologic deficit and lamina fracture. Our results indicate that IPD can have considerable diagnostic value for the assessment of thoracolumbar burst fractures.