This paper investigates the anisotropy of coal under uniaxial compression conditions using both experimental and numerical methods. Primary wave (P-wave) velocity measurements, X-ray micro-computed tomography (CT) scanning, and uniaxial compression tests were conducted to assess the anisotropic characteristics of selected coal samples. Based on the experimental results, comprehensive analyses were carried out to study the influences of different contributing factors on the anisotropic properties of coal. A three-dimensional (3D) finite difference model was then built to further investigate the effects of failure initiation, stress redistribution and the presence of microstructures on the anisotropy of coal. The experimental and numerical results of uniaxial compression tests indicate that the coal strength anisotropy is affected by the directional distribution of the microstructures. Bedding planes directly control the uniaxial compressive strength of coal, and face cleats have a greater influence on the mechanical properties than butter cleats. The presence of mineral inclusions increases the heterogeneity of coal because of the significant differences in strength and deformation in the mineral inclusion zones. The mechanical and seismic anisotropies are both directly related to the directional distribution of the microstructures, which is demonstrated by the variations in the anisotropic strength and P-wave velocity of the coal. The correlations between the uniaxial compressive strength (UCS) and P-wave velocity are different when the coals are loaded in different directions, and an exponential correlation was suitable for defining this relationship.In contrast to other well-cemented sedimentary rocks, coal is a discontinuous, inhomogeneous, anisotropic, and nonlinear elastic medium, which is because coal matrices have relatively low stiffness due to the void space and mineral inclusions that form during the geological and/or biological coalification process. The mechanical anisotropy of coal and sedimentary rocks has been broadly investigated over the past few decades. The variation in the uniaxial compressive strength (UCS) with the angle of anisotropy, which is the angle between the loading direction and the foliation plane, has several patterns, including U-shaped, shoulder, and wavy patterns, in different kinds of rock. X-ray computed tomography (CT) technology is a non-destructive imaging technique that is broadly used in various scientific disciplines. Three dimensional reconstruction technology (TDRT) is a combination of experimental investigations and numerical analyses that is based on micro-xCT technology. The In this study, the microstructure and loading direction-dependent mechanical anisotropy of coal is investigated experimentally and numerically. The numerical geometry is reconstructed based on digital micro-xCT images using the well-established TDRT protocol introduced by Zhao et al. The coal blocks used in this study were obtained from the NO. 14 coal seam at the Xinzhouyao Coal Mine, located in Datong City, Shanxi Province, China. Based on the XRD analysis, the coal blocks are composed of amorphous minerals (94%), clay minerals (3.4%), and quartz (0.6%). Both face and butt cleats were observed in the prepared specimens. The face cleats are the prominent cleat system, and the butt cleats terminate orthogonally at face cleats. Random cracks were also observed in these coal blocks. The external loading directions are determined based on the orientations of the bedding planes and face cleats. The X direction is set to be parallel to the bedding planes and perpendicular to the face cleats, the Y direction is parallel to the bedding planes and the face cleats, and the Z direction is perpendicular to the bedding planes, as shown in Nine cubic coal samples with side lengths of 50 mm were prepared based on the uniaxial compressive test suggested by ISRM. The surfaces of the samples were parallel or perpendicular to the orientation of the bedding planes or the face cleats. The coal samples were equally divided into three groups, namely, groups X, Y, and Z, and the coal samples in groups X, Y, and Z were loaded in the corresponding directions as shown in The To reconstruct the realistic structure of each coal specimen, each sample was scanned by the ACTIS300-320/225 micro-xCT scanner at China University of Mining and Technology, Beijing, as shown in Each prepared coal specimen was tested in three orthogonal directions, namely, the X-, Y-, and Z-axis directions, as shown in To simulate the axial unconfined loading process and investigate the effects of microstructures on the coal failure process, a finite difference model was developed based on the reconstructed coal structure using the CT scanning images. The mechanical properties of different components within the coal were estimated by micro-indentation tests, and the boundary conditions were prescribed based on the constant velocity controlled loading approach. We adopted the well-established geometrical model approach introduced by Zhao et al. The CT images obtained from specimen X Coal is an organic-rich mixed sedimentary material. The bulk coal is composed of a series of visible components, including the organic coal matrix, mineral inclusions, and pre-existing discontinuities (cleats, cracks, and void space), as illustrated in Because no meshes are assigned to the pre-existing discontinuities, the coal matrix and mineral inclusions are the two main constituents must be estimated in the numerical simulation. The indentation hardness test is broadly employed in mechanical engineering to determine the hardness of a material. In these tests, the examined material is indented until an impression is formed; these tests can be performed at either macroscopic or microscopic scales, and the micro-indentation tests typically use forces less than 2 N. In addition, the indentation hardness of the materials in the coal and rock are quantitatively correlated with their mechanical properties. The mechanical properties of the mineral inclusions and coal matrix are summarized in An empirical constant displacement loading rate of 5.0 × 10 The stress-strain curves of the coal specimens had similar patterns when they were loaded in the same direction. However, they were different with changes in the loading direction, as illustrated in The UCS and Young's moduli were found to be direction-dependent. The experimental stress and strain results are summarized in The coal samples loaded parallel to the bedding planes also have different mechanical behaviors. The average UCS and Young's modulus of the coals loaded in the Y direction are slightly higher than those loaded in the X direction, and the average strain and their percentage compression as well as the post-peak stages loaded in the X direction are higher than their counterparts loaded in the Y direction. This also reveals that the effect of the face cleats on the mechanical properties of coal is greater than that of the butt cleats because the X and Y loading direction represent specimens loaded parallel to the butt cleats and face cleats, respectively. In a previous study, we introduced and verified the 3-dimensional reconstruction modelling method used in this study to understand the variations in deformation and stress of a real specimen during the loading process. This method also provides new opportunities to investigate the directional failure characteristics due to the mechanical anisotropy of coal. In this study, we used the established numerical method to study the anisotropic behavior of coal. The continuous evolution of plastic zones in the FLAC The variations in the axial stress and the shear and tensile failure zones are obtained from the samples numerically loaded in the X direction using the FLAC Tensile failure is the primary failure mechanism prior to the progressive failure stage, which is confirmed by the numbers of failures. The number of tensile failures is always greater than the number of shear failures from O to Bx, as shown in The distributions of mineral inclusions, shear failures, tensile failures, and the related contours of the axial stress and shear strain rate at points of Ax, Bx, Cx, and Dx in In the elastic stage, shear failure zones propagate among tensile failure zones near the mineral inclusion zones, and some of the tensile failures in the area of strain rate concentration enter the shear failure state as shown in In the post-failure stage, the tensile failure of the coal matrix dominates after the formation of shear bands across the interior of the coal sample. This indicates that the additional crushing of the coal sample after the macro failure is a tensile-controlled failure. The failure behaviors in the Y and Z directions are similar to those in the X direction, as shown in Based on the numerical simulation results, the variations of the tensile and shear failures at different stages when loaded in the Y and Z directions are similar to those when loaded in the X direction, though the number of failures varies with the loading direction. For the Y loading direction, there are 26,313 tensile failures in the elastic stage, which similar to the number with loading in the X direction. At the peak strength, there are 260,282 shear failures, which is greater than the number with loading in the X direction. The numbers of tensile failures in the elastic stage and shear failures at the peak strength are both smallest with loading in the Z direction (∼5768 and ∼218,883, respectively). The variations of the plastic zones in the numerical simulation indicate the internal failure process of coal. A comparison of the plastic zones shows that more cracks or failures developed with loading parallel to bedding than perpendicular to bedding. The smaller number of shear failures with loading in the Z direction also indicates rapid crack growth and intensive failure of the specimen. This agrees with the experimental stress-strain curves shown in The distributions of the plastic zones, contours of the axial stress and shear strain rates were similar with loading in both the X and Y directions, as shown in The interior anisotropy of the numerical model with loading in the Z direction is less pronounced than in the models loaded in the X and Y directions. When the numerical model is loaded in the Z direction, the mineral inclusions have less effect on the stress and strain distributions inside the coal specimen in the compaction and elastic stages because the plastic zones are mainly in mineral inclusion zones and do not propagate to regions around and coalesce with other plastic zones. As expected, the axial stress was concentrated in the central part of the specimen, and no band of concentrated shear strain rate was identified, as shown in The shear failure strips and stress concentrations on both sides of the coal sample are symmetrically distributed in the progressive failure stage with loading in the Z direction due to the decreases in the heterogeneity of the coal induced by the loading direction. The effect of mineral inclusions on the fracturing of coal is significant in the post-failure stage because the mineral concentration in the lower left area contributes to the formation of the strip of strain and the area of reduced stress, as shown in The loading-direction-dependent coal failure behaviors confirm that the microstructure of the rock controls both the intermediate and ultimate rock deformation and failure mechanisms. Because the natural occurred microstructure of coal specimens contains anisotropic features, it can directly affect the bulk-scale anisotropic behavior of coal and coal formations. Compared with the experimental data, the numerical results illustrate more specific features about the anisotropic mechanical responses of coal. The differences in the UCS values in the numerical simulations in the three loading directions were more complex than those measured experimentally. The difference between the UCS values in the X and Y loading directions (25.80 and 27.17 MPa, respectively) is larger than that between the average experimental UCS values (26.21 and 26.24 MPa). The UCS in the Z loading direction (32.38 MPa) is also lower than the average value obtained in the experiments (36.07 MPa). A similar difference was also found in the elastic moduli. This suggests that the anisotropic mechanical properties in the specimen were consistent with the anisotropic trend revealed by the experimentally obtained average mechanical values. The stress-strain curves obtained based on the numerical simulations and the experiments were also different in the compressive stages, as shown in The unconfined compressive failure simulation can be applied in the X, Y, and Z loading directions using the same mesh model reconstructed from a real specimen, which cannot be done in physical lab experiments. Thus, we cannot experimentally validate the behaviors for loading in the Y and Z directions because no physical experiments were performed with these two loading directions. Because loading in the X direction was validated and demonstrated that the model reasonably accurately to represents the mechanical properties of the coal, we used the validated model to predict the behaviors of loading in the Y and Z directions to determine the possible behaviors in these two directions. Coal strength estimates are important for engineering applications and designs for coal extraction and utilization. The The Based on the experimental results, the UCS was plotted against the The correlations between the In this study, the exponential relationship is better than the other regressions because it has a higher average correlation coefficient ( This study investigated the anisotropy of coal and used both experimental and numerical methods to determine the underlying failure and deformation behaviors of coal. A numerical model was built based on a reconstructed digital rock model using xCT images. The UCS and Coal strength anisotropy is affected by the directional distribution of microstructures. Bedding planes directly control the uniaxial compressive strength of coal, and the face cleats have a greater influence on the mechanical properties than the butt cleats. The degree of heterogeneity of coal increases with the presence of mineral inclusions because of the large differences in strength and deformation around the mineral inclusion zones. The predominant failure processes in the coal specimen is consistent with the failure patterns in coal specimens observed by Zhao et al. The correlations between the UCS and The research is financially supported by The following is the Supplementary data to this article: Supplementary data to this article can be found online at