A porphyry copper ore containing chalcopyrite as the principal copper bearing mineral, and pyrite as the only other sulphide mineral, was treated in batch flotation tests under well defined physical conditions. The size-by-size flotation response was benchmarked against established calibration curves to infer an operational contact angle of the sulphide minerals as a function of particle size. The inferred operational contact angle values of the sulphide minerals were validated by independent measurements of contact angle on the concentrates and, in the case of chalcopyrite, by an indirect approach using Time of Flight Secondary Ion Mass Spectrometry (ToF-SIMS).
                  Recovery, flotation rate, and inferred operational contact angle increased with collector addition across all size fractions, with the intermediate and coarse size fractions benefitting the most from increased collector addition. The directly measured and inferred operational contact angles were in reasonable agreement, with an R
                     2 value of 0.7 across all size fractions. There was good agreement between the advancing contact angle values determined using ToF-SIMS and those calculated from direct contact angle measurement on the 53–75μm size fraction for the case of chalcopyrite. A method for benchmarking flotation response has been developed, which may lead to better flotation process diagnostics and modelling.The flotation behaviour of model chalcopyrite particles has been characterised as a function of particle size fraction and advancing contact angle range under well defined physical conditions ( Previous investigations on the relationship between the particle size, contact angle and flotation behaviour of chalcopyrite ( While the contact angle is evidently one of the most important parameters determining particle floatability, its measurement on heterogeneous particle mixtures in which the bulk is hydrophilic gangue is very problematic. As a result, researchers have resorted to characterising flotation response of natural ores in terms of particle size, liberation class, and collector surface coverage ( The flotation rate constant has been considered to be the best descriptor of floatability ( This paper tackles the determination of the operational advancing contact angle of both chalcopyrite and combined sulphide minerals (i.e., chalcopyrite and pyrite combined) in an ore feed using their flotation behaviour. A porphyry copper ore is floated at different collector additions and the flotation behaviour of chalcopyrite in each size fraction is benchmarked against the calibration curves. An attempt is made to verify the inferred contact angle values by directly measuring the advancing contact angles on size fractions of the concentrates and tailings from the flotation tests, and back calculating the contact angle of the feed. The approach is somewhat difficult because the bulk of the tailing is composed of hydrophilic gangue and the Washburn method, as demonstrated in this paper, is insensitive to low concentrations of hydrophobic particles in a bulk hydrophilic matrix. In the same vein, direct contact angle measurements on the feed size fractions were not successful because the hydrophobic component was also too low. Furthermore, there is the potential issue of surface oxidation which may take place during sample preparation of sulphide minerals for the contact angle measurement. However, the techniques developed for sample preparation seemed to preserve the surface species ( A porphyry copper ore with chalcopyrite as the principal copper bearing mineral, and pyrite as the only other sulphide mineral, supplied by Kennecott Utah Copperton Concentrator, USA, was used in the current test work. Crushed ore (<2.4 A 5 The feed, concentrates and tail samples were wet sieved into the same size fractions shown in Mineralogical analysis of all feed size fractions and selected concentrate and tailing size fractions was carried out by means of QEM-Scan analysis. Samples of the 150–210, 210–300, and +300 The bulk mineralogical composition of the ore feed is shown in The presence of pyrite, in addition to chalcopyrite, as minerals for which the contact angle can change with collector addition, complicated the direct measurement of contact angle, necessitating also the consideration of sulphur recovery representing the combined recovery of pyrite and chalcopyrite. Since there were no other significant sulphur bearing minerals, sulphur recovery can be equated to the recovery of sulphide minerals, both chalcopyrite and pyrite. Advancing contact angle measurements using the Washburn technique ( The sensitivity of the Washburn method was tested using mixtures of chalcopyrite and quartz in the 75–105 An independent surface analysis study via ToF-SIMS ( This methodology was used to “measure” the contact angle of chalcopyrite particles in the 53–75 Recovery by entrainment in a single batch flotation test was estimated using the method by The rate constant, after entrainment subtraction, was calculated assuming that there exists in each size fraction a single floatable fraction and a non-floating fraction ( For batch flotation, the recovery, From a hydrodynamic point of view, the flotation rate constant ( The flotation behaviour of chalcopyrite obtained in laboratory tests on the natural ore is typical of plant practice in terms of the recovery dependence on particle size ( Increased collector addition, and hence surface coverage of collector, causes more particles to be hydrophobised to contact angles above the critical value for stable bubble–particle attachment. Apparently, the flotation behaviour of particle size fractions below 53 The fine to intermediate size fractions appear to preferentially adsorb collector, possibly because they have a higher surface area to solution volume ratio than the coarse particles. Another possibility is that the degree of liberation is also higher for the fine to intermediate size fractions, thus more surface is available to adsorb collector. As the collector addition is increased, coarse particles adsorb more collector and become more hydrophobic, hence there is an increase in recovery with an increase in collector addition. The maximum recovery was highest for the 38–53 The decrease in recovery with an increase in size above 53 A fit of the first order rate equation to the experimental recovery with time, after subtraction of entrainment, was very good across all size fractions. The recovery with time reached an asymptotic value ( The objective of this study is to infer the contact angle of the hydrophobised chalcopyrite particles in the ore. The flotation behaviour of chalcopyrite is benchmarked against calibration curves previously developed for the chalcopyrite-amyl xanthate system ( The collection efficiency, The concept of the benchmarking procedure is illustrated in An increase in the collector addition above 2 The flotation behaviour of chalcopyrite in a natural ore may be affected by other minerals in the ore such as pyrite. In the following section, the flotation behaviour of sulphides (i.e., chalcopyrite and pyrite) is considered. The natural ore has a considerable amount of pyrite from the bulk mineralogical analysis ( The maximum recovery of sulphides (chalcopyrite and pyrite) as a function of particle size at 2, 15, and 30 Assays of the concentrates and the calculated weight percent and volume fractions of the chalcopyrite, pyrite and non-sulphide gangue minerals are considered in The flotation response of the sulphides (chalcopyrite and pyrite) was benchmarked against the calibration previously developed for the chalcopyrite-amyl xanthate system using the collection efficiency as before ( A comparison of the inferred operational contact angles of chalcopyrite and sulphide minerals is made in An attempt is made below to validate some of the contact angles inferred using the benchmarking procedure from calibration curves developed for the chalcopyrite-amyl xanthate system ( A contact angle/species intensity (ToF-SIMS) correlation ( The predicted average contact angle of chalcopyrite particles in the concentrate is 74° over 33 different chalcopyrite particles ( The Washburn technique can only measure advancing contact angles up to 90°. Some chalcopyrite particles in the ore appear to have adsorbed more collector than that observed in the calibration of the advancing contact angle and ToF-SIMS intensity correlation using single mineral chalcopyrite, resulting in contact angle values greater than 90°. All particle contact angles above 90° are in the extrapolated range and it is not yet clear how accurate these values are. As discussed previously, it is unlikely that the chalcopyrite particle advancing contact angle would be much greater than 100° for this mineral-collector system. Further, the ToF-SIMS correlation holds for oxygen, sulphur and collector species present on chalcopyrite in the ore system being the same as on the single mineral system from which it is derived. If for example, oxygen is derived from silicates for which the oxygen yield is different from oxygen bearing species on chalcopyrite (e.g., iron oxide) in the calibration stage, discrepancies may occur. The measured average contact angle by ToF-SIMS appears reasonable when compared with the inferred contact angle of 77° ( The contact angle calculated using surface analysis is for the floatable component only, while the tail component of the valuable mineral could not be determined due to the very low concentration of the chalcopyrite particles that did not float. Another approach involving direct contact angle measurements on concentrates from all flotation tests was considered, and is discussed further below. The sensitivity of the Washburn method was evaluated using single mineral chalcopyrite–quartz mixtures of varying proportions and known contact angles. The Cassie equation was used to calculate a theoretical contact angle value for each mixture. There is good agreement between the measured and the calculated contact angle for chalcopyrite concentrations above approximately 1% by volume ( It is possible that the detection limit for the hydrophobic component in the chalcopyrite–quartz mixture may be particle size dependent, and may also be influenced by the particle size in the mixture, and the contact angle of the hydrophobic component. These possibilities require further study. QEM-Scan showed that the bulk of the chalcopyrite in the ore is more than 80% liberated ( The contact angles measured on the concentrate ( The contact angle measured on the concentrates includes contributions from both the hydrophobic minerals and the non-sulphide gangue, which is assumed to be hydrophilic. In order to determine the contact angle of chalcopyrite in the concentrate, it was assumed that chalcopyrite and pyrite had the same contact angle within a size fraction and for a given collector addition (indicated as sulphide minerals CA in Based on knowledge of the composition of each size fraction ( A contact angle of 67° for chalcopyrite particles in the concentrate for the 53–75 It must be borne in mind that the contact angle calculated using Eq. A back calculation was carried out with the following assumptions: The sulphides in the feed are in two components, a floatable ( The floatable fraction The non-floatable component is the fraction of the sulphides that are lost to the tailings at 30 The difference between the maximum recovery at 30 The contact angle of sulphide particles in the feed (last column in There was a good agreement between the calculated and inferred operational contact angle ( The flotation behaviour of particles is closely related to the particle size and advancing contact angle under constant hydrodynamic conditions. A method to determine an operational contact angle of the sulphide mineral particles was developed and uses the undistributed flotation rate constant and collection efficiency to infer the operational contact angle by benchmarking against a calibration developed with single mineral chalcopyrite. The approach takes into account variations of the contact angle with particle size and infers a contact angle of the feed. This approach has been validated by direct contact angle measurements on combined concentrates on most of the size fractions, and indirectly for the 53–75 Funding from AMIRA P260E project is gratefully acknowledged, and the ToF-SIMS analysis carried out by Susana Brito E Abreu is appreciated.