Initial solution concentration effect was studied on the synthesis of mixed spinels Co1-ΨNiΨCr2O4 (0≤Ψ≤1) obtained by Solution Combustion Synthesis. Fd-3m spinel structure was developed in all range of compositions analysed, regardless of the concentration. However, structural characteristics such as ion rearrangement and crystal size showed a noticeable dependence on the initial concentration, being the spinel network more ordered and with higher crystallite size as the concentration increased. Cell parameter, however, presented dependence on composition but not on initial solution concentration.
                  All as-synthesized pigments showed a significant colouring power in ceramic glazes without any significant influence of initial solution concentration. Therefore, a second thermal treatment was not needed. The coloured glazes covered a broad range of tones in the green section of colour space, which evolved as a function of composition.Submicronic materials with characteristic structural dimensions have been of interest for more than 20 years and continue to attract attention because of their unique properties In the case of the traditional ceramic sector, submicronic powders are greatly welcomed when inkjet technology is wanted to be applied. Nanosized ceramic pigments are needed in order to develop a good quality inks, which are able to pass through the printer nozzles without damaging the mechanical system. At the same time, pigments must be able to develop intense colours. These inks are currently manufactured by micronizing conventional ceramic pigments down to average diameters of 0.2–0.6 A wide variety of techniques are used to obtain materials at microscale in industry. The most basic one used in ceramic sector is high-energy milling. However, this process is energy intensive and frequently consumes spare parts of the mill, resulting in high costs. Furthermore, this milling process presents the drawback of damaging ceramic pigment's crystalline structure and, as a consequence, their tinting strength is reduced An alternative methodology that has stood out because of its capability for obtaining fine particles is the so-called solution combustion synthesis (SCS). This method is a combination of combustion and a reactive solution approach. SCS involves a self-sustained reaction in a solution of metal nitrates and different fuels as urea or glycine. The reaction between fuel and oxygen-containing species formed during decomposition of nitrates provides conditions for rapid high-temperature interaction SCS was reported to be a technology able to synthesize simple and complex oxides used as pigments or advanced ceramics Despite all advantages that SCS technology provides, the published studies are mainly focused on characterizing synthesized products and practically no information is available about the effect of modifying the process variables like selected fuel, initial solution concentration or maximum temperature. Therefore, the aim of this study is centred on evaluating the effect of the initial solution concentration over the synthesis of pigments Co Co The first aim was to maintain the volume of solution in each experiment constant, in order to avoid increasing the number of variables to be taken into account. However, due to the high volume of the combustion product obtained in some experiments, it was necessary to readjust the original solution volume so as to avoid any contamination of the kiln chamber and their refractories. All solutions were poured in a 700-mL pyrex container of 14 Every pigment was wet milled to break the agglomerates in a ball mill using water as a fluid and agate jars (Pulverisette 5, Fritsch GmbH, Germany). Afterwards, the pigments were dried under infrared lights and sieved with a 200-µm mesh. Pigments were characterized from a chemical, microstructural, mineralogical, physical and colourimetric point of view. Chemical composition was determined by an energy-dispersive X-ray microanalysis instrument (EDX) (Genesis 7000 SUTW, EDAX, USA) coupled to a FEG-SEM (Field Emission Guns-Scanning electron microscope) (QUANTA 200F, FEI Co, USA) with which the microstructural characterisation was carried out. Adsorption/desorption isotherms and specific surface area values were determined according to the BET method (Brunauer-Emmet-Teller) using nitrogen gas as adsorbate (Tristar 3000, Micromeritics, USA). Additionally, pore size distribution was obtained from the adsorption isotherms using the Barrett–Joyner–Halenda method (BJH). Identification of crystalline phases and the posterior measurement of crystallite size and cell parameters evaluation were carried out by XRD (Theta-Theta D8 Advance, Bruker, Germany), with CuK radiation (λ=1.54183 To evaluate colour development, pigments were mixed in a proportion 2/98 As-obtained pigments presented a highly fluffy texture, filling the whole synthesis glass container. Bulk density was quite low which made them easy to disaggregate with a low effort. Pigment colours presented an evolution around the green tones, from a bluish green to a greyish green. EDX analysis of some of the synthesized pigments showed a good correlation with theoretical values according to the initial solution compositions ( According to obtained results, from a chemical point of view, SCS method allows obtaining homogeneous solid solutions of spinels with molar compositions practically adjusted to the theoretical ones. Diffraction patterns showed that the main crystalline phase obtained in all the range of compositions was of spinel type, concretely the Fd-3m class (face-centred structure) On the other side, all synthesized pigments presented a high crystallinity, higher than 98±4% according to Rietveld analysis. Practically no amorphous phase was observed in the samples. Nevertheless, spinel structure evolution in the solid solutions indicated the presence of an improvement in ion rearrangement to obtain a more defined structure, reaching a maximum for the spinel with Ψ=0.8 ( Regarding the initial solution concentration, an important effect was detected based on the progression of the main peak intensity of the diffraction patterns because, as the initial solution concentration increases, the intensity peak becomes higher and more defined, indicating the rearrangement of a more ordered spinel structure. In Taking into account The crystallite size was calculated in each one of the pigments ( Molar concentration also influences crystallite size evolution since the most concentrated solution generates pigments with bigger crystallites than the diluted ones. This result agrees with the proposed hypothesis about the effects of thermal treatment based on X-ray diffraction patterns. According to which, it was interpreted that a higher solution concentration limits the possibility of ion segregation and, at the same time, improves reactant contact during combustion process, favouring ion rearrangement as spinel network. No clear trend was observed in lattice parameter data against initial solution concentration ( The general trend of lattice parameters of the cell was consistent with the lower ionic radius of the Ni The study of morphology and grain size was carried out over the as-synthesized samples, prior to the wet-milling process, since in previous studies some modifications in the composition and structure were observed due to the hydration of certain non-perfectly reacted phases Obtained micrographies demonstrated the development of round-shaped grains in all samples ( Molar concentration exerted a significant influence in grain development since in all the compositions tested an increase in concentration favoured a grain growth in different degrees. The effect observed was similar to the effect over the crystallite size, but not equal. It can be assumed that an improvement in ion homogeneity, thanks to higher solution concentration, agrees with the fact that both the crystallite and, consequently, the grain experienced a growth Specific surface data of the pigments showed lower values when initial solutions were more concentrated, which totally corroborates the behaviour observed in scanning electron microscopy analysis (SEM). The samples with most ordered structure presented less intergranular porosity and, consequently, lower specific surface area. At the light of the results ( To study the porosity of pigments, BJH curves were calculated from the analysis carried out on isothermal curves ( All synthesized pigments presented a high colouring power in the selected glaze. No defects were observed on the surfaces like pinholes or colour heterogeneities. These facts are indicative of a good integration of the pigments into the ceramic glaze, without any unfavourable interaction. This behaviour is of relevant importance in order to determine the stability degree of ceramic pigments synthesized by SCS. Final glazes covered a broad colour palette in the green sector of colour space evolving with the composition, from a blue-green tone to a greyish-green. The spectrophotometric curves ( The CIELab* coordinates, increased progressively with Ψ but with different trends. L* coordinate experienced a 10 units’ increase, indicative of the development of brighter colours as the proportion of Ni According to colorimetric results, it was possible to obtain a practically pure green shade when spinel composition moved around Ψ=0.5 since no traces of neither blue nor yellow tones appeared in the colour. Molar concentration of the initial solution effect on the evolution of the solution combustion synthesis has been evaluated in the present study. In this case, SCS method allows synthesizing the Fd-3m spinel structures, characteristic of ceramic pigments with the solid solution composition (Co,Ni)Cr Colouring power was intense in all cases and it was not highly affected by the concentration of initial solution. The colours generated in the selected glaze covered a broad palette of green shades. A progressive Co SCS method has been validated as an effective technique for spinel pigments synthesis since the products have high colouring power, and they are stable against variations in the molar concentration of the precursor's solution. This work was supported by