In the present work, an innovative approach by adding the filler materials containing ZrO2/TiO2 hybrid nanoparticles to the weld pool during tungsten inert gas (TIG) welding under ultrasonic vibration (UV) was developed to fabricate nanostructured welds. Nanocomposite filler materials were manufactured from Al–Si alloy strips and ZrO2/TiO2 hybrid nanoparticles using accumulative roll bonding. After TIG welding, the influence of UV on the nanoparticle dispersion as well as the microstructure of welds was assessed using electron microscopes (SEM and TEM). When UV treatment was applied, the morphology of α-Al grains was changed from a coarse dendritic structure to a fine and globular shape and Al–Si eutectic phase was significantly refined. The results depict that the addition of nanoparticles together with application of UV can improve the grain refinement and as a result increases the mechanical properties than that of conventional TIG welding.Welding of aluminum alloys is a key fabrication technique, particularly in aerospace, marine, automotive and different advanced industries where high mechanical properties are required. Tungsten inert gas (TIG) welding is the major welding technique currently employed in these industries for manufacturing of the various structural aluminum components due to its advantages in terms of low fabrication cost and good process flexibility. Nonetheless, this process has some defects and limitations such as porosity, crack and an as cast-type coarse microstructure which lead to decrease the mechanical properties of weldment. According to the fact that nanoparticles possess not only excellent mechanical properties but also high chemical and thermal stability, Nanocomposite filler materials can be fabricated by various traditional methods such as spray deposition, stir casting and powder metallurgy as well as the new recent processes including friction stir processing and accumulative roll bonding. The main challenge in TIG welding with nanocomposite filler materials fabricated by various methods is to enable efficient dispersion of nanoparticles in the weld matrix. During TIG welding, reinforcing nanoparticles tend to agglomerate and form large clusters which cannot be easily wetted by molten aluminum. This would considerably deteriorate the weld properties. Ultrasonic vibration (UV) during TIG welding is a creative procedure that can overcome the mentioned problem. During this process, high intensity acoustic waves introduced into the molten weld pool by UV improve the wettability of reinforcing nanoparticles thereby ensuring their homogeneous dispersion in the weld. UV is widely applied as an application technique for melting and casting of nanoparticle-reinforced aluminum matrix composites. When preparing these nanocomposites, the cavitation and acoustic waves generated by UV can greatly enhance the uniform dispersion of reinforcing nanoparticles in the molten aluminum. Over the last years, a remarkable progress has been accomplished to use hybrid nanomaterials as reinforcing agent in TIG welding of aluminum alloys. Compared with single nanomaterials, hybrid nanomaterials not only combine physical and mechanical characteristics of each nanomaterial, but also may display novel synergistic characteristics that are not achievable by any of their single constituent nanomaterials. Amongst the various methods used for fabrication of nanocomposite filler materials, accumulative roll bonding (ARB) was selected because of its simplicity, high productivity and low cost. Therefore, nanocomposite filler materials with ZrO In this study, the annealed Al–Si alloy in the form of strips with thickness of 1 mm, ZrO The strips with 0.5 wt% ZrO The UV was generated using a high-frequency ultrasonic generator with an output power of 800 W. An optimum operating frequency of 20 kHz and a vibration amplitude of 15 μm was applied to the ultrasonic vibration platform. The platform was fastened on the horn of the transducer by an M10 bolt. During the welding process, UV transmits from the transducer to the horn and then the platform, eventually reaches the weld joint that is fixed on the platform by clamps. The direction of UV was perpendicular to the weld joint. In order to investigate the influence of UV on the properties of nanostructured welds and dispersion of reinforcing nanoparticles, three series of comparative weld joints were produced by using the filler materials with and without UV and were coded as W1, W2 and W3. The TIG welding set-up with the UV treatment depicted schematically in After TIG welding, the metallographic specimens were perpendicularly cut in the welding direction and were polished and etched with 2 ml hydrofluoric acid, 3 ml hydrochloric acid and 5 ml nitric acid in 190 ml water. The weld microstructure, dispersion of reinforcing nanoparticles and analysis of tensile fracture surface was assessed using optical and electron microscopes (OM-Olympus DP72, SEM-Tescan Vega II XMU and TEM-Hitachi H-800 T). Tensile specimens in sub-sized scale consisting completely of the weld were prepared as per ASTM E8M standard (with a diameter and gauge length of 6 and 30 mm, respectively). Tensile tests were performed by an Instron-5502 machine at the ambient with a strain rate of 5 mm min  In order to get a clearer understanding about distribution of nanoparticles within the matrix, the higher magnification SEM micrographs and corresponding EDX maps of the filler material produced by 10-cycle ARB process were used, as shown in  After adding nanoparticles to the weld, both the morphology and size of α-Al grains and Al–Si eutectic phase were considerably changed in weld W3, as shown in For the refinement of α-Al grains in the nanostructured welds, there are two distinct theories. Firstly, grain refinement is obtained by the heterogeneous nucleation on nanoparticles and the grain boundary pinning by nanoparticles. Secondly, grain refinement is accelerated due to the influence of cavitation and acoustic waves during the UV treatment. The presence of ZrO TEM micrographs of weld W3 are presented in   In order to assess the fracture morphology, the analyses of fractured surfaces were conducted by SEM, as shown in In this work, a new technique was proposed to create nanostructured welds with a uniform dispersion of nanoparticles by using UV. The following conclusions were drawn: Nanocomposite filler materials were successfully manufactured by 10 ARB cycles. ZrO Microstructure of the UV-treated nanocomposite weld was changed from coarse dendrites to fine equiaxed grains and Al–Si eutectic phase was significantly refined. The results showed that the addition of nanoparticles together with application of UV enhanced the tensile strength and microhardness in the nanoparticle-reinforced weld, as compared to the unreinforced weld. M. Fattahi and H. Moayedi conceived the idea and designed the study. A. Ghaheri and N. Arabian installed the TIG welding set-up with the UV treatment and performed the experiments. M. Fattahi and F. Amirkhanlu analyzed the data. M. Fattahi wrote the manuscript. H. Moayedi reviewed and edited the manuscript. The authors declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this paper.