A micromechanics-based plastic damage model including localised failure is proposed in the present work for heterogenous materials which can be treated as a porous matrix reinforced by mineral inclusions. This model explicitly considers the influences of pores and inclusions volume fractions, also the solid phase dilatancy on the overall mechanical performance. The induced damage in solid phase is also considered. Based on this two-scale model, the bifurcation analysis is performed to detect both the onset and orientation of localization band. Numerical simulations are carried out for different cases. It is found that the material’s microstructure affects importantly the onset point of the localization and the post-localization behavior. As an example of validation, the proposed model enhanced with localization analysis is then adopted to predict the overall mechanical response before and post localization of this typical claystone. Comparing with the experimental results, the capacity of this enhanced modelling is clearly demonstrated.In many engineering applications (like nuclear waste storage, mining engineering, etc.), rock and cement-based material are the most studied materials for the safety and durability However, in most previous studies, only elastic-plastic deformations are investigated. The progressive failure due to onset of localized bands has not been taken into account. Indeed, in most experimental studies In this work, we focus on the analysis of localization phenomena in heterogenous rock-like materials by developing an enhanced micromechanicas-based elastic-plastic damage model. As a novelty, we shall investigate the influences of micro-structures (pores and mineral inclusions) on the onset of localized bands and on the post-localization behavior of such materials. There are five principal parts in this work: adopting the macroscopic strength criterion issued from nonlinear homogenization procedure In this section, a micromechanics-based elastic-plastic damage modelling is firstly proposed to predict the macroscopic strength of heterogeneous materials with effects of porosity, mineral grains and the dilatation of the solid phase. With the elastic loading, we consider firstly the porous medium at the microscopic scale. The effective elastic bulk moduli At the macroscopic scale, the overall elastic properties The meso-inclusions are elastic, while the solid phase is elastoplastic and is described by the following Drucker-Prager model: Based on the material’s microstructure, a two-step up-scaling is adopted for the overall yield function. The micro-porosity Considering the normality rule, the support function of the porous matrix can be calculated according to It is interesting to note that both the plastically dilatant and contractant behaviors can be observed even with the normality rule for the porous matrix. Differently from the Drucker-Prager criterion According the Eq. Based on the effective behavior of porous matrix, the influence of inclusion volume fraction on the macroscopic elastoplastic properties will be accounted in the second up-scaling. By adopting the modified secant method, For the purpose to consider the plastic hardening phenomena observed in the experimental and to construct a complete constitutive modelling, the frictional parameter Then the yield function For a general case, a non-associated flow rule is chosen in this constitutive modelling. Based on the yield criterion Based on the plastic potential With the process of loading, the solid phase can be damaged because of the micro-cracks generations. This may be at the origin of macroscopic materials softening. For the simplicity, this softening effect will be considered by the degradation of the cohesion coefficient Based on The variations of pore and inclusion volume fractions are determined as: The plastic multiplier In the elastoplastic case, the tangent one This proposed multiscale constitutive model now is adopted to predict the overall mechanical behavior of heterogeneous materials as illustrated in At the beginning of the loading, the material is assumed as homogeneous and its mechanical behavior is described by the micromechanics based model presented in Section The beginning of localization is fixed at the point when the definiteness of this acoustic tensor With the loading path, the first stress-strain state for which After this beginning of localization band, the studied material will be no longer homogeneous. There are two principal parts in the studied volume: the localization zone and the outside one. In this case, the traditional constitutive models can not be used directly to describe its macroscopic mechanical behaviors. These models should be improved or extended to detect the onset of localization zone and to take into account the macroscopic behaviors of post-localization. As illustrated in Then, it is necessary to calculate the strain rate According Eqs. Based on the equilibration between the macroscopic work and the average value of local one, the following relation can be derived: Combining Eqs. The Eq. Substituting the expression of Before the beginning of the bifurcation, the studied material is homogeneous. Its macroscopic mechanical behavior is described by this micromechanics-based constitutive modelling established in above section. According to the state of The proposed micromechanics-based constitutive modelling is firstly implemented in Abaqus. As presented in  The effects of inclusion content By taking The softening rule has an important influence on the localization failure analysis. The parameter The effects of confining pressure on overall performance is investigated with In the following section, this multiscale constitutive modelling with the effect of localization will be used to predict the macroscopic performances of claystone with different material compositions and different confining pressure. In the nuclear waste storage investigation, the layer of COx has been chosen as a possible geological disposal of radioactive wastes in French. Many experimental and theoretical investigations has been performed to better under stand this clayey rock. According to The above complete constitutive modelling with the effects of localization is now applied to describe the macroscopic performance of this claystone with different material compositions and different confining pressures. The porosity is taken Using this same set of parameters, numerical simulations are performed in Abaqus with different loading condition ( The evolutions of porosity for these compression tests at different depthes and different confining pressures are illustrated in By combining nonlinear homogenization technique and localization analysis, we have developed a new enhanced micro-macro constitutive model with localization analysis for heterogeneous materials with micro-porosity and meso-grains. Compared with existing models, this enhanced multiscale constitutive modelling not only considers the influences of microstructural information on the overall mechanical behaviors of heterogeneous materials, but also captures the onset of localized failure and the post localization behavior. The localization analysis is made at the constitutive level. This makes it very easy for engineering applications. According to the results obtained, the localization behavior is strongly affected by the volume fraction of pores and grains. The local material softening rule has an important influence on the onset point of localization. Further, the proposed enhanced model with localization analysis is well able to predict the overall response of COx claystone in both pre- and post-localization regimes. Therefore, this proposed model gives a fundamental tool for the numerical study of localized damaged and fractured zones around underground structures. We declare that all credit and funding information are mentioned in the manuscript. The authors declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this paper. This study was jointly supported by the