This research reports the effects of factors such as metal ratio, thermal treatment temperature, time and atmosphere in a previously developed path that recycled spent lithium-ion batteries for OER catalysts. With regards to the uncontrollable metal-ratio in recycled material, for the first time, the metal ratio of the Li-Ni-Co-Mn oxides’ influence on their electrochemical performance is studied. In thermal treatment, the atmosphere is newly evaluated as a determining factor, while factors like temperature and time are also further compared. The mechanism of the lattice change resulted from the reductive decomposition reaction of Li
                        
                           
                           
                              x
                           
                        
                     CoO2(x
                        ≠
                     1) (
                        α
                     -NaFeO2-type), generating Co3O4(spinel) is introduced. Finally, the recycled material is innovatively applied to CO2 electrolysis as anode OER catalyst with high current efficiency (97%) towards CO production under a total current density of 32 mA cm−2 at 2.25 V, with an energy efficiency of 63%, which shows a promising future in the industry use.Nowadays, it is urgent to study the resource path of spent lithium-ion batteries (SLIBs) ( Studies have already begun before 1998 when the earliest publishing available about recycling SLIBs ( A clean, low-cost and efficient recycling method for SLIBs has been developed in our former literature ( Further, the LIB’s material composition varies significantly between different cathode types and even between manufacturers, which is under fast development (former type renovation may not in need), and future production volumes are unclear. Accordingly, co-mingled stream disposal is unavoidable and its effects on the recovered material have to be taken into account. This article takes a direct thermal treatment path and especially explores the recycled materials’ OER performance. For the first time, the diversity-tolerance will be discussed in our research from the metal-ratio aspect. The mechanism of the structure and components change in the thermal treatment was also explored, and by testing the electrochemistry performance, an optimized treatment condition (reductive atmosphere) will be reported. Finally, the cell performance of CO  KOH (Guaranteed reagent) and N-methyl-2-pyrrolidone (NMP) were purchased from Sinopharm Chemical Reagent Co., Ltd; anion exchange membrane (fumasep®FAA-3-PK-75), Toray Carbon Paper (TGP-H-60) and Au/C (20%) were purchased from Fuel Cell Store. The spent Ni-Co-Mn ternary lithium-ion batteries were 18650 cells, provided by Tianneng Battery Group Co., Ltd. The initial cathode materials with different specialized ratios of Ni-Co-Mn were provided by Shenzhen Kejing Star Technology Co., Ltd. Milli-Q ultrapure water (Millipore, The recycling materials were prepared by following our previous report (  Typically, the ink for electrochemical characterization is made from the cathode materials (20.0 ± 0.1 mg) and alkaline ion exchange membrane (7.0 ± 0.1 mg), dispersed in 2 mL N-methyl-2-pyrrolidone (NMP). Followed by ultrasonication and shaking overnight, to obtain a uniform ink. 1.25 For the CO    To figure out the effects of the metal ratio in the recycled SLIBs material, raw lithium-ion battery’s cathode materials were introduced, whose proportion of the Ni-Co-Mn is already known. Noted that NCM523, or 523, refers to Ni: Co: Mn Observed from the direct outlook in XRD patterns for all pristine samples are illustrated in  Tafel slope can also provide valuable and insightful information towards the mechanism of the reaction, especially for elucidating the rate-determining step (rds). The 4-electron transfer reaction is generally proposed as the mechanism for the OER with a sequence of steps and intermediates, in which Tafel slope is importantly correlated. The Krasil’shchikov’s Path is known to illustrate the mechanisms by Eq. The ECSA is an essential issue when studying OER catalysts, which is known concerning the electronic double layer (EDL) capacitance. By the CV method, the voltammetric charges q By Tafel analysis and In our previous report (  To acquire better OER catalytic performance, the heating time was modified within the given range 60-300 min. Tafel analysis on in  An interesting phenomenon intrigued us, that if treat the material with lidded crucible under 600 °C, the OER catalytic performance would improve than that of the lidless (shown in  Lidded and lidless crucibles acted as a clue of an atmosphere control. To further study the influence, the thermal gravimetric (TG) and differential scanning calorimetry (DSC) analysis were conducted on the pristine cathode material powders and the raw materials.  As for the raw material NCM523, the peaks of Co In this section, the generation of Co In recent researches about continuous CO  To recapitulate, this article discusses and responds to the points below:  The metal ratio of the Li-Ni-Co-Mn oxides would influence the Li-Ni-Co-Mn materials’ morphology and electrochemical performance within a certain range, while the lattice phases stay in nearly consistent. The recycled material acted like a mixture of unknown metal-ratio oxides with similar structures and its pristine material’s OER performance is During the recycled material’s thermal treatment, the atmosphere is newly defined as a determining factor to enhance the OER catalytic activity, apart from temperature and time which mainly lead to the binder’s burning-off. Under certain temperature (600 °C), the inert (reducing) atmosphere could promote the decomposition reaction of Li The recycled Ni-Co-Mn materials were innovatively used as an oxygen evolution catalyst in CO Further study needs to examine more specifically on the mechanisms variations about how the material’s components (Li, Ni, Mn oxides, Li  The authors declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this paper. The authors would like to acknowledge the Supplementary material related to this article can be found online at The following is the Supplementary material related to this article.