The new generalized (
                        
                           
                              
                                 G
                              
                              
                                 ′
                              
                           
                           /
                           G
                        
                     )-expansion method is an interesting approach to find new and more general exact solutions to the nonlinear evolution equations (NLEEs) in mathematical physics and engineering. In this paper, the method is applied to construct exact solutions involving parameters for the foam drainage equation. When these parameters are taken to be special values, the solitary wave solutions, the periodic wave and the rational function solutions are derived from exact solutions. These solutions might be imperative and significant for the explanation of some practical physical phenomena. It is shown that the method is an easy and advanced mathematical tool for solving NLEEs.Since the world around us is inherently nonlinear and NLEEs are widely used to describe compound corporeal phenomena in various fields of sciences, especially in mathematical physics and engineering such as mathematical biology, magneto fluid dynamics, water surface gravity waves, electromagnetic radiation reactions, ion acoustic waves in plasma, fluid mechanics, chemical kinematics, geochemistry, bio-genetics, acoustics, chemistry, biology, protein chemistry etc, many powerful methods to seek exact solutions of NLEEs have been proposed. Among these are the inverse scattering transform method The new generalized The rest of the paper is organized as follows: In Section Consider the general NLEE of the type       Using the general solution of Eq. When In this section, I will set forth the new generalized I utilize the traveling wave variable Integrating Substituting Eq. For set 1, substituting Eq. Substituting Eq. Substituting Eq. Substituting Eq. Substituting Eq. Again for set 2, substituting Eq. Substituting Eq. Substituting Eq. Substituting Eq. Substituting Eq. Similarly, for set 3, substituting Eq. Substituting Eq. Substituting Eq. Substituting Eq. Substituting Eq. Graph is a powerful tool for communication and describes lucidly the solutions of the problems. Therefore, some graphs of the solutions are given below. The graphs readily have shown the solitary wave form of the solutions (see The advantages and validity of the method over the basic The significant advantage of the new generalized In Ref. The new generalized Bekir and Uygun When When When