In the present work, the use of high power ultrasound as a process tool for the removal of persistent organic pollutants (POPs) from soil and the treatment of bauxite red mud waste from the Bayer process is discussed. Laboratory scale experiments have confirmed that the application of high power ultrasound to slurries of contaminated soil and of bauxite ore can treat two major environmental problems cost-effectively. Destruction rates of POPs in soil of 90% and higher have been achieved whereas 85% iron oxide has been extracted from red mud waste leaving a low-iron fraction of approximately 50% by weight which is more environmentally friendly.
                  A 4×4kW pilot plant capable of treating 2.5tonnes of slurry per day has been commissioned to provide more accurate estimates of power and energy requirements to allow scale-up to industrial use.Interest in high power ultrasound at larger than laboratory scale is currently being directed towards two major environmental problems, (i) the contamination of soils and sediments by persistent organic pollutants, POPs, and (ii) the remediation of red mud waste generated in the Bayer process for producing alumina from bauxite ore. Both target systems have reached pilot plant stage and we have commissioned a 4 The treatment of contaminated soils is a world-wide concern of major proportion. In 2004, one hundred and fifty-one countries signed the Stockholm Convention proscribing the manufacture, use, storage and destruction of the worst of these contaminants, the so-called “dirty dozen” Australia is the world’s largest producer of alumina, with 19 A major effort in the aluminium industry is devoted to improving the efficiency of the process and the environmental performance. All Australian bauxite mines are subject to post-mining restoration, and rehabilitation is a major concern. The main environmental problem in alumina production is the red mud waste from the process and its disposal. Some two to two and a half tonnes of red mud are generated for each tonne of alumina produced and the caustic nature and the shear quantity of waste constitute a serious disposal problem. The red mud waste is also thixotropic, its viscosity changing substantially with time. Red mud forms a thick gel which is not readily removed from pipelines when stoppages occur and slows pondage. The current practice of disposal involves de-watering and dry stacking which eventually leads to large areas or mounds of red mud. The red mud requires not only huge storage areas but neutralisation and containment. A great deal of effort has been devoted to finding uses for the red mud, including as construction materials and treatment of acid-rich wastes, but these are insignificant compared to the quantity of red mud produced by the aluminium industry. Consequently, massive stockpiles of red mud are developing. Depending on the source of the bauxite from which it is derived, red mud contains 30–60% Fe In the last two decades, the use of high power ultrasonics in remediation applications has been quite actively researched The features of the sonochemical process in liquids can be summarised as follows (i) the expansion and contraction of the cavitating bubble is symmetrical; (ii) the reaction occurs within the bubble on chemicals that have diffused into the bubble or, following the diffusion of radicals, at the gas–liquid interface; (iii) radical reaction with the contaminant chemicals produces a series of intermediate compounds which may themselves be subsequently destroyed; (iv) since most of the mass transport is in the gas phase, reaction rates are generally slow. The presence of solid particles in a liquid results in the preferential nucleation of bubbles at the solid–liquid interface due to the disjuncture in free energy at this interface. This is analogous to the addition of porous pot to control boiling in liquids. It has long been established that the cavitational collapse of a bubble adjoining a solid surface develops a high speed jet which impacts on the solid (see The features which distinguish cavitation in a slurry from cavitation in a liquid are (i) the process is asymmetric and the collapse of the bubble forms a high speed jet which is directed to the solid surfaces; (ii) pyrolysis is the dominant chemical process and radicals play little or no part; (iii) there is no formation of intermediates and (iv) energy is more efficiently used in the destruction process. All of the studies reported here were carried out by flowing, the slurry through a narrow sonication cell, as shown schematically in Studies of the ultrasonic destruction of POPs have been limited to laboratory scale by Environmental Protection Agency regulations which restrict the amount of scheduled materials that can be investigated in a laboratory such as ours. Pilot plant studies must be carried out in registered contaminated sites where access presents some difficulties. Worries about occupational health requirements and legal responsibilities are sufficient reason for owners of sites to refuse admission for trials. Negotiations have just been completed with two commercial companies to carry out trials. The largest POP sample we have sonicated in our laboratory is 1.5 As might be expected, the properties of the soil and the way in which the contaminant is bound to it are an important consideration. For this reason, initial studies were carried out on a “model” soil composed of 90 In A more realistic appraisal of the potential of ultrasonic destruction of POPs is shown in While tetrachloronaphthalene (TCN) has a similar structure to scheduled materials PCB 1254 and naphthalene, it is not a scheduled substance thus permitting us to work with larger sample sizes. TCN was adsorbed to washed and sonicated river sand and various slurry ratios were subjected to high power ultrasound at all three scales. The destruction rate followed the first order exponential relationship seen in Significant quantities of aluminium, iron and titanium are available in red mud waste generated from bauxite in the Bayer process if they can be accessed. We have been investigating the use of high power ultrasonics to break down the gel which forms in the red mud and the bonding of clay and iron oxide particles to allow magnetic or alternative separation of a haematite fraction from the waste. Potentially, almost half of the waste can be reduced which is, in itself, a significant benefit. However, if the iron ore is of sufficient quality and can be sintered to produce pig iron furnace feed, it becomes a convenient and valuable resource. The use of wet high intensity magnetic separation, WHIMS, immediately following the ultrasonic treatment, has been the main focus of our research. The combination of WHIMS and other separation processes to obtain commercial grades of haematite has also been considered. This paper reviews the physics of high power ultrasonics as applied here and, briefly, the WHIMS technology and then discusses the results obtained from applying the combination of high power ultrasonics and WHIMS to separating iron oxide from a Western Australian red mud. Although the gel in red mud is notoriously persistent and difficult to shift, high power ultrasonics proves to be quite effective. A combination of processes can contribute to the rupture of the gel network. Acoustic streaming will generate high shearing forces in the slurry and may be sufficient in their own right. Stable cavitation will produce microstreaming, whereas the occurrence of implosive cavitation and the high shear forces and jet formation will greatly enhance gel destruction. It has been previously shown that gangue, worthless material adhering to an ore of interest, can be removed by ultrasonics Since first introduced some 40 Following sonication, the slurry, which immediately showed signs of separation of dark brown oxide from the red mud, was quickly transferred to the WHIMS to minimise reformation of the gel. Under normal practice, WHIMS is preceded by LIMS, low intensity magnetic separation, or some form of enhanced gravity separation. Given that the iron fraction in the red mud is relatively large, the likelihood of blockage of the WHIMS filling by magnetic material and clay being filtered rather than magnetically trapped later in the run is increased. Access to an appropriate WHIMS apparatus has limited experimental runs to the smallest unit, using 30–40 The achievement of a level of 59.9% Fe in the magnetic fraction, a figure better than some commercially available ores is promising and can probably be improved by systematic study of the process parameters. The implementation of LIMS or gravitational separation before WHIMS should reduce the occurrence of blockage o the filling material, be it balls or steel wool. The effect of slurry ratios and sonication times and a better understanding of the effect of ultrasound on breakdown of the gel and the rupture of clay–iron oxide agglomerates are areas under investigation. The 4