The phase compositions of Wessels, Groote Eylandt, CVRD and Gabonese manganese ores and their change in the process of calcinations in different gas atmospheres were studied. Wessels and Groote Eylandt manganese ores were examined at the University of New South Wales (Australia) using XRD, optical, SEM and EPMA analyses; CVRD and Gabonese ores were studied at SINTEF and NTNU (Norway) using quantitative XRD analysis. The manganese ores had significant differences in chemistry and mineralogy. Equilibrium phases in ores at temperatures of 800°C, 1000°C and 1200°C in different gas atmospheres were examined using FACTSage software. The calculated phase composition was in agreement with quantitative XRD analysis.
                  In the process of calcination of manganese ores in air, MnO2 was reduced to Mn2O3 and Mn3O4, while during calcination in a reducing atmosphere manganese oxides were reduced to MnO and iron oxides to metallic iron. Formation of a liquid slag in ores at equilibrium was predicted for Wessels, Groote Eylandt and Gabonese ores at 1200°C in air and 1000–1200°C in a reducing atmosphere. No liquid slag was predicted for equilibrium phases in CVRD ore.Industrial manganese ores vary significantly in chemistry and mineralogy. It is well-known that the properties of a manganese ore have a large influence on the technology and efficiency of the production of manganese alloys. The melting and reduction behaviour of ores are defined by their chemistry, mineralogy and physical properties, which change as the ore is heated in a reducing atmosphere in a ferroalloy furnace. Mineralogy and geology of manganese ores have been presented in a number of publications which are reviewed by The focus of this paper is on the phase composition of the ore in the temperature range 800–1200 This paper analyses chemical and phase composition of CVRD, Gabonese, Wessels and Groote Eylandt ores and their change upon heating in different gas atmospheres. Equilibrium phases formed upon heating in air and in a reducing atmosphere were analysed using FACTSage software. The aim of this study is to establish the behaviour of the ore upon heating and define a temperature range in which the ore is solid. Wessels and Groote Eylandt ores were examined at the University of New South Wales (UNSW), Australia; CVRD and Gabonese ores were studied at SINTEF and the Norwegian University of Science and Technology (NTNU), Norway. The ores were ground into different particle size fractions. The size fraction of Wessels and Groote Eylandt manganese ores was 45–150 Samples of manganese ore at UNSW were subjected to XRD, optical and electron microscope analyses. XRD analysis was done using a Siemens D5000 X-ray diffractometer. The XRD patterns were analysed qualitatively using “Traces” software from Diffraction Technology Pty. Ltd., with JCPDS-PDF2 database. In the XRD analysis at NTNU (Bruker D8 advance with a wavelength-dispersive detector SolX), variable slits (V20) were used to achieve better signal peaks at higher angles and to reduce the collection time. Rietveld refinement with Topas 4 software was used for quantitative XRD analysis. A fraction of nsutite for which structure literature data were insufficient for the rietveld analysis and phases with poor crystallinity was assessed by direct area fraction measurements. Samples for optical and electron microscope analyses were prepared by mounting in an epoxy resin mould. The samples were held within a vacuum chamber for around 30 The samples were then ground using SiC paper, from 120 to 4000 grade; followed by 4 Optical photomicrographs were obtained using a Nikon Epiphot 200 (Nikon Corp., Japan) inverted stage metallurgical microscope with an attached Nikon DXM1200 digital camera. Images were captured using the Nikon ACT-1 software package. Samples were coated with carbon for SEM, EDS and EPMA analysis. SEM was carried out using a high resolution (1.5 The mounted samples were analysed using a Cameca SX-50 electron microprobe. Standard operating procedure involved a 15 Equilibrium phases in Gabonese, CVRD, Wessels and Groote Eylandt ores in the temperature range 800–1200 Wessels ore contained relatively high amount of iron and calcium, low silicon and alkalis ( The XRD analysis of sintered samples showed that in hydrogen, the manganese oxides in the ore were reduced to MnO and iron oxides to metallic iron ( Equilibrium phases in Wessels ore heated to 800–1200 Major phases in Wessels ore heated to 1000 No liquid slag was predicted in Wessels ore heated in reducing gas to 1200 Groote Eylandt (GE) ore is a high-grade ore with a manganese content of 55 Manganese was mainly present as pyrolusite and cryptomelane. Iron was found in the form of iron alumo-silicates and in small amounts in the manganese oxides. Silicon was present in the form of quartz inclusions, in iron alumo-silicate, and also in manganese oxide. Potassium was observed in the form of cryptomelane, it was also detected in iron alumo-silicate. Behaviour of GE ore upon heating was studied in air, argon and hydrogen at a temperature of 1000 FACTSage equilibrium phases in GE ore heated to 800–1200 Pyrolusite MnO The same major phases in air at 1000 When GE ore was sintered in hydrogen at 1000 XRD pattern of CVRD ore is presented in The mineralogy of CVRD sinter was also studied; the XRD spectrum is shown in Results of quantitative XRD analysis of CVRD ore heated in air and CO at 800 The phases in samples of CVRD ore processed in air at 800 The phase compositions of samples of CVRD ore heated in CO to 800 Equilibrium phases in CVRD ore calculated using FACTSage at 800–1200 Major phases in the ore heated in air, bixbyite at 800 XRD spectrum of Gabonese ore and its quantitative analysis are given in Results of quantitative XRD analysis a of Gabonese ore heated in air and CO at 800 Changes in the phase composition upon heating of Gabonese ore in air and CO followed trends observed for CVRD ore. In air, pyrolusite was converted to bixbyite and hausmannite at 800 Calculated equilibrium phases in Gabonese ore presented in Manganese ores of different origin have a different chemistry and mineralogy, which affect their melting and reduction properties. Literature covers mineralogy of original ores ( Analysis of changes in the phase composition of Wessels and Groote Eylandt ores at UNSW was qualitative; it established that MnO In general, results of equilibrium calculations using FACTSage in a reducing atmosphere and XRD analysis were in a good agreement. This indicates that the ore samples studied in reducing atmosphere were close to equilibrium. A good correlation was also observed between the experimentally determined and calculated major phases in the ore heated in air, although a discrepancy was observed for minor phases. This can be explained by poor crystallinity of some phases and insufficient holding time in air to reach equilibrium, as can also be expected during the industrial processing of manganese ores. In the original ore, manganese naturally existed in the oxidising Mn Both CVRD and Gabonese ores contained a high concentration of alumina. In a reducing atmosphere, alumina with MnO formed galaxite, detected by XRD analysis and predicted by the calculation of equilibrium phases using FACTSage. No liquid phase was observed or predicted in CVRD ore heated up to 1200 Analysis of Wessels, Groote Eylandt, CVRD and Gabonese manganese ores revealed their diverse chemical composition and complex mineralogical structure. The following phases in the original ore were identified by XRD and EPMA analyses at UNSW and quantitative XRD analysis at NTNU/SINTEF. Wessels ore: bixbyite, braunite, manganite, hausmannite and calcite; GE ore: pyrolusite, cryptomelane manganese and iron silicates, and silica; CVRD ore: nsutite, todorokite, cryptomelane, gibbsite, quartz, kaolinite, hematite and lithiophorite; Gabonese ore: nsutite, cryptomelane, gibbsite, quartz, ramsdellite, hematite, goethite and lithiophorite. Upon sintering in air, MnO Calculated equilibrium phases using FACTsage for ores heated under a reducing gas atmosphere were in agreement with XRD analysis. Formation of liquid slag in ores at equilibrium was predicted for Wessels ore at 1200 Authors are grateful to Dr Kai Tang for the ferromanganese alloy database and Dr S. Decterov for valuable comments. Oleg Ostrovski expresses sincere gratitude to SINTEF for hospitality during his sabbatical leave.