The Li-Sn-W deposit Cínovec/Zinnwald in the eastern Erzgebirge (Czech Republic and Germany) represents one of the worldwide best known examples of complex rare-metal plutons with pervasive greisenization. Mica from altogether 38 samples representing all granite and greisen varieties from the present surface to the depth of 1596 m was analysed using electron microprobe (EMPA) and laser-ablation inductively-coupled plasma mass spectrometry (LA-ICP-MS) for major (including F, Rb) and trace (Li, Sc, Ga, Ge, Nb, In, Sn, Cs, Ta, Tl, W) elements, respectively. All primary micas at Cínovec are trioctahedral Li-Fe micas close to the annite–zinnwaldite–trilithionite series. Biotite from granites in the deeper part of the pluton (depth of 735–1596 m) contains 33.9–39.6 wt% SiO2, 19.6–23.8 wt% FeO, 0.5–0.7 wt% Rb2O, 0.9–1.8 wt% Li2O, 3.4–4.8 wt% F, 381–937 ppm Nb, 34–134 ppm Ta, 20–46 ppm W, and 93–617 ppm Sn. Zinnwaldite from granites in the upper part of the pluton (depth of 0–735 m) contains 41.2–48.5 wt% SiO2, 8.9–15.2 wt% FeO, 0.9–1.9 wt% MnO, 2.0–4.4 wt% Li2O, 0.8–1.9 wt% Rb2O, 7.0–8.6 wt% F, 43–464 ppm Nb, 101–213 ppm Sn, 6–80 ppm Ta, and 28–52 ppm W. Zinnwaldite from bodies of pervasive greisen and quartz-zinnwaldite veins is, compared to zinnwaldite from granites, relatively slightly enriched in Si, Mn and Ga, and depleted in Fe, F, Rb, Sn, W and Nb; Li and Ta contents are similar. Contents of Li, Rb and F, and the Fe/Mn and Nb/Ta values in mica closely positively correlate with those in the bulk rock, illustrating an upwards fractionation of parental melt. In contrast, the contents of high-field-strength elements in mica do not correspond to their contents in the bulk rock (melt): they were controlled by the order of crystallization of mica vs. accessory oxide minerals. Therefore, biotite generally contains distinctly higher Sn, Nb, Ta, and W than zinnwaldite. Dioctahedral micas of the muscovite–phengite series were found only as a late product of alteration of primary trioctahedral mica. Replacement of greisen-stage zinnwaldite by muscovite is chemically expressed in a strong depletion in Fe, F, and Li, and an enrichment in Sn. The share of trioctahedral mica in the bulk-rock budget of Sn decreases from 40–70% in biotite granite to less than 5% in greisen; in the case of Nb and Ta from 20–50% to less than 10%. The share of mica in the budget of W, mostly in the range of 2–15%, is stable through the whole pluton.Micas are chemically the most variable mineral group among all rock-forming minerals. Due to their specific layered crystal structure, micas are able to accommodate relatively high contents of many minor and trace elements ( The present work is aimed at proving the significance of Li-micas for the concentration of volatiles and trace elements during pronounced magmatic fractionation and following metasomatic greisenization. The well-known greisen-type Cínovec Li-Sn-W deposit in the eastern Erzgebirge was chosen as a typical object for this purpose, including the 1.6 km deep borehole CS-1 in its center. First data on the chemical composition of mica from the Li-Sn-W Cínovec deposit were published by The Cínovec rare-metal granite cupola is situated on both sides of the Czech–German state border in the eastern part of the Krušné Hory/Erzgebirge Mts. as the youngest evolutionary member of the late Variscan Altenberg-Teplice rhyolite caldera ( The caldera is transected from NW to SE by mostly hidden subsurface ridge of A-type granites, with several local elevations rising to the present surface ( The RMG plutons often show a distinct vertical stratification (e.g., A fine-grained, strongly porphyritic variety of zinnwaldite granite, locally known as zinnwaldite microgranite (ZiGm, The upper part of the cupola, the “canopy”, to a depth of 260 m is composed of mostly leucocratic equigranular fine-grained albite-zinnwaldite granite (ZiGC, Banded quartz–zinnwaldite veins (QZV, ±topaz, K-feldspar, wolframite, cassiterite), form a well-known onion-like structure in the central part of the cupola. The veins 20–200 cm thick are rimmed by a cm- to m-sized selvage of quartz-zinnwaldite metasomatic greisen mineralized by cassiterite and scheelite. Steep quartz–zinnwaldite veins, striking SW–NE and texturally similar to the previous type, are rare. Bodies termed “massive greisen” by the miners (GR) are flat zones of pervasive metasomatic greisenization tens to hundreds meters in size; they were typically formed 20–200 m beneath the granite/rhyolite contact. The combination of predominantly irregular steep joints with flat L-shaped joints enabled fluid migration and intensive replacement of feldspars by quartz, zinnwaldite, topaz and fluorite. Mineralization is irregularly distributed in the greisens: cassiterite strongly prevails over scheelite. Mica-free granite (MfG) was encountered at a depth of 260–369 m as a medium-grained porphyritic rock composed of up to 10 mm-sized perthite phenocrysts in quartz–K-feldspar–albite groundmass. Zinnwaldite is present only incidentally. Fluorite, zircon, rutile, thorite, cassiterite and columbite are typical accessories. Potassium-dominated fine- to medium-grained feldspathites (FSP) form several layers up to 5 m thick within the MfG body. A zone of large xenoliths of ZiGm ( Medium- to coarse-grained albite-zinnwaldite granite (ZiG, The suite of biotite granites at the depth of 735–1596 m is homogeneous in its mineral and chemical compositions but exhibits various textures. Slightly porphyritic medium-grained biotite granite prevails (BtG, Altogether 38 samples covering all granite and greisen facies in a vertical section of the pluton to the depth of 1.6 km were collected ( Major elements in micas were analyzed using a CAMECA SX100 electron microprobe housed in the Institute of Geology of the Czech Academy of Sciences, Praha. We used an accelerating voltage of 15 kV, a beam current of 10 nA, and a beam diameter of 2 µm. The following standards were used: Na, Al – jadeite, Mg, Si, Ca – diopside, K – leucite, Ti – rutile, P – apatite, Mn – MnCr The trace elements in the micas were analyzed at the Laboratory of Atomic Spectrochemistry (LAS), Department of Chemistry, Faculty of Science, Masaryk University Brno. Besides Li, we decided to analyze another 10 elements: Sn, W, Nb and Ta as rare metals which are enriched and potentially mineable at the deposit, Cs and Tl as rare elements geochemically similar to K and potentially concentrating in micas (Rb was already analyzed by the EMPA), Ga and Ge as potential indicators of magma fractionation (as decreasing Al/Ga and Si/Ge values, To calculate the share of mica in the budget of rare metals in the bulk rock ( According to the IMA rules, only so-called “end member” mineral names are valid. Actual nomenclature of micas ( For simplicity, this paper adheres to the name “zinnwaldite” for micas containing more than 1.2 apfu Li, and the name “biotite” for the Li-poorer micas ( We studied micas in polished slabs from 38 granite and greisen samples. Typical shapes of mica grains are shown in Zinnwaldite from the middle part of the cupola (ZiG, ZiGm) is macroscopically black ( Macroscopically black biotite constitutes 2–4 vol% of biotite granites. Individual subhedral to anhedral flakes, mostly 0.5–2 mm across, often contain common inclusions of monazite, xenotime, zircon and Ti-oxides, sometimes associated with fluorite ( All primary micas at Cínovec are trioctahedral Li-Fe micas close to the annite–zinnwaldite–trilithionite series ( With respect to major elements including Li, Rb and F, the trioctahedral micas can be classified into two distinct groups: zinnwaldite and Li-enriched biotite. Zinnwaldite contains 41.2–48.5 wt% SiO Within the group of zinnwaldite, noticeable difference was found between samples from different facies of granite and greisen. For example, the contents of Nb decrease from 158–464 ppm in zinnwaldite from the lower part of the cupola (ZiG) to 45–91 ppm in zinnwaldite from the upper part of the cupola (ZiGC) and 36–70 ppm in zinnwaldite from greisen and veins. Similarly, Ta decreases from 80 ppm in zinnwaldite from the ZiG to 6–28 ppm in zinnwaldites from greisens and the ZiGC. The contents of Sn are scattered mostly between 100 and 200 (occasionally up to 530) ppm in zinnwaldite from the ZiG and 65–155 ppm in zinnwaldite from greisens, with no clear vertical trend. The contents of W are slightly higher in zinnwaldite from granites (28–74 ppm) than in zinnwaldite from greisen (13–39 ppm, in one sample only 2.9 ppm). Also the contents of Cs are slightly higher in zinnwaldite from granites (370–630 ppm) than in zinnwaldite from greisen (360–500 ppm). The contents of other analyzed trace elements in zinnwaldite from both rock types are similar: 42–100 ppm Sc, 32–55 ppm Tl, 66–160 ppm Ga, mostly 2.7–8 ppm Ge (in one case 14.5 ppm Ge) and mostly <1 ppm In (occasionally up to1.4 ppm In). In comparison with zinnwaldite, biotite from all facies of the BtG contains generally higher Nb (381–937 ppm), Ta (34–134 ppm), and Sn (93–617 ppm), while the contents of Cs (356–655 ppm), Sc (51–130 ppm), Ga (84–128 ppm), Ge (mostly 5.5–9.2 ppm) and In (mostly <1 ppm) are similar. The contents of W (20–46 ppm) and Tl (17–33 ppm) in biotite are lower than those in zinnwaldite. Along basic division of trioctahedral micas to zinnwaldite and biotite, systematic chemical changes in vertical direction along borehole CS-1are noticeable ( Different patterns were encountered in vertical distribution of rare metals in mica: the contents of Sn, Nb and Ta decrease strongly upward: 620 → 70 ppm Sn, 550 → 50 ppm Nb and 70 → 20 ppm Ta ( In contrast, the contents of W vary only slightly between 20 and 70 ppm, showing no trend ( Thallium is the only trace element the contents of which systematically increase upwards with maxima in the range of 40–60 ppm in the uppermost part of the ZiG. The contents of Tl in mica correlate well with Tl contents in the bulk rock, with Tl Of the elemental ratios proposed as indicators of magma fractionation ( Dioctahedral mica of the muscovite–phengite series was found only locally as a product of late alteration of zinnwaldite flakes. Muscovite contains ca. 47.5–49.0 wt% SiO Lithium as the only major constituent of micas from evolved granites and pegmatites cannot be analyzed using electron microprobe. To solve this problem, several methods of Li calculation from other elements, easily analyzed by the microprobe, have been suggested ( While Li enters the mica crystal lattice along several competing substitution schemes (annite–trilithionite, siderophyllite–polylithionite, muscovite–lepidolite), the Li content cannot be easily calculated based on formula stoichiometry; all suggested methods are based on statistical evaluation of large datasets of published chemical and microprobe analyses. This approach is useful for a first approximation but can result in significant errors in a particular case. Knowing the modal content of mica in the rock, the bulk-rock chemical composition, and the contents of particular elements in mica, we are able to compute the share of mica in the bulk-rock budget of these elements. This will be later used as a supporting argument for the discussion of processes forming the deposit. Mica is the only host of Li in the Cínovec magmatic system, and an important host of F, Rb, Cs, Tl, Ga, Sn, W, Nb, Ta and Sc ( Based on the vertical zoning of mica, its mineral assemblage, and the share of mica in the budget of F, Li and rare metals, we may try to interpret the role of mica in the origin of the deposit. Zinnwaldite grains in greisen are homogeneous in BSE, which indicates their homogeneous chemical composition as regards the distribution of major elements. The contents of trace elements are scattered, but no regular zoning was identified. Consequently, remnants of primary magmatic zinnwaldite and later hydrothermal zinnwaldite grooving in the greisen stage cannot be distinguished. We conclude that all zinnwaldite in greisen was fully re-equilibrated in a reaction with the greisenizing fluid. This is different from quartz, where magmatic cores and hydrothermal overgrowths can be easily distinguished using cathodoluminescence ( Comparing zinnwaldite from granite and these from greisen and veins, the latter is slightly poorer in FeO (means 11.5 Comparing zinnwaldite from greisen in the central part of the deposit (greisen selvages of quartz veins, altogether 165 analytical spots) with zinnwaldite from greisen in the southern part of the deposit (massive greisen bodies, 119 analytical spots), the former is slightly enriched in Li (17.350  Among the analyzed elements, only Tl is well positively correlated with Li ( In our opinion, Sn-rich biotite in biotite granites as well as Sn-poor zinnwaldite in zinnwaldite granites are primary magmatic minerals. The only documented hydrothermal alteration of zinnwaldite within the complex of zinnwaldite granites is muscovitization locally found in greisens ( The paradox that biotite from only slightly Sn-enriched biotite granites (usually 10–30 ppm Sn) shows higher Sn contents than zinnwaldite from strongly Sn-enriched zinnwaldite granites (usually 50–200 ppm Sn) can be explained by evaluating the whole mineral assemblages of both granite types and the order of crystallization of particular minerals. Biotite is, besides relatively scarce Ti-oxides, the major host of rare metals in biotite granites, while the generally low contents of Sn, Nb, and Ta in zinnwaldite from all facies of zinnwaldite granites should be explained by its relatively late crystallization when a substantial part of rare metals was already bound in disseminated magmatic cassiterite and columbite. During the greisen stage, rare metals preferably formed oxide minerals ( The probable source of rare metals and Li and F necessary for the greisen formation was in the middle part of the complex of zinnwaldite granites, at depths of 260–369 m in borehole CS-1. Here, a body of quartz-feldspathitic rocks about 130 thick, extraordinarily poor in volatiles and metals (“mica-free granite”), is explained as alkali-rich remnant after fluid segregation from the residual melt. The released fluid rich in F and Li effectively sequestered Sn and W from the melt and transported those upwards forming zinnwaldite-rich greisen + oxide minerals (cassiterite, scheelite>wolframite, columbite, pyrochlore), while the residual silicate melt crystallized as volatile- and metal-poor mica-free granite ( Late muscovitization indicates the second, although spatially limited, episode of tin transfer to the upper part of the cupola. In Beauvoir, France, similar Sn-rich late muscovite in greisen is interpreted to incorporate tin from altered magmatic cassiterite ( Despite of huge volumes of mica-related literature, papers with reliable datasets of major, Li, and trace element analyses of Li-rich micas from rare-metal granites or pegmatites are as yet scarce. Papers using modern spot analyses (EPMA + LA-ICP-MS) are effectively limited to The contents of Nb in mica is relatively high and systematically decrease during the evolution of some granite plutons (Saudi Arabia, Cínovec) or are generally low in others (<350 ppm: western Erzgebirge, Cornwall, China). Low Nb contents (mostly <200 ppm) were found also in all referred pegmatitic muscovites ( Chemical composition of magmatic and hydrothermal micas along with whole-rock chemistry provide important information about the evolution of strongly fractionated rare-metal granite system necessary to formulate a reliable genetic scenario. In the case of the Cínovec deposit, the micas yielded following constraining information: all primary micas are trioctahedral micas of the annite–zinnwaldite–lepidolite series. vertical zoning (fractionation) of lithophile elements in mica including Li, Rb, and F well corroborate zoning of these elements in the bulk rock. the contents of HFSE in mica do not correspond to those in the bulk rock (melt). Generally, biotite associated only with Ti-oxides displays distinctly higher contents of Sn, Nb, Ta and W than zinnwaldite associated with cassiterite, columbite, and pyrochlore. the share of mica in the bulk-rock budget of Sn decreases from 40–70% in biotite granite to less than 5% in mineralized greisen; the shares of mica in budgets of Nb and Ta are lower but have identical trends. The entry of the HFSE to mica is mainly controlled by the order of crystallization of mica during hydrothermal greisenization, primary magmatic zinnwaldite was fully re-equilibrated: slightly enriched in Si, Mn and Ga, and depleted in Fe, Rb, F, Cs and ore elements Sn, Nb, Ta and W. late local muscovitization in the upper part of the cupola was accompanied by an input of Sn. Late muscovite is Li, F-poor, and chemically strongly differs from remnants of greisen-stage zinnwaldite; no transitional composition between zinnwaldite and muscovite was found. we do not recommend to calculate Li contents in mica from microprobe data. Such calculation is subject to a large error. This work was supported by the