Scant information has been published describing the effect of laser fiber distance from the stone target on the mechanism of calculus fragmentation. Using high speed photography and acoustic emission measurements, Fuh et al (page 1542) from Durham, North Carolina characterized the impact of laser fiber proximity on stone comminution. Stone fragmentation was assessed using a FREDDY (frequency doubled double pulse Nd:YAG) laser and a holmium laser. A high speed camera was used to capture transient cavitation bubbles at a framing rate of up to 1,000,000 frames per second. Acoustic emission signals associated with shock waves generated during the rapid expansion and collapse of the cavitation bubble were measured using a focused ultrasound transducer. The authors found that while bubble size increased with a larger stone-to-fiber distance using the holmium laser, to consistently generate cavitation bubbles and shock waves using the FREDDY laser, the laser fiber should be operated within 3.0 mm of the target stone. These findings have significant implications for clinical laser stone fragmentation. The incidence of urinary incontinence increases with age, but the cause and effect relationship between aging and altered bladder function is poorly understood. It has been suggested that melatonin can ameliorate negative effects induced by aging by its free radical scavenging activity and ability to decrease oxidative stress. Gomez-Pinilla et al (page 1558) from Caceres, Spain investigated the changes in bladder function evoked by aging and the possible benefits of melatonin treatment on age related bladder disturbances. Bladder function was assessed using cystometry in conscious female guinea pigs. Aging led to increased detrusor activity, as demonstrated by short micturition intervals, decreased bladder capacity and spontaneous contractions during the filling phase. During the voiding phase aged animals showed lower micturition pressures than young adults. Melatonin counteracted the cystometric changes in senescent animals and restored micturition parameters to those of young adults. If similar effects can be demonstrated in humans, melatonin treatment may be a new approach to decrease the impact of age related bladder disorders. TRPV1 is a nonselective ion channel that is sensitive to capsaicin, noxious heat and low pH. It is largely expressed in the lower urinary tract, in sensory fibers coursing through the muscular and mucosal layers, and in urothelial cells. Based on several prior studies it has been suggested that TRPV1 could be involved in cystitis. However, a definitive role has not yet been established. To further clarify this issue Charrua et al (page 1537) from Porto, Portugal used transgenic mice in which the TRPV1 gene was inactivated (TRPV1 –/–) to determine the contribution of the receptor to the generation of noxious bladder input and bladder overactivity associated with cystitis. The data demonstrated that TRPV1 is essential for the generation of noxious bladder input and bladder overactivity associated with cystitis. The clinical implication of this study is in the treatment of pain and bladder overactivity associated with chronic painful bladder syndrome, including interstitial cystitis. The study suggests that the TRPV1 blockade by an appropriate antagonist might provide significant analgesia and contribute to the control of the high urinary frequency exhibited by such patients. Multidrug resistance commonly limits effectiveness in treating malignancy with chemotherapy. Multidrug resistance has classically been described as a cell membrane phenomenon. Multidrug resistant cells are known to specifically exclude chemotherapy from the nucleus, resulting in lower nuclear concentrations than in the cytoplasm. This phenomenon is known as nuclear sparing and little is known of its etiology. Lewin et al (page 1526) from Southampton, United Kingdom hypothesized that a component of the nuclear membrane, the nuclear pore, is responsible for this phenomenon. After quantitative assessment of nuclear pores resistant and sensitive urothelial cancer cells were fused using polyethylene glycol, and laser scanning confocal microscopy was used to identify if drug resistant and sensitive nuclei can coexist within the same cell. Nuclear pores appeared more numerous in the multidrug resistant cells. Cell fusion experiments showed that multidrug resistance and sensitive nuclei could coexist with the same cell milieu. Multidrug resistance is a complex phenomenon occurring at many cellular levels, of which all may be potential therapeutic targets. The nuclear pore is involved in this process, which was a previously undescribed phenomenon. Nuclear pores have a significant role in the development of neoplasms and our ability to treat them effectively. A greater understanding of their role in multidrug resistance would allow for new therapeutic targets and improved chemotherapy efficacy. Vaginal delivery is a risk factor for stress urinary incontinence. Rat models of simulated childbirth have demonstrated hypoxia of the urogenital organs as well as the development of stress urinary incontinence following vaginal distention. A separate rat model of myocardial ischemia led to the identification of a subset of cytokines that are transiently over expressed in myocardial tissues after ischemic injury. Known as monocyte chemotactic protein-3 (MCP-3) and stromal derived factor-1, these chemoattractants function as homing molecules that signal mesenchymal stem cell and hematopoietic stem cell migration to sites of damage, thus promoting subsequent tissue repair. Given the focal hypoxia observed with vaginal distention, Woo et al (page 1568) from Cleveland, Ohio characterized stromal derived factor-1 and MCP-3 expression by pelvic organ tissues after vaginal distention in female rats. The authors noted that MCP-3 is significantly over expressed in rat urethral and vaginal tissues immediately following vaginal distention with greater than normal but decreasing expression 24 hours later. The association between MCP-3 over expression and targeted stem cell migration in the lower urinary tract would introduce the potential for novel nonoperative treatments and/or preventive measures for stress urinary incontinence.