To uncover the failure and instability mechanism of coal-rock combination under loading, it is very crucial to investigate crack development and energy evolution. In this work, the uniaxial compressive and Brazilian split tests of coal-rock combinations were first performed. Secondly, the corresponding numerical models were built using the UDEC-Trigon method. Based on numerical results, the number, length and macroscopic area of cracks during failure and instability were determined, and the crack development and energy evolution rules were analysed. The main conclusions were obtained as follows: 1) the stress thresholds of crack initiation and damage of coal-rock combination rose with the increasing height ratio of coal to rock. The maximum event count of acoustic emission (AE) appeared earlier than the peak strength; 2) the failure and instability of coal-rock combination occurred when crack propagation and connection in central coal exceeded the damage limit. The shear failure was dominant mechanical behaviour of coal with the ratio 9:1 of shear to tensile fractures. The cracks connection was presented as a shear failure surface with an inclination angle of 15°–30° in coal and a vertical tensile failure plane in rock; and 3) the energy evolution in coal-rock combination was described as follows: the larger the height ratio of coal to rock is, the higher the cumulative energy is, and the faster the speed of energy dissipation is, indicating the higher risk of rockburst triggered by failure and instability of coal-rock combination.Strain-type rockburst commonly occurs when stress subjected to coal-rock combination reaches or exceeds its strength limit accompanied with the disruption of dynamic balance between energy accumulation and dissipation. Microscopically, rockburst is closely associated with initiation, propagation and interaction of micro-cracks in coal-rock. Therefore, it is of great practical significance to study the deformation and failure law of coal-rock combination as a whole to guide safe production in coal mines. Compared with theoretical analysis and laboratory tests, numerical simulation is more effective to capture the microscopic mechanical behaviours and crack propagation and evolution during the process of coal-rock combination failure. Commonly, the PFC can also simulate the microscopic mechanical behaviour of coal-rock under loading. However, by calibration and inversion of microscopic parameters of contact surface, it was found that the tensile strength of rock increases apparently and the ratio of tensile to compressive strength is about 0.25, At present, the researches on fracture characteristics of coal-rock combinations mainly focus on laboratory tests, which are difficult to accurately locate the fracture position. Rock model in the UDEC is an assembly of blocks, which are bonded together through contacts. The blocks and contacts obey respective constitutive rules. The blocks comprising the model can move and rotate freely and they are allowed to fall when fracturing from the rock until failure. For the UDEC, the deformation properties of the blocks can be characterized by the bulk modulus The deformation properties of the contacts between the blocks are characterized by the normal and tangential stiffness The strength of contact is defined by the friction angle Tensile damage occurs along the normal direction of contact when the tensile stress on the contact surface exceeds Similarly, the contact obeys the Coulomb-failure law along the shear direction of the contact surface. The stress-strain relationship in the tangential direction of the block is determined by the shear stiffness When According to the For the discrete element method, the microscopic mechanical parameters of blocks and contacts can't be directly derived from laboratory tests, but only by repeated calibrations to obtain the macroscopic response. Previous researches used the polygonal blocks in the UDEC to compare the cohesion, internal friction angle and tensile strength of the joints between natural rock blocks and those of numerical models. In this work, the initial micro-parameters were first assumed according to coal-rock mechanical properties, and then the numerical simulations were carried out. Eventually, the simulation results were compared with macro-parameters measured in lab. According to the comparisons, the micro-parameters were carefully adjusted until the simulation results were approximately consistent with the laboratory tests. The calibration process of parameters is shown in Laboratory tests were performed to calculate the uniaxial compressive strength (UCS) and tensile strength of coal, mudstone and sandstone, and the full stress-strain curves from lab and numerical simulations were plotted, as shown in The crack initiation stress or threshold is defined by onset of stable crack growth. The cracks start to appear systematically when the stress level is above the crack initiation stress. The crack damage stress is defined as the point where volumetric strain reversal occurs and unstable crack growth begins. It also corresponds to the stress where a drastic increase of crack activity (the slope of the accumulated crack events increase sharply) is observed. At present, uniaxial compression experiments are extensively used to study the failure process of coal-rock combination, while triaxial experiments are rarely reported. Meanwhile, the number of cracks can't be measured directly. We used numerical simulations to investigate the fracture development process of coal-rock combination under uniaxial compression. According to different height ratios of roof-coal seam-floor, three models were simulated to reveal the influencing effect of the height ratio on crack development. Three different height ratios of R The axial stress-strain, shear failure via the number of tensile crack and AE event count curves were obtained from the simulations, as shown in From Hoek and Bienawski divided crack development into five stages. The number of cracks on contact in the combinations was recorded for each 1000 steps, and it was regarded as the AE event count, shown in To further distinguish the crack types at different stages, the AEs were used combined with the curves of tensile and shear crack development. The stages Ⅱ and Ⅲ were subdivided into Ⅱ For UDEC model, a contact crack can produce a release of strain energy, which can be regarded as an AE event. The AE event can be simulated by counting the number of fracture joints. Due to the limitation of computational ability, the size and number of joints of UDEC model can't achieve the real simulation of the mechanical response of macroscopic rock and single AE event caused by multiple cracks. However, it is still helpful to simulate the AE by counting the number of contact faults. This method of AE modelling has been fruitfully tried. Quadratic polynomial was fitted for the AE event count at the stages Ⅱ From  From On microscopic scale, fractures are the result of cumulative crack of micro-units. Based on the theory of damage mechanics, the damage variable is defined by According to Eq. The total number of joints, numbers of tensile and shear cracks in the coal and rock were calculated using the FISH function of the UDEC. The damage rate of coal and rock and average tensile and shear damage rates were calculated, as shown in From  With the interconnection of tensile and shear cracks, a large number of macroscopic cracks were formed in the coal-rock combinations. There were two types of macroscopic cracks depending on the formation morphology. From  In addition, the crack area was calculated using Imaj software. Energy accumulation and dissipation in the coal-rock combinations was monitored and recorded during the process of contact compression. For each contact, the energy accumulation is governed using Eq.  From It is well known that AE is used to monitor energy within a certain frequency band and can't specifically detect the fracture information of weak joints. In this work, the characteristics of energy evolution were retrieved by recording energy dissipation information of crack points. From  As the height ratio of coal to rock in the combinations increases, both stress thresholds for crack initiation and damage rise. The maximum of AE event count appears earlier than the peak strength and the warning of failure can be made based on this indicator. Based on AE curves, the stages Ⅱ and Ⅲ can be subdivided into the stage Ⅱ Failure of the coal-rock combinations occurs when the crack damage rate of the coal exceeds its damage limit, about 33% of the contact number in the coal. The ratio of shear damage rate to tensile damage rate in the coal was about 9: 1. The cracks in coal mainly belong to shear failure, and the angle of the fracture plane is 15°–30°. The cracks in rock mainly belong to tensile failure with vertical fracture plane. The crack length is positively proportional to the height ratio of coal to rock, and the crack area is negatively proportional to the height ratio. The higher the coal-rock height ratio is, the greater the difference between energy accumulation and dissipation is, and the smaller the energy dissipation of cracks is. Therefore, rockburst is easy to occur in a working face with hard and thick roof. We gratefully wish to acknowledge the collaborative funding support from the