Brazil has one of the largest reserves of granite in the world and is in part of the top ten producers of dimension stone. The dimension granite extensive mining in this country generates expressive volumes of tailings, among then rock fragments and fine particles, accounting for more than 50% of the material extracted from the quarries. The dimension stone, commercially known as Marrom-Guaíba granite, is an alkali-feldspar quartz syenite rich in potassium and sodium exploited by Serra Geral Mining in the southern part of Brazil. Due to its chemical composition, Marrom-Guaíba tailings have potential application in the ceramic industry. However, the grade of iron bearing minerals (considered a contaminant) is too high. Tailings samples were grinded, milled, chemical analyzed and tested using magnetic separation and froth flotation in order to reduce the iron and quartz content. The results show that the magnetic separation reduced the iron content from 3.20 to 0.48% and increased the feldspar content from 72.20 to 81.23% with 65.31% of mass recovery and 73.48% of metallurgical recovery. Flotation provided small decreased in quartz content, from 4.40 to 3.90%. A suitable feldspar concentrate for ceramic industry was obtained.In 2014, the world production of dimension stone reached 136,500 Ceramic and glass industries are the main consumers of feldspar in Brazil. In glass manufacture, feldspar is used as fluxing agent and as a source of alumina (Al Brazilian's feldspar gross production in 2014 was 497 One of the main characteristics to be considered of feldspar for ceramic industry is the grade of iron bearing minerals (oxides or silicates) present on it. Although the ceramic industry requirements for raw material are quite diversified, since they depend on the type of material to be produced, if the grade of this contaminant is higher than 0.5% it promotes a dark colouring and other irregularities in the final product, detrimental to the processes and to the quality of the ceramic. In the production of white dishes, the maximum iron content (evaluated as Fe This paper describes the tests in bench scale performed with samples from Marrom-Guaíba granite tailings in order to obtain a feldspar concentrate with chemical and granulometric properties suitable for use in the ceramic industry. A dry high-intensity magnetic separator was used in order to reduce the iron bearing minerals content on the sample. Cationic flotation of feldspar using amine and HF was used to reduce the quartz content. A sample of 20 The rock samples were crushed in a jaw crusher, to obtain particles below 10 To determine the optimum time for the rock comminution (100% below 600 A high-intensity (22 After the magnetic separation, the non-magnetic particles @ 12 Feldspar contents were calculated by stoichiometry based on sodium and potassium contents, as can be observed in The microscopic description showed that the Marrom-Guaíba granite was constituted predominantly by K-feldspar and amphibole, which agrees with the macroscopic description, having secondarily titanite, apatite, and opaque minerals, and traces of clinopyroxene. The rock texture was a stacked arrangement of K-feldspar crystals, which showed preferred alignment. The modal composition estimated was 66% K-feldspar, 24% amphibole, 4% quartz, 3% titanite, 2% opaque minerals, and 1% apatite. The rock was classified as a syenite alkali-feldspar    Regarding the K   Chemical analysis of the flotation concentrate were inconsistent for milling times of 5 and 10 Marrom-Guaíba granite corresponds to an igneous rock, classified as alkali-feldspar quartz syenite due to its low amount of quartz (5.7% on petrographic and 8.4% on the semi-quantitative analysis). Therefore, the rock cannot be considered as a granitic, or a granitoid, geologically speaking. The feldspar concentrate production with chemical and granulometric specifications suitable for the manufacture of ceramics, porcelain tiles, sanitary wares, glasses, and insulators was investigated in this work. After 15 Flotation tests were not efficient for coarser particles (lower milling time). However, there was a slight increase in the alkalis content and consequently in the feldspar grade and a decrease in quartz content in those conditions, which could not be observed for 15 The authors declare no conflicts of interest. The authors gratefully acknowledge the financial support of the Brazilian agencies