In this paper, a novel macromolecular depressant polymaleamide-propyl dithiocarbamate (PMA-PDTC) was designed and synthesized according to density functional theory (DFT) calculations results, and its structure was characterized by infrared spectra (IR). The flotation experiments results demonstrated that PMA-PDTC was an effective depressant for galena in separating galena from chalcopyrite, and it exhibited a stronger depressing ability and a better selectivity for galena than for chalcopyrite. When the dosage of PMA-PDTC was 2.0mg/L, a good separation result was obtained with O-isopropyl-N-ethyl thionocarbamate (IPETC) as collector at pH 8.5 for an artificial mixture of Cu-Pb minerals. The Cu concentrate could reach a grade of 28.89% containing 12.12% Pb, and the Pb concentrate could reach a grade of 80.65% containing 1.49% Cu. The experimental results agreed with the DFT calculations results well, which indicated that DFT method was useful for predicting the adsorption strength of some molecules on mineral surfaces and for guiding the design of the depressant for galena or other minerals.Chalcopyrite and galena have extremely similar floatability in minerals processing. The major difficulty the researchers face is how to efficiently realize the separation of these two minerals. Usually, there are two methods widely used in the separation of Cu-Pb concentrate by depressing chalcopyrite with cyanide or depressing galena with dichromate in most cases ( In recent years, there are many organic compounds used as galena depressants. Dextrin was used for depressing galena selectively while chalcopyrite was floated with xanthate collector using NaOH to adjust the pulp pH ( Density functional theory (DFT) has been used in minerals processing for analyzing some properties of mineral crystals, such as band structure, density of states (DOS), Mulliken population, frontier orbitals, and so on, and also used for analyzing the interactions between reagents and minerals to predict the functions of molecules and to explore the adsorption mechanisms on mineral surfaces. Chen and his research group had done many simulation works about sulfide minerals, such as pyrite, sphalerite, galena, et al. based on DFT ( In this paper, DFT was used to analyze the properties of chalcopyrite and galena mineral crystals, such as band gap, Mulliken population, frontier orbitals energies, and so on. At the same time, DFT was also employed to determine the optimal molecular structure and calculate electronic properties of selected small molecules, such as geometric parameters, atomic charge values and the energies of highest occupied molecular orbital (HOMO) and lowest unoccupied molecular orbital (LUMO). Through these analysis, the reactive abilities of O-isopropyl-N-ethyl thionocarbamate (IPETC) and one molecule with dithiocarbamate (DTC) group with galena surface were explored and predicted. Based on these theoretical calculations, a new organic macromolecular depressant PMA-PDTC was designed and synthesized by grafting DTC groups into the structure of hydrophilic polymaleic anhydride (PMA). The structure of PMA-PDTC was characterized by IR spectra. Then the flotation separation tests for pure minerals were carried out. DFT calculations results agreed with the flotation experiments results well, which indicated that DFT methods could be used to guide the design of depressant molecules for sulfide minerals. Chalcopyrite and galena pure minerals were purchased from the geological museum of China. Two minerals were both handpicked to get high purity samples, and then ground and screened out to collect the −0.074 mm +0.038 mm size fractions for the following flotation tests. The purities of chalcopyrite and galena could reach 96.21% and 99.23% by X-ray diffraction (XRD) analysis and chemical analysis, respectively (shown in Maleic anhydride and 1,3-diaminopropane (DAP), the raw materials for the synthesis of the macromolecular depressant, were of analytical grade originating from Sinopharm Chemical Reagent Co., Ltd, China. Benzoyl peroxide (BPO) acted as an initiator and toluene was used as the reaction solvent, which were both bought from Tianjin Kemiou Chemical Reagent Co., Ltd. IPETC obtained from commercial companies with a purity of >95% was used as a collector in the study. Methyl isobutyl carbinol (MIBC) was chosen as a frother bought from Sinopharm Chemical Reagent Co., Ltd, China. Solutions of HCl and NaOH were used to adjust the pH of the pulp. All waters used in the experiments were distilled waters. All calculations were carried out with Materials Studio 7.0 (MS 7.0). Geometry optimizations of chalcopyrite and galena mineral crystals were performed using Cambridge Serial Total Energy Package (CASTEP), which was a first-principle pseudopotential method based on density functional theory (DFT) ( The frontier orbitals of chalcopyrite and galena were calculated by Dmol Firstly, polymaleic anhydride (PMA) was synthesized in anhydrous toluene initiated by BPO as the literatures presented ( PMA-PDTC was prepared according to the synthesis route as shown in The flotation tests for pure single minerals were conducted in a XFG5-35 flotation machine with a 40 mL plexiglass cell and its impeller speed was kept at 1754 r/min. In a single mineral flotation test, the mineral samples were pre-cleaned in an ultrasonic bath for 5 In the flotation tests of artificial mixture of minerals, 1.2 All the flotation separation tests were conducted as shown in The chalcopyrite band gap is 0.98 Mulliken population is usually used to analyze the charge distributions of atoms and the bonds among them. Through Mulliken atomic population, the charge distributions of atoms would be investigated. According to Mulliken bond populations, the character and the strength of bonds between atoms can be learned. The value is larger, the stronger covalent bond is. The value is smaller, the stronger ionic bond is. As seen in The selection of the suitable collector and depressant is very important in the separation of polymetallic sulfide ores, especially for the separation of chalcopyrite and galena. Here, in order to realize the separation of Cu-Pb concentrate, IPETC is selected as chalcopyrite collector. The key is how to design a galena depressant. As we know, sodium diethyldithiocarbamate is usually used as galena collector. So dithiocarbamate (DTC) group could be regarded as a selective group for galena. In this flotation system, a depressant with DTC group for galena would be designed. In order to explain their electronic structures well, IPETC and a similar molecule of one part of the depressant with DTC group were simulated by DFT methods to explore their reactive abilities with chalcopyrite and galena. The optimized structures of studied molecules are shown in Compared with C The net charges of atoms in IPETC and DTC molecules are given in   Based on FMO theory ( Frontier orbital theory deems that properties of molecules are mainly determined by their frontier orbitals, HOMO and LUMO. The extent of the interaction between minerals and reagents is inversely proportional to the energy difference between HOMO which donates electrons and LUMO which accepts electrons ( It is shown that the absolute value of ΔE According to the design principle of depressants, there must be two groups in the structure of one molecule, one is hydrophilic group, the other one is mineral-avid group. Based on the DFT calculations results, DTC had stronger power and selectivity for galena than IPETC, and was found to be an effective molecule matrix for galena with more selective adsorption than chalcopyrite. If this kind of mineral-avid group for galena is introduced into a hydrophilic molecule, it will be changed into a depressant, and shows a good selectivity and depressing ability, but it also needs enough hydrophilic groups. Herein, PMA, as a kind of hydrophilic polymer, is used to link hydrophilic groups and mineral-avid groups together by its active anhydride groups just like  The flotation performances of chalcopyrite and galena were investigated in the presence of PMA-PDTC as a depressant with different concentrations at various pHs. Herein, IPETC and MIBC were used as the collector and the frother both with a concentration of 10.0 mg/L. The flotation results are illustrated in   These results show that PMA-PDTC could be an effective depressant for galena with a slight effect on chalcopyrite, which agrees with the DFT calculation results. Herein, 1.2 g galena and 0.8  In the research, a novel macromolecular depressant polymaleamide-propyl dithiocarbamate (PMA-PDTC) was synthesized and characterized according to DFT calculations. DFT calculation results showed that DTC exhibited a better adsorption on galena surface than on chalcopyrite surface by analyzing frontier orbitals energies, the sulfur atom charges, and so on. Based on these computational results and discussions, the following conclusions may be drawn: From the HOMO energies and the electron densities of the reactive centers, the following collecting ability order on galena surface was theoretically obtained: DTC The flotation separation results illustrated that PMA-PDTC exhibited a stronger depressing ability and a better selectivity for galena than for chalcopyrite. When its dosage was 2.0 mg/L, a good separation result for mixed minerals was obtained with IPETC as collector at pH 8.5. The grade of Cu concentrate could reach 28.89% containing 12.12% Pb, the grade of Pb concentrate could reach 80.65% containing 1.49% Cu. Hence, this study provides a straightforward use of the computational technique based on DFT methods for designing the depressant for galena. The flotation test results indicate that DFT calculations could be used to predict the adsorption strength of some molecules on mineral surfaces and to guide the design of depressants for galena or other minerals, and then to achieve the desired results. However, the depression mechanism of PMA-PDTC is not clear, and the knowledge of its application conditions is also not enough. This will be the object of our following works. The authors would gratefully thank for the financial supports of the