In this paper, 5-(2-hydroxy-5-nitrophenylazo)thiorhodanine (HNATR) was synthesized. A new method for the simultaneous determination of palladium, platinum, rhodium and gold ions as metal-HNATR chelates was developed using a rapid analysis column high performance liquid chromatography equipped with on-line solid phase extraction technique. The samples (Water, human urine, geological samples and soil) were digested by microwave acid-digestion. The palladium, platinum, rhodium and gold ions in the digested samples were pre-column derivatized with HNATR to form colored chelates. The Pd-HNATR, Pt-HNATR, Rh-HNATR and Au-HNATR chelates can be absorbed onto the front of the enrichment column when they were injected into the injector and sent to the enrichment column [Zorbax Stable Bound, 10mm×4.6mm, 1.8μm] with a buffer solution of 0.05molL−1 phosphoric acid as mobile phase. After the enrichment had finished, by switching the six ports switching valve, the retained chelates were back-flushed by mobile phase and travelling towards the analytical column. These chelates separation on the analytical column [Zorbax Stable Bound, 10mm×4.6mm, 1.8μm] was satisfactory with 72% acetonitrile (containing 0.05molL−1 of phosphoric acid and 0.1% of Triton X-100) as mobile phase. The palladium, platinum, rhodium and gold chelates were separated completely within 2.5min. Compared to the routine chromatographic method, more then 80% of separation time was shortened. By on-line solid phase extraction system, a large volume of sample (10mL) can be injected, and the sensitivity of the method was greatly improved. The detection limits (S/N=3, the sample injection volume is 10mL) of palladium, platinum, rhodium and gold in the original samples reaches 1.4, 1.8, 2.0 and 1.2ngL−1, respectively. The relative standard deviations for five replicate samples were 2.4–3.6%. The standard recoveries were 88–95%. This method was applied to the determination of palladium, platinum, rhodium and gold in human urine, water and geological samples with good results.Environmental contamination by the precious metal, mainly related to electroplating, hydrogenation catalyst, microcontactors in the electronics, hard alloy in dentistry and the three-way catalysts in automobile exhaust gas catalytic beads, is exponentially increasing In this paper, to select a more sensitivity, selectivity and convenience derivatization reagents for palladium, platinum, rhodium and gold, a new reagent, 5-(2-hydroxy-5-nitrophenylazo)thiorhodanine (HNATR) was synthesized and used as pre-column derivatization regents for palladium, platinum, rhodium and gold. To shorten the separation time and improve the sensitivity, a Zorbax Stable Bound rapid analysis column (50 On line column enrichment system used is shown in In a 100 All of the solutions were prepared with ultra-pure water obtained from a Milli-Q50 SP Reagent Water System (Millipore Corporation, USA). Palladium, platinum, rhodium and gold standard solution (1.0 An appropriate volume (not more than 20 The optimal condition for the reaction of Pd(II), Pt(II), Rh(III) and Au(III) with HNATR is in the acid medium. Therefore, the effect of hydrochloric acid, sulfuric acid, perchioric acid, phosphoric acid and the like, on the color reaction of Pd(II), Pt(II), Rh(III) and Au(III) with HNATR was studied. The experiments show that the phosphoric acid has the best effect, and the concentration of phosphoric acid within 0.05–0.5 It was found that 0.5 The experiments show that in the nonionic surfactants or cationic surfactants medium, the sensitivity of the metal-HNATR chelates was increased markedly. Various nonionic surfactants and cationic surfactants enhance the absorbance in the following sequence: Triton X-100 The HNATR can react with Pd(II), Pt(II), Rh(III) and Au(III) rapidly. The reaction was complete for 8 The on-line solid phase extraction was carried out on an on-line solid phase extraction system as shown in The Pd-HNATR, Pt-HNATR, Rh-HNATR and Au-HNATR chelates were stable in phosphoric acid medium. To avoid decomposition of the chelates during the enrichment step, a 0.05 The aim of the present research was to determine trace metal ions by injecting a large volume of sample. The effect of the injection volume was therefore investigated. An injection volume of 0.1–20 The absorption spectrum of metal-HNATR chelates was obtained by measured with a Shimidzu UV-2401 spectrophotometer. The results show that the maximum absorption is 504 The experiments showed that the Pd-HNATR, Pt-HNATR, Rh-HNATR and Au-HNATR chelates have a good stability in the presence of phosphoric acid solution and Triton X-100 medium. The mobile phase containing a 0.02–0.15 Under the optimum conditions, regression equations of metal-HNATR chelates were established based on the standard sample injected and its peak areas, and the linearity defined by Mandel's fitting test. The limits of detection in the original samples are calculated by the ratio of signal to noise (S/N Under the pre-column derivatization conditions, the foreign ions of Cu(II), Hg(II), Pb(II), Tl(III), Bi(III), Ag(I) which can reacts with HNATR to form color chelates. To examine the selectivity of this method, the interference of these foreign ions was investigated. When 2.0 Taking an appropriate volume (industrial plant effluents 20 A 20,000 The proposed method has the following characteristics: (1) HNATR was firstly synthesized and used as pre-column derivatization regents. The palladium, platinum, rhodium and gold ions can form stable color chelates with HNATR at room temperature rapidly. The molar absorptivity was calculated to be 1.28 This work was supported by the National Natural Science Foundation of China (20471051) and the Key Natural Science Foundation of Yunnan Province (2005K021).