In view of the fact that the microbial oxidation of ferrous iron to the ferric form is an essential sub-process in the bioleaching of sulphide minerals, the development of a comprehensive rate equation for this sub-process is critical. Such a rate equation is necessary for the design and modelling of both tank and heap bioleach systems.
                  Most of the rate equations presented in the literature define the specific microbial growth rate using a Monod-type form for ferrous substrate limitation, with further terms added to account for ferric product inhibition, ferrous substrate limitation and inhibition. A few of the published rate equations describe the specific substrate utilization rate in terms of a modified Michaelis–Menten equation and include the maximum yield constant and cell maintenance via the Pirt equation. Other rate equations are based on chemiosmotic theory or an analogy with an electrochemical cell.
                  In the present paper a selection of rate equations are compared against each other by calibrating them against the same set of data and comparing the fits. It was found that none fits the data particularly well and that some of the underlying assumptions need to be questioned. In particular, it appears that ferric inhibition is perhaps not as significant a factor than previously assumed and that rate control by the availability of ferrous is more significant.
                  Some rate equations include terms to account for the effects of temperature, pH, biomass concentration, ionic strength as well as inhibition due to arsenic. In general these effects have been studied in isolation and in ranges not too far off the optimum. Few rate equations combine more than 2 effects and there is no clarity on how a comprehensive model to account for all effects should be constructed.
                  Rate equations have been applied to tank bioleach systems, which usually operate under controlled conditions near the optimum. Heap bioleach systems, on the other hand, often operate far from optimum conditions with respect to temperature, pH, solution conditions, etc., at the same time. The kinetics of such sub-optimal systems are still poorly understood. Future studies should be directed towards the development of a comprehensive rate equation useful for describing the kinetics of heap bioleaching over a wide range of conditions.It is generally accepted that the bioleaching of sulphide minerals involves three major sub-processes, viz., the acid ferric leaching of the sulphide mineral, microbial oxidation of the sulphur moiety and the microbial oxidation of ferrous-iron to the ferric form. Although the stoichiometry of the overall reaction will vary according to the particular metal sulphide being bioleached, a typical reaction for a metal sulphide (MS) as follows: The ferrous-iron is then re-oxidized to the ferric form by microbial action: It is the kinetics of this reaction and the subsequent biomass synthesis and maintenance that is the main focus of this paper. There are many publications on the kinetics of microbial ferrous-iron oxidation It is the objective of this paper to review published studies and to attempt to identify a rate equation that is both consolidated and comprehensive, and which includes substrate utilization, biomass synthesis and biomass maintenance. The rate equations for microbial ferrous-iron oxidation have been reviewed previously This has been extended to include the effects of ferric inhibition on microbial growth, as proposed by Jones and Kelly Braddock et al. Above equations are formulated in terms of specific growth rate. However, following the work of Boon and co-workers Boon and co-workers Crundwell Meruane and co-workers Eq. The fundamental rate models presented above have emerged over some 30 years of research and in each case were calibrated against a set of experimental data generated by the individual authors using widely varying experimental techniques, as indicated in The models compared were those given in Eqs. The results indicate that in the case of The models by Boon and Meruane (Eqs. Both of these two would predict negative ferrous iron oxidation rates at a Fe In the absence of data measured at Fe While extensive study has been dedicated to the effects of ferrous and ferric iron concentrations on microbial iron oxidation kinetics, other factors that may have a significant effect on this have been much less extensively studied. A brief overview is given in the following. Changes in pH have not been found to have a significant effect on either the growth or the iron oxidation kinetics of iron oxidizing microbes a narrow range around their optimum pH. Breed and Hansford Microorganisms are classified in terms of the temperature range in which they survive, with optimum temperatures in the 30–40 °C range for mesophiles, around 50 °C for moderately thermophiles and above 65 °C for extreme thermophiles. At temperatures below the optimum the microbes become inactive, and they become rapidly destroyed at temperatures above it. The models proposed by Hinshelwood Oxygen is the electron acceptor in microbial ferrous iron oxidation (Eq. This formulation of the oxygen term has been used by Huberts The use of oxygen partial pressure as measure of dissolved oxygen concentration is dubious. Dissolved oxygen concentrations in solution are always low due to its low solubility in water. In a rapidly operating bio-oxidation system the adsorption of oxygen may be gas–liquid mass transfer limited and thus govern the overall rate rather than microbial oxidation kinetics. Inhibitory concentrations of dissolved metals, such as arsenic, copper, mercury, nickel, uranium, etc., on microbial growth and ferrous oxidation have been reported by several authors The combined/synergistic effects of all the factors mentioned above on microbial ferrous-iron oxidation kinetics have not been adequately studied. Combination of rate terms accounting for all three substrates of the ferrous oxidation process–ferrous ions, oxygen and acid–has been incorporated only in Crundwell's Eq. It has been suggested that the microbial specific growth rate should be the product of the Monod terms of all essential substrates of the microbe Industrial application of bioleaching falls into two categories, tank and heap bioleaching. Almost all application of rate equations has been in the context of tank bioleaching. This is not surprising considering that these are engineered processes operated under controlled conditions at which the overall rate of bioleaching is near optimal. This implies that parameters such as temperature and pH are maintained close to optimum values, whereas the ferric to ferrous ratio prevailing in the system is governed primarily by the interplay between micro-organisms, mineral concentrate and tank residence times. It is interesting to note that Heap bioleach processes, on the other hand, offer no control over the prevailing operating conditions. Moreover, parameters such as temperature and pH can vary widely over time and location within the heap. While pyrite heaps are known to reach considerable temperatures, often into the thermophile range, heaps of copper sulphide minerals remain largely cold, often at temperatures well below those commonly studied in the laboratory. The relatively large quantity of gangue compared to valuable minerals within a typical heap, continuous recycle of the solution inventory, and the protracted times of exposure can result in the release of considerable concentrations of gangue cations into the heap leach solution—to the point where they exceed limits commonly considered toxic to iron-oxidising micro-organisms. Modelling of heap bioleaching is complex as it has to incorporate a large number of phenomena, such as solution, gas and heat transport, multi-mineral kinetics, bacterial kinetics, diffusion effects, etc. Rate equations that describe the kinetics of microbial ferrous iron oxidation have been formulated for over 30 years. A direct comparison of some of the more prominent models relative to a set of data for The effect of other parameters, such as pH, temperature, concentration of oxygen and other ions, on microbial ferrous iron oxidation kinetics have been studied to some degree, but usually within fairly limited ranges. No model allows incorporation of all of these parameters simultaneously, and there is little clarity on how a comprehensive model should look. While the available models are of sufficient quality to be used in the design of tank bioleach processes, which progress under fairly optimal and controlled conditions (in terms of temperature, pH, and O 