This work addressed the mechanochemical activation of chalcopyrite by vertically stirred ball milling (VSBM) to enhance copper dissolution in leaching. Grinding with Zr balls and quartz sand as dispersing agent produced a significant increase of copper extraction from +10% to +40%, depending on grinding conditions. X-ray diffraction (XRD) and x-ray absorption fine structure (XAFS) results highlighted that the mechanochemical activation of chalcopyrite occurred through partial oxidation and rupture of crystal lattice. The contribution of each activation mechanism to leaching enhancement was assessed by two-stage leaching. The 10% increase of copper extraction in first stage leaching by H2SO4 confirmed the increase of soluble copper due to mechanochemical oxidation. Second stage leaching by H2SO4-Fe2(SO4)3 highlighted a larger dissolution of copper from chalcopyrite and enhanced kinetics upon activation. Whether grinding by VSBM or not, the kinetics of second stage leaching was found to be controlled by ions diffusion through the solid product layer. The partial amorphization of chalcopyrite resulted into additional increase of copper extraction ranging from +6 to +11% and produced a decrease of leaching activation energy from 91.0 to 79.4 kJ/mol.Given the current imbalance between copper supply and copper demand, chalcopyrite has become one of the main natural sources of copper ( In the recent years, several methods have been proposed to overcome passivation ( Alternatively, mechanochemical activation showed a surprising ability towards the enhancement of leaching of non-ferrous metals from sulfide ores ( This study addressed the mechanochemical activation of chalcopyrite by vertically stirred ball milling (VSBM). First, grinding and leaching experiments were performed to confirm the efficiency of high-intensity grinding on copper extraction and to optimize grinding conditions. Following this step, the activation mechanism under the best grinding conditions was elucidated by particle size, x-ray diffraction (XRD), x-ray absorption fine structure (XAFS) and leaching experiments. To identify the changes due to mechanochemical reaction and to minimize those simply due to particle size decrease, all mechanism investigations were performed on original and activated samples in the same size range. Two-stage leaching experiments were performed to determine possible changes of phase composition and to assess the change of activation energy upon mechanochemical activation. This approach enabled us to identify the different activating phenomena and assess how each of them contributed to the overall leaching enhancement. All chemicals used in this work (H The chemical characterization of samples was performed by alkali fusion method. 1 g of the sample was first digested by aqua regia, followed by evaporation to near dryness and digestion in 0.5 M HCl. After filtration, the insoluble residue was fused with small quantities of 1:1 Na High-intensity grinding was performed using a vertical stirred media mill (Powder Lab, Nippon coke, Japan) equipped with 80 zirconium balls (ø = 1 cm) and set at 700 rpm for 60 min. To increase the grinding surface, quartz sand was mixed with chalcopyrite prior to grinding. A schematic representation of the grinding systems used in this study is shown in The effect of quartz sand percentage in the feed (Q) and Zr balls/concentrate weight ratio (Zr/C) on particle size distribution and copper dissolution was investigated by mixing 80 Zr balls with quartz sand and copper concentrate up to the desired ratios. Leaching was carried out in two stages. First stage leaching was performed in 0.5 M H In addition to chemical digestion, the composition of samples was determined by x-ray fluorescence (XRF, ZSX PrimusIII+, Rigaku Corporation, Tokyo, Japan). The particle size distribution of solid sample before and after grinding was determined by laser diffraction particle size analyzer (SALD-2300, Shimadzu, JAPAN). The phase composition of was determined using an x-ray diffactometer (Rigaku RINT UtimaIII) with with Cu Ka radiation (k = 0.154 nm) operated at 40 kV and 20 mA emission. The average crystallite size was determined from XRD peaks using the Shrerrer equation ( XAFS analysis was performed at the beamline BL5S1 at Aichi Sinchrotron Radiation Center (Aichi Science and Technology Foundation, Japan). Samples for XAFS analysis were mixed with boron nitride (BN) powder and pressed to create a thin tablet shaped sample, in accordance with the requirements of the transmission method. The cumulative particle size distribution of chalcopyrite samples before and after VSBM under different operating conditions is shown in To assess the efficiency of VSBM towards mechanochemical activation and to optimize grinding conditions, non-ground chalcopyrite and samples ground under different grinding conditions were leached in H To assess whether the investigated factors had an actual significant effect on copper extraction, to quantify the significant effects and to identify the best activation conditions, the extraction data at 24 h were statistically analyzed by ANOVA. The data used in ANOVA are listed in ANOVA highlighted the significant effects (Fcal > Fcrit) of both Zr/C weight ratio (Fcal = 11.763; Fcrit = 4.256) and quartz percentage in the feed (Fcal = 17.121; Fcrit = 4.256) on copper extraction. The effects were positive in the low-medium range and negative in the medium-high range ( ANOVA results confirmed that the best conditions for the mechanochemical activation of chalcopyrite by VSBM corresponded to Zr/C 61 and Q = 30%. Based on ANOVA results, the grinding condition corresponding to Zr balls/concentrate ratio 61 and 30% of quartz sand was chosen to investigate the mechanochemical activation mechanism. Because comminution would intrinsically increase the surface area of the sample, the experiments to investigate the activation mechanism were conducted from samples in the same size range, namely 35–43 µm. This size range was chosen because it could be found in the cumulative size distribution curves ( The chemical composition of the 35–43 µm fraction of activated and non-activated samples is described in XRD spectra of sample before and after grinding by VSBM are shown in Activated and non-activated samples were analyzed by XAFS to identify possible chemical modifications occurred to chalcopyrite. Results of Cu K-edge XAFS spectra in the near-edge (XANES) are shown in XANES results highlighted the occurred oxidation of chalcopyrite in the natural air atmosphere of the mill chamber due to the large amount of energy transferred to the sample. Reasonably, the mechanochemical reactions resulting in the generation of CuO and CuS are like in Eqs. The occurrence of these reactions was already reported by High-intensity grinding by VSBM resulted into changes of both phase composition and crystal properties. Therefore, the possible mechanochemical activation of chalcopyrite can be due to these two mechanisms. Two-stage leaching was carried out to assess the contribution of each of them to the leaching enhancement. The first stage leaching was performed by 0.5 M H The second-stage leaching was performed in the presence of Fe(III) sulfate to oxidize and dissolve chalcopyrite through reaction The extraction of copper observed in 24 h is shown in To quantify the improvement from the kinetic point of view, the experimental results in Accordingly, the slope of the straight line gives the apparent rate constant 1/τ, where τ is as in The data in The good fitting in The apparent rate constants determined from the straight lines in The Arrhenius plot is shown in More importantly, grinding by VSBM produced a decrease of leaching activation energy of about −11 kJ/mol. Since the contribution of oxidation to leaching improvement was already isolated in first stage leaching, this result can be considered as a direct consequence of induced microstrains in the crystal structure of chalcopyrite. High-intensity grinding by vertical stirred ball milling enhanced the extraction of copper from a chalcopyrite concentrate sample. ANOVA evidenced that a strict optimization of grinding conditions is required for VSBM to effectively enhance leaching. Grinding for 60 min with Zr balls in the presence of 30% quartz produced a decrease of particle size, slight agglomeration, partial oxidation and amorphization of chalcopyrite. In leaching, the mechanochemical activation resulted into a significant increase of copper dissolution and accelerated kinetics. Two-stage leaching highlighted + 10% increase of copper extraction due to chalcopyrite oxidation and an additional increase from +6 to +11% due to microstrain. The activation energy for the leaching of chalcopyrite upon activation decreased from 91.0 to 79.4 kJ/mol due to microstrain and partial rupture of crystal lattice. Given the simplicity of operation, grinding by VSBM could be integrated within a well-established process at the stage of mineral processing to enhance the leaching of chalcopyrite. The authors express their gratitude to the Aichi Synchrotron Radiation Centre (Aichi Science and Technology, Aichi, Japan) for the XAFS analysis and to the technical staff of Materials Characterization Central Laboratory and Environmental Safety Centre of Waseda University for their analytical support. A part of this work was performed within the activities of Research Institute of Sustainable Future Society (Waseda Research Institute for Science and Engineering, Waseda University).