The present work aims at using grafted polyacrylic acid (PAA) films as active surfaces for heavy metal waste removal. We focus first on grafting PAA onto carbon felt surfaces by means of an economical and simple preparation method compatible with real industrial applications. XPS, SEM results and interfacial electrochemistry allow us to confirm the grafting of PAA films on carbon felts. Metal ion uptake inside the PAA film is discussed in detail. The final part of the work is then devoted to the application of carbon felt grafted PAA electrodes to remove metal ions from aqueous waste according to the electrochemical-switchable process. Primary treatments of real industrial effluents are performed with a lab-made semi-pilot system. Such electrochemical-pH-switchable PAA films can be considered within the field of aqueous effluent treatments in order to reach very low concentration in heavy metal ions.Polymer-modified electrodes have received considerable attention in areas such as biosensors, enzyme immobilization, separation membranes, surface patterning, nano-composites because of many advantageous properties of polymers Main characteristics of the carbon felt used in this work are presented in The grafting of PAA on carbon felts was carried out at open air and room temperature as already described XPS studies were performed with a KRATOS Axis Ultra DLD spectrometer, using the monochromatized Al Kα line at 1486.6 The scanning electron microscopy images were recorded by a Hitachi S4500 equipped with a Field Emission Gun (FEG-SEM). A multiparameter bench colorimeter (Spectrophotometer HI 83200 from Hanna Instrument Corporation) was used to measure copper and zinc amounts in the solutions. Measurements are performed in two successive steps, on 10 Electrochemistry was carried out with a SOLARTRON 1255 frequency analyzer controlled by a computer with the Corrware and Zplot softwares. For impedance spectroscopy, the frequency analyzer was equipped with an electrochemical interface (SI1286) and the measurements were realized in a range of frequencies extending from 0.01  According to the synthesis process mentioned in Section The grafted samples were first characterized by XPS. The PAA-grafted samples were further characterized by scanning electron microscopy.  Study on sorption equilibrium between the metal ions and the PAA matrix is extremely important because it provides the information about the saturation time for metal uptake which affects the efficiency of the separation process. In this work, three samples were introduced in 500 From measuring the copper ion remaining in solution after 21 In order to better describe the interactions between the copper metal ions and the PAA film, we performed some XPS measurements after copper uptake. In the electrochemically switchable process, the copper ions are released from the polymer film when water electrolysis provides hydronium ions to regenerate the acidic form of the PAA film. We thus applied a current of 1 The capability of PAA-grafted carbon felts to capture and electrochemically release copper metal ions has thus been demonstrated. To validate this result in view of industrial applications, we will now focus on testing a real industrial solution containing metal ions at low concentration with our semi-pilot system. An experiment similar to the one described above with a synthetic copper solution has then been performed with 1.5 In a previous work, we demonstrated on a similar example that the electrochemically induced pH modifications remain extremely localized within the film The validity of the electrochemically pH-switchable process for the treatment of metallic ion aqueous waste on an industrial semi-pilot scale has been confirmed. The capture of metal ions at very low concentration is based on the chelating and ion exchange properties of PAA film grafted on the carbon felt surfaces. Due to the localized water electrolysis in the PAA film, a rapid regeneration that neither uses additional chemical reagents nor products any secondary effluents has been demonstrated at the pilot scale. This work provides an efficient technique to satisfy the new criterion of “zero waste rejection” for sustainable development on environmental issues. Studies on optimizing the semi-pilot system as well as improvement of various metal sorption capacity of PAA film are our objectives for further work. The authors wish to thank Union des Industries de Traitements de Surfaces (France) and Agence de l’Eau Seine-Normandie (France) for financial support.