In this work, a comparison of Soxhlet extraction (LPSE–SOX), percolation (LPSE–PE) and pressurized liquid extraction (PLE) for the recovery of carotenoid-rich extracts from pressed palm fiber (PPF) was carried out in terms of yield, carotenoid profile and economic viability to evaluate the methods’ industrial applicability. An optimization study was performed for each extraction technique with ethanol at a solvent/feed ratio of 20. The independent variables were temperature (35–55°C), pressure (0.1–8MPa) and flow rate (1.6, 2.4g/min). The results showed that the global extraction yield obtained using LPSE–SOX (96±4mg extract/g PPF d.b.) after 6h was higher than that obtained using LPSE–PE (74±5mg extract/g PPF d.b., 35°C, 2.4g/min) or PLE (44±3mg extract/g PPF d.b., 55°C, 4MPa, 2.4g/min) after dynamic extraction time of 17min under optimized conditions. On the other hand, the carotenoid yield obtained using PLE (305±18μg α-carotene/g extract and 713±46μg β-carotene/g extract) was higher than the obtained by LPSE–SOX (142±13μg α-carotene/g extract and 317±46μg β-carotene/g extract). PLE technique showed the highest selectivity for carotenoids than LPSE techniques. The lowest cost of manufacturing (COM) were obtained for LPSE–PE and PLE with values of US$13.4 and US$29.2/kg extract for a 0.5m3 vessel capacity.Current climate change interest and environmental preservation has promoted the development of sustainable technologies for the renewable exploited resources and the extracted and isolated bioactive compounds ( Solid–liquid extraction of target compounds from plant materials is a unit operation that consists in the separation of solute (soluble compounds) from the vegetal matrix by using a liquid solvent. This operation involves three steps: (i) contact of the solvent with the vegetal matrix and transferring of the solute to the solvent, (ii) separation of the solvent from the matrix, and (iii) recovery of the solvent from the solute by evaporation or distillation ( Low-pressure solvent extraction (LPSE), which includes Soxhlet extraction (LPSE–SOX) and percolation (LPSE–PE), among others, uses solvents at low pressures (ambient pressure) for the selective dissolution of target compounds contained in the solid matrix by a liquid solvent. Several applications of LPSE in the food industry include the extraction of residual oil in vegetable oil processing with hexane, the extraction of lycopene from tomato peels and extraction of β-carotene from carrot by-products with ethanol which is recognized as a green solvent ( Ethanol (99.5%) was obtained from Chemco Ltda. (São Paulo, Brazil). Hexane (98.5%) was obtained from Dinâmica (São Paulo, Brazil). The analytical reagents used in carotenoid analysis, namely petroleum ether (≥99.5%), ethyl ether (≥99.5%), acetone (≥99.5%), methanol (≥98%) and potassium hydroxide (>90%), were obtained from Synth (São Paulo, Brazil). Acetonitrile (≥99.9%, HPLC grade) was obtained from JT Baker (New Jersey, USA). Methanol (≥99.9%, HPLC grade) was obtained from Merck (Darmstadt, Germany). Ultrapure water (18.2 A PPF sample was supplied by Agropalma Company (Tailândia, Brazil) in December 2012. The sample was obtained after the palm oil industrial extraction from palm fruits, and it consisted of a mixture of palm fiber and palm husk. This raw material was dried at 30 The PPF after drying step was characterized in terms of its percentual composition. The moisture, extractives in water and alcohol and ash content were determined according to the Standard Biomass Analytical Methods provided by the National Renewable Energy Laboratory ( LPSE–SOX experiments were performed by using a 500-cm LPSE–PE experiments were conducted in a homemade unit described by PLE experiments were performed in a homemade unit described by The global extraction yield Sample preparation was performed for carotenoid analysis with some modifications ( The isolation, identification and quantification of α- and β-carotene standards from carrots was performed using open-column chromatography according to the methodology described by Chromatographic separation was performed on an Acquity UPLC system (Waters, United Kingdom) equipped with a binary pump, degasser, autosampler, photodiode detector array (PDA) and a Hypersil Gold C18 chromatographic column (100 The statistical analysis of the experimental results was performed using the software MINITAB The software SuperPro Designer 8.5 The chemical composition of the PPF on a dry basis is shown in The UHPLC-PDA analysis of α- and β-carotene was performed under the conditions described in Section LPSE–SOX of PPF using ethanol and hexane as solvents were performed at the boiling temperature of each solvent over 6 LPSE–PE of PPF was carried out at temperatures of 35, 45 and 55 PLE experiments were performed in semi-continuous mode at temperatures of 35, 45 and 55   The calculated COM for extracts obtained using three sizes of extractors, 0.005, 0.05 and 0.5 The extraction of carotenoid-rich extracts from vegetable matrixes is highly desirable for the food, pharmaceutical and cosmetics industries. PPF is a residue obtained from the oil palm industry that is an important source of α- and β-carotene, among other compounds. Soxhlet extraction is a conventional technique that requires long extraction times and can replace high-pressure techniques such as pressurized liquid extraction. The comparison of three processes, Soxhlet, percolation and pressurized liquid extraction, was performed with the objective of selecting the most suitable technology permitting the highest recovery of carotenoids in extract from PPF. The results showed that the global extraction yield for LPSE–SOX was higher than the ones obtained for LPSE–PE and PLE; however, the operation time for LPSE–SOX was long (∼6 The authors acknowledge the financial support of