Recovery of lithium ions from salt lake brine is becoming more important because of the rapid increase in projected demand for lithium resources. N,N-bis(2-ethylhexyl)acetamide (N523) is a newly developed extractant that presents good lithium extraction ability and selectivity. In this study, the kinetics and mechanism of lithium ion extraction with N523 in kerosene at 298.15K were investigated using the rising single drop method. Results showed that the extraction process is controlled by diffusion and that the chemical reaction occurs at the interfacial area.Lithium is a crucial resource that is used in batteries, medicines, light aircraft alloys, and thermonuclear fusion reactors ( Extractants with high selectivity toward lithium ions in salt lake brine has been investigated, including several new substances such as 2,6-Dimethyl-4-heptanone (DIBK) ( The kinetics of metal extraction is complicated because both chemical reaction and diffusion are involved in a heterogeneous system. However, elucidation of the kinetic behavior of an extraction system is important because of their influence on economic parameters, such as equipment model, and extraction reaction temperature and residence time. Hence, several techniques to study the kinetics of metal extraction have been developed over the years, including Lewis cell ( In the present work, lithium extraction kinetics by N523-sulfonated kerosene extraction system was studied using the rising single drop method. The effects of different parameters, such as interfacial area, column height, temperature, and concentrations of Fe The new extractant, N523, was prepared by Shanghai Institute of Organic Chemistry of the Chinese Academy of Sciences. The structure of N523 is shown in A stock solution of the aqueous phase containing 3.50 We studied the effects of lithium concentration ranging from 0.90 The design of the single-drop apparatus for kinetics measurement is shown in The organic phase was placed in a 70 Formation of organic phase drops was strictly regulated to ensure the same intervals between organic phase drops. The volume of a drop was averaged from the volumes of 100 drops collected in the measuring tube. Changes in lithium concentration in the aqueous phase were neglected while drops run in the short column. The extraction rate was calculated using Eq. Lithium analysis in the organic phase was performed in two steps. A weighed sample was completely back-extracted with 6 In this paper, the mass of Li Given that ferric ion is the synergist in this experiment, it existed in the form of [FeCl The equation for forward extraction rate study in logarithmic form is: The relationship in Eq. At constant concentrations of Li In the kinetic study, the effect of interfacial area on extraction rate can be treated as one of the most important criteria in determining the chemical reaction occurring in the bulk phase or at the interface. If the reaction occurred in the bulk phase, then the initial rate would be independent of interfacial area; otherwise, the rate would depend on interfacial area ( The effect of interfacial area on the extraction rate of lithium was investigated. As shown in The effect of temperature on extraction kinetics can be derived by plotting ln  The enthalpy of activation (Δ The logarithmic relationships of R and the initial concentrations of lithium, ferric and N523 from non-linear fittings and Eq. The values of a, b, and c represent the slopes of the linear relationships which correspond to the reaction orders with respect to lithium, ferric and N523, respectively.  The above experimental data of every factor was non-linearly fitted by Levenberg–Marquardt ( Based on the above discussion, the index was rounded off to the closest integer, and the experimental rate equation can be obtained: To verify the accuracy of Eq. The species Mg(FeCl Li The ions of Li The proposed reaction mechanism which supports the rate expression in Eq. The kinetics and mechanism for the extraction of lithium from salt lake brine with N523 in kerosene was investigated at 298.15 The extraction process is controlled by diffusion, and the chemical reaction occurs at the interfacial area. The mechanism of lithium extraction with N523 can be treated as follows: the species Mg(FeCl The reaction mechanism for the extraction of lithium with N523 is established. This work was financially supported by the  The reaction in Eq. Then, according to steady-state approximation (QSSA) ( The rate of extraction can be expressed as: Assuming that