Large use of shotcrete, especially in mining and underground operations, pushed the introduction of the Round Determines Panels (RDP) test as an effective design tool for the required toughness of the concrete mix. Nevertheless, structural more than material properties can be obtained from it and there are serious concerns related to safety of experimental operations and to their costs. In order to overcome these flaws, a recent study introduced the mini notched RDP test and showed that it is possible to correlate the energy absorbed by RDP samples with equal thicknesses but different diameters. Along this line, the present study focuses on the influence of the thickness of RDP samples on their toughness; an experimental campaign has been carried out, showing that the absorbed energy is thickness-dependent; in order to validate the results, a simple analytical model has been developed, able to provide for a direct relation between the absorbed energy and the material fracture energy. As a consequence, a new design procedure based on these findings has been proposed, allowing for the use of conventional designing tools together with the mini notched RDP test. Finally, hypothesis introduced in the analytical model have been verified both experimentally and by means of a non-linear numerical model.Ratio between Crack mouth opening displacement Crack tip opening displacement Central vertical displacement of Round Determinate Panel Tensile stress Crack opening angle Crack opening angle for Resultant of compression stresses Depth of crack Energy under the Energy under the Compressive strength Ultimate tensile stress Fracture energy Effective thickness Bending moment Bending moment per unit length along radial crack Central point load Radius of the Round Determinate Panel Distance between the center of round panel and any of its supports Resultant of tensile stresses Thickness Crack opening displacement such that Crack opening displacement crack opening at tip of notch, equivalent to Coordinate along the radial direction Coordinate along the depth of the crack Level arm between the compressive and tensile resultant Coefficient of variation Fibre reinforced concrete Fibre reinforced shotcrete Mini notched Round Determinate Panel Round Determinate Panel Relative humidity The use of sprayed concrete (often referred to as shotcrete) has increased in civil engineering applications over the last few decades. Shotcrete is generally helpful where formwork could not be easily placed. This is especially true for the case of ground support structures in underground mining sites. When the structure is expected to undergo large deformations, the addition of fibres to the shotcrete mix can provide the material with the proper degree of ductility needed to guarantee the serviceability and safety of the structures. The fibre dosage is therefore a factor that plays a crucial role at the design stage. It is a fundamental parameter that, if correctly calculated, allows to achieve the desired toughness. One of the most used practices to design fibre-reinforced ground-support structures is the Barton’s chart In 2004, Bernard The low coefficients of variation obtained when using the RDP test Structural rather than material properties are obtained. The energy absorption measured using the RDP test is calculated as the area under the point load-central deflection curve and it is referred to as flexural toughness. It represents the ability of the sample to redistribute the load carried after cracking Safety: The RDP is a round FRS sample of 800 Costs and time: For quality control, FRS is usually assessed every 50 A recent study To fulfil the objectives of this research, three series of panels were tested with equal radius and three different thicknesses of 60 RDP failure pattern is often made by three radial cracks spaced about 120°. Inhomogeneities due to aggregates and fibres may force cracks to deviate from this theoretical position leading to asymmetrical crack patterns or, in rare cases, even the propagation of a single diametrical crack. It is believed that deviations from the symmetric crack pattern affects the overall energy absorbed by the sample and that it is one of the factors responsible for the deviance from standard r sults. To mitigate this variation, panels were notched to guarantee 120° symmetrical crack pattern. Notching was performed when panels reached the age of 28 The fully matured round panels were tested by placing each sample on three point-supports and by applying a vertical central point load. The support conditions were identical to those recommended by ASTM For each MnRDP test the following measurements were taken:    The crack tip opening displacement ( In addition to the MnRDPs, for quality control purposes three cylinders of 100 The   Following the notation used in It is important to comment that, rigorously, the integral of Eq.  The average values of Series S-60 shows the highest value of COV. This is because for this series one panel exhibited a higher post-peak capacity than the other two, as shown in Figs.  That It is worth emphasising that Eq. The experimental results reported in For the proposed analytical model, a few assumptions and simplifications have been considered: The depth of the crack Although the crack path along the thickness might be tortuous (see Cohesive tensile stresses By enforcing that the resultant of the tensile stresses In view of Eqs. Noting that The constitutive model presented in Another interesting consideration regards the expression of Eq. The findings presented in the previous Section are used here to propose an alternative testing procedure that permits to use smaller round panels (hence safer and more cost-effective) without any modification of the Barton’s chart. It is important to remind that the Barton’s chart is based on the toughness of 400 Consider now a notched mini round panel (MnRDP) of a certain radius From Eq. Eq. In Section The behaviour of the notched panels was investigated by means of a Non-Linear (NL) fracture mechanics model. In particular the model proposed by The step after the parameters identification was the numerical simulation of the test. In order to increase numerical stability, the analysis was carried out under displacement control. The software Abaqus was used to perform the analysis. This paper has analyzed the experimental results obtained through a new testing procedure named MnRDP test. This innovating testing method has been proposed to investigate the geometry-dependency of the energy absorbed by FRC samples during the cracking process. To this purpose, an experimental campaign has been carried out, where a number of RDPs with different thickness have been subject to flexural tests until complete cracking. Notching of the specimens along three lines separated by 120° allowed to obtain symmetrical failure configurations and a small COV, thus reducing the need of a larger number of specimens to be tested. Dissipated energies, both in terms of A practical application of these findings has also been proposed. It allows to use the Barton’s chart, calibrated on RDP samples Another interesting finding is that when the Finally, a numerical model has been also developed and used, in order to validate the experimental results and clarify some of the findings. The numerical results of this study confirmed that the crack opening along the notch is constant; furthermore, the experimental measurements at different cross sections along the notch proved that the crack opening angle The second author would like to thank SIKA AUSTRALIA PTY LTD for his fellowship. The financial support of the This appendix presents the procedure used to obtain Eq. Due to internal equilibrium, cohesive tensile stresses must be compensated by the compressive stresses. The resultant of the compressive stresses If the crack opening displacement Eq.