Background:
                      Coronary artery calcification (CAC) is thought to be associated with greater cardiovascular mortality in patients with end-stage renal disease than in nonuremic persons. The purpose of the present study is to assess the effects of etidronate, a synthetic analogue of pyrophosphate, on progression of CAC score. 
                        Methods:
                      The extent of CAC was evaluated by using multidetector spiral computed tomography. Repeated CAC score estimation was possible in 35 patients (29 men, 6 women). Bone mineral density (BMD) was measured using dual-energy X-ray absorptiometry. Serum osteoprotegerin (OPG) was measured by using enzyme-linked immunoassay. Serum etidronate was measured by means of the gas spectrometry technique using deuterium-labeled etidronate as internal standard. 
                        Results:
                      Mean patient age was 63.2 ± 8.2 (SD) years, and mean duration of dialysis therapy was 7.4 ± 5.5 years. CAC score was estimated 3 times in each patient. After the second CAC score estimation, 35 patients were administered etidronate, 200 mg/d, for 14 days. This cycle was repeated 3 times every 90 days. CAC progression was significantly less pronounced during treatment with etidronate compared with the period before treatment was initiated. The median annualized absolute increase in calcified volume was 195.0 mm3 without treatment compared with −490.0 mm3 during treatment (P < 0.01). Patients were divided into 2 groups based on changes in CAC score during etidronate treatment. Responders (n = 26) were patients whose CAC score decreased during therapy, and nonresponders (n = 9) were patients whose CAC score increased, even after etidronate therapy. Serum C-reactive protein values (0.18 ± 0.13 mg/dL) in the responder group were greater than those (0.14 ± 0.08 mg/dL) in the nonresponder group (P = 0.013). Serum OPG levels decreased significantly during etidronate therapy (256.8 ± 93.8 versus 245.0 ± 83.0 pg/mL; P = 0.0161). Etidronate was well tolerated during the study. BMD values during etidronate therapy were not significantly changed from 0.941 ± 0.125 to 0.968 ± 0.246 g/cm2. 
                        Conclusion:
                      Results of the present study suggest that the extent of CAC may be suppressed by etidronate in association with a reduction in chronic inflammatory responses. They also suggest that a decrease in serum OPG concentrations by means of etidronate may be associated with changes in vascular calcification in dialysis patients.CARDIOVASCULAR MORTALITY is greater in patients with end-stage renal disease (ESRD) than in nonuremic persons. Approximately 50% of all deaths are attributed to cardiovascular disease, Osteoprotegerin (OPG) is a decoy receptor that blocks the interaction of the receptor activator of nuclear factor-κB with its ligand, thereby inhibiting osteoclast differentiation and activity. Vascular calcifications have similarities to bone, and macrophages in the vessel wall have both osteoclastic and osteoblastic potential. Of patients undergoing regular hemodialysis at the Dialysis Unit of Takeda General Hospital (Fukushima, Japan), 53 patients agreed to have their CAC score estimated. We excluded 6 patients with obvious acute inflammation and 2 patients who did not comply with their drug therapy. Two patients did not comply adequately with the etidronate regimen. Eight patients were excluded from the study for the following reasons: refusal of follow-up MDCT, 3 patients; transfer to another dialysis unit, 3 patients; and incomplete blood sampling, 2 patients. Thus, 35 patients (29 men, 6 women) completed the protocol and could be evaluated. CAC score was measured 3 times in each patient. Age was calculated at the time of the second CAC estimation. Blood pressure was measured before dialysis sessions during the follow-up period, and the mean of at least 5 measurements was used in the second and third CAC estimates. Diabetes was noted if the patient was being treated for it medically or had a fasting blood glucose level of 126 mg/dL or greater (≥7.0 mmol/L). As a temporal control group, 21 patients (16 men, 5 women) on long-term hemodialysis therapy without etidronate therapy were studied retrospectively. Mean patient age was 61.3 ± 8.5 years, and mean duration of dialysis therapy was 7.4 ± 6.1 years, ranging from 1.5 to 21.6 years. The sequence of the 2 CAC measurements was randomized, and the operator was unaware of study identification numbers and dates. Hemodialysis using hollow-fiber dialyzers, such as cellulose triacetate and polysulfone, was performed 3 times/wk (4 h/d). Patients had been on hemodialysis therapy for at least 3 months before the study, and the same membrane and dialysis procedure had been used for at least 2 months before the study. Dialysate potassium concentration was 2.0 mEq/L (mmol/L), and Ca concentration was 3.0 mEq/L. Blood flow rate was 200 mL/min, and dialysate flow rate was 500 mL/min. Residual urine volume of hemodialysis patients was less than 100 mL/d. Blood sampling was performed in the morning before the first weekly hemodialysis session used in the second and third CAC estimates. Each subject gave informed consent to participate in the study. This study was approved by the institutional ethics committee of the hospital. To assess the effect of etidronate on bone resorption, bone mineral density (BMD) measurement was performed twice at the second and third MDCT scan. BMD was measured by means of dual-energy X-ray absorptiometry. The coefficient of variation in vivo for the spine ranged from 1% to 1.5%. Computed tomographic scans were performed using the 8-slice technique on the model Light Speed Ultra (Yokokawa Medical Co, Tokyo, Japan). Slices were acquired with simultaneous acquisition of eight 1.25-mm thick slices, 120 to 140 kVp, 85 to 150 mAs, and 500-millisecond exposure (gantry rotation time, 0.5 seconds). The entire heart was covered in a single breathhold (20 to 30 seconds). All images from multislice computed tomography were transferred to a dedicated workstation (Yokokawa Medical Co). With this workstation, score according to the algorithm suggested by Agatston et al Blood chemistry values were determined once a month. Whole blood was used for hematocrit; EDTA-plasma, for fasting blood glucose and lipids; and serum, for the other biochemical assays, including albumin, Ca, P, and C-reactive protein (CRP). Albumin, Ca, P, total cholesterol, triglyceride, and CRP levels were measured using automated methods. Serum OPG was measured by means of a sandwich enzyme immunoassay purchased from Immunodiagnostik (Bensheim, Germany) that uses 2 highly specific antibodies against human OPG, as previously described. Mean interval from the first to the second MDCT scan was 192 ± 31 days. At the time of the second MDCT scan, blood sampling was performed before dialysis. After the second CAC estimation, 35 patients received intermittent cyclical therapy with etidronate. The treatment regimen consisted of etidronate, 200 mg/d (2 hours before meals with water), for 14 days. This cycle was repeated 3 times every 90 days. Patients were instructed to keep any other medical therapy unchanged. During the study period, patients were questioned regarding medication side effects. When they completed the treatment regimen, a third MDCT scan and blood sampling were performed. Safety was evaluated during the study by tabulation of adverse events and laboratory assessments. A temporal control group without etidronate therapy was followed up for 388 ± 21 days with no changes in treatment regimens. MDCT was performed twice in each patient. All values are expressed as mean ± SD. All data were tested for normal distribution before analysis, and appropriate tests were used. Differences between mean values of the 2 groups were tested by means of analysis of variance. To statistically analyze differences between the first and second MDCT scans or second and third MDCT scans, Wilcoxon’s matched-pairs signed-rank test was used. Spearman’s rank correlation (nonparametric) coefficient was used to test associations between 2 kinds of parameters. Because CAC scores, as a dependent variable, were in nonnormal distribution, scores were logarithmically transformed before statistical analysis. Group comparisons of categorical variables were made using chi-square analysis. A multiple regression analysis was applied to identify independent determinants of CAC score. A probability less than 0.05 is considered significant. Statistical analyses were performed using the StatView statistical software package (StatView 5; SAS Institute, Cary, NC).  Clinical characteristics of the hemodialysis patients studied are listed in CAC score was estimated 3 times in each patient. Patients were divided into 2 groups based on changes in CAC score during etidronate treatment. Responders (n = 26) were patients whose CAC scores decreased during therapy, and nonresponders (n = 9) were patients whose CAC scores increased, even after etidronate therapy. Median annualized absolute increase in calcified volume was 195.0 mm  Etidronate was well tolerated during the study. Of note, gastrointestinal events appeared in only 2 patients. Data at the end of etidronate therapy were similar to baseline with respect to laboratory parameters. BMD during etidronate therapy was not significantly changed from 0.941 ± 0.125 to 0.968 ± 0.246 g/cm Many investigators were able to establish that atherogenic vascular calcification in patients without ESRD is caused by an active process resembling osteogenesis in bone. It is possible that subtle changes in vascular calcification occur during bisphosphonate treatment for postmenopausal osteoporosis. Etidronate and several other first-generation bisphosphonates previously have been shown to inhibit vitamin D-induced artery calcification in rats. One possibility is that inhibition of bone resorption could decrease Ca and/or P concentrations in blood and thereby reduce the tendency of mineral nuclei to form and grow in the artery wall. Because we observed no significant effect of etidronate on serum Ca or P levels in any patient, it seems unlikely that etidronate inhibits CAC by lowering serum Ca or P levels. Another possibility to account for the effectiveness of etidronate as an inhibitor of artery calcification is that artery calcification could be initiated by the action of vascular cells in hemodialysis patients. This possibility has the advantage of placing the site of drug action at the location. Price et al The hypothesis that vascular calcification is linked to bone resorption is supported by studies of OPG-deficient mice. Kazama et al We recently showed significantly greater serum OPG concentrations in rapid progressors than slow progressors and a significant association between rapid progression of vascular calcification and serum OPG concentrations in hemodialysis patients. Because our sample size was small and we have no proper control data for patients not on dialysis therapy, a larger patient group must be studied to confirm our findings. However, results of this study show that the extent of vascular calcification may be suppressed by etidronate in association with a reduction in chronic inflammatory responses. They also suggest that a decrease in serum OPG concentrations by means of etidronate may be associated with changes in vascular calcification in dialysis patients. The clinical significance of these observations remains to be determined. The authors thank Hiroyuki Ashikaga for assessment of CAC score; Masahiro Haga for blood sampling; Keita Matsushita (Sumitomo Pharmaceutical Co, Tokyo, Japan) for help in serum etidronate level measurement; and John P McCormick, PhD, for reviewing the manuscript.