In order to produce tungsten carbide from its oxide through mechanochemical process, a mixture of tungsten oxide, carbon and aluminum powders was subjected to high energy milling. Excess carbon addition was made in expense of aluminum, so that carbon acts not only as a carbide former agent but also as a reductant. Aluminum and carbon contents of the mixture were altered according to the following reaction: WO3
                     +(4−1.5x)C+
                     xAl=WC+(x/2)Al2O3
                     +(3−1.5x)CO(g). The value of x varied from 0.5 to 1.9 and the effect of Al content on the mechanism of tungsten carbide formation was investigated. Thermodynamic calculations revealed that the amount of Al in the mixture plays a key role. Experimental results showed that at lower Al content in the WO3–Al–C mixture (x
                     =0.5–1.2), reactions proceed through a gradual mode. By increasing Al content (x
                     =1.3–1.6), type of reactions changed to mechanically induced self-propagating reaction (MSR) with no carbothermic reduction reaction of WO3. Further increase of Al content (x
                     =1.7–1.9) resulted in MSR mode reactions consisting of both aluminothermic and carbothermic reactions. Optimum value of x which yields maximum amount of WC was found to be around 1.7. Discussion has been made to elucidate the phase formation types in accordance with the above three reaction modes.Tungsten carbide (WC) has unique properties such as high melting point, high hardness, high fracture toughness, very high compressive strength, high corrosion resistance and good thermal stability. Such excellent characteristics make this compound a reliable material for a wide range of applications such as fabrication of cutting and drilling tools as well as dies and wear resistant parts. Moreover, it has been reported that tungsten carbide can be used as a catalyst Conventional method of WC production is high temperature solid-state reaction between W and C under controlled atmosphere. Necessity of prior reduction of WO New methods such as spray conversion process (SCP), co-precipitation and mechanical alloying (MA) have been introduced for WC production Synthesis of WC powder through milling of WO Aluminothermic reduction of WO The main purpose of the current research work was to provide information about the effect of Al amount in WO  In the above reaction, Samples were milled for up to 2 Milling products were examined by an X-ray diffraction instrument (XRD, Rigaku, RINT-2200/PC System) with a Cu Kα radiation. Temperature of the outside wall of each milling pot ( Although thermodynamic calculations of non-equilibrium processes such as MA  Δ Δ   XRD patterns of samples containing different amounts of Al ( For better discussion and understanding, the samples are categorized into three groups, as follows. 0.5  By further milling, peaks of WO Absence of CO/CO With regard to reactions 1.3 XRD patterns of some samples of this group are presented in In group B, it was expected that the high temperature resulting from MSR mode reaction would activate the carbothermic reaction. Nevertheless, formation of CO/CO In this group of samples, MSR type reaction has been accelerated by increasing Al content of the mixture (see 1.7 XRD patterns of some samples of this group are shown in According to the XRD pattern of a sample milled for 10 It is evident from In this group of samples the maximum amount of WC was yielded in the mixture containing 1.7 At high temperatures resulted from MSR mode reactions, W Occurrence of carbothermic reaction, which is activated by the heat of aluminothermic reaction, consumes carbon and causes carbon deficiency in the system. Increasing W By increase of Al, Increased Same as group B, increasing Al content accelerates the MSR mode reactions. Summary of the discussion, regarding reaction mechanism, is shown schematically in Both thermodynamic calculations and experimental tests were conducted to investigate the effect of Al amount, within a range of 0.5–1.9 As to the reduction reaction of WO Depending on the amounts of Al in the WO With Al content in the range of 0.5–1.2 With Al content in the range of 1.3–1.6 With Al content in the range of 1.7–1.9 Optimum amount of Al, which yields maximum amount of WC, was found to be around 1.7