This study evaluates bioleaching treatments to remove copper from the Sarcheshmeh (Iran) molybdenite concentrate using a native strain of Acidithiobacillus ferrooxidans. Copper content of the concentrate was 0.83 wt.% as chalcopyrite. The tests showed selective dissolution of copper (chalcopyrite) from molybdenite concentrate. Up to 65% of copper content of molybdenite concentrate was removed via bioleaching with a native strain of A. ferrooxidans in less than 15 days. Ferrous sulfate, sulfur or pyrite was added to culture medium to enhance the activity of bacteria. Sulfur was the preferred additional source of energy for removing copper from molybdenite via bioleaching with A. ferrooxidans. In addition, 9K or Norris medium was also used as the culture medium in the experiments. The experiments showed that application of Norris medium would be better than that of 9K medium in order to remove copper from molybdenite via bioleaching. These results were backed up due to the fact that the cost of Norris medium was also less than that of 9K medium.Nowadays bioleaching plays an important role among the available hydrometallurgical technologies. Bioleaching is no longer a promising technology but an actual economical alternative for treating specific mineral ores. A significant number of the large-scale bioleaching operations are currently running in developing countries. Simplicity and low capital cost requirement of bioleaching technologies make the processes suitable to developing countries which have significant mineral resources ( In bioleaching different types of bacteria (mesophiles, moderate thermopiles and extreme thermopiles) are employed to dissolve valuable metals from mainly mineral sulfides ( The presence of copper in a molybdenite concentrate drastically reduces its market value due to terms imposed by buyers. In the standard molybdenite flotation methods copper impurities rarely is to desired specifications, i.e. maximum 0.5% copper, or up to some premium grades with less than 0.15% copper. It has been recognized that purification by the flotation processes to produce molybdenum concentrate with less than 1% (or even 1.5%) copper becomes uneconomical. This is because of high losses in molybdenum recovery and high retreatment costs. Different hydrometallurgical methods including ferric chloride, sodium cyanide and hydrochloric acid leaching and acid bake–leach–flotation processes have been used for decreasing copper content of molybdenite concentrate ( Recently, bioleaching has also been used for selective dissolution of chalcopyrite of molybdenite concentrate ( The aim of present work is to evaluate selective dissolution of copper during bioleaching of molybdenite concentrate using a native strain of A molybdenite concentrate from Sarcheshmeh Copper Complex of Iran with a size distribution of 90 wt.% less than 33 μm was used. The chemical composition of the concentrate was: 48.53 wt.% Mo, 37.61 wt.% S, 0.83 wt.% Cu and 1.20 wt.% Fe. The X-ray diffraction and SEM–EDX analysis of the concentrate showed molybdenite (MoS In an experiment, a typical ground pyrite finer than 53 μm in size was used as the additional energy source for bacteria growth. The chemical composition of the pyrite was: 45.8 wt.% Fe, 52.3 wt.% S, 0.21 wt.% Cu and 0.22 wt.% Zn. The main source of Cu in the pyrite sample was also chalcopyrite. A native strain of Bioleaching experiments were performed in 500-ml Erlenmeyer flasks containing molybdenite concentrate (1%, 5% or 10% pulp densities), 200 ml of iron-free 9K or Norris medium inoculated with 5% (v/v) of bacteria adapted to the molybdenite. About 2 g of ferrous sulfate, pyrite or elemental sulfur powder added to the flasks depending on the experiments. The pH was adjusted at 2. Flasks were shaken in an orbital shaker at 120 rpm, and 35 °C. About 1 ml of the solution was taken at the desired time intervals for chemical analysis. Measurements were taken to determine redox potential (ORP), copper and molybdenum content of the solutions. Redox potential values refer to the standard hydrogen electrode. A Seiko SPS 7800 inductively coupled plasma atomic emission spectroscope (ICP–AES) was used for chemical analysis. First, in order to determine the contribution of direct (Fe  Oxidation of ferrous to ferric ions in the solutions was very low in the absence of bacteria in all of the present experimental conditions. The main reason of ORP increment was also the oxidation of Fe Variations of ORP indicated that growth of microorganism on the molybdenite concentrate was not significant without the addition of other sources of iron ( Molybdenum content in the solution (fraction of Mo extraction) has been increased by the addition of sulfur, ferrous sulfate or pyrite in the molybdenite bioleaching ( In order to determine the effect of pulp density on copper and molybdenum dissolution during molybdenite bioleaching, experiments were also performed with 10% and 1% pulp densities. These pulp densities have also been applied without ferrous sulfate addition to evaluate the possibility of microorganism growth on such molybdenite concentrate without the addition of other sources of energy. Contrary to 1% pulp density, at 5% and 10% pulp densities there were more benefits on copper extraction with the addition of ferrous sulfate ( Mo extraction was increased by increasing pulp density from 1% to 5%, but it was decreased by increasing pulp density from 5% to 10% ( The reagents that are used to make Norris medium are fewer and cheaper than those for 9K medium. Hence, at this stage Norris medium with ferrous sulfate were evaluated in the present study. Iron content in the solutions may be changed by the amounts of phosphate in the solutions ( Fractional extraction rates of copper and molybdenum were shown versus average potentials in  Copper content of molybdenite concentrate from Sarcheshmeh could be selectively reduced via bioleaching of molybdenite with Applying other sources of energy (sulfur, ferrous sulfate or pyrite) was necessary for the bioleaching of molybdenite concentrate with Sulfur was found as the best source of energy for reducing copper in bioleaching process. Copper content of the Sarcheshmeh molybdenite concentrate was reduced to less than 0.3% in 15 days using sulfur in the process. Medium redox potential was more suitable for the reduction of copper, but high potentials were better for molybdenum extraction via bioleaching of molybdenite concentrate. However, high concentrations of iron in the medium would be required to increase the Cu and Mo extraction rates in the bioleaching of molybdenite concentrate. Application of Norris medium was preferred for the selective dissolution of chalcopyrite from molybdenite concentrate by bioleaching with Experiments were partly carried out in the Laboratory of Mineral Processing and Resources Recycling (Hokkaido University). The authors would like to thank Hokkaido University and the staff of this lab, Professor M. Tsunekawa and Dr. N. Hiroyoshi. The authors wish to thank University of Tehran and National Iranian Copper Industries Company for their financial support of this work.