The effect of extended milling on the carbothermic reduction of a manganese ore has been examined using a combination of thermal analysis and X-ray diffraction (XRD). Thermodynamic modelling indicated that reduction of MnO2 to MnO was possible at 25 °C, although no reaction was found to occur during milling of the ore with graphite for up to 10 h. For a physical mixture, cryptomelane, KMn8O16, reduced at 500 °C and braunite, Mn7SiO12, at 700 °C after 10 h milling these temperatures were reduced by 200 °C. The initial product was Mn3O4, although in the 10-h-milled powder, the reduction of braunite may have been directly to MnO. Reduction at 600 °C only formed Mn3O4 in the unmilled powder but the major product in the 10-h-milled powder was MnO. The increased extent of reaction after premilling may allow current processing plants to expand their throughput without increasing the size of reduction kiln.One of the major components in alkaline batteries is γ-manganese dioxide; this phase is also present in lithium batteries as the intercalation host. The major commercial route to γ-MnO A number of other nonthermal reduction routes are under investigation The leach solution is neutralised with lime and both gypsum (CaSO As the world grows, the number of batteries in use is increasing and will continue to do so for many years to come. The present consumption of MnO Methods of increasing capacity within an existing plant include replacement of equipment with a larger model, duplication of existing plant and increasing throughput in existing equipment. The first route may require the plant to be closed whilst replacement is made if building space is limited, the second route essentially builds a new plant alongside the first increasing the number of streams within the plant and increasing the engineering complexity. In many plants, there is no method of increasing the throughput of existing equipment as optimisation ensures that each operation is at the maximum capacity to maximise production. It has been shown previously This paper examines the effect of premilling on the carbothermic reduction of manganese ore. The Ellingham diagram for the Mn–O–C system, calculated for a total pressure of 1 atm, is shown in A free energy minimisation technique was used to assess the MnO It should be noted that these calculations were made considering only those phases for which thermodynamic data were available; no data could be found for Mn A sample of commercial manganese ore was obtained from a mine site in Western Australia and comprised lumps which were typically >30 mm. One lump was smashed using a hammer to <5 mm and then ground in a ball mill for 2 min; the resultant powder was screened at 212 μm and the oversize reground. This cycle was repeated three times and any remaining oversize was discarded. Three powders were prepared in accordance with the anticipated reaction: Thermogravimetric analysis (TGA) was performed on the powders. Approximately 20 mg of each sample was loaded into a platinum crucible, heated to 1000 °C at 20 °C/min in a flowing argon atmosphere using a Shimadzu TGA-50 instrument. Each powder was also annealed at 300–800 °C for 0.5 h in a flowing nitrogen ambient. The products were analysed by X-ray diffraction (XRD) using monochromatised Co K The as-milled powders were examined by scanning electron microscopy and elemental mapping used to determine the effect of milling on the distribution of manganese and carbon. XRF analysis of the powdered concentrate showed the presence of 48.83 wt.% Mn, 1.03% Si, 1.17% K, 1.11% Fe and 1.38% alkaline-earth metals. XRD of the raw concentrate is shown in No thermodynamic data could be found for cryptomelane, but a free energy of Δ The only major change in the XRD traces due to milling is the diminution and disappearance of the main graphite peak. This cannot be due to consumption by reaction since no evidence of gas was present directly after milling and must have been due to amorphisation. In two-phase systems, it has been noted that the softer phase tends to undergo more damage to the crystal structure than the harder phase SEM images of the as-milled powders are shown in After milling for 1 h, the particles are generally smaller and somewhat more rounded. Clearly, the milling is reducing particle size leading to the faces and edges becoming smaller and less obvious at this scale. The larger particles are mostly covered in smaller particles, unlike the unmilled powder where faces were smooth. There is an increase in particle size after 10 h of milling and the particles are generally rounded with few facets evident. The relative absence of very small particles suggests that the rounded particles evident were aggregates of the smaller particles formed during milling. The elemental mapping for the two components shows distinct changes as the mixture was milled. The unmilled powder shows segregation of manganese and carbon, indicating that there were separate particles of each with little mixing evident, other than those where graphite was on the surface of the manganese ore particles. The distribution is somewhat more even after 1 h of milling with few areas where distinct particles of graphite and manganese ore occurred. Further milling led to the almost complete absence of distinct particles of either graphite or ore with the distribution being almost identical. The low volume fraction of graphite in the mixture (∼13.3%) makes it more likely that carbon-free manganese particles would remain, and there are a few areas where Mn was found but not C. Clearly, the particles are composites of graphite and ore and the mixing of the two phases is more intimate than for the shorter milling times. The presence of carbon-free particles of Mn indicates that further mixing could be expected to occur with longer milling times. The effect of extended milling on mixing has previously been demonstrated in a system where the two phases had similar volume fractions The TGA traces of the powder mixtures and a sample of the crushed ore are shown in For the 10-h-milled powder, the result is somewhat different with an increased mass loss evident by 200 °C and this increased mass loss continued beyond 1000 °C. A similar trend in mass loss is also observed for the samples heated for 0.5 h. The milled samples both had a greater mass loss than the unmilled powder and the 10-h-milled powder had a greater mass loss than the powder milled for 1 h, although at ≥700 °C, the difference was small. XRD traces of the products from TGA (not shown) indicated the heated concentrate contained only Mn The rates of mass loss for the TGA traces are also shown in Heating the powders for 0.5 h resulted in somewhat larger mass losses than those observed in the TGA; this is to be expected since TGA is a non-equilibrium technique, except for extremely fast reactions. For all samples, except the unmilled powder heated at 300 °C, the mass loss after 0.5 h was approximately the same as that attained by heating ∼200 °C higher in the TGA. This indicates that the reactions occurring are relatively slow and did not attain equilibrium during heating in the TGA. It is interesting to note that the powders milled for 1 and 10 h both show a similar mass loss at ≥700 °C, implying that the same reaction may have been occurring in these powders. XRD of the samples derived from heating the 1-h-milled powder at 300–800 °C are shown in The peak area of the most intense peaks for each of the four phases present were determined by profile fitting. The fraction of each phase present was estimated as the ratio of each peak area to the total area of the peaks and the results are shown in On heating to 400 °C, there was no reaction apparent in either the unmilled or 1-h-milled powders with only braunite and cryptomelane evident. In the 10-h-milled powder, the fraction of cryptomelane decreased to 5% at 300 °C and was absent at 400 °C. This decrease was concomitant with the appearance of Mn In all three powders, the fraction of Mn Premilling of a manganese ore, comprised of cryptomelane, braunite and an unidentified manganese phase with graphite led to enhanced reduction at decreased temperatures. The longer premilled powder showed complete reduction to MnO within 30 min at 600 °C, the unmilled powder showed Mn