Iron ore slimes of India contain high alumina and silica that reduce the grade and pose difficulty in processing. This investigation addresses the interactive effect of process parameters on the processing of Indian iron ore slimes by using column flotation. The iron ore slime containing 58.7% Fe, 5.2% SiO2 and 4.9% Al2O3 was used for this investigation. The subsequent size analysis, chemical characterisation, desliming and column flotation tests were performed targeting the effect of process parameters on the flotation behaviour of the slimes. A factorial design of experimental approach was followed using three variables at two levels namely froth height, superficial air velocity, and collector dosage. The dosages of frother and depressant were held constant. Froth height plays a significant role on recovery and Fe-grade in the concentrate. The interaction effects of the variable factors on recovery and Fe grade of concentrate were studied. The relationship between the residence time of air in froth zone and recovery was also established. Increased residence time demands more collector dosage for high recovery of the concentrate. Recovery of the concentrate could be improved to 63% (54.6% overall recovery) with a grade of 64.3% Fe, 1.9% silica and 2.2% alumina.The Indian iron ore industry is one of the fastest growing iron ore processing industries in the world. It is estimated that about 200 Processing of iron ore slime in an Indian scenario is a challenging task as it contains a significant amount of silicates and different types of aluminates as gangue minerals. Research carried out on Indian iron ore slime ( In any froth flotation process the hydrophobic particles are carried out from pulp zone to froth zone by means of true flotation, but undesirable gangue minerals also report to the concentrate through entrainment and entrapment rather than true flotation. In the case of iron ore flotation, the hydrophilic silica and quartz minerals report to the concentrate by means of entrainment and entrapment. The important factors affecting the recovery of entrained gangue are water recovery and particle characteristics in the ore. Water flow is the medium whereby gangue is transported by mechanical entrainment ( The abovesaid problems can be solved using column flotation by replacing the mechanical flotation cell. The column flotation process has a substantial advantage over the mechanical batch flotation process for achieving higher grades with reduced maintenance cost as well as better control on the froth depth ( The froth flotation is a complex phenomenon as all the process parameters are dependent on each other. The present study aims to highlight the effect of process parameters like collector dosage, superficial air velocity, froth height and their interactive effect on recovery of mass and grade of Fe in the processing of iron ore slime using column flotation. A regression equation model was fitted to the experimental results which allowed an optimum setup of conditions to be provided and targeted so that mass recovery and Fe-grade can be maximised. The relationship between the residence time of air in the froth zone and recovery was also addressed. The iron ore slime sample from eastern parts of India was used for this investigation. The feed sample was thoroughly mixed and homogenized for drawing a representative sample for chemical analysis, characterisation and beneficiation studies. The feed sample contains 58.7% Fe with a significant amount of silica and alumina ( Mineralogical study of the sample was carried out through optical microscopy (Leica make) and degree of liberation using a Wild zoom stereo microscope (Leitz make). The microscopic study indicates that hematite and goethite are the major iron-minerals, and kaolinitic clay, quartz and trace amount of gibbsite as gangue minerals. Goethite occurs with colloform structure ( Microscopic liberation analysis using the point count method was performed to assess the degree of liberation and interlocking status on different sized fractions of slime sample. The stereo microscope was used and the liberation characteristics are shown in The homogenized slime sample was subjected to froth flotation. A laboratory column flotation cell of 7.5 The flotation results for mass recovery and Fe-grade in the concentrates under different conditions are shown in Based on the analysis of the experimental results using “Design Expert8”, the regression (Eqs.  From The statistical design of experiments facilitates to illustrate the interactive effects of the process parameters on the responses. The combined effect of superficial air velocity and collector dosage on yield and Fe grade at low froth height is shown in The metallurgical performance of any flotation system considerably depends on the superficial air velocity and froth height. The effect of superficial air velocity and froth height on yield is shown in The above relationship shows that the high superficial air velocity reduces the froth residence time and increases the mass recovery by reducing the Fe grade. The recovery also increases with high collector dosage. Therefore, for assessing the rate of solids carrying to the froth phase, the overall rate constant (K  The bubble surface area flux (S Hence, to optimise the flotation recovery and selectivity, the combined effects of the froth height and superficial air velocity (defined by residence time), and collector dosage needs to be understood. The effect of residence time of air in the froth zone and collector dosage on mass recovery and Fe grade is shown in Collection efficiency (E The optimisation of the process variables was analysed using Eqs. Therefore, in order to achieve the high grade of iron values with increased recovery, the feed sample was deslimed using 2″ Mozley hydrocyclone. The ratio of spigot opening to vortex finder was kept between 0.45 to 0.9 to prevent roping ( The column flotation test was performed with the deslimed feed under different conditions ( The flotation performance of iron ore slimes is highly dependent on the levels of the variable parameters. In the present studies, the flotation carried out using factorial design of experiments reflects the interactive effect of the variables. The following conclusions can be drawn from the above studies: In column flotation, the effect of superficial air velocity is more dominant than collector dosage for recovery at low froth height. The ultrafines in the feed cannot be controlled even at high froth height and low superficial velocity. Therefore, the deslimed feed is favourable for column flotation to reduce the entrainment and improves the metallurgical performance with high recovery and grade. The interactive effect of froth height and superficial air velocity has an impact on the metallurgical performance. At low froth height and high superficial air velocity, grade reduces due to the entrainment of the gangue than true flotation of the iron bearing minerals. The interactive effect of residence time of air and collector dosage in the froth zone plays a dominant role on mass recovery and Fe grade. The high collector dosage aids to improve the yield at high residence time ( The authors would like to thank the