In vivo expression of the type III sodium-dependent phosphate transporter (NaPiT) Glvr-1 during endochondral ossification, suggests a functional role for inorganic phosphate (Pi) transport in cartilage calcification. For further analysis of this relationship, an in vitro model of endochondral ossification is required. In this context, we investigated the characteristics of Pi transport in the new chondrogenic cell line ATDC5 in relation to extracellular matrix (ECM) formation and mineralization. Pi uptake in ATDC-5 cells and in isolated matrix vesicles (MVs) is mediated by an Na-dependent Pi transporter with a pH dependency characteristic of a type III Pi carrier (lower activity at alkaline pH). Northern blot analysis indicated that ATDC-5 cells express Glvr-1 transcripts during the various stages of their maturation with a maximal level during the proliferating stage. In isolated MVs, Pi transport activity was maximal at day 21, concomitant with the beginning of type X collagen messenger RNA expression. These events preceded the initiation of matrix mineralization, which was apparent at day 25, and then gradually increased until day 47. This temporal relationship between maximal Pi transport activity in MVs and the expression of a marker of mineralizing chondrocytes is compatible with the possible involvement of Pi transport in the ECM calcification observed in ATDC-5 cell cultures. In conclusion, these observations suggest that ATCD-5 cells in culture represent a promising model for the analysis of a functional role of Pi transport in the initial events of endochondral ossification.Endochondral ossification is a tightly regulated process Atsumi et al. Inorganic phosphate (Pi) is essential not only for cellular metabolism but also for the formation of the mineral phase in calcified tissues, due to its structural role in the apatite crystal. In the present study, we analyzed the characteristics of Pi transport in ATDC5 cells and in released MVs in order to assess the suitability of this experimental system for studying the functional role of Pi transport in the initial events of matrix mineralization in the process of endochondral ossification. Results indicate that ATDC5 cells take up Pi through a type III NaPiT and express transcripts encoding type III NaPit Glvr-1. A type III phosphate transport system is also present in MVs and the temporal analysis of maximal Pi transport activity in these structures in relation to matrix calcification suggests that this model is suitable for further investigation of Pi transport in cartilage mineralization. Cell culture plasticware was purchased from Falcon (Becton-Dickinson, Franklin Lakes, NJ) and Corning-Costar (Integra Biosciences, Wallisellen, Switzerland). Fetal calf serum (FCS), glutamine, antibiotics, and trypsin/ethylene-diamine tetraacetic acid (EDTA) were from Gibco (Life Technologies, Basel, Switzerland). A 1:1 mixture of Dulbecco’s modified Eagle and Ham F12 medium (DMEM/F12) was provided by ICN Biochemicals (Munich, Germany) and α-modified essential medium (α-MEM) was from Amimed (Bioconcept, Allschwill, Switzerland). Bovine insulin, type II collagenase, sodium selenite, and phosphonoformic acid were from Sigma (Sigma Chemical Co., St. Louis, MO), and human transferrin was from Boehringer Mannheim (Rotkreuz, Switzerland). Radiolabeled H ATDC5 cells (obtained from Prof. Hiraki, Kyoto University, Sakyo, Japan) were routinely grown in a maintenance medium consisting of DMEM/F12 (1:1) containing 5% FCS, 10 μg/mL human transferrin (T), and 3 × 10 The PiT studies were performed at 37°C in Earle’s buffered salt solution (EBSS, pH 6.6–8.2) containing 143 mmol/L of sodium chloride as previously described. The ATDC5 cell layer was rinsed once with 0.9% NaCl at 37°C and digested with 500 U/mL of collagenase in 300 mmol/L mannitol, 30 mmol/L HEPES/KOH (pH 7.5), and 1 mmol/L CaCl Total RNA was extracted from ATDC5 cells cultured for the indicated times using the RNeasy total RNA kit (Qiagen, Hilden, Germany). Ten micrograms of total RNA was electrophoretically resolved on a 1.5% agarose gel and transferred onto nylon membranes. The membranes were hybridized at 68°C for 2 h with the desired cDNA probe labeled with [α- The amount of total calcium present in cell layers was determined by atomic absorption spectrophotometry at 422.7 nm (Model 1100B, Perkin Elmer, Norwalk, CT) after extraction of the cells with 4 mol/L HCl containing 1% LaCl. Alkaline phosphatase (ALP) activity was assayed, as previously described, Results are expressed as mean ± SEM. Comparative studies of means were performed using one-way analysis of variance followed by a post hoc test (Fisher’s projected least significant difference) with a significance level of  Northern blot analysis revealed the expression of a 4 kb transcript encoding Glvr-1 The amount of MVs released by cells cultured for different times was constant between days 7 and 35, with a mean of 6.2 ± 0.2 μg MV protein/mg cell protein. ALP-specific activity, used as a marker of isolation of MVs, was routinely enriched 10- to 20-fold in the MV fraction (mean 16.9 ± 3-fold; n = 5) compared with the cellular fraction. As shown in To assess the role of Pi transport on the mineralization ability of ATDC5 cells, we used the inhibitor of Pi transport, phosphonoformic acid (PFA). Addition of PFA (5 mmol/L) in the transport solution induced a significant decrease of Na-dependent Pi transport in MVs isolated on day 21 (vehicle: 0.72 ± 0.03; PFA: 0.4 ± 0.04 nmol/mg protein, The results of the present study suggest that the chondrogenic cell line ATDC5 is a suitable model for assessing the functional role of type III Pi transport systems in initial events of cartilage matrix mineralization. Among the reported in vitro models of chondrocyte differentiation, As previously described in the murine calvaria-derived osteoblastic MC3T3-E1 cells, Whether the drop in Glvr-1 mRNA expression between the early and late phase of cell differentiation corresponds to a lower rate of Pi transport in cells could not be assessed in this culture system because ATDC5 cells form cartilage nodule-like aggregates during their differentiation. During the formation of hypertrophic ATDC5 cells, the transient stimulation of Glvr-1 mRNA expression, as previously reported using in situ hybridization during bone development in vivo, is also difficult to assess in cultured ATDC5 cells. This difference, observed in vivo and in vitro during cell hypertrophy, may result from the use of a different method. In fact, northern blot analysis includes expression of Glvr-1 transcripts in cells at various stages of development. Although the difference between day 15 and day 20 did not reach a significant level, we did observe a rise in Glvr-1 mRNA expression at day 20, which corresponded to the maximal Pi transport activity in matrix vesicles released by ATDC5 cells at this timepoint. It remains to be investigated whether this change in Pi-transport activity in released MVs is related to changes in either transcription or translation of Pi transporter or to the MV maturation process as previously suggested. In conclusion, the present work reports, for the first time, expression of the phosphate transporter Glvr-1 in a chondrogenic cell line during the early and late phase of chondrogenic differentiation. These mineralizing-competent cells produce MVs with type III Na-dependent phosphate transport activity concomitant with collagen type X expression and preceding the initiation of matrix calcification. Regarding the characteristics of epiphyseal growth-plate chondrocytes in vivo, the ATDC5 cell line is an adequate model for analyzing the functional role of Pi transport in the initial events of cartilage matrix calcification and for studying the molecular mechanisms involved in the mineralization process. The authors thank S. Troccaz and P. Apostolides for their expert assistance. Also, special thanks is addressed to M. Linder. We are grateful to Dr. D. Manen and Dr. S. Bourrin for helpful suggestions and discussions. This study was supported by the Swiss National Foundation (Grant No. 32-49839.96).