Inhibitive performance of a new thiazolo-pyrimidine derivative has been investigated on mild steel in a solution of 1M H2SO4. Electrochemical measurement, scanning electron microscope analysis and quantum chemical calculations are the tests and methods used to assess the performance of the inhibitors. The results indicate that the thiazolo-pyrimidine derivative used acts as a mixed-type inhibitor retarding the anodic and cathodic corrosion reactions. The studied compounds followed the Langmuir adsorption isotherm. Thermodynamic parameters showed that inhibitor adsorption is physical as determined by those parameters. The effect of molecular structure on the inhibition efficiency was investigated by quantum chemical calculations.Plain carbon steels have various applications in different industries; acids are also very commonly used in applications such as acid pickling, oil well acidifying, industrial acid cleaning etc. The downside to this collaboration is steels and ferrous alloys severely corrode in acidic solutions especially in sulfuric and hydrochloric acids; this imposes heavy maintenance and repair costs. Four thiazolo-pyrimidine derivatives: 2-benzylsulfanyl-5-chloro-7-methyl-thiazolo[4,5- The electrolyte solution used for the corrosion test was 1 The reference electrode and auxiliary electrode were saturated calomel electrode (SCE) and a 2 Potentiodynamic polarization was conducted at a constant sweep rate of 60 The molecular structures of BCMTP, CETP, EMMTP and CMTPT were geometrically optimized by density functional theory (DFT) method using B3LYP level and 3-21G** basis set with Gaussian 03. Quantum chemical parameters such as the highest occupied molecular orbital (HOMO), the lowest unoccupied molecular orbital (LUMO), energy gap (Δ Effects of thiazolo-pyrimidine derivatives were investigated in the concentration range of 25–100 It could be seen that Results of the EIS measurements of 1 In order to have an accurate study of impedance behavior of the electric double layer, CPE was used as the alternative to capacitor. The impedance of the CPE is presented as In the Helmholtz model of the surface adsorbed film capacitance, Another useful and fast technique employed in inhibitor studies is the LPR method. Regarding Eq. The influence of various temperatures on the specimen corrosion rate has been studied in the absence and presence of different inhibitors at 100 By calculating the slope of ln( Adsorption isotherm can provide invaluable information about interactions between adsorbed inhibitor molecules and the metal surface Rearranging Eq. Gibbs-Helmholtz equation can be used to calculate the heat of adsorption process (Δ To investigate the correlation between molecular structure of inhibitors and their inhibition effect, quantum chemical study has been performed. Results show that there is a weak correlation between electronic structure parameters and inhibition efficiency. The expectation was that amongst the derivatives of a given compound, the molecule with the highest (most positive) A non-linear equation was used to correlate all quantum chemical parameters (  The scanning electron microscope (SEM) images of mild steel in 1  All compounds have high inhibitive effect at room temperature on mild steel in 1 Adsorption of studied inhibitors follows Langmuir rule and thermodynamic data extracted from this rule shows physical adsorption. Effect of temperature on behavior of the inhibitors shows noticeable decrease in efficiency that confirms physical adsorption of inhibitors. Quantum chemical study results show that there is a weak correlation between molecular electrostatic structure parameters and inhibition efficiency. Also, the theoretically obtained results using the non-linear equation are not in good correspondence with the experimental results. The reason was found to be the solvation free energies of the inhibitors. SEM micrographs show anodic dissolution of grain boundary in mild steel even in the presence of inhibitors, whereas complete deterioration of surface is evident for samples in blank solution. The authors appreciate the financial support from