Çan, Çatalağzı, Seyitömer and Afşin-Elbistan thermal power plant fly ashes were used to investigate the sintering behavior of fly ashes. For this purpose, coal fly ash samples were sintered to form ceramic materials without the addition of any inorganic additives or organic binders. In sample preparation, 1.5g of fly ash was mixed in a mortar with water. Fly ash samples were uniaxially pressed at 40MPa to achieve a reasonable strength. The powder compacts were sintered in air. X-ray diffraction analysis revealed that quartz (SiO2), mullite (Al6Si2O13), anorthite (CaAl2Si2O8), gehlenite (Ca2Al2SiO7) and wollastonite (CaSiO3) phases occurred in the sintered samples. Scanning electron microscopy investigations were conducted on the sintered coal fly ash samples to investigate the microstructural evolution of the samples. Different crystalline structures were observed in the sintered samples. The sintered samples were obtained having high density, low water adsorption and porosity values. Higher Al2O3
                     +SiO2 contents caused to better properties in the sintered materials.The sintering process is a world wide known technique in the production of conventional ceramic materials. Sintered ceramics have been widely used in the construction sector. The ceramic industry consumes large quantities of natural raw materials such as quartz, feldspar and clay. A ceramic factory of medium size uses ∼400 Increasing demands to the generation of more electric power has resulted in construction of coal fired thermal power plants worldwide and thus of coal consumption and generation of the combustion wastes. In Turkey, considerable amounts of coal fly ash are generated daily in the thermal power plants, due to the high coal consumption and the high mineral matter content of coal. Fly ash’s potentially hazardous nature is primarily due to the volatile toxic metals that it contains and therefore, it causes environmental pollution. The management of coal fly ash is a major problem in Turkey since only a small amount of it is utilized. Fly ash contains valuable oxide resources such as SiO In this study, coal fly ash samples obtained from four different thermal power plants have been sintered using conventional powder processing based on powder compaction and firing, without the addition of any additives. The main aim of this investigation is to optimize a powder technology route for fly ash samples in order to maximize the sintered density of the products with the lowest possible sintering temperature. The fly ash samples used in this study were obtained from Çan, Çatalağzı, Seyitömer and Afşin-Elbistan thermal power plants in Turkey. Chemical compositions and loss of ignition values of fly ash samples are given in It is clear that the major chemical components in fly ash samples are SiO The average particle sizes were determined using a Shimadzu centrifugal particle size analyzer (SA-CP3 Model) and the density of fly ash samples were determined by means of mercury porosimeter. Particle size and the densities of fly ash samples were obtained in a previous study X-ray diffraction (XRD) was utilized to determine the mineralogical properties of the fly ash samples. During the combustion process, temperature may exceed 1600 In sample preparation, a small amount of water was used to wet fly ash before compaction. 1.5 The sintered samples were analyzed by means of X-ray diffraction to determine which crystalline phases were present and also to determine if the sample had fully crystallized. In all cases, samples were ground to fine powder form and then they were analyzed by X-ray diffraction. A Siemens diffractometer Model D 5000 operated at 40 Scanning electron microscopy (SEM) investigations were conducted in a JEOL Model JSM-5410 operated at 20 Rockwell hardness measurements were done on the sintered materials produced from fly ashes to determine the effects of heat treatment process on the mechanical property of the samples. The Rockwell hardness tester used in this study was a Wilson Model 4J. The hardness of sintered materials was determined by the Rockwell hardness test, according to the specifications of ASTM E-18 Density and porosity of the sintered materials were measured by using a Quantachrome Autoscan-33 mercury porosimeter. Mercury intrusion porosimetry measurements of the samples were carried out pressurizing up to 227 The water absorption (%) of the produced materials was determined using the procedure outlined in the ASTM C-20 Coal fly ash samples were sintered to form ceramic materials using conventional powder processing based on powder compaction and firing, without the addition of any additives. A number of preliminary experimental trials were conducted on fly ash samples at different firing temperatures and residence times in order to investigate the possibility of thermal treatment of fly ash alone. The residence time was selected as 2 Pressed Çan, Çatalağzı and Seyitömer fly ash samples were heat treated at the temperature of 1175 SEM investigations were conducted on the sintered coal fly ash samples to investigate the microstructural evolution of the samples. SEM observations of CFA sample indicated that the mullite crystallites formed in the microstructure of the sintered sample. In order to investigate the nature of phases resulting from thermal treatment, the XRD patterns of samples heat treated at different temperatures were compared. XRD patterns of CFA, CATFA, SFA and AEFA samples were given in  Kara et al. Water absorption and porosity values CATFA sample are lower than the values reported by Jonker and Potgieter Physical and mechanical properties of the CFA, CATFA and SFA samples are better than those of the AEFA sample. The properties of the produced materials are dependent on the sintering conditions. The important variables in the sintering process are: The sintering temperature and time, the particle size and distribution of the powder, the composition of the system and packing pressure. Although the sintering time and packing pressure are the same for all fly ash samples during the sintering process, sintering temperature, particle size and chemical composition of the fly ash samples are different from each other. Sintering temperature of the produced materials is dependent on the chemical composition of the fly ash samples. The chemical composition and the particle size of the fly ashes are the other important factors which affect the properties of the resultant materials. The average particle size of Çan fly ash sample is lower than the other fly ash samples except Çatalağzı fly ash sample. The decrease in particle size caused to increase in surface area. Increasing the surface area promotes the sintering process. Decreasing the particle size of fly ash samples resulted to the improvement of the properties of the sintered fly ash samples. Therefore, sintered Çan and Çatalağzı fly ash samples had better properties with the lowest particle size. High Al The sintering process results showed that the properties of the produced materials are depending on the sintering temperature and time, the particle size and distribution of the powder, the composition of the system and packing pressure. Higher Al