The basic oxygen furnace (BOF) sludge samples received from Dofasco Inc., have been characterized by a variety of methods such as X-ray diffraction, chemical analysis, particle size and scanning electron microscope and energy dispersive X-ray analysis. This characterization phase was accompanied by experimental work to see to what extent the zinc-bearing components would be removed.
                  The experimental work involved various methods such as scrubbing and size separation, flotation, and size separation followed by sulphuric acid leaching. Physical separation methods were found to be largely inappropriate for this kind of complex material. Chemical processing has a much greater chance of success. It was demonstrated that about 81% of zinc could be removed from the coarse size fraction (i.e., >38 μm) of the BOF sludge sample by sulphuric acid leaching at a pH of about 2. The corresponding amount of iron co-extracted by acid leaching was about 18%. This leaching step lowers the zinc content of the iron-bearing solids to 0.39%, a product which is acceptable for its recycling to the main iron-steel making process.
                  Based on the current findings, a simple classification and leaching circuit was proposed to produce an acceptable product suitable for recycling. The fines fraction does not seem to be amenable to separation by either physical or chemical methods that have been examined so far. The amenability of coarse fraction to processing may represent a partial solution to this problem. However, it seems to offer highly significant financial saving due to avoidance of corresponding land-disposal costs.Primary source of iron as feed to iron and steel facilities comes from the oxide ores containing minerals such as hematite (Fe A sludge stream is produced from furnace dusts carried away with off-gases that are directed to scrubbers for cleaning prior to their release. It is estimated that each year, 5–7 million tones of BOF sludge is generated worldwide. This sludge is generally disposed as landfill. Two concerns here are related to the cost of landfill and the loss of iron units. Recovery of iron at acceptable zinc grade is an attractive option as long as it can be done economically. In a previous study, it was suggested that if the final zinc content of BOF sludge can be reduced to below 0.4% (wt.), it can be directly recycled in the iron-making or steel-making process ( The BOF sludge samples were received from Dofasco (Hamilton operations) in moist form. The samples were subjected to characterization by a variety of methods such as X-ray diffraction (XRD), chemical analysis, particle size and scanning electron microscope (SEM) and energy dispersive X-ray (EDX) analysis. This work was accompanied by experimental work to see to what extent the zinc-bearing components would be removed. Various batches of samples were received and tested at different periods. Their chemical analyses were carried out using acid digestion (aqua-regia and perchloric acid) followed by atomic absorption spectroscopy. Sample #4 (see Flotation approach has been tested using the new sample and additional reagents, which involved dodecyl diethylenetriamine and kerosene as collector species as partial replacement of xanthate. As in the application for the initial sludge samples (samples #1–3), this involved adjustment of pH to about 4.5, however, by sulphuric acid addition in place of hydrochloric acid that had been used earlier. The use of sulphuric acid is more desirable since it is commonly available and cost-efficient while its effect on dissolution of iron is relatively less. The general procedure for flotation tests and other experimental work has been described earlier ( The initial work revealed that zinc-bearing component was present as an outer layer on the iron components. This prompted additional investigations to find out its ability to be separated by means of other physical methods. One obvious approach was to scrub the sample and classify it in terms of particle size. Chemical analysis of the fractions would then give an indication of whether or not the sludge material would be amenable to removal of zinc impurity using gravity or hydrocyclone classifiers. A significant amount of work was done on assessing the particle size distribution of the samples. Following the scrubbing step, the sample was placed in a 2 l graduated cylinder, filled with water up to 2000 ml mark and was allowed to fractionate in a series of sedimentation tests. The contents of the cylinder were well mixed (just prior to zero time) and then left on the bench for 5 min to settle down. Without disturbing the settling and starting from top, samples of 250 ml were taken from the cylinder and analyzed for particle size distribution. Each sample taken was also subjected to chemical analysis for zinc and iron contents. Leaching tests were carried out both with coarse (+38 μm) and fine (−38 μm) size fractions of the sludge samples where the initial zinc contents of coarse and fine samples were 1.60% and 1.90%, respectively. In each case, a 50-g dry solid sample was well mixed with 200 ml de-ionized water. The initial pH values of the suspensions were found to be 9.96 for the coarse sample, and 8.76 for the fines. With the drop-wise addition of concentrated sulphuric acid, the pH of the mixture was decreased to 2.0 in about 10 min, while it was cooled in a water bath and well stirred with an impeller. The addition of concentrated H  Chemical analysis of various batches received over the course of investigations indicated some differences in metal assays. Typical averages for iron, zinc and lead assay are given in The range of particle sizes in the sludge was found to lie from less than 5 μm to as large as 1 mm (18 mesh). Size distribution of a sample extracted from batch 4 is shown in Further characterization work was carried out using scanning electron microscope (SEM) to examine the nature of sludge particles. Dust particles ranging from 3 to 100 μm in diameter were observed as spherical formations. Some large particles were also observed to be agglomerates of smaller dust particles forming somewhat porous surface structure as shown in Zinc levels obtained using a penetration depth of 1.7 μm ranged from 0% to 10%. Discrepancies with the chemical analysis suggest presence of a zinc-rich thin layer at surface of the particles. Some particles were mounted, sectioned and then analyzed for further characterization. Additional work with SEM was carried out in combination with energy dispersive X-ray (EDX), which indicated an unrealistically high level of zinc and confirmed concentration of zinc-bearing species around spherical iron cores in the particles as shown in Morphology of the particle (about 40 μm) indicates a metallic iron core inside followed by a slightly agglomerated ferrous oxide layer and a formation of agglomerated fine particles of zinc ferrite as an external coating. A colour micrograph of the same particle along with EDX mapping provided some details (not reported here) that were helpful for confirmation on elemental distribution of zinc, iron and oxygen. Accordingly, zinc is distributed within the outer layer of the particle, which is shared by iron. Iron appears to be equally distributed within the particle as the dominant species in various forms. Oxygen’s distribution is similar to that of iron with the exception of central core, which is occupied by the metallic iron. In order to assess differences in the zinc grade of various size fractions, the sludge sample was subjected to settling experiments with or without some pre-treatments. These experiments allowed the sampling of different size fractions. The particle size distribution of the sample “as-received” was given in    Size distribution of intermediate cuts indicated expected shifts in the proportion of fines and coarse fraction (not shown for the sake of brevity). Variation of zinc and iron grades in the fractions of BOF sludge with or without any pre-treatment is shown in In order to find out the zinc content of particles with different size range in the last fraction, the remaining residues were sieved and analyzed for zinc content. Results are shown in The iron data corresponding to the zinc data summarized above is also shown in In addition to variation of zinc content in size fractions, it is important to examine its % distribution (or recovery) in the same size fractions. Zinc distribution is shown in Two bench scale flotation experiments that were conducted with scrubbed samples (having an initial zinc content of 1.82%) are designated as flotation-1 and flotation-2, respectively. The first test involved adjustment of pH by addition of sulphuric acid to a pH of 4.5, and use of collectors such as potassium amyl xanthate (collector), and dodecyl diethylenetriamine (at the half dosage of xanthate). The second test was carried out with kerosene in place of xanthate at a natural pH level of 11.7. Results are shown as typical grade variation of zinc in the concentrate samples (C1 to C6) and tailing (T) in As can be judged from the grade variation of flotation products, the separation between zinc and iron components under these experimental conditions is very poor. The flotation recovery plots also indicate an insignificant separation. It is seen that data points consistently shift away from the non-selectivity line, indicating some selectivity in favour of zinc. However, this is far from being acceptable in view of grade requirements. Thus, these two sets of flotation results indicate that selective separation of zinc and iron bearing components in this sludge sample is extremely difficult. Further flotation testing that was carried out following the acid leaching tests indicated no improvement in separation efficiency. Results of sulphuric acid leaching tests are shown in Overall removal efficiency of zinc from these samples is shown in The nature of the zinc species that is easily solubilised by acid leaching is not clear. It is speculated, however, that it involves zinc oxide in a greater proportion in the coarse fraction of the sludge sample than zinc ferrite. Likewise, the inability of the fines for zinc leaching is probably related to the presence of zinc ferrite in much greater proportion than the zinc oxide. For verification purposes, these points may require additional characterization work for the sludge sample currently tested. Initial batch of sludge samples did not indicate presence of zinc oxide by XRD technique. In view of all results obtained with the BOF sample, the following flowsheet ( Although the experimental strategy adopted in this work is justifiable based on data available on characterization of the samples, results of physical separation tests have fallen short of expectation. Physical separation methods appear to be inappropriate for this kind of complex material. In the flotation testwork reported previously, the mechanism of zinc-removal was in fact largely leaching due to acidic nature of pulp, not a flotation separation. It can be concluded that nature of various batches of sludge samples is different, and that representativity issue has apparently played a role in poor separation efficiency of zinc. Some of the differences in the characteristics of sludge samples used may originate with the variation of feed characteristics and operating conditions of the Basic Oxygen Furnace. Another contributing factor might be related to the selection of particles for SEM characterization. Chemical methods have a much greater chance of success as it was demonstrated in this work. Note that acid leaching behaviour presented here is limited due to the control of pH at ∼2. The reaction is highly exothermic due to alkaline nature of the sludge. Harsher chemical conditions involving a higher dose of acid, high temperatures, and use of an appropriate catalyst would probably cause dissolution of greater amounts of zinc. However, this will probably be at the expense of greater loss of iron units. Although the overall process efficiency seems to be low, size separation followed by acid leaching leads to a final product (consisting of 25–30% of the total BOF dust) that can be obtained with zinc content as low as 0.39%. Ability to recycle BOF dust is economically and environmentally advantageous. In this particular case, at a 25% mass recovery based on treatment of 100,000 tonnes/yr of BOF dust (25,000 TPY recycled) about $200,000 credit is obtainable for the recycled iron. In addition, there exists a potential to save up to a $1,000,000 by avoiding landfill costs. The authors would like to thank Dofasco Inc., for some financial support provided during the course of the project as well as their permission for current publication. Financial support from the Natural Sciences and Engineering Research Council of Canada (NSERC) is also gratefully acknowledged.