The purpose of this study was to investigate the influences of Jameson flotation operation variables on the recovery and kinetics of unburned carbon (UC). The waste sample of petroleum coke, filter powder or fly ash, used in the experiments was collected from lime calcination plant tailings. The effect of Jameson flotation parameters on the recovery and kinetics efficiencies of UC was systematically studied. The feasibility of separating unburned carbon and refuse was determined from the combustible recovery (CR) and ash reduction (AR) (%) curves. Within the range studied, the optimum diesel oil dosage was 3500 g/tonne, pine oil dosage was 2500 g/tonne, pulp density was 15%, wash water rate was 0.17 cm/s and downcomer immersion depth was 50 cm. The results indicate that the Jameson flotation technique is effective in removing the UC from waste filter powder. Furthermore, the classical first-order kinetic flotation model (R
                     =
                     R
                     ∞ [1−exp (−
                     k
                     ⁎
                     t)]) was applied to data from the tests. The model was evaluated by statistical technique, after non-linear regression on the model parameters. It is found that the classical first order flotation kinetic model, most extensively used among flotation models, fits the tests data very well.Flotation is one of the most complex mineral processing operations and is affected by a large number of variables. Many of these are beyond the control of the mineral engineer, and some cannot even be measured quantitatively with the available instruments. The relations between measured and controlled variables are intricately related. Sometimes simultaneously changing various component settings will reinforce a particular attribute. In addition, various component settings can cancel or counteract each other if changes are not chosen wisely. For coal fines (− Flotation is increasingly used in waste treatment, especially in the mining and metallurgical industry. Furthermore, the introduction of new, superior, flotation devices should lead to better applications for remediation of mineral industry contaminated waters and solids The Jameson cell is a patented technology which uses a plunging jet to generate air bubbles and results in a more effective flotation process The Jameson cell can be divided into three main zones Compared to mechanical cells, the functions of producing bubbles and particle–bubble collision/attachment in a Jameson cell are done separately inside the downcomer. A schematic diagram of the downcomer is shown in the jet created by the slurry passing through the orifice promotes the inducement of air into the downcomer; shearing action of the jet generates fine bubbles and transports them through the mixing zone; particles and the bubbles collide and attach to each other and subsequently travel down the downcomer; through the pipe flow zone; bubbles are removed by hydrostatic pressure from the downcomer creating a vacuum for further air entrainment. In froth flotation, air bubbles are injected into a moving stream of aqueous slurry containing a mixture of particles, so that only hydrophobic ores collected on the bubble surface exit the stream. Owing to its simplicity, the process is widely used for separating a great variety of solid particles. However, a number of complex chemical and physical interaction aspects are involved in the literature on the study of this process. Of these, the kinetic approach has been highly instrumental in a better understanding leading to reasonably accurate predictions The waste sample of filter powder used in the experiments was collected from Kaksan Lime Stet. Plant tailings basin in Adana, Turkey. The chemical analysis of the sample is given in In this study, the fractional recoveries after 1, 2, 3, 5 and 8 min of flotation time were fitted to the models. A proprietary curve-fitting program (Curve Expert 1.3, shareware from The collector dosage is a critical flotation parameter in the flotation experiments. Adjusting the collector dosage can change the surface character of the particles and influence the recovery efficiency. Diesel oil was chosen as collector in the trials. In this study, five different collector dosages (2000, 2500, 3000, 3500 and 4000 g/tonne) were used. The influence of collector dosage on the unburned carbon recovery (CR) and ash reduction (AR) efficiency is shown in A bubble produced in water is unstable. One of the prerequisites for a successful flotation operation is the stability of the bubble–particle aggregate. A frother has a number of functions in flotation. First, it reduces the surface tension of the air–liquid interface in order that a stable bubble is produced in the system. Secondly, it influences the kinetics of bubble–particle adhesion. Thirdly, it thins the liquid layer by interacting with collector molecules. Finally, it stabilizes the bubble–particle aggregate Pulp densities used in flotation columns are generally lower than those used in mechanical flotation cells. It is well known that pulp density is an important parameter, so column flotation experiments were carried out at different pulp densities (7.5–20%) in the Jameson flotation cell in order to determine its effect on the recovery of UC. Results of flotation tests are plotted in Wash water is introduced into flotation froths to reduce the amount of entrained material reporting to the product. However, the behaviour of wash water in a froth is not well understood at present, and detailed information is sparse Experiments were run at different wash water rates (0 cm/s The downcomer is the heart of the Jameson cell and is where primary contacting of air bubbles and particles occurs. Feed pulp is pumped into the downcomer through a slurry lens, creating a high-pressure jet. The jet of liquid shears and then entrains air, which has been naturally aspirated. Due to a high mixing velocity and a large interfacial area, there is rapid contact and collection of air bubbles/particles. The downcomer residence time varies from 10 to 30 s A study was carried out to determine the main trends on the impact of various operating and design parameters on Jameson flotation recovery of unburned carbon (UC). The conclusions obtained from this study are as follows: By optimizing the flotation parameters at collector dosage (diesel oil) of 3500 g/t, frother dosage (pine oil) of 2500 g/tonne, pulp density of 15%, wash water rate of 0.17 cm/s and downcomer immersion depth of 50 cm, UC has been successfully recovered from waste filter powder. For this study, first-order kinetic flotation model described as The main advantages of the Jameson flotation cell are the rapid collection of particles in the downcomer, and the relatively small footprint. The cell is simple and easy to operate, and draws air from the atmosphere, eliminating the need for compressors or blowers. In conclusion, Jameson flotation seems a viable and effective separation process for recovering the unburned carbon (UC) from waste filter powder. The author thanks the Kaksan Lime Company and Çukurova University, Mining Engineering Department, for their great help on laboratory support.