This paper explores the feasibility of a high temperature chlorination roast for selectively remove Zn from steelmaking dust. Experiments using ammonium chloride as the chlorination reagent indicate promising removal of up to 99% Zn. However, up to 30% of the Fe content of the dust is concomitantly recovered with the Zn, this is an undesirable feature in the process. This paper examines optimisation of Zn recovery and minimisation of Fe recovery during the chlorination roast through variation of parameters such as roasting temperature, time and chlorination agent ratio.For the iron (Fe) and steel sector the greatest opportunities for environmental improvements are increasing energy efficiency, reducing emissions and minimizing waste. The principal value components of steelmaking dust are Fe, zinc (Zn), and calcium (Ca), their recovery from effluent streams would improve the sustainability of the steelmaking process. Currently steelmaking dust is often recycled in Blast Furnace (BF) applications ( Chlorination roasting is one of the pyrometallurgical techniques that can be used to recover metal from metal oxides ( In this study, NH Two samples were used in this study. The first sample was weathered BOS dust taken from an historic stockpile and the second sample was fresh BOS dust (non-weathered dust) obtained from the clarifier at the end of the BOS off-gas dust collection system. X-ray diffraction (XRD) was utilised to determine the mineralogy of the materials. Solids and calcine residues were acid digested in a microwave digestor and subsequent elemental analyses were carried out using inductively coupled plasma optical emission spectrometry (ICP-OES). General purpose grade NH Both samples were dried at 110 The initial weight of crucibles and lids were recorded. Approximately 0.2 In some experiments three roasting stages were used. In these cases the residue from the first roast was roasted further two times, each time with a stoichiometric excess of NH From ICP-OES analysis, the highest Fe concentrations were found in the non-weathered dust; 58.5% compared to 50.9% in weathered dust. Zn, Ca and Mg were higher in the weathered dust (7.8%, 8.2% and 1.1% respectively) compared to the fresh dust (6.3%, 6.4% and 0.8% respectively). The composition for Zn and Fe in the fresh dust are in the range stated by A preliminary set of experiments (data not shown in The effect of roasting temperature, reaction time and roasting stages are summarised in The maximum extraction of Zn observed at 750 Reaction time is an important parameter for the chlorination roasting process ( On the basis of this laboratory scale study, it is possible to recover 98% of Zn and 30% Fe by roasting at 750 For 1-stage 750 The research has demonstrated that chlorination extraction has potential application in the steel sector for removal of Zn from steelmaking BOS dusts. From this investigation we can conclude that chlorination roasting indicates relative selectivity, recovering higher percentages of Zn than Fe. High levels of Zn recovery (53–99%) are obtained over wide ranges of roasting times (10–180 The authors wish to express sincere thanks to Tata Steel Ltd., UK for their kind permission to publish this paper, and to the Ministry of Higher Education, Malaysia, for the provision of an international studentship.