Due to the extraordinary mechanical, electronic, optical, and thermal transport properties, graphene had been one of the most fascinating and extensively studied two-dimensional materials in recent years. Benefiting from the extremely high thermal conductivity, the thermal transport in graphene has received exceptional attention in both experimental and theoretical studies. In this paper, based on first-principles calculations, we performed systematic study on the thermal transport properties of graphene using 10 different exchange-correlation (XC) functionals combined with ultrasoft or projector augmented wave (PAW) pseudopotentials. The thermal transport properties of graphene show distinct diversity for different XC functionals despite their overall good agreement with experimental measurements. It is found that the thermal conductivity of graphene could range from 1936 to 4376 W m−1 K−1 with different XC functionals employed. The reason for the diversity in the thermal transport properties of graphene is analyzed based on the insight into the mode level phonon behaviors. Our study executed a comprehensive investigation of the thermal transport properties of graphene with different XC functionals employed, which would shed light on future researches related to graphene and other novel materials.Graphene, the first two-dimensional (2D) atomic crystal available to us, possesses honeycomb lattice structure and exhibits numerous striking properties Despite the intensive studies on the thermal transport in graphene, it has been a long time debate on how large the thermal conductivity of graphene exactly is, since the reported In this paper, based on first-principles calculations, we performed systematic study on the thermal transport properties of graphene using different XC functionals combined with ultrasoft or projector augmented wave (PAW) pseudopotentials. The thermal transport properties of graphene show distinct diversity for different XC functionals despite their overall good agreement with experimental measurements. It is found that the thermal conductivity of graphene could range from 1936 to 4376 W m All the first-principles calculations are performed based on the density functional theory (DFT) as implemented in the Vienna In the calculations for obtaining harmonic (second order) interatomic force constants (IFCs) and anharmonic (third order) IFCs, a sufficiently large supercell is necessary for the accurate prediction of lattice dynamics properties. After performing calculations with different supercell sizes, the supercell size is chosen as The optimized lattice constants of graphene using different XC functionals are listed in Based on the optimized geometry structure with high precision, the phonon dispersions of graphene are obtained. The calculated phonon dispersions using different XC functionals are plotted together in In condition of fully considering the phonon-phonon scattering as determined by phonon anharmonicity, the lattice thermal conductivity ( The temperature dependent We further study the contribution to the The cumulative thermal conductivity with respect to the phonon mean free path (MFP) at Deep insight can be achieved based on the mode level analysis, such as the phonon lifetime as plotted in It is well-known that the thermal conductivity is governed by the specific heat capacity, group velocity, and phonon lifetime The mode level Grüneisen parameter of graphene predicted from different XC functionals are plotted together in As listed in Before closing, we would like to discuss the role of vdW interactions. It was concluded that the vdW interactions could have remarkable effect on the thermal transport properties of some materials, such as phosphorene In summary, based on first-principles calculations, we performed systematic study on the thermal transport properties of graphene using 10 different XC functionals combined with ultrasoft or PAW pseudopotentials. The thermal transport properties of graphene show distinct diversity for different XC functionals despite their overall good agreement with experimental measurements. It is found that the thermal conductivity of graphene could range from 1936 to 4376 W m The authors declared that there is no conflict of interest. The raw/processed data required to reproduce these findings cannot be shared at this time due to technical or time limitations. The authors acknowledge the support by the