Previous studies have shown that clayey soil admixed with Ca-bentonite can be considered as an alternative backfill for slurry-trench cutoff walls. However, the effects of contaminant exposure on the engineering properties of the clayey soil/Ca-bentonite backfills, such as compressibility and hydraulic conductivity, have not been investigated. This study presents several series of oedometer tests conducted to evaluate the compressibility and hydraulic conductivity of clayey soil/Ca-bentonite backfills exposed to different levels of lead (Pb) contamination. Kaolin is used as the base clayey soil, and it is amended with Ca-bentonite at three content levels (5, 10 and 15% by dry weight) to prepare the backfill samples. Pb is a representative metal contaminant commonly found at contaminated sites. The backfills are prepared by thoroughly mixing the kaolin–bentonite mixture with Pb concentrations of 60, 120 and 600mmol/L. The results reveal that the level of Pb concentration and bentonite content are the critical factors that affect the compressibility of the backfill. The ratio of the compression index of the Pb-contaminated backfill to that of the clean backfill decreases with an increase in the Pb concentration and bentonite content. The void ratio at an effective vertical compression stress of 1kPa is a useful characteristic parameter to correlate with the compression index for all the backfills tested here. The Pb-contaminated backfills exhibit a maximum fifty-fold increase in hydraulic conductivity when compared to clean backfills. The hydraulic conductivity of the clean backfills and those contaminated at low concentration of Pb (60mmol/L) is generally less than the typical regulatory limit of 10−9
                     m/s; whereas the hydraulic conductivity exceeds the regulatory limit when the Pb concentration is higher than 120mmol/L. The ratio of hydraulic conductivity for Pb-contaminated backfills to that for clean backfill decreases with an increase in the effective vertical compression stress. This indicates that under relatively higher effective vertical compression stress conditions the detrimental effect of Pb on hydraulic conductivity can be insignificant. The hydraulic conductivity of the Pb-contaminated backfills decreases slightly when there is an increase in the bentonite content for a given Pb concentration, while the hydraulic conductivity ratio increases significantly with a rise in the bentonite content. A proposed empirical method is assessed to predict the hydraulic conductivity of Pb-contaminated clayey soil/Ca-bentonite backfills as well as clean ones subjected to vertical compressive stress lower than 1600kPa. Using this method, the predicted hydraulic conductivity values fall in the range of 1/3 to 3 times those obtained from the oedometer tests.The contamination of subsurface soils and groundwater by high amounts of heavy metals, which result from improper disposal practices and accidental spills, is a critical problem world-wide ( The influence of the fines content, bentonite content, gradation of sand and amendment type and content (e.g., zeolite and activated carbon) on the compressibility and hydraulic conductivity ( The chemical compatibility of engineered barriers (e.g., bentonite filter cakes, sandy SB backfill, geosynthetic clay liners, and compacted sand–bentonite mixtures) is an important consideration in geoenvironmental applications ( Several contaminant compatibility studies have reported on sandy soil/Na-benotinite and sand/clay backfills. However, none have been conducted on clay soil/Ca-bentonite backfills. The present study aims to investigate the impact of Pb contamination on the liquid limit, compressibility and hydraulic conductivity of clayey soil/Ca-bentonite slurry-trench wall backfills. Several series of Atterberg limit and oedometer tests are conducted to: (1) investigate the chemical compatibility in terms of liquid limit, compressibility and hydraulic conductivity when these backfills are exposed to Pb at various concentrations; (2) identify the effects of the concentration of Pb and effective vertical consolidation stress levels on the hydraulic conductivity of the backfills; and (3) examine an empirical method, the framework of the Kozeny–Carman equation, to predict the hydraulic conductivity when the clayey SB backfills are exposed to Pb contamination. The clayey SB backfills are composed of kaolin and Ca-bentonite provided by the MUFENF mineral processing plant in Zhenjiang City, China. The kaolin is used to simulate a clayey soil because: (1) it is one of the most common minerals found in natural clays (  To simulate Pb exposure, distilled water (DW) and lead nitrate (Pb(NO The bentonite content ( The backfills were prepared by mixing clay soil, Ca-bentonite and deionized water or the Pb solution in predetermined amounts for 30 Two types of clayey SB backfills, Model A and Model B, were prepared with differing initial moisture contents for the oedometer tests. The initial water content ( For the oedometer tests, a predetermined mass of the prepared backfill was placed in a consolidation ring made of stainless steel with 61.8 The oedometer tests were conducted as per ASTM D 2435 ( At a given average effective vertical compression stress (    Two characteristic parameters, compression index (   The relationships of  The  To better understand the effect of the Pb concentration on the hydraulic conductivity of the backfill, the relation between the Pb concentration and hydraulic conductivity as well as the relation between the hydraulic conductivity ratio corresponding to void ratio of 0.79 to 0.94 and Pb concentration are presented in As shown in    Several methods have been used in previous studies to predict the hydraulic conductivity of clays, and most of them originate from the Kozeny–Carman (KC) equation, The KC equation is commonly used to estimate hydraulic conductivity and it is expressed by:  The predicted hydraulic conductivity ( This study demonstrates that the Pb concentration has a remarkable impact on the chemical compatibility of clayey soil/Ca-bentonite backfills in terms of significant change in the liquid limit, compression index and hydraulic conductivity. These phenomena are attributed to the combined influences of Pb on: (a) a diffuse double layer of bentonite particle and (b) the micro-fabric of the kaolin particle. The nitrate anion (NO When the bentonite is contaminated by the Pb(NO The engineering behavior of metal-contaminated kaolin is controlled by its fabric ( The results indicate that Pb-contaminated backfills with higher bentonite content display a significant increase in hydraulic conductivity with respect to lead concentration (see In this study, the Model A backfills were prepared with an initial water content that matched their liquid limits, while the initial water content of the Model B backfills was controlled so that the liquid limits were the same as those of the corresponding uncontaminated backfills. Based on the slump tests, the selected initial water contents proved unsuitable to yield the target slump (− Clayey soil/Ca-bentonite backfill is an acceptable alternative to the common sandy soil/Na-bentonite backfills used for slurry-trench walls when that use is based on the availability of local materials. This study provided a detailed investigation on the response of clayey soil/Ca-bentonite backfills in terms of changes in the liquid limit, compressibility and hydraulic conductivity when exposed to Pb at different concentrations. Based on the results presented in this study, the following conclusions can be drawn: The liquid limit, specific surface area and pH decreased as the Pb concentration increased. A linear relationship exists between the reciprocal of the liquid limit and reciprocal of the specific surface area for the Pb-contaminated backfills, whereas that for the clean or uncontaminated backfills noticeably deviated from this relationship. The compression index decreased considerably with an increase in the Pb concentration or a decrease in the bentonite content. The unique relationship between the compression index ( The hydraulic conductivity of the backfills was significantly affected by the Pb concentration level. The hydraulic conductivity even exceeded the typical regulatory limit of 10 The proposed method based on the framework of Kozeny–Carman equation was applied to predict the hydraulic conductivity values for the Pb-contaminated clayey soil/Ca-bentonite backfills. The results indicate that the predicted hydraulic conductivity values using the two proposed equations were within a range of 1/3 to 3 times those obtained from the oedometer tests. The changes in the liquid limit, compression index and hydraulic conductivity of the backfills with respect to the Pb concentration can be attributed to the contraction of diffuse double layer of bentonite and aggregation of kaolin particle caused by the Pb contamination. The authors are grateful for the financial support of the