In order to obtain a marketable rare earth product, purity requirements need to be met. More specifically, purification needs to be undertaken before precipitation. This addresses the technical feasibility of the use of different reagents such as limestone, lime, sodium hydroxide and magnesium oxide, to purify a rare earth sulphuric liquor containing impurities such as Ca2+, Mg2+, Mn2+, Fe3+, Al3+, Th4+, UO2
                     2+, SO4
                     2− and PO4
                     3−. Moreover, it is important to avoid significant losses of rare earth elements during purification. To achieve this, experimental batch tests were carried out and the results obtained suggest that the best procedure for chemical precipitation requires neutralization in two consecutive steps: (i) limestone should be added until the pH level is about 3.5 and (ii) calcium hydroxide or lime is dosed until pH level rises to approximately 5.0. Under this optimum condition, some relevant impurities were fully removed, namely Fe, P, Al and Th. Also, about 98% of the initial uranium was removed, reaching the lowest uranium to rare earth oxides (REOs) mass ratio in the purified rare earth liquor considering all the experiments performed. Likewise, this was the condition in which the lowest sulphate content and U/REOs mass ratio in the purified rare earth liquor was obtained. Furthermore, the rare earth oxides recovery reached about 85%, preserving the same light (La + Ce + Pr + Nd)/total rare earth mass ratio observed in the purified liquors when compared to what was noticed in the initial rare earth sulphuric liquor. Moreover, the purified liquor is suitable to produce marketable rare earth salts to be processed in solvent extraction or ion exchange units.The term “rare earth” denotes a group of 17 elements which are chemically similar, comprising scandium, yttrium and lanthanides. Lanthanides is a group of elements in the periodic table having atomic numbers ranging from 57 to 71. Furthermore, the rare earth elements (REEs) invariably occur together in an ore deposit and behave as a single chemical entity ( Nevertheless, the characteristics of the purity and quality will impact the final price of the rare earth products ( According to In this context, the aim of this work is to devise a method to remove undesirable impurities prior to the rare earth precipitation step. In order to achieve this, different reagents were tested, including limestone, lime, sodium hydroxide and magnesium oxide. This purification aims at reducing the concentration of impurities such as Fe The typical chemical and mineralogical compositions of the beneficiated rare earth ore are shown in the The main rare earth bearing mineral was monazite, which is represented by (REEs,Th)PO According to A 97.5% w/w sulphuric acid supplied by Química Moderna, a 97.0% w/w sodium hydroxide supplied by Anidrol Produtos Laboratórios, as well as a 95.0% w/w magnesium oxide and 98.6% w/w calcium hydroxide supplied by Sigma Aldrich, were used in the experiments. A commercial limestone (91.0% purity and 100% of particles below 74 µm) was used and its chemical composition is shown in The contents of the elements in the samples were determined according the analytical methods described in The pH and redox potential measurements were performed with a Mettler Toledo type M400, having a reference electrode InPro3250SG/325/Pt10. Samples for X-ray diffraction were ground below 74 µm and analysed on PANalytical Model X́PERT PRO MPD (PW 3419) with PW3050/60 (θ/θ) goniometer, X-ray ceramic tubes, Cu anode (Kα1=1,540,598 Å) model PW3373/00 – (2000 W-60 kV). Diffraction patterns were acquired from 5° to 75° in 0.02 steps. The identification of all minerals was done with a X́Pert HighScore version 2.1b software from PANalytical. The mineralogical characterization has been conducted using Quantitative Evaluation of Materials by Scanning Electron Microscopy (QEMSCAN), equipped with energy-dispersive spectrometers (EDS). The rare earth sulphuric liquor was obtained through the procedure shown in Ore beneficiation to classify the fine particles in the ore (100% smaller than 74 µm); Drying at 100 °C; Sulphation by reacting the beneficiated ore with a 97.5% w/w sulphuric acid (430 kg/t beneficiated ore); Pyrolysis or thermal treatment of the mass obtained after sulphation in a muffle at 700 °C for 2 h Cooling at 20 °C. This is step is required, as REEs Water leaching at 10% w/w of solids at 20 °C. Filtration. The REOs extraction from the ore was approximately 65.6%, but the amount of iron leached was only 6.3%. A complete chemical analysis of the rare earth sulphuric liquor produced is presented in The pH of the rare earth sulphuric liquor was increased to either 3.5 ± 0.2 or 5.0 ± 0.2 using the following reagents separately: limestone (CaCO As neutralization is concerned, The following reactions occurred during ore digestion with sulphuric acid. The reactions are based on Eq. The rare earth phosphates (REEsPO During ore digestion with sulphuric acid, a solid mass was produced and it was roasted in a muffle at 700 °C for 2 h (pyrolysis step) aiming at decomposing preferentially the impurities in the form of sulphates and not the REEs Moreover, the ionic balance of this liquor indicates an acceptable difference (9%) between the total millimol of cations per liter of solution, 281 mmol·L The experimental conditions are summarized in The compositions of all purified rare earth sulphuric liquors obtained with different reagents are shown in According to the Furthermore, the lowest sulphate content (8.5 g·L The purified rare earth sulphuric liquor obtained with MgO presents a high magnesium content (1.39 g·L The purified rare earth sulphuric liquor produced with MgO presented a higher mass ratio U/REOs (26:1 mg·kg The concentrations of each individual rare earth element in the purified liquors are shown in There were only slight differences in the ionic balance in all purified rare earth sulphuric liquors (below 4%), indicating that most of the cations and anions were considered in the chemical analyses. The composition of the dry solid residue produced during the neutralization experiments is shown in It can be observed that the highest REOs, Sc, Th and U contents are in the residue obtained with MgO and the highest Mn content was found in the residue using only NaOH. Also, the highest Fe, P and Si contents in the residue were obtained in the first step with CaCO Other reactions that occur during neutralization are shown by equations Eq. The reactions shown in equations (Eq. The x-ray diafractograms of the solid residues obtained in the purification experiments is shown in The main results of the neutralization experiments with different reagents up to a pH 5.0 are shown in REOs recovery represents the amount of REOs present in the initial rare earth sulphuric liquor in the relation to the amount of REOs found in the purified rare earth sulphuric liquor. This can be calculated by equation Eq. C C  Most of the REOs losses in the experiments using CaCO The highest generation of solid residues occurred with CaCO Batch experiments to remove the impurities were carried out in just one step using CaCO The authors would like to thank Vale S.A., especially Patrice Mazzoni and Keila Gonçalves for authorizing the publication of this work. The authors are also thankful to the CDḾs technicians that were involved in this work. We would like to thank Marcus de Castro Carvalho Simões, Daniel Saturnino and Felipe Hilário for proofreading the paper. FAPEMIG, CNPq and CAPES (Brazilian Council for Scientific and Technological Development) are also acknowledged.