In this study, we have investigated the bioleaching potential of a native strain of Acidithiobacillus ferrooxidans isolated from zinc and lead sulfide mines under varied ambient conditions of growth and substrate consumption. The effects of intermittent irrigation, type of agglomeration, feed formulation in terms of acid, enriched salt solution, initial number of microorganism, and their interactions on the bioleaching of low-grade zinc sulfide ores (containing 5.78% zinc) on growth and biooxidation efficiency of the bacteria have been evaluated. Bioleaching capacities of the isolate were optimized by the utilization the Taguchi method (e-qualitic-4) for design of experiments. As a result, eight column bioreactors with 5.7kg ore (100% <12mm) capacity were fabricated. Through the analysis, continuous inoculation of the ores with the solution of A. ferrooxidans type and spraying a bacterial-rich solution into the agglomerator were found to be the most significant factors, whereas intermittent irrigation and interactions of parameters have less effect within the ranges investigated. The extraction of zinc was obtained under the optimal conditions more than 70% in 80 days, which is noticeable to compare with conventional bioleaching.The remaining minerals resources of the world are gradually becoming more challenging to exploit by the conventional processing technologies There are a number of operating parameters controlling bioleaching process, which are required to be maintained within a certain range in operation condition whereby the activity of bacteria with the resultant of maximum extraction of metals can be optimized. In this study we have evaluated the effect of intermittent irrigation, type of agglomeration, feed formulation in terms of acid, microorganism and enriched salt solution, and their interactions, on the growth and activity of indigenous bacterium that has been isolated from Koshk Zn/Pb sulfide mine, central of Iran. Taguchi method has been utilized for design of optimization experiments under eight equal size column bioreactors. Ore sample supplied by Kooshk Bafgh mine (Yazd province, Iran) was used in this study. XRF (X-ray Fluorescence) and XRD (X-ray diffraction) tests were employed for the mineralogical identification of the ore. The mineral ore used in this study mainly consisted of Pyrite (FeS The Na (NH The isolated bacterial strain was identified and characterized with conventional and molecular level technique. DNA of the isolate was extracted for 16S r RNA analysis. The late–exponential phase culture were harvested and washed with same basal media without iron, cells were suspended in 576 For identification of the bacterium, 16S ribotyping was carried out. The sequence analysis was done at Ribosomal Database Project (RDP) I & II and the Basic Local Alignment Search Tool (BLAST-n) analysis at National Center for Biotechnology Information (NCBI) server. The alignment of the sequence was done using CLUSTALW program at European Bioinformatics site. These sequence data have been submitted to the GenBank databases under accession no. FJ479706. The 16S ribotyping and BLAST-n analysis of the 762 base pairs were done at the National Center for Biotechnology Information (NCBI) server which confirmed the identity of organism, i.e. it was a strain of As part of the preliminary test work for the heap, Taguchi method Accordingly, eight experiments were carried out to study the effect of these parameters. For this purpose eight plexiglass columns with 70 To have bioleaching condition in all columns at the beginning of experiment, they have been inoculated via the feed solution of bacteria by the population of 3 Definition of each level is as follow: Agglomeration: Level 1: Each kilogram of ore has been acid conditioned with 30 Level 2: Each kilogram of ore has been acid conditioned with 3 Intermittent irrigation: Level 1: Irrigation continuously. Level 2: Shut down irrigation after stabilization of pH at 2.4–2.6 for at least 48 Microorganism feeding: Level 1: Feeding just by acid. Level 2: Feeding by microorganism, the initial bacterial population was 3 Enriched salt solution feeding: Level 1: Feeding just by acid. Level 2: Feeding by enriched salt solution, the combination of enriched salt solution is FeSO Conditions of each column are summarized in Identified reaction products included Pyrite (FeS The presence of elemental sulfur in the residues implies that organisms used in bioleaching could not oxidize sulfur as rapidly as it was produced. Sulfur oxidation rates for several acidophiles have been shown to be significantly slower in solutions of pH Although, the XRF analysis of ore sample after bioleaching process shows about 50% extraction of zinc ( Signal-to-noise ratio (S/N) characteristics formulates for three different categories as follows: Nominal is the best. Smaller is better. Bigger is better. Since maximum zinc extraction in specific time duration was objective of this study, “Bigger is better” was selected for this design of experiment Taguchi method cannot judge and determine effect of individual parameters on entire process while percentage contribution of individual parameters can be well determined using analysis of variance (ANOVA). Qualitek-4 software of ANOVA module was employed to investigate effect of process parameters. Estimate of expected results from S/N ratio is as follow: Expected performance in QC units (or overall evaluation criteria) is: Yexp The main effects of each parameter during 80 days are illustrated in Moreover, second level of agglomeration shows better situation than first level, which means, although, all columns have been inoculated via bacteria at the beginning of experiment, immobilization of bacteria on the ore during agglomeration has significant effect on the improvement of bioleaching. On the other hand, interaction between first level of parameters 1 and 4 (Inter Col. 1*4) and Inter Col. 1*6 show better performance than second level, which suggest to apply first level of intermittent irrigation to satisfy the first level of Inter Col. 1*4 and Inter Col. 1*6 since, the optimum conditions happened at second level of fourth and sixth parameters. However, the first level of intermittent irrigation shows better performance than its second level, it has remarkable impact on bacterial activation. So, it is useful to have intermittent irrigation alternatively during bioleaching. Indubitably, the period of intermittent irrigation and its alternation should be optimized. Bacterial leaching of metal values from the substrate is a complex process and is affected by multiple factors. Effects of important parameters including different types of feed, intermittent irrigation, different types of agglomeration and their interactions on bioleaching of zinc sulfide ores were investigated by Taguchi method in 8 columns. Column bioleaching results were encouraging in that more than 70% of zinc was extracted in 80 days, which is so remarkable to compare with conventional bioleaching. The key factor in zinc recovery during the bioleaching of a low-grade, sulfide ore is the continuous inoculation of the ores with the solution of While intermittent irrigation did not seem to be a key parameter in the leach, it was required, to sustain and improve bacterial activity in the column. So, the period of its alternation should be optimized. Acid-agglomeration tended to zinc extraction initially, but did not ultimately control overall recovery. The main point to note is that all the columns operated in recovery mode but just some of them were up to the mark performance. It should be remembered that leach results, such as those presented, are the net result of many contributing and perhaps competing reactions. This study should be considered as a first step in the development of methodology for the design and planning of heap leaching plants. The authors wish to express their gratitude to the