Fractures of the radius bone, especially those involving the distal radius, are extremely common injuries. These fractures are the most frequent type of bone injury in the upper extremity; they occur in athletes of all ages, from preadolescent to the elderly.
                        4,6,8,21,23,24,26
                      Distal radius fractures are more common in the adolescent athlete than in the adult.
                        11,20
                      Radius injuries can be sport specific with each sport having its own injury pattern, incidence, and distribution.
                        18,25
                      Distal radius injuries are encountered most often in the impact sports such as football, basketball, snowboarding, rollerblading, and soccer; in the racquet and stick sports such as baseball, tennis, hockey, golf, skiing, and racquetball; and in the apparatus or external contact sports such as gymnastics, rock climbing, and weight lifting. Distal radius fractures can occur, however, in any athletic endeavor where falling onto the outstretched hand is possible, such as horseback riding and cycling.
                  Radius injuries, and specifically radius fractures, will have a profound influence on the athlete's ability to throw, catch, shoot, strike, push-off, and especially to manipulate objects with skill during athletic competition. Frequency of injury is highest during the intensity of athletic competition, and less frequent in practice sessions or recreational competition.
                        25
                     
                  
                  The conservative medical or surgical management of the radius fracture and associated injuries follows already well-established treatment principles of orthopedic care.
                        4,21,23,26
                      What is different in the management of the athlete's fractured radius is that great pressure is placed on the treating physician to minimize lost time from athletic competition.
                        28
                      Specific orthopedic treatment must be custom tailored to the location of the injured tissues; the severity and extent of the tissue trauma; the patient's age—preadolescent versus skeletally mature versus elderly; level of competition; and the sport-specific demands, especially if a unique performance task is required of a particular position in that sport.
                        6,24
                      Sound orthopedic treatment principles never should be compromised to return the athlete to early sports participation.
                        28