Introduction
                  Certain patients with pilon fractures present with significant soft-tissue swelling or with a poor soft-tissue envelope typically not amenable to definitive fixation in the early time period. The objective of this study was to review the treatment of simple intra-articular fractures of the tibial plafond (Arbeitsgemeinschaft für Osteosynthesefragen/Orthopaedic Trauma Association (AO/OTA) type 43C1–C2) via intramedullary nailing (IMN) with the assessment of clinical and radiographic results and any associated complications.
               
                  Materials and methods
                  Retrospective clinical and radiological reviews of 31 patients sustaining AO/OTA type 43C distal tibial fractures treated with IMN were evaluated. Our main outcome measurement included achievable alignment in the immediate postoperative period and at the time of union along with complications or need for secondary procedures within the first year of follow-up.
               
                  Results
                  Seven patients were lost to follow-up. All the remaining patients achieved bony union at a mean union time of 14.1±4.9 weeks with no evidence of malunion or malrotation. All patients were at full-weight-bearing status at 1-year follow-up. Complications were notable for one delayed union, one non-union, one patient with superficial wound drainage, two with deep infection, one with symptomatic hardware and one with deep vein thrombosis.
               
                  Conclusion
                  Simple articular fractures of the tibial plafond (AO/OTA type 43C) treated via IMN can achieve excellent alignment and union rates with proper patient selection and surgical indication. One should not hesitate to use additional bone screws or plating options to help achieve better anatomic reduction. However, larger, prospective randomised trials comparing plating versus nailing, in experienced hands, are needed to completely delineate the utility of this treatment modality.Optimal treatment of pilon fractures remains a controversial topic. Many have adopted a delayed, staged surgical treatment protocol in order to optimise soft-tissue swelling, which minimises wound complications. Extra-articular distal tibial fractures (AO/OTA type 43A) are also controversial when it comes to an ideal treatment protocol. Some retrospective reports note slightly fewer complications with plating, while others favour IMN; a recent prospective, randomised trial reported no differences between the two treatment options. With noted similarities between extra-articular distal tibial fracture (AO/OTA type 43A) and simple articular fracture (AO/OTA type 43C1–C2) patterns, IMN has been used in both of our level 1 trauma centres as a viable treatment option ( Ethical approval was obtained from all institutional review board committees prior to conducting this retrospective review. Initial retrospective screening of each institution's orthopaedic trauma databases was performed. From December 2004 to March 2010, using initial search criteria (surgically treated tibial fractures, all comers), a total of 265 cases were identified for review. Of these, 165 cases were treated via IMN, of which 31 cases were identified to have at least 1-year clinical follow-up with an AO/OTA type 43C fracture. One AO/OTA type 43C3 fracture was removed. This was confirmed via corroboration between the treating surgeons’ notes, radiographs and computed tomography (CT) analysis. Seven patients were lost to follow-up following initial discharge after definitive fixation. Thus, final alignment and union data were summarised for 23 cases. Initial management consisted of closed reduction and splinting followed by irrigation and debridement (I&D) for any open fractures within 8 Postoperative and follow-up data collection parameters included additional operations related to polytrauma cases, complications and need for subsequent re-operations up to 1-year minimum follow-up. Classification and tibial alignment measurements in both frontal (varus/valgus) and sagittal (anterior/posterior) planes were performed by two fellowship-trained orthopaedic traumatologists (JL and FAL) in accordance with the measurement technique described by Freedman and Johnson Statistical analysis was performed via Statistical Package for the Social Sciences (SPSS) version 18.0 (IBM Corp., Somers, NY, USA). Mean values for alignment were calculated denoting valgus as a positive number and varus as a negative number, in the frontal plane, and procurvatum as a positive number and recurvatum as a negative number, in the sagittal plane. A continuous variable comparison was performed via unpaired Student's A total of 23 patients, mostly men (57%) with a mean age of 43.3 Twenty (87%) patients received additional non-IM distal screws, with the cohort receiving an average of two-and-a-half screws with a total of 58 screws. Two surgical techniques were used: 13 (57%) patients received nails in the semi-extended position, while 10 (43%) patients received medial parapatellar nails in the supine position ( Besides the 7 patients lost to follow-up, all 23 patients (100%) achieved bony union at a mean time of 14.1 Complications were minimal. One patient exhibited non-union of the tibial shaft component of the fracture, required bone grafting and subsequently went on to union at 28 weeks. Only one patient (smoker) exhibited superficial wound drainage, which only required a short course of intravenous antibiotics. Two were diagnosed with deep infections (one was an open fracture). These patients required multiple I&Ds and one of them needed a latissimus flap. One patient was diagnosed with deep vein thrombosis and another patient's distal screws were removed because they were symptomatic ( To our knowledge, this is the first report summarising the use of IMN in the treatment of simple pilon fractures, not used in the setting of salvage and/or fusion. Traditionally, definitive fixation of pilon fractures is performed via ORIF, using low-profile plates and not IM nails. Comparisons to the data concerning IMN for the treatment of extra-articular distal tibial fractures also yield similar conclusions. Vallier et al. who treated 76 AO/OTA type 42 fractures with IMN noted a 5.3% infection rate, a 6.6% non-union rate and a 29% malunion rate. However, despite comparable results to the literature in both treatment settings, our study is not without its limitations. Foremost, our relatively small case series with data collected in a retrospective fashion is obviously subject to bias. A prospective, randomised trial or even a prospective, case-comparative design with validated functional outcome measurements with an objective range of motion data along with rates of postoperative knee pain would offer higher-level evidence. Second, with only 1-year minimum follow-up, the incidence of posttraumatic arthritis and other complications was not tabulated. However, despite these limitations, we argue that this initial data cohort offers another alternative to treating lower-grade type 43C1–C2 fractures with the ability to achieve anatomic reduction with low complication rates while offering added load distribution via the use of an IM device. Offering another surgical option, there is the potential to improve future patient outcomes. Finally, it is important to note that these operations were performed by experienced, fellowship-trained orthopaedic traumatologists who, with their experience, have the ability to precisely add non-IM, free screws to the distal bony architecture in order to achieve further anatomic reduction; in less experienced hands, this may not be done without a steep learning curve ( In conclusion, IMN is a reasonable treatment option for lower-grade AO/OTA type 43C1–C2 fractures, with the ability to achieve anatomic reduction with low complication rates. However, experienced hands may be necessary to reproduce our excellent results. Prospective, randomised trials along with longer-term follow-up are necessary in order to definitively assess the efficacy of this treatment method for this particular fracture pattern. None declared.