This study was conducted to establish the possible application of bioleaching to recover valuable metals from the sulfidic tailing of Golgohar Iron Mine (Kerman, Iran). Shake flask leaching experiments were carried out in the presence of a mixed culture of moderately thermopilic microorganisms at a stirring rate of 150rpm and a temperature of 45°C, with the addition of yeast extract (%0.02 (w/w). The influence of bacterial inoculation, pH, nutrient medium type and pulp density on the recovery of copper, nickel and cobalt from the tailing was investigated. The results showed that 55.0% of copper, 98.2% of nickel and 59.5% of cobalt could be extracted from the tailing through the bioleaching process after 30days at 5% (w/v) pulp density. The recovery of valuable metals from the tailing in the presence of microorganisms was approximately three times higher than that in the un-inoculated leaching experiment under similar conditions. It was also found that the recovery of copper at the initial pH of 1.2 was 17% higher than that at the pH of 1.8, while nickel and cobalt recoveries were 37% and 23% more at the pH of 1.8, respectively. It was also revealed that the recoveries of valuable metals were approximately similar in both 9K and Norris nutrient media. Moreover, the results showed that in both nutrient media, copper recovery at the higher pulp density was significantly higher than that at the lower pulp density; this was mainly attributed to the lower redox potential. On the other hand, nickel and cobalt recoveries were higher at the lower pulp density, probably due to the higher redox potential values. A two-stage bioleaching process in which the redox potential is controlled at a low level in the primary reactors, followed by the secondary reactors with a high redox potential is supposed to achieve the maximum recovery of valuable metals.Due to the depletion of high-grade and simple ores, the growing demand for valuable metals and the development of new hydrometallurgical technologies, extensive efforts have been made to recover valuable metals from low-grade ores and tailings. These lean materials can account for up to three quarters of the total reserves of certain metals ( Golgohar Iron Ore (Kerman Province, Iran) is one of the largest deposits in Iran with a probable reserve of 1350 Bioleaching has a great potential to recover valuable metals from low grade, polymetallic and complex sulfide ores due to its technical ability, relative simplicity, environmentally eco-friendly process and low capital and operational cost requirements ( Recently, several investigations on the extraction of copper, cobalt and nickel from low grade sulfide ores have been reported ( Bioleaching of low-grade and complex copper–nickel–cobalt bearing sulfidic tailings was not found in the technical literature. Such a material could be considered as a good candidate to supply the related metals in the future. Hence, in the present study, a low-grade copper–nickel–cobalt bearing sulfidic tailing from Golgohar Iron Complex was subjected to shake flask bioleaching by a mixed culture of iron- and sulfur-oxidizing moderately thermophilic microorganisms. The aim of the present research was to assess the amenability of bioleaching to recover valuable metals from the tailing and also, to investigate the influence of some chemical and operational parameters on the process efficiency. A sulfidic tailing obtained from the floated portion of reverse flotation cells in Hematite Recovery Plant (HRP) of Golgohar Iron Complex (Kerman province, Iran) was used in experiments. Chemical analysis of the representative sample by ICP-OES showed 0.16% of Cu, 0.078% of Ni and 0.044% of Co ( Further mineralogical analysis was conducted using an electron probe micro-analyzer (EPMA). A mixed culture of iron- and sulfur‐oxidizing microorganisms, including Bioleaching experiments were conducted in 500 During the experiments, the difference between the concentration of each ion in the solution and its initial concentration was accounted as what was leached from the solid tailing. Bioleaching progress was monitored by measuring soluble metals, pH and the redox potential. In order to evaluate the replicability of the bioleaching experiments, the test conducted in nutrient medium Norris, the pulp density of 5% (w/v), the initial pH of 1.8 and the temperature of 45 In order to evaluate the effect of microorganism inoculation on the extraction of metals, an abiotic sterile test was performed at 5% pulp density, an initial pH of 1.8 and a temperature of 45 Samples of 5 Evaporation loss was measured by a weighting flask and then compensated by adding distilled water to the slurry before sampling. At the end of the experiments, solids were filtered from leach solution samples through Whatman No. 41 filter paper. The residues were washed with acidified distilled water (pH All reagents used in this study were of analytical grade. Distilled water was used in all experiments. The inoculation effect of a mixed culture of iron‐and sulfur‐oxidizing moderately thermophilic microorganisms on the extraction of copper, cobalt, nickel and iron was investigated at the pulp density of 5% (w/v), the initial pH of 1.8 and the nutrient medium of modified 9K. The variations of pH and redox potential during leaching experiments in the un-inoculated and inoculated media are presented in  In the biotic medium, bacteria could oxidize the insoluble metal sulfides by contact and/or non-contact mechanisms ( In order to investigate the influence of the initial pH on the bioleaching of the iron concentrator sulfidic tailing, experiments were performed at the initial pH values of 1.2 and 1.8, and the pulp density of 10% (w/v) in Norris nutrient medium with the addition of 0.02% (w/v) yeast extract ( Nickel and cobalt recoveries at the initial pH of 1.8 were higher (37% and 23%, respectively) than those at the initial pH of 1.2. At higher pH, a higher redox potential was recorded. According to the EPMA analysis( A group of Canadian researchers ( In addition, the driving force in the leaching of most metal sulfides is determined by the difference in the rest potential of the minerals present, and the redox potential of the leaching solution. As mentioned, the optimum efficiency of chalcopyrite leaching occurs at low values of redox potential around 420 Another strategy is the agglomeration of the tailing with a coarse reject and the use of heap bioleaching to recover the valuable metals. This strategy is now under investigation. Controlling the redox potential could be carried out by changing the mass transfer rate of oxygen through regulating the stirring rate or injecting air flow rate into the tanks. In order to evaluate the replicability of bioleaching experiments, the test conducted in Norris nutrient medium, 5% (w/v) pulp density, the initial pH of 1.8 and the temperature of 45 In addition, solid residues obtained from two bioleaching experiments performed in the 9K nutrient medium, the initial pH of 1.8 and the leaching time of 30 Microorganisms require nutrients for their metabolism and biosynthesis ( The effect of nutrient medium (9K and Norris) on the recoveries of copper, nickel, cobalt and iron at the pulp density of 10% and the initial pH of 1.8 is presented in The influence of pulp density on the recovery of valuable metals from the sulfidic tailing was investigated by performing bioleaching experiments at the pulp densities of 5% and 10% in both the Norris and 9K nutrient media. It should be noted that the increased pulp density generally led to a prolonged lag phase period (the time required to adapt microorganisms to the bioleaching medium), decreasing the bio-oxidation rate and decreasing the ultimate extent of oxidation. The bioleaching of valuable metals from the sulfidic tailing of Golgohar Iron Complex was investigated in the presence of a mixed culture of iron-and sulfur-oxidizing moderately thermophilic microorganisms and the following results were achieved. The recovery of copper, nickel and cobalt from the sulfidic tailing in the presence of microorganisms was approximately three times higher than that in the un-inoculated control leaching experiment. The results also showed that 55.0% of copper, 98.2% of nickel and 59.5% of cobalt could be extracted from the tailing by the bioleaching process after 30 It was also found that the recovery of copper at the pH of 1.2 was 17% higher than that at the pH of 1.8. This behavior was attributed to the high leaching rate of chalcopyrite at low values of redox potential around 400 to 450 Results also showed that the recoveries of valuable metals had approximately the same values in both 9K and Norris nutrient media. At 10% pulp density and the pH of 1.8, copper recovery was progressively increased throughout the experiments, while the recovery of nickel and cobalt leveled off after the first week of the experiments. This behavior could be attributed to the relatively low redox potential value, which was favorable for chalcopyrite leaching and undesirable for the leaching of nickel and cobalt sulfide minerals. It was also found that in both nutrient media, copper recovery at 10% pulp density was significantly higher than that at 5% pulp density, while nickel and cobalt recoveries were higher at the lower pulp density, probably due to the higher redox potential value at 5% pulp density. A two stage bioleaching process was proposed to maximize metal recovery from the tailing in continuous stirred tank reactors. It is recommended that in the first stage, the redox potential is controlled in primary reactors at low values of redox potential about 420 The authors gratefully acknowledge the financial support from