Ceria-praseodimia nanotubes (Ce0.8Pr0.2O2−δ
                     –NT) have been synthesized for the first time employing a template-based electrodeposition method inside the pores of anodic aluminum oxide (AAO) membranes. Various electron microscopy techniques such as Field Emission Gun Scanning Electron Microscopy (FEG-SEM), Scanning Transmission Electron Microscopy working in High Angle Annular Dark-Field mode (STEM-HAADF), High Resolution Transmision Electron Microscopy (HRTEM), Energy-dispersive X-ray Spectroscopy (X-EDS), Electron Energy Loss Spectroscopy (EELS) and Energy Filtered Transmision Electron Microscopy (EFTEM) have been used to characterise the morphology, structure and chemical composition of the nanotubes. The results indicate that nanotubes are formed by nanocrystals of cerium and praseodymium mixed oxide. Furthermore, the system Ce0.8Pr0.2O2−δ
                     –NT/AAO shows a better performance in the CO oxidation reaction than both powdered Ce0.8Pr0.2O2−δ
                      prepared by conventional methods and CeO2–NT/AAO. These results have been discussed and related to the synergistic effect of doping and nanostructuration of CeO2.The presence of electrons in the 4f subshell lends the lanthanide elements remarkable electronic, structural, and magnetic properties which have attracted much interest both in fundamental research and in applied sciences The redox behaviour of ceria can be improved by means of two approaches. On one hand, transition metals (specially Zr) or lanthanide elements (Pr, Tb,) have been traditionally added to CeO In the present work, Pr-doped CeO A template-based electrodeposition method was employed to synthesize the nanotubes following a procedure similar to that previously reported in  The as-prepared nanomaterials were characterized by means of XRD using a Bruker D8 ADVANCE diffractometer (CuKα radiation). FEG-SEM images of the nanotubes and X-EDS spectra were acquired in a FEI SIRION microscope equipped with a EDAX Phoenix system. STEM-HAADF images, HREM images and DDPs were obtained in a JEOL2010F microscope equipped with an HAADF detector, working at 200 The morphological information was obtained analysing FEG-SEM and STEM-HAADF images. A structural characterisation was accomplished using XRD patterns, HREM images and their corresponding DDPs. Finally, X-EDS and EELS spectra were studied to elucidate the chemical composition of the samples. The catalytic activity of the nanotubes/membrane system, namely Ce   In In order to characterize further the structure of the nanotubes, HREM images were acquired and corresponding digital diffraction patterns (DDPs) were generated calculating the fast Fourier transform of the images or parts of them. HREM images in The HREM results just described agree with XRD patterns, this indicating that Pr fully incorporates to the CeO  Further quantitative X-EDS-STEM analysis carried out in spot mode with a subnanometer electron probe allowed us stablising the following molar contents: 75 To gain more detailed information about the chemical composition of the nanotubes, an STEM-EELS study was carried out using a 0.5 These EEL spectra have also allowed us estabilishing in qualitative terms the oxidation state of Ce and Pr  The results of the CO oxidation essays carried out on the synthesized nanotubes and the corresponding reference materials are plotted in According to As shown in Regarding with the effects of Pr-doping on the catalytic activity of the nanotubes, the characterization work presented in this paper clearly proves that Pr incorporates into the fluorite ceria matrix in the form of a solid solution which present an homogeneous composition along the tube structure. The co-existence of Ce(III)/Ce(IV) and Pr(III) ions in the nanotubes, predicted by the literature and confirmed by our EELS studies, gives rise to a higher concentration of oxygen vacancies related to Pr(III) which can eventually lead to an improved oxygen mobility in the mixed oxide with respect to that of the pure ceria nanotubes The differences between the nanostructured materials, those in the form of nanotubes, and those in the form of powders require a more in depth analysis. Although this issue is still challenging, a detailed review of the literature suggests that some features of the peculiar nanostructuration reached by the template-assisted electrodeposition method used in this work could have a significant contribution to the improvement in catalytic performance. Firstly, nanosized crystallites may exhibit quantum-size effects. In fact, it has been found recently that small clusters of Ce Given that the nanostructural features of pure ceria and ceria–praseodimia nanotubes are fairly the same, our data prove that the addition of praseodimium during the electrodeposition process results in materials with significantly improved catalytic performance. Cerium-praseodymium mixed oxide nanotubes have been prepared and characterized for the first time. A convenient and fast synthesis method based on electrodeposition inside the pores of anodic alumina oxide templates has been employed. The samples obtained have been characterized morphologically, chemically and structurally by means of various electron microscopy techniques. The main results of this characterization work show that the samples are nanotubes formed by cerium–praseodymium mixed oxide nanocrystals (1–5 The catalytic activity of the samples prepared and those of other reference materials were evaluated and discussed. Although there are ongoing studies to understand in more details the catalytic performance of the oxide-NT/AAO systems, some conclusions can be claimed so far. Thus, the CO oxidation reaction at 200 This work has received financial support from MICINN-FEDER (Proj. Ref. CSD2009-00013 and MAT2008-00889-NAN). J.J. Delgado and X. Chen thank the Junta de Andalucía (Proj. Ref. FQM-3994). X. Chen acknowledges the Ramón y Cajal program from Spanish Ministry of Science and Innovation. Electron microscopy data were obtained at DME-SCCyT UCA.