In the present study, we have investigated the influence of aging heat treatments on the microstructure, mechanical properties and shape memory effect on a spray-formed Cu-Al-Ni-Mn alloy with minor Nb additions. The samples were homogenized and subsequently aged at distinct temperatures in order to obtain different microstructures and structural ordering states. The effects of aging heat treatment on the initial microstructure and on mechanical properties were evaluated. Also, shape memory effect was tested in terms of recovery strain Ɛemf (%), residual strain Ɛr (%) and recovery ratio (R) in different thermomechanical conditions. The compressive fracture stress reached 1400 MPa with a fracture elongation of 19% for the sample with microstructure composed of the austenite β, martensite β’ and the intermetallic AlNb3. For the same condition, the recovery strain was 1,76% and recovery ratio was 42%. Furthermore, it is proposed one mechanism based on the hampering of the phase transformation by Nb rich precipitates. It can be considered as a new route to improve mechanical property, ductility and the shape memory effect at the same time.With the advance of the smart devices technology, functional materials have become essential in many different applications, such as actuators, biomedical devices, sensors, aerospace and automotive devices [ Cu-based shape memory alloys, such as Cu-Al-Ni, Cu-Al-Ni-Mn and Cu-Al-Mn, have been studied by many groups due to their ease of process and low cost if compared with the commercial NiTi [ Some improvements in mechanical and functional properties have been achieved so far. In previous works, we showed that Cu-Al-Ni-Mn alloy with a small addition of Nb produced by spray-forming resulted in a maximum recovery strain of around 1% when subjected to 690 MPa, with a recovery ratio of 73%, in the as-sprayed condition [ The shape memory alloy with nominal composition Cu-11.35Al-3.2Ni-3Mn-0.5Nb (wt %) was prepared by spray-forming from high purity elements (>99.9%). Details of the process are found in previous work [ The microstructures were observed using an optical microscope (Leica Microsystems DM 2500 M), scanning electron microscope (SEM, FEG with Nanofabrication System FIB - Quanta FEG 3D FEI), transmission electron microscope (TEM, JEOL 2000FX, at 200 kV) and X-ray diffraction (XRD, PANalytical Empyrean) in operating conditions of 2θ: 20°–90°; Step: 0.02°; time per step: 1 s. In order to check the transformation temperatures, differential scanning calorimetric analysis (DSC) was performed at a rate of 20 °C/min in a 200 F3 NETZSCH calorimeter. The mechanical tests were carried out by Vickers hardness measurements and compression test. Vickers hardness tests were performed in all heat treatment conditions on a Future Tech, FM-700 Model using load of 500 gf for 10 s. The compression tests were performed in a Shimadzu, AGS-X Series High Capacity Model with a crosshead speed of 0.5 mm/min on three pre-determined conditions: (1) homogenized at 800 °C for 30 min followed water quenching (#HT); (2) homogenized at 800 °C for 30 min followed water quenching and aging at 450 °C for 1 h (#T450); (3) homogenized at 800 °C for 30 min followed water quenching and aging at 550 °C for 1 h (#T550). The same specimens used on compression tests were used for shape memory effect testing. SME was evaluated with different pre-stress applied on the samples (800, 1000 and 1200 MPa) before fracture. They were analyzed based on the original sample length (h  In order to homogenize the microstructure and dissolve any reminiscent phase in the matrix, a homogenization heat treatment was performed at 800 °C for 30 min in the β field of the Cu-Al-Ni equilibrium phase diagram. After the homogenization, the samples were quenched to avoid equilibrium phase's precipitation. Thereby, the equilibrium eutectoid decomposition β → α + γ was avoided. Then, only the monoclinic martensite β′ could be seen by x-ray diffraction, as shown in In the sequence, the samples were aged at four different temperatures in order to change the microstructure by nucleating other phases than β’ and changing the structural ordering state. Both events are known to improve the strength of shape memory alloys. As the final reverse transformation temperature A  Consequently, the Nb rich precipitates within the grain boundaries may hamper the phase transformation. This hypothesis is corroborated with the analysis of SEM and EDS, which revealed for the presence of a phase rich in Nb and Al in the grain boundary. The percentage (in weight) of elements exhibits 2.7% of Nb within the grain boundary, in contrast with 0% inside the grain. The grain boundary percentage of Al is 16.5% versus 8.8% inside the grain. This result is a strong indication that a phase rich in Nb and Al may have been formed within the grain boundaries. In order to estimate changes in the mechanical strength of the material after the heat treatments, Vickers hardness measurements were performed in the samples, as shown in As can be observed from the DSC curve, the metastable austenite β decomposes into the equilibrium eutectoid phases above 450 °C, as pointed out by number 3 in the DSC analysis in The compression tests, shown in  As we could observe by X-ray diffraction, the heat treatment induced the formation of β phases and a fraction of it does not transform back into the martensite β’ during cooling (forward transformation), as would be expected for the present alloy. Together with the β phase, the intermetallic AlNb Considering the exposed facts, we propose a new mechanism in order to explain the better ε Consequently, when the heat treatment aiming the shape recovery is performed, all the martensite present in the microstructure transforms back into austenite β. Thus, the pre-existing martensite present in the microstructure and the stress induced martensite transforms into the austenite β. As the amount of detwinned martensite is greater due to the present of the stress induced ones, the shape memory effect is more pronounced. After cooling, the same phases than the compressed one are present, as shown in The microstructure of spray-formed Cu-Al-Ni-Mn alloy with Nb additions can be changed by heat treatments in the austenitic field. Mechanical and functional properties were affected by the microstructural changes by tailoring the presence of the metastable phases. It was found here one new mechanism to explain a better recovery strain in the sample with the highest amount of austenite β. When subjected to compression, stress induced martensite has been formed, but retained when the stress was released. The reason for the retained austenite may be the precipitation of Nb rich phases, supposedly AlNb This work was funded by