We investigated the influence of a salt solution on the flotation behaviour of synthetic malachite using a sodium oleate as a collector. We found that the floatability of oleate ions-adsorbed synthetic malachite monotonically increases with an increase in the overall ionic strength (IS) range (1–1000mM) of the monovalent cation (Na+), while the floatability sharply increases only up to a level of 30mM of the divalent cation (Ca2+), followed by decreased floatability with further increases in the IS. For a monovalent salt, Na+ ions effectively screen a negatively charged bubble surface, reducing the energy barrier for attachment and thus increasing floatability. Moreover, electrophoretic mobility measurements revealed that oleate ions-adsorbed synthetic malachite is negatively charged in a NaCl solution while it is positively charged in a CaCl2 solution over the entire IS, indicating the specific adsorption of Ca2+ ions onto the surface of oleate ions-adsorbed synthetic malachite in a CaCl2 solution. This surface charge reversal in the CaCl2 solution suggests that electrostatic interaction between positively charged oleate ions-adsorbed synthetic malachite and a negatively charged bubble is attractive, yielding high flotation efficiency. The increased floatability of both the entire IS of NaCl and a low IS of CaCl2 can be well explained by the extended DLVO theory. At a high IS (100–1000mM) of CaCl2, however, the decreased floatability did not follow the extended DLVO prediction, implying that additional non-DLVO type interactions are likely to be involved. Direct contact angle measurements and an inductively coupled plasma (ICP) analysis with the electrophoretic mobility measurements revealed that this unusual flotation behaviour is likely due to the hydration layer by the hydrated Ca2+ adsorption onto oleate ions-adsorbed synthetic malachite.Flotation is one of the most widely used techniques to recover a useful resource in mineral processing. This technique typically uses water as a medium during the process, and it is well known that the water quality considerably affects the flotation efficiency ( During the flotation process, the most important step is the attachment of minerals to the bubble surface, as the interaction between mineral particles and the bubble determines overall efficiency of the process. Unfortunately, this interaction is extremely complex. Moreover, there are some types of interactions involved, including electrostatic, van der Waals, hydrophobic, capillary, and hydrodynamic interactions ( Electrolyte solutions typically change both mineral particle and bubble surfaces ( In contrast, other studies observed decreased floatability with a saline solution. Several groups have suggested that metal hydroxide precipitations would form due to dissolved ions, thus decreasing floatability ( In this study, to advance our understanding of the roles of electrolytes in flotation and to gain useful information regarding the use of saline water in a flotation process, we systematically study the effects of salt solutions for concentrations on three orders of magnitude (1–1000 Synthetic malachite (CuCO According to previous literature, the raw ores including malachite are highly deposited with silica ( To assess the influence of changes in the electrostatic force on the surface properties and flotation behaviours of synthetic malachite, changes were made to the ionic strength (IS) and ion valence (IV). Sodium chloride (NaCl) and calcium chloride (CaCl The collector adsorption of synthetic malachite was carried out using SO. 1 The electrophoretic mobility of synthetic malachite was measured using the ELS-Z system (Otsuka, Japan). To measure the mobility, a raw synthetic malachite sample from a bottle was further ground using a mortar to obtain a smaller size (< To investigate the hydrophobicity of the oleate ions-adsorbed synthetic malachite surface on the solution chemistry (i.e., IS and IV), flat synthetic malachite was prepared using a compressor (DSP-5, Yujin Co., South Korea). Briefly, the flat synthetic malachite was mixed with a 2 To identify the flotation behaviour of oleate ions-adsorbed synthetic malachite, a Hallimond tube that was made specifically for this study was used to perform the flotation tests. For all tests, the following identical conditions were used: 1 To verify the concentration on the desorption of oleate ions from oleate ions-adsorbed synthetic malachite surface according to changes in the solution chemistry (i.e., IS and IV), the surface tension of the SO concentration was measured using a tensiometer (DST60, SEO, South Korea). 1 In order to investigate the adsorptive amounts of sodium and calcium ions onto the oleate ions-adsorbed synthetic malachite surface according to changes in the IS (1–1000 Here, Before investigating the effects of IS and IV on the flotation behaviour of oleate ions-adsorbed synthetic malachite, we initially measured the zeta potential of raw and oleate ions-adsorbed synthetic malachite to understand their surface charges.  The extended DLVO theory can explain this increased floatability (  Previous studies showed that Ca Another possible mechanism explaining the observed low flotation efficiency for a high IS (100–1000 According to previous studies, unlike typical cations that are usually only responsible for screening surface charges, some hydrated cations in solutions have strong affinity to solid surface, leading to the reorganization of the surface and eventually modifying particle-bubble interactions. This is termed the hydration force ( This hydration presumably takes place in our system due to the high IS (100–1000  The low ISs (1–30 Direct contact angle measurements between oleate ions-adsorbed synthetic malachite and bubble should provide clear evidence of whether the hydration layers exist, as they make the surface hydrophilic. To check this, the synthetic malachite surface was compressed into a pellet and treated with 2 Direct contact angle measurements between oleate ions-adsorbed synthetic malachite and bubble should provide clear evidence of whether the hydration layers exist, as they make the surface hydrophilic. To check this, the synthetic malachite surface was compressed into a pellet and treated with 2 In summary, we systematically investigate the effects of salt on the floatability of synthetic malachite with adsorbed oleate ions. A monovalent salt, NaCl, and a divalent salt, CaCl To the best of our knowledge, this is the first systematic investigation of both monovalent and divalent salts at various concentrations. Our findings provide useful information in terms of solution chemistry during flotation; in general, increasing the salt concentration helps to increase the flotation efficiency; thus, the use of seawater instead of deionized or distilled water would be advantageous, facilitating mineral adsorption onto bubbles. However, the use of divalent salts, in particular those that strongly form hydration layers, should be used with care, as they would significantly decrease the floatability. Therefore, seawater, which has many types of divalent ions, should be used with caution, despite the fact that their concentrations are relatively low. We believe that our finding can be generalized for other monovalent and divalent ions, especially for oxide minerals, as they are known to have similar surface properties. This would be extremely helpful in the efforts to optimize various flotation processes. The following is the supplementary data related to this article. Supplementary data to this article can be found online at This work was supported by the