Isolated and combined damaging effects of PbO and CuO nanoparticles were estimated on an established line of human fibroblasts by a decrease in: (a) the cellular dehydrogenase activity (MTT Assay), (b) the ATP content (Luminescent Cell Viability Assay), (c) the cellular proliferation, viability, spreading, and attachment to substrate evaluated integrally by continuous impedance-based measurement of the Normalized Cell Index. Using all these indices, we demonstrate an explicit dependence of cell damage on the concentrations of both metal oxide nanoparticle (MeO-NP) species. This dependence is adequately approximated with a hyperbolic function. At equal exposure levels, PbO-NP and CuO-NP demonstrate quantitatively similar cytotoxicities. The same was observed previously for some non-specific in vivo toxicity measures. The combined in vitro cytotoxicity has also been described mathematically using the Response Surface Methodology and found to be represented by various types, thus corroborating, in this respect also, the findings of a previous animal experiment with the same MeO-NPs.Nanoparticles (NP) of metals (Me-NP) and especially of their oxides (MeO-NP) are of special interest in the light of health risk assessment and management because, along with so-called engineered NPs having many important technical, agronomical and medical uses Meantime, while most of the published research in the field of nanotoxicology has been performed For that study, we chose Mn We do realize, however, that the above statements might appear too categorical given a restricted actual experience they are derived from, and that the problem under consideration is important enough to be delved deeper. It should be stressed that experimental modeling of real-life exposure scenarios For our new study, we have chosen the pair CuO-NP and PbO-NP, which is characteristic of condensation aerosols polluting air in and around copper smelters and copper fire refineries In the recent literature, extensive data is available for toxicological characterization of CuO–NP, obtained on different experimental models Regrettably, we have not yet found an adequate For this experiment, we prepared suspensions of MeO-NPs by laser ablation of 99.9% pure metal targets under deionized water (for technical details, see Katsnelson et al, 2015). The concentration of the suspensions was increased to 0.5 mg/mL by partial evaporation of the primary suspensions for 5 h at 50 °C. A scanning electron microscope (SEM), Cross Beam Workstation Auriga (Carl Zeiss, Germany), was used for the visualization of the nanoparticles. The NPs in both suspensions were of spherical shape The absence of any noticeable changes in the zeta potential as well as in the shape and position of the plasmon resonance peak two weeks after suspension preparation confirmed the satisfactory stability of the suspensions. The experiments were performed on a FLECH-104 cell line of human lung-derived embryonic fibroblasts from the bank of cell cultures by BioloT Ltd., Saint Petersburg, Russia. It presents a monolayer culture of fibroblast-like cells obtained from the lungs of an eight-week human embryo. The cell culture was kept at 37°С under an atmosphere of 5% СО The cells were seeded on a 96-well plate (TPP Techno Plastic Products AG, Trasadingen, Switzerland) for testing the dehydrogenase activity or ATP content, and on an 8-well plate (ACEA Biosciences, San Diego, California, USA) for determining the cell index, 70 000 cells per well in 100 μL of the medium and were incubated under an atmosphere of 5% CO The cytotoxic effect of such incubation was estimated quantitatively by three indices: the ATP content of the culture as per the luminescent signal, dehydrogenase activity in the МТТ-assay, and determination of the Normalized Cell Index. The ATP bioluminescent assay was performed using CellTiter-Glo reagents (Promega Corporation, U.S.A.). The work solution was obtained by reduction of lyophilized CellTiter-Glo Substrate in CellTiter-Glo Buffer and heating on a water bath to room temperature. A 100 μL of this solution was added in each well. Then the plate was rotated for 2 min in one plane to cause cell lysis. Upon incubation at room temperature for 10 min, cell luminance was measured with the help of an LM-01T luminometer with Kilia software (Immunotech, Beckman Coulter Company, Praha, Czech Republic). Measurement results were presented in relative luminescence units (RLU). Dehydrogenase activity was determined by the МТТ-assay using the yellow tetrazolium dye 3-(4,5-dimethylthiazol-2-yl)-2,5-diphenyltetrazolium bromide (Sigma Aldrich, St. Louis, Missouri, U.S.A.), which is reduced in live cells to purple formazan. The dissolving component was dimethyl sulfoxide (DMSO). We added 20 μL of the dye at a concentration of 5 mg/mL in each well with cells and incubated for 2 h. After this, all of the medium was removed from the plates, and 100 μL of DMSO was added in each well to dissolve the formazan crystals. Optical density was measured by a spectrophotometer, Epoch™ (BioTek, Winooski, Vermont, U.S.A.), at a wavelength of 490 nm. The results were calculated by the formula: Dehydrogenase activity (%) = 100 * (А490nm sample – А490nm blank)/(А490nm control – А490nm blank), where А490nm is the optical density of a sample at a wavelength of 490 nm, blank is the culture medium, for determining the culture medium background, The cell index was estimated on an RTCA iCELLigence™ real-time cell analyzer by ACEA Biosciences, San Diego, California, U.S.A. This instrument uses biosensor electrodes submersed in each individual well. Cells adhere to the surface of the electrode and act as an insulator, increasing electrical impedance Normalized Cell Index (NCI(t)) is calculated as the Cell Index (CI) at a given time point t (CI(t)) divided by the Cell Index at the selected normalization time point (CI(t NCI The results were first processed to construct functions approximating the dependence of the cytotoxic effect on the dose of СuO-NP or PbO-NP. Preliminary visual assessment of the plots for the most adequate model suggested choosing a linear Y = b As well as in our previous works on combined toxicity (Varaksin et al., 2014; Katsnelson et al., 2015a; 2015b; The regression equation describing the response surface Y = Y (x Actual experimental values were employed to obtain Equation Theoretically, a quantitative relationship between the magnitude (specifically, toxicant dose or concentration) of an assumingly damaging impact on a living system and the value of some index of this system's status is an important argument in favor of the assumption that a shift in this index could be attributed to this impact. At the same time, analysis of dose-effect or dose-response relationships is of practical importance both in terms of health risk assessment and management and from the perspective of experimental toxicology for selecting a range of doses within which to conduct further investigations. For instance, it seems most reasonable to model the combined cytotoxicity of two MeO-NP species on a cell culture using the concentrations of each of them acting alone which are explicitly effective according to the toxic effect's index used, whereby even a relatively small increase in the concentration increases the shift in this index considerably. The first step in our study was, therefore, experimental and mathematical modeling of one factor dose-response dependencies for each of the three cytotoxicity indices used. The results of this step are shown graphically in We can see that in each of the three cytotoxicity tests the dose-response dependence under consideration displayed the same common pattern for both CuO-NP and PbO-NP. This conclusion is now even more unequivocal than when it was based on the previous experiments ( Indeed, as follows from the isobolograms obtained with the help of the Response Surface Method ( It should be emphasized that in a whole range of Out of the multitude of isobolograms, we show in On the whole, in the subchronic animal experiment under consideration the isobolograms of the type shown in Thus, the variability of the typology of combined cytotoxic action displayed by CuO-NP and PbO-NP With regard to the case considered in this paper, we can also hypothesize that the similarity of the combined toxicity types determined by the МТТ-assay and NCI ( 1. Separate damaging effects of PbO and CuO nanoparticles as estimated on an established line of human fibroblast-like cells using three different cytotoxicity indices are similarly dose-dependent. In a practically possible range of nanoparticle concentrations, this dependence can be adequately approximated with the hyperbolic function. 2. At equal exposure levels, the cytotoxicity of PbO-NP compared with that of CuO-NP was found to be quantitatively rather similar, as previously observed by 3. The combined The following is the Supplementary data to this article: Supplementary data to this article can be found online at