Amorphous ribbons of the alloy Fe73.5Cu1Nb3−x
                     Mo
                        x
                     Si13.5B9 (x=1, 2, 3) were prepared by the standard single copper wheel melt spinning technique in air atmosphere. The isothermal annealing was carried out at 550, 570 and 590°C for 1h in a vacuum furnace to study the effect of annealing temperature on the formation of nanocrystallite in as-spun ribbons. The X-ray diffraction (XRD) technique was used to analyse the grain size of the crystalline phase in the annealed samples. It was found that for samples annealed at 590°C for 1h, the average grain size increased from 13nm for the sample with x=1 to 16nm for the sample with x=3. The primary crystallization kinetics of amorphous ribbons was analyzed by non-isothermal differential scanning calorimetry (DSC) measurements. The crystallization activation energies of amorphous ribbons calculated by using Kissinger model were 347, 297 and 326kJ/mol for x=1, 2 and 3, respectively. The calculated Avrami exponents n were 1.95, 2.14 and 2.00 for x=1, 2 and 3, respectively. The crystallization mechanism for the non-isothermal primary crystallization of the amorphous ribbons was discussed.The magnetic properties of Fe-based nanocrystalline alloys have been extensively studied since Yoshizawa et al. The understanding of the crystallization kinetics in these materials is of great scientific interest for two crucial reasons. Firstly, in the case of amorphous alloys that exhibit excellent magnetic properties, the crystallization kinetics represents a limit at which these properties begin to deteriorate. Therefore, thermal stability determines the magnetic stability of the materials in the amorphous phase. Secondly, in the case of alloys with a nanocrystalline/amorphous matrix structure that exhibit excellent magnetic properties, controlling the crystallization kinetics provides an ability to tailor the microstructure. The amount of the nanocrystalline phase formed within the matrix can be controlled to achieve the desired magnetic performance. Additionally, models of the crystallization from the metastable amorphous state to the stable crystalline state depend on various parameters such as composition, concentration of nucleation sites, diffusion coefficients, activation energy for diffusion, etc. The investigation of crystallization kinetics will be beneficial for understanding the thermal behaviors and for optimizing the fabrication process in industry. Although the Finemet alloy exhibits excellent soft magnetic properties, it has not gained wide applications as expected. One of the reasons is the high price of Nb. Therefore, a number of studies have been made to investigate the effects of replacing Nb by transition metals and other elements on soft magnetic properties and crystallization kinetics, but no significant improvements have been reported The Fe  The XRD patterns after annealing at 550, 570 and 590  The activation energy ( The crystallization kinetics of the amorphous Finemet alloy is usually described by the JMA equation In this study, the effect of substituting Nb by Mo on the crystallization kinetics of amorphous Fe This work was supported by