Controversy continues about the benefits and disadvantages of open reduction and internal fixation of fractures of the condylar head. Once a decision to treat surgically has been made, an appropriate method of fixation must be chosen. Standard titanium fixation has a number of complications, including the risk of protrusion of the screw beyond the condylar head and the possible need for removal later. Resorbable fixation is an alternative, and ultrasound-activated resorbable pins are a new innovation. We have treated a series of 15 patients with 17 fractures of the condylar head, in which the use of ultrasound-activated resorbable fixation has provided adequate strength and stability during early healing. Complications included technical difficulties in achieving complete anatomical reduction as a result of fragmentation of the condylar head, and three facial nerve palsies, two of which recovered within three months. No pins failed, and there was no sign of instability during healing.A number of studies have reported better functional outcomes with open reduction and internal fixation (ORIF) of fractures of the condylar head compared with non-surgical treatment, but this remains controversial in craniomaxillofacial traumatology. Miniplates and screws are difficult to use to fix these fractures because of the relative fragility of the proximal fragment, which may disintegrate further during drilling or placing screws, and there is also the technical difficulty of placing fixation that does not interfere with the articular surfaces of the condylar head itself. Kermer et al suggested bicortical miniscrews for the fixation of such fractures, and cannulated lag screws and headless bone screws have also been used. More recently the use of resorbable screws has been suggested, KLS Martin (Tuttlingen, Germany) developed a resorbable fixation system using ultrasound-activated poly D-L lactide pins rather than screws. The advantage over standard resorbable fixation systems is that the ultrasound-activated pins liquify and run into the bone, which avoids the compressive forces that are involved in the insertion of standard metal or resorbable fixation screws. This should minimise the risk of disintegration of fragments during fixation. It was initially used in animals, where it gave sufficient stability to the fragments to encourage its use in vivo. Abdel-Galil and Loukota Here we present a larger series of patients treated with ultrasound-activated resorbable pins to fix fractures of the condylar head. We examined specifically whether the technique provides adequate stability for healing fractures. Patients with either unilateral or bilateral fractures of the condylar head who were referred from the Emergency Department had computed tomographic (CT) scans to assess fully the type of fracture (described according to the classification by Loukota et al) and to ensure there were fragments suitable for fixation. Those with fractures that involved a loss of vertical height of the mandibular ramus (types B and C) were offered the option of non-surgical or surgical treatment after we had discussed the relative risks and benefits of each technique with the patient. Those who opted for surgical treatment had open reduction of the fracture using a preauricular approach and incision of the capsule at the posterolateral aspect of the condylar neck. The fracture is reduced with hooks anteriorly or posteriorly, or both, to pull the displaced fragment into alignment ( A special graduated drill, which is provided with the equipment ( The intra-articular disc is pulled medially by the proximal fragment of the condylar head, and is plicated to the retrodiscal tissue and lateral capsule with sutures, or reattached to the condylar neck with a Mitek Where there are additional fractures of the facial skeleton they are treated by standard ORIF using titanium mini-plates or, if there are fractures of the opposite condylar head, these are assessed and treated with the same protocol if appropriate. Postoperatively patients were advised to maintain a soft diet, but were not immobilised. They were reviewed after 1-2 weeks and at regular intervals until at least 3 months postoperatively. An orthopantogram and a posteroanterior view of the mandible were taken routinely immediately postoperatively ( The reduction of the fracture was recorded as good if the alignment of fragments was anatomical, or if there was less than 2 Complications such as haematoma, wound infection, and injury to the facial nerve were recorded. Fifteen patients with 17 fractures of the condylar head who were treated with the new protocol have now reached 3 months’ follow up. Their personal details and characteristics of the fractures are show in One patient had comminution of the neck of the condyle and titanium plates were placed on the same side as the pins to restore the height of the neck so that it could support the condylar head. Five other patients had more than one mandibular fracture ( In 8 fractures the reduction was deemed to be good and in the other 7 (including both bilateral cases) the reduction was deemed to be partial. In the patients where it was not possible to achieve full reduction of the fracture intra-operatively, this was predominantly because of comminution of the head. Although partial reduction and improved alignment of the condylar head was achieved there was some loss of the vertical ramus-condyle height. In the eight cases where the reduction was thought to be good, and in four of the seven in whom it was partial, the patients were able to achieve centric occlusion without interference, had close matching of wear facets, and stated that their occlusion felt normal. In none of the remaining three patients was a good reduction achieved. In one case there was a change in occlusion postoperatively. This was a 21-year-old woman with a unilateral type C fracture. The fragment of condylar head was comminuted, and although there seemed to be a good anatomical reduction, the stability was not good and there was only sufficient bone to place two pins. Postoperatively the occlusion was initially judged to be good, but at the 3 months’ follow up she felt that her occlusion had changed. Radiographically there was some change in the shape of the condylar head, which was thought to indicate early remodelling with shortening of the unstable fracture. Mean (range) interincisal distance at 3 months was 38 (30–45) mm. Three patients developed weakness of the facial nerve postoperatively, two of whom had bilateral fractures. These were more comminuted than the others and presumably greater traction was placed on the nerve during fixation. The third had a comminuted fracture of the condylar base on the same side as the fracture of the condylar head, and the weakness was thought to be the result of the extra traction that had been required to expose the condylar base fully. At three months, two patients had recovered completely and the third had shown improvement in function of the facial nerve. The need for treatment of fractures of the condylar head remains controversial, and we know of no high quality, randomised controlled trials that have examined outcomes. Ideally, to resolve the question about the benefit of ORIF of these fractures fully, a large, prospective, randomised, controlled trial that focussed on patient-related outcome measures would be required. Fractures of the condylar head were included in the trial of treatment of condyle fractures by Eckelt et al, but the number of these fractures was small and they made no subgroup analysis. Landes et al compared outcomes of treated and untreated undisplaced fractures of the condylar head in a prospective cohort study, with the choice of treatment being decided by the patient, and they reported on objective functional and anatomical outcomes rather than patient-related ones. The primary goal of ORIF of fractures of the condylar head is to restore the normal height of the posterior mandible, and to minimise the biomechanical disruption of mandibular–occlusal function. Full restoration of the fractured condylar head to its normal relations with the condylar neck in all three dimensions is technically difficult, particularly as there is often some fragmentation in the contact area. We think that restoration of the fragment to the closest possible position, and further restoration of the intracapsular disc to its normal relation with the condylar head, should give the best possible functional outcome. Our failure to achieve complete reduction in all cases was not related to the fixation technique that we used, but it did encourage maximum surface contact at the fracture to encourage bony union, and returned as much height as possible to the ramus-condyle complex, together with alignment of the condylar head within the articular fossa to maximise the function of the temporomandibular joint. Because of the many unresolved questions about the true benefit of ORIF of fractures of the condylar head, we think that it is important to discuss the indications, benefits, and risks fully with the patient to allow them to make an informed choice about treatment. The risks of ORIF of these fractures include general operative risks such as infection and bleeding, and specific risks such as injury to the facial nerve, reduced mouth opening, pain, malocclusion, and non-union. The risk of any of these should not be affected by the type of fixation used, and we had no more complications with this technique than with others. Additional complications related to fractures of the condylar head are the potential for fragmentation of the proximal fragment as a result of stresses applied when tightening the screw, and exposure of the fixation after condylar remodelling, which might interfere with the function of the joint or potentially erode the articular fossa. Clearly good initial fixation is of no benefit if it is not sufficiently strong to retain the function. During in vitro testing of these pins in pigs the mean shearing force was 310 A fixation device must also retain its stability during the period of bony healing. The stability of 50:50 poly (D-L) lactide compounds (as found in the Sonic Weld An early concern of using resorbable fixation was the risk of severe inflammatory reactions during the degradation process, but there have been no reports of serious problems with bony healing using the currently available ultrasound-activated 50:50 poly (D-L) lactide system. Pilling et al showed that the Sonic Pin system resulted in good tissue integration with no evidence of ultrasound-related alteration to the initial bony healing. The poly (D-L) lactide pins start to resorb within two months with no evidence of foreign body reaction or serious inflammatory response. Schneider et al showed in sheep that at three months there was complete bony healing with no signs of resorption or necrosis. The stability and remodelling of the fractures were also comparable to that after fixation with titanium pins. We conclude, in what is to our knowledge a larger series than has previously been published, that fixation of fractures of the condylar head with ultrasound-activated resorbable pins is stable. Technical problems arise mainly if the fracture is comminuted. In the only patients who developed any occlusal change postoperatively it was related to instability of the initial fixation. The question as to whether there are any late resorption reactions will require longer term follow up (which is in progress) and the true benefits of ORIF of these fractures will necessitate high-quality, randomised, controlled trials. Both authors have received honoraria for teaching. Not applicable.