Despite cyanidation currently being the conventional gold recovery process, researchers are looking for alternative methods for the recovery of gold from its sources without using cyanide. The current work attempts to study the recovery of gold from copper anode slime by means of a novel process utilizing magnetite nanoparticles (MNPs).
                  In this process, MNPs were first synthesized by the co-precipitation method, and the characterization of the product was then carried out using the X-ray diffraction (XRD), transmission electron microscopy (TEM), and vibration sample magnetometer (VSM) methods.
                  Thiourea solution was employed as leachant. All the gold content of copper anode slime was dissolved in thiourea solution and a positive complex of gold and thiourea was obtained as a result. At a pH value higher than the pH of point of zero charge (PZC), the nanoparticles (NPs) were added to the gold solution. The gold complex adsorbed on the NPs due to their negative surface charge. At the last stage, ammonia was added to the gold-attached NP suspension and gold was consequently precipitated in metallic form. The results obtained from the method indicate the high efficiency of the method for the recovery of gold from copper anode slime.In the conventional method of copper extraction from its ores and secondary source, at the electrorefining stage, only copper and electropositive metallic impurities such as iron, zinc, and lead are solved as ions and deposited on anode. At the above mentioned stage, impurities such as gold, silver, selenium, and tellurium, which are known as the anode slime, remain intact and fall down as the anode corrodes gradually ( Zinc–dust cementation ( The recovery of gold from waste is more appealing than that of other metals. According to the World Gold Council, the demand for gold has had an increasing trend during the last decade ( Activated carbons are carbonaceous materials with a well-developed porous structure consisting of hydrophobic graphene layer surface and hydrophilic surface functional groups. These characteristics turn them into efficient adsorbents, catalysts, and catalyst supports ( Nowadays, NPs, nanomembranes, and nanopowders are used for detection and removal of chemical and biological substances including metals (e.g. cadmium, copper, lead, mercury, nickel, and zinc), nutrients (e.g. phosphate, ammonia, nitrate, and nitrite), cyanide, organics, algae (e.g. cyanobacterial toxins), viruses, bacteria, parasites, and antibiotics ( It has been reported that metal ions such as lead, chromium, copper, silver, and mercury can be removed/collected from diluted aqueous solutions using TiO In recent years, magnetite nanoparticles (MNPs) have gained an increasing interest because of their potential applications; instances include their uses for cell separation ( Among the various NPs, nanomagnetites are particularly appealing for the above-mentioned purposes and due to two main reasons: 1. they behave superparamagnetically and present a relatively high magnetic saturation and high magnetic susceptibility and biocompatibility; and 2. in comparison to the magnetic transition metals such as cobalt, iron and nickel ( The current research work employs MNPs for gold recovery. MNPs were synthesized through the co-precipitation method, and then were coated by the method introduced by The novelties of this work, which might be of more interest, are first the high potential of such nanoparticles for gold recovery even at very low concentrations; second their reproducibility after several recycling periods, and third the introduction of a new method for gold recovery from copper anode slime and other sources with an efficiency of 100%. The copper slime utilized for the test was obtained from the National Sarcheshmeh Copper Company in Iran. All chemicals used in the preparation were procured from Merck (Germany). The procedure applied for the preparation of SCMNPs was of two stages: first, the synthesis of the magnetite (Fe MNPs were first prepared using a slightly modified version of the co-precipitation method, introduced by According to this method, 10.81 Leaching of gold in the copper anode slime is affected by some elements such as silver, iron, and selenium. Therefore, copper anode slime was first washed by concentrated nitric acid (65%). 10 The gold and silver content of the residue was measured after leaching by atomic absorption spectroscopy (AAS), methyl iso-butylketone (MIBK), and XRF. Leaching tests were carried out by thiourea in a 500-ml round bottomed flask. Mixing was performed by an adjustable speed stirrer. All of the experiments were carried out at ambient temperature. Thiourea powder, hydrogen peroxide (30%) (as the oxidizing agent), and sulfuric acid (98%) (for pH adjustment) were used for gold leaching with thiourea. In the next step, 5 At this step, MNPs were utilized for recovering gold from the gold-containing solution. Since the surface charge of the NPs changes by varying pH ( By mixing 10 The crystal structure, morphology, and magnetic properties of the NPs were characterized by XRD, TEM, and VSM, respectively. The XRD pattern was obtained using a Rigaku RINT-2000 diffractometer using CuKα radiation (λ TEM images for MNPs and SCMNPs were obtained using a Philips, EM 208 instrument at 100 According to the TEM images obtained for MNPs ( The size reduction results in an increase in superparamagnetic properties ( As shown in This property is suitable for industrial applications and is a significant finding on MNPs. A similar observation has been reported by  This reduction is due to the presence of nonmagnetic silica layers on the magnetite particles. A similar magnetic behavior with the same amount of magnetization for MNPs, which have a similar diameter, has been reported by The magnetically separated MNPs and SCMNPs are not permanently magnetized, and can be re-dispersed without any signs of re-aggregation when the external magnetic field is removed. This property is due to the super-paramagnetic NPs. Both MNPs and SCMNPs show similar characteristics. Because of the higher saturation magnetization for MNPs relative to SCMNPs, and working in aqueous phase, it can be concluded that Fe  It can be inferred from the results that a large amount of copper, selenium, and silver were eliminated.  According to Gold in thiourea solution is in the form of the Au(CS(NH Morphology of gold on the surface of NPs was studied by TEM at 100 TEM images show spherical NPs with an average diameter of around 25 At this step, for the desorption process, ammonia solution was added to the magnetite-gold NP suspension, and as a result, a black sediment containing gold and MNPs was deposited. The gold complex was stable in the pH range from 1 to 1.5, and therefore, by adding ammonia to NPs, pH reached a level of over 8, and the complex disassociated according to the following reaction. Therefore, gold along with other components was precipitated ( Thiourea can also be dissociated according to reaction 2. Furthermore, thiourea can be hydrolyzed, and have reaction with H Another reversible reaction that may occur is the formation of formamidine disulfide. Formamidine disulfide oxidizes to produce cyanamide, hydrogen sulfide, and elemental sulfur. Also, to confirm the elemental gold precipitation, XRD test was carried out on the residue; the results of the test without any noise filtration and numerical normalization are shown in Finally, after washing the precipitate with deionized water, gold was separated from MNPs by applying a magnetic field. In fact, the XRD analysis of results shows that there are no metallic impurities besides gold. They also indicate the successful recovery of gold. After desorption process, MNPs were separated from gold by applying magnetic field. MNPs were then washed by acidic buffer with a pH of about 5 as well as water to remove all impurities. The obtained recycled products were used for separation of gold complex. The adsorption capacity (q where C  MNPs were prepared using the co-precipitation method, and the silica-coating process was carried out according to the Stöber method (1968). NP characterization suggested that the process produced a uniform structure and uniform properties. TEM images illustrated that the particle size for MNPs and SCMNPs was about 8 and 10 Due to various reasons such as higher saturation of magnetization of MNPs relative to SCMNPs, working in aqueous phase as well as economic reasons, it can be concluded that Fe Gold solution was prepared using thiourea as solvent. Gold ions appeared in the solution in the Au(CS(NH Gold adsorption onto the NPs occurred according to the electrostatic attraction between the negative charged MNPs and positive complex of gold. Gold-attached MNPs were successfully prepared in an aqueous solution with pH control. In fact, this was achieved by using copper anode slime as Au source. Au ions attached the MNP surfaces as per the ionic surface charge force as well as the zeta potential or pH Au complex adsorbed on MNPs could be desorbed effectively using ammonia for increasing pH, and this is because of the low stability of gold complex in alkaline solution. The capacity of gold adsorption was reduced about 2–4% during each recycling step and this shows the stability of MNPs after separation and recycling process. The results suggest that MNPs can be an effective alternative to conventional adsorbents for the adsorption of gold complex from its solution at high recovery efficiency of about 100% and in a very short time. The advantage of MNPs is their ease of separation by an external magnetic field and possibility of simple recovery after washing with acidic aqueous solution and water. The method for synthesis of MNPs and gold collection process addressed in this work is viable for obtaining gold with high purity from anode slime and other secondary sources.