Cationic glycogen (Cat Gly) was synthesized by incorporating a cationic moiety N-(3-chloro-2-hydroxypropyl) trimethyl ammonium chloride (CHPTAC) onto the backbone of glycogen, a branched polysaccharide. Five grades of Cat Gly have been synthesized by varying the reaction parameters such as monomer concentration, reaction time, etc. The synthesized products were then characterized by various instrumental techniques like elemental analysis, FTIR spectroscopy, viscometry, etc. The weight average molecular weights (M
                     w) of glycogen, the best performing cationic glycogen (Cat Gly4) and the commercial flocculants have been determined by SLS analysis using DLS–7000 Super Dynamic Light Scattering Spectrophotometer. From the characterization, it has been concluded that cationic moiety has been inserted onto the glycogen backbone. The flocculation characteristics of these synthesized cationic glycogens were compared with each other and with some of the commercial flocculants available in national and international markets.The anionic, cationic and nonionic polymeric flocculants endowed with several distinguished characteristics are being increasingly applied for the treatment of industrial effluents, municipal and wastewater. The world's current crisis of potable water necessitates the treatment of municipal wastewater and industrial effluents under water recycling paradigm. Under the above treatment, the contaminants are flocculated by organic and inorganic chemicals for liquid/solid separation. In recent years, considerable attention has been focused upon the treatment and disposal of wastewater sludge Polyacrylamide-based synthetic polymers are used generally as flocculants. The use of natural polymers such as polysaccharides is also in vogue. The chemical and physical properties of synthetic and natural polymers can be modified by grafting a synthetic polymer onto the backbone of natural polymers. Polyacrylamides are much more effective flocculants than natural ones due to their versatile tailorability. However, they are not shear resistant. Polysaccharides are fairly shear stable, biodegradable and cause drag reduction and flocculation at relatively higher concentrations because of their lower efficiencies. The biodegradability of natural polymers reduces their shelf life and needs to be suitably controlled. It is thus evident that all polymers whether synthetic or natural have one or other disadvantages. Several attempts have been made in the past to combine the best properties of both by grafting cationic moiety onto natural ones. One of the great advantages thus obtained is the consequent reduced biodegradability because of the drastic change of the original regular structure of the natural polymer as well as the increased synthetic polymer content within the product. Singh et al. have synthesized polyacrylamide grafted amylopectin Cationic high polymers are used as flocculating agents to remove finely divided solids from aqueous suspension Glycogen is an energy reserve form of glucose. Mammalian cells, shellfish, fungi, bacteria, liver and skeletal muscles are major depositories of glycogen. Glycogen consists of linear chains of an average 10–18 of α-1,4-linked The cationic moieties have been loaded on amylopectin Glycogen was purchased from Sigma Chemicals Ltd., USA. Iron ore (Joda) was a gift from Joda Mines, Jharkhand, India. The detailed characteristics of iron ore suspension, i.e. chemical analysis, FTIR spectroscopy, measurement of specific gravity, particle size, zeta potential are given in Five commercial flocculants, namely Magnafloc LT 22 (Mag LT 22, cationic in nature), Magnafloc 351 (Mag 351, cationic in nature), Magnafloc 156 (Mag 156, anionic in nature), Rishfloc 226 LV (Rish 226 LV, nonionic in nature) and Rishfloc 440 HV (Rish 440 HV, anionic in nature) are used for comparison. Glycogen has been cationised by incorporating a cationic monomer Glycogen (1 The chemical analysis of the iron ore slime (wt%) is given in The density of the iron ore sample was measured using a specific gravity bottle by the standard method. The result is shown in Particle size distribution of iron ore slime was measured by Malvern 3601 Particle Size Analyzer, manufactured in England. The particle analyzer works on the principle of laser diffraction. The results are shown in Zeta potential of iron ore slime was measured by Particle Micro Electrophoresis (Apparatus mark II) manufactured in England. The measurement of zeta potential was done at neutral pH (pH 7.0). The result is shown in Elemental analysis of glycogen, various grades of cationic glycogen and CHPTAC was undertaken with a Carlo Erba 1108 elemental analyzer. The estimation of only three elements, that is carbon, hydrogen and nitrogen, was undertaken. The results are shown in A Thermo Nicolet FTIR Spectrophotometer (Model, Nexus 870 FTIR) was used and the potassium bromide (KBr) pellet method was used for FTIR study. The FTIR spectrum of iron ore (Joda) slime is shown in The FTIR spectra of glycogen, cationic glycogen 4 and Viscosity measurements of the polymer solutions were carried out with an Ubbelohde viscometer (CS/S: 0.003899) at 25 The weight average molecular weights ( Flocculation tests of iron ore suspension were carried out by using a standard flocculation jar apparatus. The standard flocculation jar apparatus was supplied by M.B. Instruments, Mumbai, India. The turbidity measurement was carried out with the Digital Nephelo Turbidity Meter 132, procured from Systronics (Ahmedabad, India). 0.25 From the chemical analysis, it is evident that the major component of the iron ore slime is Fe From zeta potential measurement (  Development of cationic glycogen from glycogen is a substitution reaction, which has been shown in Percent grafting efficiency Percent grafting efficiencies for various cationic glycogens are given in From The results of element analysis of glycogen, all the grades of cationic glycogens and The FTIR spectra of glycogen, cationic glycogen 4 and The broad band (  In case of The weight average molecular weight and the radius of gyration of Gly, Cat Gly4 and the commercial flocculants used for flocculation comparison was determined from Zimm Plot using SLS analysis. The results are summarized in Radius of gyration is a parameter, which characterizes the size of a particle of any shape. The higher the radius of gyration, molecular dimension of the polymer will be more and that will affect the flocculation characteristics synergistically. From the radius of gyration results ( The flocculation performance of various grades of cationic glycogen was compared in 0.25 An attempt has been made to compare the flocculation characteristics of the best performing cationic glycogen (Cat Gly4) with some of the commercially available flocculants ( The present results conclude the occurrence of loading of cationic moiety on the backbone of glycogen. Variation in the synthetic parameters results in a series of cationic glycogens with varying number and length of the CHPTAC chains resulted in different intrinsic viscosities. Investigation of FTIR spectra and elemental analysis provides a strong proof of cationization. From SLS analysis, it is obvious that because of the presence of CHPTAC chains on the glycogen backbone, the molecular weight is enhanced in case of cationic glycogen. Investigation on flocculation characteristics reveals that among the various grades of cationic glycogens, the one having longer CHPTAC chain performs better than those with shorter CHPTAC chains. In comparison with the commercial flocculants, the best performing cationic glycogen shows better flocculation characteristics.