La-doping titanium-zirconium-molybdenum alloys have good arc erosion resistance performances, but there is no research about the changes during the arc erosion. Arc erosion characteristics of La-doping titanium-zirconium-molybdenum alloys after 5000 operations under direct current 20 V, 15 A and resistive load conditions were investigated using a JF04C test system. The results indicated that the probability distribution and change trend of arc energy and arc time during 5000 operations were similar and the relationship between arc time and arc energy followed exponential function. The change of arc energy with test number was consistent to electrical resistance. Oxide particles, crater and cracks defects were discovered on the surface of La-doping titanium-zirconium-molybdenum alloy. The electrical resistance change is mainly concerned with the surface.Titanium-zirconium-molybdenum (TZM) and La-doping molybdenum (La-Mo) alloy are the two of most widely molybdenum alloys. Rare earth doped in molybdenum alloy could improve the strength of molybdenum alloy. La-doping titanium-zirconium-molybdenum (La-TZM) alloys have excellent performances such as high temperature strength, adequate thermal conductivity, low contact resistance and good arc erosion resistance. Molybdenum alloy was widely used in the electronics industry, aerospace and energy industry With the development of rocket missile technology, space technology, aviation technology, nuclear power technology and other cutting-edge technology, the material requires higher operation temperature (above 1500 °C) and good performance of oxidation resistance and ablation properties Qian et al. For molybdenum and molybdenum alloy, it was easy to be oxidized at high temperature Molybdenum powder (99.95%, 2.0–3.5 μm), TiH The flow diagram of manufacture processes is presented in Electrical contacts were tested by JF04C electrical contact materials testing system with breaking measurement mode. The experimental conditions are shown in The form of contacts is shown in The sintering density of La-TZM alloy was measured by the displacement method. The electrical resistivity was tested by a DC low-voltage conductivity instrument (TH2513A, China). The hardness of La-TZM alloy sintered compact was tested with digital Vickers hardness tester (WILSON 401MVD, China). Electronic universal tensile machine (WDW300, China) was used for the tensile strength and elongation. The mass losses were measured using an electrical scale. By using the scale, mass changes of more than 0.1 mg can be measured accurately. (CP2245, China). The microstructure was characterized by both an optical microscope (POLYVAR-MET) and a scanning electron microscope (JSM-6460LV) equipped with an energy dispersive energy diffraction spectroscope (EDS). X-ray Diffractometer (Bruker D8 advance, Germany) was used to test the phase on the surface of the material substance formed after ablation. Electrical and mechanical properties are represented in As shown in The changes of arc energy, arc time, closed pressure and contact resistance during 5000 operations are shown in The contact resistance was measured every 1000 times. To begin with, the contact resistance increases with the times before 3000 times. Secondly, it decreases between 3000 and 4000 times, and then it increases between 4000 and 5000 times. The contact resistance is related to the material surface. It could produce oxide when the temperature is up to 400 °C, and then the oxide will hinder the current conduction, so contact resistance is increase because the arc erosion is from points to area and produces much more oxide on the surface before the 3000 times. Its schematic shows in By measuring the mass loss of a static and movable contact, the total mass is 1.5027 g before test and 1.4999 g after test. The mass loss is 0.0028 g, which is accounted for 0.18% of the original sample. As shown in As shown in As shown in With the development of oxidation, arc erosion starts from the surface to the inside of sample. The surface oxide would evaporate when the temperature reach above 700 °C. There are a little of small and deep pores on the surface, as shown in The rapid solidification of melted layer leads to the increasing of vacancy and dislocation density in melted layer microstructure. Increase of vacancy and dislocation density would decrease grain boundary intensity, which increases the possibility of grain boundary crack formation under stress action  The results in The previous studies have shown that arc energy and arc time have an important influence for arc erosion of material, and arc time also has a significant effect for arc energy. In this paper, the relationship between arc time and arc energy of La-TZM alloy electrical contact material under DC20 V–15 A and resistive load conditions during 5000 operations was discussed. The relationship curves between arc energy and arc time were clearly represented in The correlation of data fitting ( Molybdenum is stable in the air or water when the temperature is not too high. When the temperature is up to 600 °C, the oxidation of molybdenum started slowly, and generates yellow product of MoO The arc erosion diagram of La-TZM is shown in Contact resistance is related to the contact surface and clean condition. As the change of contact surface, the resistance showed that they have the same trend, corresponding to the arc erosion process diagram.  The change and distribution of arc energy and arc time are similar and the relationship between them can be expressed using by the followed exponential function: The electrical resistivity of La-TZM alloy decreased by 34.6%, compared to TZM alloy. The mass loss of product is mainly volatile MoO Oxide particles, crater and cracks defects were discovered on the surface of La-TZM alloy. The resistance change is mainly concerned on the surface. This work is financial supported by the