A new process called Continuous Anti-Solvent (CAS) process was developed for the production of liposomes using supercritical CO2. Unlike the current dense gas technologies, CAS method is a single step and continuous process. Preliminary experiments were conducted in semi-batch mode to determine the most suitable operating conditions (stirring speed=225rpm; water/lecithin mass ratio=21) to ensure an efficient phase mixing in the autoclave. Then, two procedures were developed for the CAS process in the continuous mode. According to the results, the single exit procedure enhances the phase mixing in the autoclave with the formation of a CO2-in-water emulsion which is a good precursor to liposome formation. Liposomes prepared with the CAS method (P
                     =9MPa; T
                     =308K; CO2 flow rate=0.3kgh−1; organic solution flow rate=240mLh−1; water flow rate=180mLh−1) are spherical and multilamellar with a medium diameter included between 10 and 100μm.Phospholipids are natural surfactants which have the ability to form spherical vesicles in presence of water called liposomes. Indeed, phospholipids organize themselves into aqueous phase to reduce the unfavourable interactions between the hydrophilic and hydrophobic parts, leading to one or several phospholipid bilayers encapsulating an inner aqueous phase i.e. liposome structure. Because they are non-toxic and biodegradable, liposomes serve as convenient delivery vehicles for biologically active compounds. As drug delivery systems, liposomes can be administrated either by orally, parenterally or topically way. In order to avoid liposome degradation in human body (phagocytosis, degradation in bile salts and pancreatic lipase, etc.), liposomes are complexed, coated or modified Many methods have so far been reported for preparation of liposomes such as Bangham method Given the widespread interest in the use of liposomes in medical, pharmaceutical and cosmetic fields, development of new processes using Generally Recognized as Safe (GRAS) solvents such as supercritical CO This study focuses on the application of the SAS process to produce liposomes in a continuous way. In the past, several works have been dedicated to high pressure micronization of phospholipids with the SAS process This study is divided in two parts. First of all, a semi-batch mode process has been used to determine the experimental conditions. A second part is dedicated to the study of the process in continuous mode. Generally, dense gas processes of particle generation are classified according to the role of the supercritical fluid in the process. Three different strategies are considered. The compressed CO As concerns works dealing with the production of liposomes, addition of water can be carried out when the system is under pressure or after the depressurization of the system Castor Castor Dense gas methods producing proliposomes are numerous in the literature. These methods are not specific to the production of liposomes but they are known to be efficient for the comminution of solids difficult to handle. The following processes can be cited: the SAS (Supercritical Anti-Solvent) process These processes are all batch or semi-continuous processes. Imura Soy lecithin S100 (94% phosphatidylcholine and 6% others compounds, mainly phospholipids) was purchased from LIPOID (Ludwigshafen, Germany). Analytical grade analysis ethyl alcohol was obtained from Sigma–Aldrich (St Louis, MO). Instrument grade carbon dioxide (purity of 99.7%) from Air Liquide Méditerranée (Vitrolles, France) was used. Double distilled and deionized water was used throughout the experiments.  First of all, experiments have been conducted in semi-batch mode. The purpose was to find the suitable experimental conditions to ensure the stability of the phase behaviors in the autoclave. The other trials are dedicated to the study of the process in continuous mode. As concerns the continuous mode, two cases have been studied: (i) CAS1: CO First of all, a given quantity ( Experimental conditions were set according to previous experiments conducted with the SAS process As presented before, two procedures were tested for the CAS method. CAS1 is a single exit process: CO CAS2 is a two exit process: CO The two procedures have been tested to assess the influence of the CO All experiments were carried out at 308 Liposome images were recovered using a phase contrast optical microscope Reichert-Jung, Polyvar (plan objective 4×/10×/25×/40×). For each liposomal suspension, two samples have been taken. For each sample, five liposomes were observed and presented images were selected to be representative of the sample. Particle size distribution was measured by laser diffraction using Malvern Mastersizer S (laser 663 Several parameters have been tested. Experiments were conducted in the following experimental domain: Stirring speed: 100, 225 and 300 Weight ratio water/lecithin: between 16 and 24 (sets 2 and 4–9). Pressure: 9 and 12 Introduction mode of the organic solution: with and without dispersion (sets 2 and 10). Depressurization speed: 0.02 and 0.2 Organic solution concentration: 15 Organic solution flow rate: 240 Temperature: 308 CO For each trial, experimental values are summarized in Values of the experimental parameters were assessed according to liposome size and visualisation of the phase stability in the autoclave. Changes in the composition of the CO  The atomized jet of organic solution is observed at the beginning of the injection ( Two distinct phenomena are perceptible in A white like-solid phase appears in the aqueous phase ( After a certain time depending on the operating conditions, the middle phase emulsion and the water rich-phase combine each other ( During depressurization ( Three stirring speeds have been tested: 100, 225 and 300 Liposome size distributions are presented in Influence of the stirring speed is significant. A low stirring speed (100  Several experiments (sets 2 and 4–9) have been conducted varying the water/lecithin mass ratio from 16 to 26 while other parameters were held constant ( To further understand these tendencies, three specific values of the water/lecithin mass ratio have been studied: (i) a water/lecithin mass ratio of 16 (set 4), (ii) a water/lecithin mass ratio of 21 (set 8) and (iii) a water/lecithin mass ratio of 24 (set 9). Other parameters were held constant: Liposome size distributions are presented in  To investigate the influence of pressure, two experiments have been conducted, respectively at 9 and 12 Batch process has been tested according to the depressurization speed. Two distinct values have been tested (sets 12 and 13): 0.02 In most cases, the formation of a middle phase emulsion entails the immersion of the injection capillary into an emulsion phase. In that case, the dispersion of the organic solution and the mixing of the phases differ from the classical SAS process Dispersion of the organic solution in the vessel is thus required to micronized finely the phospholipid matter and formed liposomes with unimodal size distribution curves. According to the results, a working point for the semi-batch mode has been defined: a stirring speed of 225 A tendency emerges from these results: when varying an experimental parameter, the width of the main liposome population peak decreases when the peak moves to the higher values. Continuous experiments have been conducted taken into account results of the semi-batch process. As explained before, two procedures have been tested for the continuous process: CAS1 and CAS2. Liposome size distributions and phase behavior visualizations in the autoclave are presented to assess CAS1, then CAS2 processes. For each trial, experimental values are summarized in To compare CAS1 and CAS2, stirring speed, water/lecithin mass ratio and pressure were set respectively at 225 Trials have been conducted with CAS1 process (single exit process). Process control was done manually. First of all, the organic solution was sprayed in the closed autoclave under stirring. Once a homogeneous and whitish aqueous phase was formed in the bottom of the vessel (after 10 Liposome size distribution for CAS1 process (set 14) is shown in As concerns the phase behavior in the autoclave during the process, images (not presented in this study) show an homogeneous and whitish CO CAS1 process enables an effective phase mixing in the autoclave. As a result, liposome size distributions are unimodal. Experiments have been performed with CAS2 process (two exit process). Once, the CO  In the autoclave, CO Both CAS1 and CAS2 are single step and continuous processes. Phospholipids are then micronized as in the SAS process and divided matter is directly stirred with the liquid phase (water rich-phase). According to the previous results, CAS1 appears to be the most reliable process compared with CAS2. CAS1 ensures an effective phase mixing during the whole process and formed liposomes have unimodal size distribution concentrated between 10 and 100 Other experiments have been conducted concerning: (i) a reproducibility study, (ii) a study of the pressure influence on liposome size distribution and (iii) a study of the liposome morphology according to optical phase contrast microscope images.  Experiments have been performed to study pressure influence on liposome size distribution (sets 18, 19 and 20 respectively 9, 12 and 20 Phase contrast microscope images of liposomes formed with the CAS process ( In the CAS process, ethanol of the organic solution is trapped in the aqueous phase which differs from the classical SAS process. Liposome suspension contains ethanol. This section is dedicated to the removal of the ethanol from the liposomal suspension thank to a membrane-assisted process called diafiltration. Diafiltration is a technique that uses ultrafiltration membranes to remove or lower the concentration of salts or solvents (in our case ethanol) from suspensions containing biomolecules such as liposomes. The technique is also called constant volume washing. Permeable membrane filters are used to separate the components of the suspension based on their molecular size. The solution retained by the membrane is known as the retentate. The solution that passes through the membrane is called permeate. Unlike other techniques used for buffer exchange (membrane dialysis and column-based gel filtration), manipulations are reduced with diafiltration. Diafiltration was run with addition of water to replace ethanol and keeps a constant volume of retentate. The cut-off of the membrane (50 Diafiltration turns out to be an effective method to remove ethanol from the liposomal suspension produced with the CAS process. The purpose of this section is to put forward some elements for the CAS process oversizing. A 3 litter “closed” autoclave (vertical cylindrical autoclave: 90 A new dense gas process has been developed for the production of liposomes: Continuous Anti-Solvent method. Unlike the current dense gas techniques, CAS method is a single step and continuous process. CAS process benefits from the advantage of the SAS process which ensure the fine division of the lipid material. Such comminution of phospholipid particles is a good preliminary step to liposome formation. First of all, experiments have been conducted in semi-batch mode to investigate the influence of the experimental parameters and provide a better understanding of what can be expected with the continuous process. The second part of the study is dedicated to the continuous process. Two procedures have been tested. The first one is a single exit process and the second one is a two exits process. According to the results, the single exit process enhances the phase mixing in the autoclave with the formation of a CO