Experiments were carried out in a continuous classification column of diameter 191mm and height 1.47m with water as the liquid and glass beads as the particles. Initial experiments were carried out with narrowly sized particles and somewhat larger tracer particles which could be separated by screening. The main experiments involved a wide distribution of particle sizes, with injected pulses of tracer particles of slightly higher density separated from samples using an organic liquid of intermediate density. The results show that the mixing behaviour is intermediate between plug flow and perfect mixing. Increasing the discharge rate of underflow product stream decreased both the mean residence time and the degree of classification significantly. At relatively low voidage, small particles settled more quickly and large particles more slowly than predicted on the basis of the approach proposed by Lockett and Al-Habbooby (Trans. Inst. Chem. Eng. 51(1973) 281–292) where each particle fraction is assumed to travel as if it were alone in a suspension of the overall solids concentration.Particle classification occurs when particles are separated according to their relative sizes and/or densities. Classifiers employing liquid as the separating medium have existed for more than a century ( Classifiers are also important in the Diapol-PP process of the Mitsubishi Chemical Corporation (MCC) for the production of propylene copolymer ( Researchers at the University of British Columbia (UBC) worked closely with MCC over a period of several years to improve the understanding of gravity-based liquid classifiers, based on both experimental and theoretical studies (e.g. see The work reported in this paper characterizes the residence time distribution (RTD) of particles of different size fractions in the cylindrical column using tracer injection into a liquid classifier operating in a continuous manner. The results provide insight into the mechanisms that aid and hinder classification of particles of different sizes. The experimental equipment employed is shown schematically in Process flow rates— To determine voidages at different heights in the column, differential pressure transducers were connected to pressure taps (not shown) along the column, with acceleration and friction at the wall neglected. Data were logged into a PC. Liquid volume fractions (voidages) at different heights were obtained from From a mass balance on the solid particles at steady state, we can write The system temperature was controlled to Slurry samples were taken from the discharge and overflow lines, and the glass beads were then dried completely in an electric oven. The particle size distribution (PSD) of each sample was measured using standard sieves. The PSDs were fitted to the well-known Rosin–Rammler distribution, i.e., the cumulative percentage oversize by weight, Two kinds of glass bead systems were employed, one having particles of relatively uniform size and the other with a wide distribution of sizes. In the former case, the tracer particles were standard glass beads with a narrow size distribution in the 1.7–2.0 For the second case, glass beads with a solid density of Tracer particles must be similar to the base particles in their hydrodynamic characteristics. In order to confirm this point for our system, the terminal velocity of the glass beads in water was measured for the base particles (Potters) and tracer particles (Toshiba). The RTD of particles in the classifier was measured with a pulse injection method, where a known mass of tracer glass beads was injected into the column and samples were then taken just beyond the discharge valve at regular intervals. However, the discharged tracer can return to the column via the tank, pump, cyclone and feed line, because the system is closed, with all particles recycling. Therefore, the tracer glass beads in the samples are not always particles which have passed through the column only once. A schematic showing the general problem appears as Two tests were conducted for each experimental condition, with the first determining the recycling characteristics, while the second obtained raw data from which the RTD in the column can be determined with the aid of the first set. Operating conditions and sampling procedures were identical in both cases, with the only difference being the tracer injection point. In the first test, tracer was injected at point T1 (see Let the tracer concentration response to the first (recycle system) pulse test be Once this recycle-free response curve has been obtained in this manner, then the  Consider particles of uniform size and density settling in the cylindrical zone of the column. From the well-known correlation of In Dispersion in multiphase systems containing a variety of particle sizes or densities can be represented in terms of RTDs for different particle species (e.g. see Ideally, the exit age (  In the experiments with a multi-disperse particle system, tracer particles having a broader PSD were used to determine the RTD for different sizes in a single experimental run. As described above, the tracer particles were separated using a density-controlled solvent, followed by sieving to measure the concentration of each tracer particle size fraction. The inlet tracer glass bead PSD was adjusted so that it became nearly “flat”, i.e., the mass injected for each size fraction was almost the same. Average residence times were determined for each particle size fraction in the multi-disperse experiments. In this section, several possible average residence times are compared. (1) (2) (3) In As mentioned above, the total mass of tracer recovered in the discharge stream can be determined by the tracer flowrate data after curve fitting. Tracer recovery, defined as the ratio of tracer recovered in the discharge stream to the injected mass, is summarized in PSDs in the feed and discharge streams are plotted for each run in In order to explain the overall classification mechanism, it may be essential to take into account other effects, including the feed zone. However, the tracer recovery information in the cylindrical zone should be useful in understanding the liquid fluidized bed as a classifier. It is common to summarize data for studying hindered settling velocities in terms of the slip velocity, defined as the particle velocity relative to the local fluid velocity. By definition, the particle slip velocity of particles is given by From Eqs. The slip velocity is usually expressed by an equation of the form The  To explain this discrepancy, one should take into account particle interactions and mixing. It should be noted that correlations proposed by previous workers are based on experiments where particle mixing was eliminated as much as possible to reveal only particle settling. If a liquid–solid fluidized bed is well mixed or if small particles become trapped by larger ones, we should not expect the differential particle sedimentation by size predicted by the Richardson and Zaki correlation. The likely reason for the high slip velocity of the smaller particles, resulting in their surprisingly rapid settling, is that these small particles become trapped in the interstices among the larger particles. The latter are in turn retarded by the drag on the smaller particles. The net result is that there is much less differentiation in the falling velocity of particles at low voidages than predicted by approaches which assume that each particle fraction settles independently, as if it were surrounded by identical particles at the same overall particle volumetric concentration. The RTD of particles was studied in a cold model continuous liquid–solid fluidized bed classifier to better understand the settling and mixing behaviour of the particles. Experiments were carried out with glass beads as the particles and water as the liquid. Pulse injection of two kinds of tracer glass beads was employed: Standard glass beads of narrow size distribution in the range 1.7–2.0 Glass beads of density The single-parameter TIS model can express the experimental data with good agreement for most cases, significantly better than the axially dispersed plug flow model. The mixing was relatively close to perfect mixing, with RTDs for different particle sizes were determined for several different operating conditions. The novel technique employed for determining the RTD of glass bead systems was successful. From the RTD data for each particle size fraction, average settling velocities were determined and compared with values predicted by the equation of  The authors acknowledge with gratitude financial support from the Mitsubishi Chemical Corporation of Japan.