The objectives of this work are to characterize the flow behaviour of the Ti–6Cr–5Mo–5V–4Al (Ti6554) alloy at high strain rates and elevated temperatures using the Johnson–Cook (JC) model and a modified Zerilli–Armstrong (ZA) model, and to make a comparative study on the predictability of these two models. The stress–strain data from Split Hopkinson Pressure Bar (SHPB) tests over a wide range of temperatures (293–1173K) and strain rates (103–104
                     s−1) were employed to fit parameters for the JC and the modified ZA models. It is observed that both the JC and the modified ZA models have good capacities of describing the flow behaviour of the Ti6554 alloy at high strain rates and elevated temperatures in terms of the average absolute error. The modified ZA model is able to capture the strain-hardening behaviour of the Ti6554 alloy better as it incorporates the coupling effects of strain and temperature. However, dynamic recovery or dynamic recrystallization that may happen at elevated temperatures should be taken into consideration when selecting data set for parameters fitting for the modified ZA model. Also the modified ZA model requires more stress–strain data for the parameters fitting than the JC model.The usage of β titanium alloys in the manufacturing of critical load bearing structural parts in the aerospace industry has continued to increase in the past decade owing to their excellent combination of high specific strength, superior fracture toughness and good corrosion resistance. In addition, this category of alloys is deep hardenable through heat treatment processes and has good forgeability which are important features for alloys which are used for manufacturing large section aerospace structures Materials constitutive models are used to describe the relationship between flow stress and strain, strain rate and the temperature of materials. This forms the foundation for FEA modelling of the deformation behaviour of materials. Several constitutive models based on different theories have been proposed and can be sorted into three different types: phenomenological, semi-empirical based and physically based models. Two physically based models: the Mechanical Threshold Stress (MTS) model So far, investigations into the constitutive models for titanium alloys have mainly focused on the Ti6Al4V alloy and several sets of parameters for the JC model have been developed. Very few studies have been concluded on the constitutive model for metastable β titanium alloys. Hokka et al. The Ti–6Cr–5Mo–5V–4Al (Ti6554) alloy is a newly-developed metastable β alloy with an ultimate tensile strength (UTS) of around 1250 The Ti–6Cr–5Mo–5V–4Al alloy was casted by multiple vacuum arc melting. Ingots of 620 Mechanical behaviour of the Ti6554 alloy at high strain rates was tested using a Split Hopkinson Pressure Bar (SHPB) arrangement at strain rates from 1000 For the experiments at elevated temperatures, the specimens were heated by an in-situ induction coil and the temperature was regulated by a thermocouple not in contact with the specimen. After reaching the designated temperature, the specimen was maintained at the designated temperature for approximately 2 Flow curves of the Ti6554 alloy at a range of temperatures (293–1173 The basic form of the JC model is defined by the product of three distinctive mathematical terms: The procedures for parameters fitting for the JC model are illustrated below: Taking 293 At the reference temperature of 293 At a strain rate of 4000 Parameters for the Ti6554 alloy to suit the JC model are listed in The format of the modified ZA model is modified on the basis of the ZA fcc model A strain rate of 1000 Then at the reference strain rate, Eq. By taking the natural logarithm of Eq. Two sets of parameters for the modified ZA model for the Ti6554 alloy have been obtained in As the parameters in One of the main characteristics of the strain hardening behaviour of the Ti6554 alloy at high strain rates over a wide range of temperatures is that flow curves show a negative slope at 293 For the JC model, all the predicted curves maintain a negative slope following the curve performed under the reference condition as shown in The modified ZA model has a better capacity to capture the strain hardening behaviour of the Ti6554 alloy at high strain rates as it incorporates the coupling effects of strain and temperature on the flow stress. The format of It should also be kept in mind that the JC model only has 5 parameters to evaluate while the modified ZA model has 7. In addition, the modified ZA model requires more experimental data for parameters fitting than the JC model. Original Johnson–Cook (JC) model and a modified Zerilli–Armstrong (ZA) model have been established to characterize the flow behaviour of the Ti6554 alloy over a wide range of strain rates (10 The main characteristic of the flow behaviour of the Ti6554 alloy at high strain rates is that flow curves exhibit a negative strain hardening rate at 293 The JC model is capable of predicting the dynamic flow behaviour of materials accurately in a narrow domain near the strain value which is fixed in the parameters fitting for the JC model. However the format of the JC model is inadequate to track the complex strain-hardening behaviour of the Ti6554 alloy. The modified ZA model has a much better capacity of describing the strain-hardening rate of the Ti6554 alloy as it incorporate the coupled effects of strain and temperature. However, the temperature range should be controlled when selecting data for parameters fitting for the modified ZA model in order to eliminate the influence of dynamic recovery or dynamic recrystallization. The authors would like to acknowledge the support of the