In this kinetic study, the separation mechanism and chemical interactions of Ni(II) ion removal from synthetic wastewater were evaluated by ion flotation. The influence of effective factors such as pH, collector concentration, ionic strength, activity coefficient, foreign salts, and gas type were also evaluated on the kinetics of Ni(II) ion removal and water removal during the process. By increasing pH, the Ni(II) removal rate increased, in which foam fractionation occurred at pH levels of 3, 5.5, and 8 and ion flotation at a pH level of 9.7. The difference between foam fractionation and ion flotation is related to the flotation of a soluble or insoluble complex of the ion–collector. The kinetic study was also used to determine the separation mechanism. The order of Ni(II) foam fractionation was two, while the order of Ni(II) ion flotation was one. The Ni(II) removal rate was faster than the water removal rate, which indicated that Ni(II) ion removal was carried out by true flotation. The effect of chemical interactions on the characterization of the sublate (insoluble complexes formed in the scum layer) were studied using scanning electron microscopy coupled with energy dispersive X-ray (SEM/EDX) spectroscopy and Fourier transform infrared (FTIR) spectroscopy. The results showed that the chemical conditions have an important effect on the Ni(II) ion flotation efficiency.The rapid developments in industrial mining operations, mineral processing, metal plating facilities, tanneries, paper industries, and fertilizer industries produce large amounts of heavy metal wastewater. The wastewater contains high concentration of heavy metals such as chromium, mercury, cadmium, lead, nickel, and zinc, which are not only biodegradable but also toxic or carcinogenic. Therefore, wastewater treatment has become an important issue that has attracted the attention of many researchers ( Kinetic studies of the mechanism of ion removal from solutions give insights into the process of ion removal and facilitate the engineering process. The flotation mechanism of ions including foam fractionation (a soluble complex of ion–collector product was removed using rising bubbles) and ion flotation (an insoluble complex of ion–collector product was removed using rising bubbles) can be determined by kinetic studies. The kinetic studies of the removal rates of some ions such as Co(II), Cd(II), Ag(II), Cu(II), Zn(II), Th(IV), Pb(II), and Fe(III) have been investigated ( In this study, Ni(II) removal using ion flotation was comprehensively evaluated based on various effective parameters including chemical interactions, water entrainment in the froth phase, separation mechanism, and the Ni(II) removal rate (the kinetic of Ni(II) removal from solution). In this regard, the effects of important factors such as pH, collector concentration, ionic strength, activity coefficient, foreign salts, and gas type on the removal rate of Ni(II) and water during ion flotation were evaluated by considering the removal of both Ni(II) ions and water during the process. Sodium dodecylsulfate (SDS) as an anionic collector (Merck) and Dowfroth 250 (DF250) as frother (Dow Chemical), nickel nitrate ((Ni(NO Ni(II) removal percentage ( After integration and conversion to common logarithms, Eq. The optimal conditions of collector concentration, frother concentration, and pH of the Ni(II) flotation process were initially determined using the central composite design (CCD) of the response surface methodology by Design Expert 7. As many as 17 experiments were designed and carried out. The results show the Ni(II) flotation optimal conditions as pH of 9.7, collector concentration of 135.1 ppm and frother concentration of 20 ppm. In the optimal conditions, the Ni(II) removal percentage of 100% was achieved after 8 min. The constant impeller speed of 800 rpm was considered based on the previous study for the effect of energy input on the process efficiency ( In order to investigate the influence of effective factors including flotation time, pH, collector concentration, ionic strength, activity coefficient, foreign salts and gas type on the efficiency and kinetics of Ni(II) flotation, experiments were carried out in various conditions. To determine the effect of pH on Ni(II) removal, flotation experiments were carried out as a function of pH at a fixed initial Ni(II) concentration, flotation time, impeller speed, frother and collector concentrations, and air flow rate. The results are shown in In order to evaluate the efficiency of Ni(II) ion flotation with the consideration both of Ni(II) removal and water removal during ion flotation, Ni(II) removal obtained for different pH as a function of water removal is shown in The flotation mechanism can also be determined by kinetic studies ( The order of water removal was one in the foam fractionation process, while it was zero in the ion flotation process (Eq. To determine the effect of SDS/Ni(II) molar concentration ratio on the Ni(II) removal, flotation experiments were carried out as a function of SDS/Ni(II) molar concentration ratio at fixed initial Ni(II) concentration, pH, flotation time, impeller speed, frother concentrations, and air flow rate. The results are shown in The kinetic studies show that the Ni(II) ion removal rate decreased with increasing SDS/Ni(II) molar concentration ratios, while the water removal rate increased ( In order to evaluate the effect of the collector concentration on the complexation of SDS and Ni(II) ions, the sublate formed in the first 0.5 min of flotation was studied using FTIR. The OH absorption band of the sublate in the sample spectra of SDS/Ni(II) = 2 was stronger and broader than SDS/Ni(II) = 4, indicating the different absorbed percentages of OH in the hydrolyzed species. These bands shifted at lower frequencies by 6.07–4.45 cm The effect of collector concentration on the formed sublate morphology characterization in the first 0.5 min of flotation was evaluated using SEM. Ionic strength is the main characteristic of a solution with dissolved ions. The electric field intensity and the ion concentration of the solution can be measured by ionic strength. It can influence the ion removal efficiency using ion flotation. The ionic activity coefficient can be described using ionic strength (Eq. It depends on the charge and size of ions and the ionic strength of the solution. The activity coefficients can determine the deviation measure of the real solution from the ideal. This includes the value of all the effects that lead to these deviations, and the main effect in the diluted solution is the attraction of electrical (ionic) charges of opposite signs ( The effect of an increase in SDS/Ni(II) ratio on the ionic strength (I) and activity coefficient (ɣ) is shown in The effect of KCl on the Ni(II) removal is described in this section. Ni(II) removal decreased in the presence of K The foreign salt addition effect of ((Zn(SO The same experiment was also performed with a solution containing the same concentration of Zn(II) (10 ppm) and Ni(II) (10 ppm). Increasing of Zn(II) ions in the solution reduced the Ni(II) ion removal percentage ( The kinetic studies show that the removal rates of Ni(II) ions and water were reduced with the addition of Zn(II) ions into the solution ( In order to evaluate the effect of gas type used in the process on Ni(II) flotation, two gas types, namely nitrogen (N The effect of gas types during Ni(II) flotation on the complexation of SDS and Ni(II) ions was evaluated using the study of sublate formed in the first 2 min of flotation using FTIR. The effect of nitrogen and oxygen on the formed sublate morphology characterization in the first 2 min of flotation was evaluated using SEM. The kinetic study, separation mechanism, and chemical interactions of Ni(II) ion removal were performed to assess the influence of effective factors such as pH, collector concentration, ionic strength, activity coefficient, foreign salts and gas type. The results showed that the pH of the solution is an important factor. It can determine the separation mechanism of Ni(II) removal, in which foam fractionation carried out at a pH of less than 8 and ion flotation at a pH of 9.7. The kinetic study also indicated that the separation mechanism changed by increasing pH. The efficiency of Ni(II) ion flotation was more than Ni(II) foam fractionation. The increase in the number of SDS ions in the solution decreased the Ni(II) ion removal rate using the rising bubble due to the formation of Ni(II)–SDS complexes in the solution. The increase in the SDS/Ni(II) ratios increased the ionic strength and decreased the activity coefficient leading to an increase of water removal. The presence of other ions in the solution decreased the Ni(II) ion removal. They competed with Ni(II) ions for the complex formation with the SDS ions and reduced the interaction of Ni(II) ions with SDS anions. The study of gas type effect on the Ni(II) ion removal showed that the efficiency of Ni(II) ion removal was greater with the use of nitrogen and oxygen comparing with the air. The results showed that the reagent interaction during the ion flotation process and the type of separation mechanism had a significant effect on the efficiency of ion flotation.