The morphology and growth kinetics of intermetallic compounds that are formed in the interface of H13 tool steel and A380 molten aluminum has been investigated through immersion experiments. The effect of addition of micro alloying elements to the melt on the formation and thickness of intermetallic layer was also studied. Microstructural investigation showed that three intermetallic layers formed through the liquid–solid reaction during immersion of steel samples in the liquid aluminum at a temperature of 680°C for the duration time of 2min to 2.5h. These intermetallic compounds are Al8Fe2Si, Al5FeSi and Al12Fe5Si. The effect of nitride coating of the surface of H13 steel on the growth of intermetallic phases has also been studied. Micro alloying elements such as strontium and titanium have been used in the melt and their effects on the morphology of intermetallic compound and their growth rate have been investigated by the immersion experiments at the temperature of 680°C for the time of 0.5–2.5h. The results showed that two layers of Al8Fe2Si and Al5FeSi formed at the interface and Al12Fe5Si layer was not observed. Nitride coating decreased the overall thickness of the intermetallic layer about 50% after immersion time of 0.5h. Addition of micro alloying elements such as Sr (0.05wt%) and Ti (0.2wt%) to the melt decreased the total thickness of the intermetallic layer about 31% after immersion of steel for 0.5h in the melt. Both nitride coating and addition of strontium (0.05wt%) and titanium (0.2wt%) micro alloying elements to the melt had the most influence on decreasing the overall thickness of the intermetallic layer. The thickness of the intermetallic layer decreased about 60% after immersion of steel for 2.5h in the aluminum melt. The experimental results clearly indicate the beneficial effect of strontium on the kinetics of the formation and growth of the intermetallic layers.Intermetallic layers form in the interface of un-similar metals at high temperature. This phenomenon is often observed in processes such as aluminizing, permanent mold casting, high pressure die casing (HPDC), fiber–matrix reactions in making composites, and manufacturing bimetallic parts Die soldering is a casting defect which is caused by an interfacial reaction between molten aluminum and die material. In this process, molten aluminum welds to the die surface and damages it during the ejection of casting from die The reason for reduction of thickness of intermetallic layer by addition of iron to the melt is; as the iron content in the melt reaches the saturation level, the chemical potential gradient which is a driving force for the diffusion of iron atoms from die steel to the melt is greatly reduced The size, morphology, and distribution of iron-bearing intermetallics (IBI) in the microstructure play a major role in achieving optimum mechanical properties It has also been found that surface coating is effective in reducing the formation of intermetallic layers at the interface of die steel–molten aluminum The experimental set up has been illustrated in One kilogram of A380 aluminum alloy was melted in an alumina crucible in each experiment. Melt temperature was controlled using an auto-setting PID microprocessor-based temperature controller via k-type thermocouple located in the melt inside the crucible. Coated and un-coated H13 tool steel samples were dipped into the molten aluminum when the melt temperature was stabilized at 680 Experiments have also been performed with the melts having a) 0.05 Optical microscopy and scanning electron microscopy (SEM) were used to investigate the intermetallic layers in each specimen. Intermetallic phases were studied using SEM Philips XL40 having a Super Ultra Thin Window detector (SUTW). Intermetallic layers were analyzed using X-ray microanalysis (XMA) linked to SEM. Also a Cam Scan MV2400 SEM was used to get line-scan profiles of elements across the straight line in the interfaces of tool steel–intermetallic layers–aluminum alloy. X-ray diffraction tests were performed on materials obtained from grounding and machining of surface layers of some specimens. A Siemens D500 X-ray diffractometer with the monochromatic Cu Kα The micrographs presented in      The overall thickness of intermetallic layer versus immersion time is shown in  When the surface of H13 steel contacts with A380 molten aluminum, its temperature reaches the temperature of the melt and gets wet. Then the surface of H13 steel reacts with molten aluminum and is corroded. This is because of the affinity between the atoms of steel and aluminum. This phenomenon has been observed in When Al The dissolution of Al The pits in nitride-coated steel which are observed in When strontium and titanium is added to the melt, the formation mechanism and morphology of the intermetallic layers do not change and they are similar to the un-treated melt. But the number and overall thickness of the intermetallic layers will be decreased. As observed in When strontium is added to the melt, this element dissolves in the melt and then moves through the composite layer and decreases the chemical potential of iron atoms for the reaction. Iron has an important role in controlling the rate of the reaction. Strontium reduces the amount of the intermetallic compounds in the melt. Titanium refines the grains and reduces the coefficient of thermal conductivity of the melt to the same amount of the coefficient of thermal conductivity of the intermetallic layers. This probably decreases the cohesive energy of aluminum atoms in the vicinity of the intermetallic layers. Titanium also affects the interface of the intermetallics and reduces the growth kinetics of the intermetallic layers.  The type of intermetallic layers does not change, however their thickness will change by increasing immersion time, applying nitride coating on the surface of H13 steel, and adding micro alloying elements to the melt. Three intermetallic layers of Al The formation of intermetallic layers in the interface of steel and melt is due to the simultaneous dissolution and growth phenomena of the intermetallic layers. Nitride coating of the surface of H13 steel decreases the number and thickness of the intermetallic layers by delaying their growth kinetics. Adding strontium, titanium, and mixture of them to A380 aluminum melt decreases the thickness, number, and growth kinetics of the intermetallic layers. The effect of strontium in reducing the intermetallic layer is more effective than titanium. In the case of H13 steel without nitriding coating and adding Sr to the melt, the total thickness of the intermetallic layer decreased about 25% after an immersion time of 0.5 Adding both strontium (0.05