The role of four gas dispersion parameters in ink particle collection was investigated in 4″ and 20″ flotation columns. Gas holdup (ε
                     g) and superficial gas velocity (J
                     g) were measured on-line and bubble size (d
                     b) was estimated using drift flux analysis that enabled bubble surface area flux (S
                     b) to be calculated. Operating with approximately zero froth depth ink recovery as a function of retention time (controlled by underflow rate) was determined. Using a mixing model, the collection zone flotation rate constant (k
                     c) was estimated from the recovery––time data. The rate constant was not related to J
                     g or d
                     b but was linearly dependent on ε
                     g and S
                     b, similar to findings in mineral flotation studies.Flotation involves contacting particles (typically <150 μm) in a pulp (slurry) with a dispersion of bubbles (typically 0.5–2.5 mm). The properties of this bubble (gas) dispersion clearly play an important role. Recent developments have permitted reliable measurement of some gas dispersion parameters, notably superficial gas rate ( In this, the system offers some advantages over mineral flotation in mechanical machines. The low solids content in de-inking, The experiments were performed on industrial paper recycle pulps using a 4″ laboratory (Ø=10 cm, The columns were fed continuously with pulp (∼45 °C, ∼1.2% w/w solids, ∼pH 10 (NaOH) and surfactant, a blend of stearic and oleic fatty acid soaps) from the feed end of the de-inking plant flotation circuit (ca. 1.2% w/w solids). The chemical conditions were not altered. Level was controlled with the feed rate and set to within 1–2 cm of the column overflow lip, i.e., operation with essentially zero froth depth. The feed and underflow rates, gas rate and gas holdup were monitored during each experiment. Samples of 1 L were taken from the underflow and feed streams as a function of time when steady-state conditions were achieved. The particle retention time was controlled with the underflow rate. Ink recovery was measured according to Bowater’s procedure and calculated as follows: Recovery in the collection zone ( For vessels with levels of mixing between the two extremes, the relationship between An expression for the vessel dispersion number In the absence of direct bubble size measurement, which is only now becoming available for flotation systems ( The rate equations require The dependence of To test the dependence of rate constant on the gas dispersion parameters requires integration of several measurements. The work of Gorain et al., The results are similar to those reported elsewhere. The rate constant is linearly related to The dependence on bubble surface area flux implies an inverse dependence on bubble size whereas the literature supports The linear Regardless of modeling, the gas dispersion parameters become powerful diagnostics. The measurements have been used to remedy instrument and machine malfunctions and define the cell operating range ( De-inking in a flotation column was used to test the dependence of the pulp zone rate constant on the gas dispersion parameters. A linear relationship with bubble surface area flux was found as reported in mineral flotation in mechanical machines. A linear dependence on gas holdup was also found supporting a previous suggestion that these two gas dispersion parameters can be interchanged. The authors wish to thank Bowater Gatineau’s mill for providing equipment and test facilities. Special thanks are also given to the Mechanical and Chemimechanical Wood-Pulps Network (Natural Sciences and Engineering Council of Canada Network of Excellence) for their financial support, and the Consejo Nacional de Ciencia y Tecnologı́a (CONACYT) of Mexico for a scholarship to H.H.