The evolution of continental surfaces is controlled by biophysico-chemical alteration processes and erosion mechanisms, which are significantly affected at present day by anthropogenic forcing factors. This evolution ultimately controls the nature and properties of soils but also the physico-chemical quality of the waters, which drain the continental surfaces. The zone impacted by these reactions constitutes the so-called “critical zone” (e.g., The whole community studying the critical zone acknowledges the complexity of the processes controlling the formation and functions of soils (e.g, It is this long and complex history, involving spatially integrated processes in the critical zone that must be accurately deciphered, and whose time constants inferred, if one aims first at describing and then finally modeling the functioning of the critical zone and understanding the evolution of continental surfaces and their soils. Such a challenge requires the scientific commmunity to develop tools and approaches specifically adapted to deciphering the complexity of the critical zone. The community has been dedicated to this task during the past years and a special session was devoted to this general topic at the European Geoscience Union General Assembly in 2015 (Vienna, Austria). This session clearly demonstrated the vast diversity of approaches and geochemical and geochronological tools available today for “Deciphering time-dependent processes in soil and weathering profile evolution, and hence to look deeper into the superimposition of geochemical and mineralogical processes governing soil and weathering profile evolution that may vary from seasonal to millennial time paces”. The interest and diversity of the papers presented during the session led us to propose editing a Chemical Geology thematic issue, dealing with this topic, which was open to submissions beyond the session participants. The aim of the present thematic issue is to highlight some of the various approaches that can be used in this field, with examples demonstrating their application. Future progress in increasing our understanding of, and determining the relationships between, the different processes involved in the formation of present day continental regoliths will be made by combining several of these approaches, as illustrated by papers presented in this thematic issue ( The thematic issue brings together contributions that illustrate the diversity of approaches utilized today. The first paper by We thank all the authors for their involvement in this special issue, and for the quality of their contributions, which will add to the success of this issue. We are also thankful to Michael Böttcher, Editor in chief of Chemical Geology, for his help in handling the manuscripts.