The aim of this work consisted of developing a flotation model based on industrial data from modern and large mechanical flotation cells (up to 300 m3). Using industrial data from different flotation plants a general model was develop considering the metallurgical performance, residence time distribution, and operational and hydrodynamic conditions. The model considers the behaviour of each cell in a flotation bank separately, using a distributed approach. The overall mineral recovery by true flotation, in terms of the collection and froth zone recoveries and the gangue entrainment into the concentrate, was calculated. The mineral feed characterization by particle size and liberation classes allowed the evaluation of the metallurgical performance along the flotation bank.
                  This paper presents a new approach for flotation circuit modelling and simulation, which addresses the challenges for improving the froth behaviour by varying the cell design as well as the potential for circuit optimization.froth cross-sectional area bubble load stream valuable mineral flow in concentrate of cell N-1 water flowrate into the concentrate in cell 1 Sauter mean diameter of bubbles particle size class i entrainment flowrate of mineral gangue into the concentrate cell N entrainment factor feed flowrate of liberated gangue in size class i entering cell N valuable mineral flow in the feed of cell N-1 feed water flowrate in cell 1 froth depth froth depth under normal conditions (reference) superficial gas rate superficial gas rate under normal conditions (reference) flotation rate constant cell number in a bank volumetric feed flow to cell N collection zone recovery in cell N mineral froth recovery mineral froth recovery in cell 1 mineral froth recovery in cell N total recovery in cell N overall recovery in a bank recovery of liberated gangue by entrainment in cell N maximum recovery in cell N water recovery in cell 1 water recovery in cell residence time distribution bubble surface area flux solids flowrate entering the froth solids flowrate recovered by true flotation in concentrate residence time of liquid in collection zone residence time of fine particles in collection zone residence time of intermediate particles in collection zone residence time of coarse particles in collection zone top of froth grade total cell volume in cell N effective slurry volume in cell N size class liberation class fractional flowrate distribution between two parallel perfect mixers mean particle size for mean gas holdup in the froth zone mean gas holdup in the collection zone cell design parameter proportionality parameter in Eq. dead time residence time of gas in the froth froth residence time mean residence time in perfect mixer 1 mean residence time in perfect mixer 2 Flotation models have been developed for different purposes from batch scale to more complex industrial steady state predictors or simpler dynamic models for process control and optimization. The basic approach consists of describing the flotation process by a single zone (pulp) where a first order collection process occurs operating under perfect mixing conditions. Otherwise, the froth separation zone is not considered. Dynamic flotation models developed for control purposes ( Nowadays, the increase of flotation tank volumes proposes advantages, such as smaller footprint requirements and better control capacity (e.g. level control). In addition, new challenges such as the froth transport characterization becomes more critical. In this sense, due to the significant increase in cell size, the large impact of the froth zone on flotation metallurgical performance has been largely recognized ( This article presents a new flotation model based on a wide industrial database, including several sampling campaigns in 17 Cu concentrators and 6 Mo concentrators. The model allows for the calculation of the metallurgical behaviour of each cell of a flotation bank in terms of the operating conditions, flotation cell design and feed mineral characterization. For modelling purposes, the simulator uses a distributed approach (i.e., each cell is considered as an independent unit), considering the collection and froth zones separately. The model includes the hydrodynamic and metallurgical effects related with the cell design and operating conditions as well as the mineral feed characterized by size-liberation classes. In summary, this new tool allows for the prediction of a flotation banks metallurgical performance, in terms of different operating conditions, cell design and feed mineral characteristics. Data from sampling campaigns carried out in Chilean concentrators using large mechanical flotation cells, including hydrodynamic and metallurgical diagnosis, allowed the identification and evaluation of parameters used for flotation modelling. The selected database on liquid and solid residence time distributions (RTD) of flotation cells and banks, together with down the bank surveys and flotation rate data, included forced air cells of large size (100, 160, 200 and 300 m There is not a unique model structure for describing the different mixing regimes in mechanical flotation cells. The most common approach in a single flotation cell consists of using a perfect mixing model, because of its simple representation and mathematical treatment. An alternative approach such as the LSTS model (large and small tank in series) has proven to be useful particularly for self-aspirating cells. This model structure involves one large perfect mixer and one small perfect mixer in series plus a dead time, from which a good performance has been obtained to describe self-aerated cells of 130 m  The model of a single cell considers two zones: pulp and froth, as shown in  A distributed approach, by evaluating each cell sequentially ( The characterization of the mineral feed considers size-by-liberation classes (e.g., 3 size classes and 3 liberation classes). Regarding the chemical assays and mineralogical analysis (e.g., Qemscan, MLA) required for the flotation rate characterization ( The total cell recovery Eq. The Equation The feed pulp flowrate and solids percentage of each cell depends on the water recovery and varies along the flotation bank. Eq.  The froth recovery consists of the fraction of air, water and solids overflowing into the concentrate launder, relative to the corresponding mass flowrates entering the froth zone at the pulp-froth interface. Eq. In case of very low bubble loading (low minerals collection) it does not mean that froth recovery will be zero. A flotation cell or column can operate with only air–water and the overflow of froth (or foam, if only contains air and water) will depend on the air rate, frother dosage, froth depth and the cell design characteristics. However, the presence of collected solids (by true flotation) enhances the froth stability and consequently improves the froth recovery ( The average residence time of gas in the froth, This approach provides cell-to-cell froth performance along the flotation row and was validated using an extended industrial database.  The water recovery in the first cell of a flotation bank, From the industrial database, under normal operating conditions the water recovery in the first cell, The water recovery in cell N of a flotation bank was calculated by Eq. The gangue recovery in cell N, The entrainment of mineral gangue The overall cell recovery and the pyrite feed flowrate to each cell was calculated the same way as the Cu sulphides, considering flotation rate constants and maximum recoveries for the collection zone per size class. Liberation analysis was not used for pyrite because in most cases the main association was pyrite with sulfide minerals (and free pyrite) and only a minor fraction of pyrite was associated with gangue minerals (<10%). In addition, the same froth recovery was used for the Cu sulfide minerals and pyrite.  Eq. The bubble surface area flux From Eqs.  From the industrial data shown in The mean gas holdup Combining Eqs. The general model was evaluated using different industrial data from three concentrator plants in Chile. The evaluation allowed for the estimation of the kinetic parameters of valuable minerals per size-by-liberation class. The fitting procedure considers data on Cu recovery together with the concentrate grade profiles per size class along the rougher flotation rows. Alternatively, data on top of froth measurements can be useful (if available) for improving the parameters fitting. Measurements of operating conditions such as froth depth and superficial gas rate complement the model testing and evaluation. The model fitting consists of identifying the kinetic parameters (rate constants and maximum recoveries) of selected mineral classes. For this purpose, the following information from the flotation plant was required to provide enough data to estimate the model parameters:  In a case of study for a flotation plant, the copper mineral feed was characterized considering the copper valuable mineral in terms of size-by-liberation classes (3 × 3 matrix) ( In summary, nine copper mineral classes plus three pyrite classes were selected, given a total of 12 minerals classes. This means that plant data is required to identify 24 parameters: 12 rate constants and 12 maximum recoveries.  A kinetic survey was developed in a rougher flotation bank consisting of nine 130 m  Feed characteristics such as solids flowrate (681 tph) and solids percentage (30%) were measured during plant survey. Additionally, feed samples were taken for the feed mineral characterization, previously described. Operating conditions such as froth depth of each cell were also measured ( The goodness of the model fitting for the copper recovery profiles is shown in  In summary, a new model was developed and successfully tested using data from industrial flotation operations. The new approach corresponds to an improved attempt to separate the effect that minerals have on the plant flotation kinetics from the effect of plant design and operating conditions. Mineral characterization in terms of size-by-liberation and the operating conditions such as effective residence time in the collection zone, allow for the identification of the intrinsic floatability of each mineral class in the collection zone. On the other hand, the froth transport characteristics, in terms of launders design, froth depth and froth superficial gas rate, allow for a more sensitive estimation of the froth recovery and fine gangue entrainment. In this way, the main advantage of the new model with respect to the available commercial software is that it incorporates simultaneously the feed mineral characterization by size and liberation and also the froth transport characteristics. This includes the launders design, which nowadays has become a key aspect to evaluate large size flotation cells. The main disadvantage of the model is that it requires an extensive plant survey to calibrate the plant flotation kinetics when a new ore is characterized. However, after the mineral characterization, it has been found that kinetic parameters have a good potential for predicting new operating conditions related to changes in cell size, cell design or circuit arrangement. In addition, hot batch flotation tests have been developed in parallel with plant surveys and are recommended to build the data base for flotation scaleup. This work is under development. A general flotation model based on industrial data was developed and validated for evaluating the metallurgical performance of industrial cells and flotation banks, including different cells design and operating conditions. The general approach for flotation process modelling considers a model structure with a single cell consisting of two different zones, the collection and froth zones, and a distributed system to evaluate the performance of a bank of cells in series. In this approach, the feed mineral characterization in terms of size-by-liberation class allows for the evaluation of the metallurgical performance along the flotation bank. A single rate constant and a maximum recovery parameter characterized each size-by-liberation class. A simple model consisting of two perfect mixers in parallel was more appropriate to describe the RTD of the forced air cells. The selected model has the flexibility for describing the case of a perfect mixer plus by-pass flow, which was the case used for testing the metallurgical response. The RTD model plus the flotation rate data allowed for the building of the metallurgical model and validation. The minerals flowrate entering the froth by true flotation, the cell design characteristics and the cell operating conditions allowed for the froth recovery estimation. An update of the industrial correlation of bubble size (0.7–4.3 mm) versus superficial gas rate (0.1–2.3 cm/s), including cells operating with sea water, was developed. A new correlation relating industrial data on bubble surface area flux versus superficial gas rate was presented. A maximum bubble surface area flux was observed at an intermediate range of superficial gas rate (0.6–1.8 cm/s), achieving values of about 38 ± 10 (m The general model validation using an extended industrial database showed a good potential for metallurgical evaluation, grade and recovery along flotation banks, in terms of the feed characteristics (size-by-liberation), cell size, cell design and operating conditions.  The authors declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this paper. The authors are grateful to 