This work investigates the effects of precipitation hardening on hot hardness and high-temperature sliding wear resistance of an iron-nickel base alloy. Three variants of a carbide rich alloy containing 0, 2 and 3 wt.-% aluminium were manufactured and aged for 24 h at 650, 700 and 750 °C. Hot hardness (20–800 °C) and sliding wear tests (600 °C) were conducted for each condition. The addition of aluminium has little effect on the type or volume content of the carbides. Ageing caused the precipitation of NiAl in the aluminium-containing alloys. The precipitation-hardened samples show higher hot hardness and better hot wear resistance. The lower wear loss can mainly be attributed to the improved support of the carbides by the precipitation strengthened matrix.The wear resistance of metallic alloys can significantly be improved by the presence of non-metallic hardphases such as carbides, borides, nitrides or oxides [ Most metallic matrices used for wear application at room temperature drastically lose strength with rising temperature and thus, lose the ability to effectively support hardphases during wear at elevated temperature. The ledeburitic steel X210Cr12 for example, tested by Fischer et al. under low-stress abrasion tests, showed a four times higher wear rate at 550 °C than at room temperature [ In order for the metal matrix of a Fe-base alloy to provide good support for the hardphases even at temperatures above 550 °C, appropriate hardening mechanisms must be utilized. For this, hardening with intermetallic precipitates seems to be promising. In iron-nickel alloys such as Inconel 718, Incoloy 800 HT and aluminia-forming austenites (AFA-steels) precipitation hardening is used to ensure a good creep resistance at a temperature of 600 °C and above. However, these are single-phase alloys with relatively low wear resistance. The effect of precipitation hardening in carbide-rich austenitic Fe-alloys has not yet been investigated in any detail. This paper addresses the question, whether precipitation of an intermetallic phase can improve the wear resistance of a hardphase containing austenitic alloy at 600 °C. Therefore, a nickel-rich Fe-based test alloy with varying aluminium content is aged at different temperatures and then tested for hot hardness (RT - 800 °C) and sliding wear resistance at 600 °C. For a deeper understanding and to adequately assess the results, these tests are accompanied by microstructural characterization of the alloy and micromechanical investigations of the present phases. To investigate the effect of aluminium content and heat treatment on hot hardness and wear resistance, three specimens with aluminium contents of 0, 2 and 3 wt.-% were manufactured by casting. The chemical composition of the specimens is given in The elements chromium (Cr), niobium (Nb), vanadium (V) and tungsten (W) together with carbon (C) form carbides and strengthen the metallic matrix by solid solution hardening. Furthermore, the high Cr content of 25 wt.-% leads to a Cr content of > 12 wt.-% in the metallic matrix and therefore ensures good corrosion and oxidation resistance of the alloy. Iron (Fe) and nickel (Ni) are the main constituents of the matrix. The latter serves to stabilize the desired fcc structure and may contribute to the formation of intermetallic phases. Beside Ni, Aluminium (Al) is also added for the formation of intermetallic phases. Al is the most promising choice for this work, as it does not participate in the formation of carbides. Therefore it should be possible to change the amount of precipitation without simultaneously effecting total carbide content or carbide composition. The different alloys will in the following be named according to their aluminium content 0Al, 2Al, and 3Al. At first, the microstructure of these alloys in as-cast condition was analysed by scanning electron microscopy (SEM, Mira 3 GM from Tescan). Therefore, small samples were cut from the cast material, ground and polished down to a grit size of 1 μm using diamond polishing suspension. Micrographs were recorded using a backscatter electron (BSE) detector, an acceleration voltage of 15 kV and a working distance of 15 mm. These same settings were also used for all other images presented in this paper. Phase analysis was done with electron backscatter diffraction (EBSD, Nordlys Nano Detector from Oxford) and X-ray diffraction (XRD, D8 Advanced from Bruker), while the chemical composition of the different phases was obtained by electron dispersive X-ray spectroscopy (EDS, Xman In order to fully comprehend the effect of aluminium in this alloy and to accurately interpret the results of the wear testing, the mechanical properties of the different phases present in the microstructure have to be known. These were obtained by means of nanoindentation in accordance to standard DIN EN ISO 14577-1:2015 [ To investigate the effect of ageing temperature on hot hardness and hot wear resistance, specimens in three different heat-treated conditions and in as-cast condition were tested. The heat-treated specimens were solution annealed for 1 h at 1100 °C, quenched in water and then aged for 24 h at 650 °C, 700 °C and 750 °C. The times and temperatures were chosen in accordance with heat treatments commonly used for aluminium-containing, but hardphase free austenitic alloys [ The macroscopic hot hardness of the specimen measurements were performed on an SRV 4 tribometer from Optimal Instruments. For this we equipped the SRV 4 with a high temperature heating-module and an unheated Vickers diamond indenter. The hardness was measured at intervals of 100 °C steps from room temperature to 800 °C in ascending order with a force of 98.07 N, which corresponds to HV10. The heating dwell times were kept as short as possible to avoid microstructural changes during testing but long enough to ensure proper heating of the whole sample. At each temperature, four indentations were made. To prevent oxidation and thus eliminate any influence of oxide films on the test results, both, hot hardness testing and hot wear testing, were carried out in an inert argon atmosphere. The indentation marks were afterwards measured at room temperature using optical light microscopy. The results of the four indentations were averaged. The hot wear testing was carried out using a high-temperature tribometer (SRV 4) with a ball-on-disc setup. The experimental setup is shown in The tested specimens were heated by a resistance heater. The temperature and power of that resistance heater were controlled by a thermocouple so that the surface temperature of the specimen was held at a constant temperature of 600 °C. The temperature of 600 °C was chosen as it represents a typical operating temperature for minerals processing or power plants and exceeds the temperature limit for the application of martensitic alloys. Before wear testing, the testing temperature was applied for 50 min to reach isothermal conditions and to eliminate any effects of thermal expansion during the actual wear tests. Given the elastic modulus of Al   The corresponding SEM observations are presented in  After ageing, the aluminium containing alloys are significantly harder at room temperature than in as-cast condition. In the 0Al alloys, the hardness after ageing is slightly lower than in the as-cast state. For higher testing temperatures, all aged specimens experience a steady decline in hardness. However, as the rate of decline in hardness is nearly constant for all specimens, an increased room temperature hardness translates into higher hardness values at elevated temperatures. In terms of hot hardness, two trends are observable: Firstly, for each ageing temperature, the hot hardness of 3Al specimens is greater than that of the 2Al specimens. The 2Al specimens, in turn, show a higher hot hardness than specimens of 0Al. Secondly, the hot hardness of the aluminium containing alloys depends on the ageing temperature. For these alloys the hardness at a given temperature generally descends in the following order of ageing temperatures: 650 °C, 700 °C, 750 °C and as-cast condition. The only exception being the hardness of 3Al, which is higher at 800 °C in as-cast condition than after ageing at 750 °C. In The measured wear loss of each condition is shown in The samples of 3Al alloy show the largest differences in wear volume relative to each other (5–14 × 10 To investigate the changes in the microstructure caused by wear testing, all specimens were cut in the middle of the wear track and perpendicular to the sliding direction. The resulting cross-section was then observed in the SEM. To illustrate the difference in the wear behaviour, the cross-sections of two specimens are shown in In the microstructure of the 3Al specimen, some spots of plastically deformed material can be seen, as well as some cracks in carbides closest to the surface. Besides that, however, the microstructure beneath the wear track appears largely to be undamaged. In contrast to that, a mechanically mixed tribo-layer has built beneath the surface of the 0Al specimen. This layer contains the remains of broken carbides which are intermixed and embedded in a severely deformed matrix material. The layer is up to 150 μm in thickness and interspersed with cracks in the surface near regions. The chemical composition of the layer equals the chemical composition of the undamaged alloy. The other specimens investigated within this research, show material losses and microstructures that lay within the spectrum defined by these two extreme points. This spectrum, however, is not continuous, but as The microstructural investigation shows that aluminium has no significant effect on the carbide volume fraction nor the chemical composition of the carbides in as-cast condition (see Additionally, the γ-Fe/M In the 2Al alloys (all ageing temperatures) and the 3Al alloy aged at 650 °C, NiAl precipitates could not directly be observed in the metallic matrix by SEM. However, due to the crystallographic investigation (see The fact that the variants of the 2Al and 3Al alloys aged at 650 °C have a higher hardness than the variants of the same alloys aged at 700 and 750 °C indicates that the size of the NiAl precipitates after ageing at 650 °C is closer to the precipitate size for optimal hardening (see In addition to the size, the number of precipitates (i.e. their total volume fraction) also influences the hardness gain through precipitation hardening. From the fact that the 3Al alloys have a higher hardness than the 2Al alloys after the same ageing treatments, it can be concluded that an increased aluminium content leads to the precipitation of a higher volume content of NiAl. The precipitation of NiAl is consistent with previous studies of Al-containing stainless steels with compositions comparable to that of our metal matrix (see In addition to NiAl, small amounts of M Since the quantity of M The increasing hardness of the 2Al and 3Al alloys above temperatures of 600 °C and 400 °C, respectively, in as-cast conditions can be explained with the formation of NiAl during hot hardness testing. The hardness of steels usually declines with raising temperature [ Wear and especially hot wear is a highly complex process. Wear related quantities such as the wear volume can only be explained with respect to the whole tribological system in which wear occurred. Conclusions on the influence of a single factor can therefore only be made reliably if all other parameters remain constant. By using the same experimental set-up, the same adjustable parameters, an inert atmosphere and materials with a very similar microstructure, we ensured that the observed differences in the hot wear tracks can be clearly attributed to precipitation hardening. From a macroscopic standpoint, the situation in our system can be described as one of sliding wear. As a matter of principle, all of the presently described wear mechanisms (abrasion, adhesion, tribochemical reaction, surface fatigue) can act, alone or simultaneously in such a system. As the surrounding atmosphere during testing was inert, and the material of the counter-body, Al Shape and size of these characteristics, however, differ substantially with aluminium content and ageing temperature. The extensive formation of a pronounced MML can be observed in each of the aluminium-free samples. The fact that this layer has the same chemical composition as the base material suggests that it consists entirely of previously removed and recompacted material. Material transfer from the counter body to the tested specimen could not be observed. However, investigation of the counter-bodies after wear testing showed that a metallic layer had deposited on the surface of each Al Since the size of the carbides in the MML is significantly smaller than the size of the carbides in the uninfluenced base material (compare Considering that the mechanical properties of the carbides are not affected by the addition of aluminium (same hardness) this can be traced back to the precipitation hardening of the matrix. This has two effects on the wear system. First, the extent of plastic deformation in the matrix will be smaller and therefore the extent of strain in the carbides will be smaller. This makes it less likely for carbides to fracture. Secondly, if the carbides do not fracture, they will in turn also support the matrix in a better manner during wear testing. If less material is removed and this material is even stronger, the tendency to form an MML naturally decreases. The absence of an MML also explains the large relative differences in volume loss of the 3Al alloy samples. Without MML, the counter-body comes into direct contact with the base material. As a result, differences in the mechanical and tribological properties of the base material are more pronounced. After the formation of an MML, however, its mechanical properties and in particular its adhesion are decisive for the loss of wear volume. The present findings are in good agreement with the results of Varga et al. who reported that matrix support of the hardphases is essential for good wear resistance at elevated temperature. If the matrix fails to support the hardphases wear drastically increases [ In several publications, researchers reported that the formation of a mechanically mixed layer (MML) can significantly improve the wear behaviour at elevated temperature [ To answer the question of whether intermetallic precipitations enhance the wear resistance of an austenitic matrix material by themselves, Zum Gahr conducted abrasive wear test on hardphase free austenitic steels containing aluminium rich precipitations of different size and kind. He found, that coherent precipitations of type Ni As the precipitations encountered in the present study were identified as NiAl and therefore incoherent, it can be assumed that their presence directly improved the wear resistance of the austenitic matrix. So that the positive effects of aluminium on wear resistance of the alloy system used can be attributed to both, more effective carbides and a more resistant matrix. The effects of precipitation hardening on hot hardness and high-temperature sliding wear resistance of differently alloyed (0, 2 and 3 wt.-% Al) and aged (24 h at 650 °C, 700 and 750 °C) iron-nickel base alloys have been investigated. The following conclusions can be drawn: The hot hardness and sliding wear resistance at 600 °C of a carbide containing austenitic iron-nickel alloy can be significantly improved by the addition of aluminium. The addition of 3 wt.-% Al leads to higher hot hardness and lower sliding wear compared with the 2 wt.-% Al alloys. The alloy with 2 wt.-% is, in turn, better than the aluminium free alloy. The enhancement of hot hardness and wear resistance can be attributed to the presence of aluminium rich precipitates. In the alloy system used in this study, the precipitates are of NiAl-type. For a given aluminium content the positive effect of aluminium is a function of ageing temperature. For the alloy system used within this study, the best results were obtained after 24 h ageing 650 °C. The alloy is therefore suited as a wear-resistant material up to such temperatures. The primary reason for the improvement of wear resistance at elevated temperature is the better support of the hardphases by matrix strengthening. Using precipitation strengthening seems to be a promising approach to compensate for the naturally weaker matrix of iron-nickel base alloys in the efforts to substitute cobalt-base alloys in wear application at elevated temperature.  The authors declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this paper. The authors gratefully acknowledge financial support by the