Human and ecological risk assessment requires the sources, distribution, mobility and environmental behaviour of contaminants to be investigated on a site-specific basis. It often deals with data sets which are relatively small and affected by sampling gaps. In the case of a polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbon (PAH) contaminated industrial site, Kriging interpolation of spatial data and principal component analysis (PCA) proved useful for extracting additional value from the data set. Kriging was adopted for assessing the horizontal and vertical distribution and transport of PAHs in soil. PCA was applied to PAH concentration and relative abundance in soil samples and interpreted on the basis of the PAH physico-chemical and bio-degradation properties. It revealed correlation with the products of a neighbouring factory and the weathering of the lighter PAHs. The geo- and multivariate statistical results were coupled with the previous hydrogeological characterisation of the site to develop a site-conceptual model for use in the exposure scenario modelling for risk assessment.Risk assessment has been internationally recognised as the most cost-effective and scientific tool for tackling the overwhelming problem of the contaminated sites management ( Risk assessment procedures are generally based on the source–pathway–receptor model ( Thus, site characterisation is the basis for risk assessment. Although much scientific literature is developing on risk assessment issues ( A proper risk-oriented characterisation should provide a conceptual model of the site, a quali/quantitative representation of the contaminant sources and as much of the data necessary for modelling contaminant fate and transport ( Since risk assessment is frequently a tiered or phased approach, moving from conservative assumptions to more site-specific and accurate characterisations, the characterisation is also a tiered approach, based on preliminary through to detailed investigations. The selection of the appropriate level of detail necessary for risk assessment depends on the complexity and the particular circumstances of the site, as well as cost and other project constraints ( Both the characterisation and the overall risk assessment, have to deal with a large number of uncertainties ( Kriging is a linear-weighted gridding method, that has been already successfully used to produce illustrative contour plots of contaminant distribution on the basis of scattered observed concentration data ( PCA has been extensively applied in many disciplines, but not yet in the risk assessment-oriented characterisation of contaminated sites. PCA enables the pollutant composition in different samples to be compared and also provides fingerprints for identifying the origin of the pollution ( The objective of this work is to extend, by the use of Kriging, PCA and additional data, the results of the risk-based characterisation of an industrial contaminated site presented by Previous results suggested the need for further investigation of PAH distribution and the relation of the PAH contamination in the study area with that originated from a factory producing PAHs located on the East site. The use of Kriging and PCA as explorative methods to describe the distribution and identify the primary and secondary sources of the site contamination is reported below. The study area was described in detail by The upper 1.5 m of soil appears disturbed and permeable, while the subsurface unsaturated soil (1.5–4 m layer) is a silty clayey layer including silty sandy horizons. A phreatic aquifer is settled in sandy-silt levels and perched on clayey intercalations, at a depth of 4–9 m, whereas a semiconfined aquifer, partially connected to the phreatic, is settled in a gravelly layer, at a depth of 10–25 m ( Both the phreatic and the semiconfined water table flow to the north-east with a low hydraulic gradient (0.15–1%). However, until the 1980s both aquifers were heavily exploited for industrial purposes by several wells in the CIP and surroundings areas ( Soil analysis showed heavy contamination by total and Et The semiconfined aquifer in the CIP area was found to be about one order of magnitude more contaminated than the phreatic aquifer by PAHs, with the more soluble PAHs (19.3 μg/l of naphthalene, 1.3 μg/l of methylnaphthalene) dominating over the others (<1 μg/l). Almost pure mineral oil was pumped off in the semiconfined aquifer close to the CARB factory. The results of 46 soil samples collected in the CIP area (18 sampling points labelled with 1–5 and E3–14) and analysed using the mobile chemical laboratory of the Joint European Research Centre (JRC) in 1996 ( On the mobile laboratory, the unsubstituted PAHs in soil were extracted by a 1:1 (v/v) acetone–ethane mixture and determined by gas chromatography–mass spectrometry (Fisons GC8000 gas chromatograph with AS800 autosampler). The sensitivity varied from 0.1 to 1 μg/kg for each PAH. A detailed description of the analytical procedure is reported elsewhere ( Although the analytical sensitivity in the CARB laboratories was lower than that obtained in the mobile chemical laboratory, CARB results were considered comparable to those of JRC, because PAH concentrations in CARB soil were one to three orders of magnitude higher than those in CIP soil. Kriging was used to interpolate concentration values. Then, on the basis of Kriging extrapolated values, contour plots of the contaminant distribution in the studied area were produced.The Kriging weights are calculated by means of a functional model (variogram) describing the spatial correlation of the data. The appropriate functional model is selected on the basis of the experimental variogram of the observed data, The variogram is summarised by three characteristics: Sill, the plateau the variogram reaches. Range, the distance at which the variogram reaches the sill, which represents the ‘range of correlation’ of data values. Nugget effect, the vertical height of the discontinuity at the origin, which represents the combination of short-scale variations and sampling-analytical errors. In this study, the variogram functions of the experimental data were computed and modelled by Variowin 2.2 ( Since the distribution of PAH concentrations showed a log-normal distribution, the PAH concentrations were log-trasformed to show a better agreement with a normal distribution. It provided more regular variograms. The Kriging interpolations were performed on log-concentrations and the estimated values were inversely transformed by the exponential function. The PCA was used to determine the variation of PAH composition in different soil samples. PCA is a multivariate statistical analysis converting the variables (analytes concentrations) in the so-called factors or principal components, i.e. linear combinations of the variables that are themselves not correlated and together explain the total variance of the data. The first factor explains the most variance, the second factor the next highest variance and so on. It follows that the dimensionality of the original data space can be reduced to a few factors, commonly two or three, retaining almost all the system variance. Furthermore, the factors can be rotated, in a way that each factor mostly explains a different subset of correlated variables (i.e. analytes), making the factors more comprehensive and causally explicable. The PCA allows ‘a factor score’ for each sample to be calculated. When plotted by factor scores, samples with similar analyte compositions (i.e. scores) will be closer than those with dissimilar compositions. The similarities among samples can shed light about the contamination sources. Details of this method are provided by The descriptive statistics of the PAHs concentrations in CIP and CARB soil are presented in Variography and gridding were applied to the total PAHs measured in both CIP and CARB soils. An explorative investigation by considering the highest concentration measured in the unsaturated zone (0–4 m depth) for each sampling station is presented here. The choice of the highest value was suggested by the fact that contaminants in unsaturated zone accumulated in permeable soil lenses irregularly distributed at different depths. Moreover, the interpolation obtained by considering different soil layers (0–1.5; 1.5–3; 3–6 m depth) showed a remarkable reduction of interpolating points in the east area, making the interpolation less explicative of the general trend of the contamination. However, the contour maps were in agreement with the considerations below relative to the entire unsaturated zone. Directional variograms (east–west and north–south directions) showed no marked anisotropy, therefore an omnidirectional variogram was selected and modelled with a spherical variogram (  From On the contrary, the percentage of less soluble compounds (right side of the  On the contrary, The PAH composition of the aromatic hydrocarbon blends produced by the CARB factory ( In order to investigate the origin of the CIP and CARB soil contamination, PCA was applied to the data matrix composed of PAH composition (%) in the CIP soil (46 samples, 0–7 m depth), and the CARB soil (25 samples, 0–7 m depth), as well as of CARB factory products (13 samples). The first two factors, explaining 62% of the total determinable variance, were retained. The correlation between the variables and the factors, the so-called factor loadings, are reported in The scores of factor 2 versus scores of factor 1 scatterplots are shown in The difference between the PAH contamination in CIP and in CARB was further investigated by applying PCA to the PAH concentration matrix composed of 14 individual compounds for 71 soil samples, of which 46 were collected in the CIP area, and 25 in the CARB area, 0–7 m depth. The first two principal components, explaining 80% of the total determinable variance, were retained. In It can be noted that each factor is significantly correlated with a different group of compounds. The most soluble and volatile, but least adsorptive PAHs (naphthalene, 2-methylnaphthalene, acenaphthylene, fluorene and phenanthrene) are correlated to factor 1, whereas the less soluble and volatile but more adsorptive PAHs are correlated with factor 2. The exceptions are benzo(b)fluoranthene+benzo(k)fluoranthene and benzo(g,h,i)perylene, that show a low solubility but are weakly correlated with factor 1. The scores of factor 2 versus scores of factor 1 scatterplot is presented in PAH distribution in CIP soil is remarkably different from those of Pb and Et On the basis of the PCA analysis, it can be reasonably inferred that the PAH blend discharged on CIP and CARB soil was similar to the CARB factory products. In fact, the plot of PCA scores in The fact that weathering processes in CARB soil are less evident than in CIP soil is caused by the ongoing pollution of CARB soil until recent times. Furthermore, The vertical concentration profiles of benzo(a)pyrene and naphthalene ( To be used in risk assessment, the final conceptual model of the study area concerning fundamental hydrogeological characteristics and the information so far obtained on the contaminant distribution can be visualised as in In this case study, additional information from the data set, which is relatively small and affected by sampling gaps, was extracted by Kriging and PCA. It provided fundamental results to risk assessment, such as the determination of the primary and secondary pollution sources, and allowed the development of a reliable conceptual model of the site. The study of the spatial correlation of the concentration data allows preliminary information on the general pattern of contaminative processes and geophysical phenomena to be incorporated in the interpolating exercise. Moreover, the variogram can be judged on the basis of the expert knowledge of the site. It makes Kriging a reliable technique for investigating the distribution and sources of contaminants in soil, even when relative small data sets and not exhaustive samplings are available. However, variograms of pollutants in soil often show a large nugget, due to sampling-analytical errors and small-scale variability. It should be remembered that including a nugget in kriging smoothes the highest concentrations. It outlines the general trend of the contamination, but in case of few data it would mask the presence of hot spots and singularities. PCA is a very promising tool for risk assessment-oriented characterisation studies. The PCA interpretation according to the physico-chemical properties of contaminants provides a new insight in the contaminant environmental behaviour and sources. In the case of PAHs simple source scenarios, the PCA would be preferred to other fingerprinting methods, such as those based on specific source and weathering ratios ( In this case study, the extended investigation about the primary sources of the contamination proved useful both for identifying pollution liabilities and even more so for a better understanding of contaminant fate and transport at the site (degradative processes, extent of transport through the soil medium and the aquifer). Furthermore, the investigation of neighbouring pollutant sources was necessary to understand the contaminant distribution and characterise the external sources of risk. Indeed, the risk-based characterisation of a site should encompass the collection of available data on the neighbouring areas.