In this paper a multidimensional model for binder granulation is presented. The particles undergo different transformations such as coalescence, compaction, and breakage. Further chemical reaction in the granules is taken into account in order to incorporate binder solidification which is observed to be a significant transformation in many industrial applications. The equations of the model framework are solved numerically with a direct simulation Monte Carlo (DSMC) algorithm. In addition to the comparison between experiment and simulation, the model framework also enables the study of critical parameters in binder granulation such as reaction rate (solidification of binder) and size of the added binder droplets, which demonstrates its promising potential.Granulation is a common industrial process which transforms fine powders into coarser grains that are user-friendly for handling, storage, post-processing, re-dispersion, and other processing or usage needs. Benefits include improved flowability and compaction behaviour for subsequent industrial processes (pharmaceutical tabletting, ceramic dry forming, minerals processing), storage stability, handling, and re-dispersion required by end-use applications (foods, detergents, agricultural chemicals, etc.). Besides the improvement to powder handling, granulation is also used to create ordered micro-mixtures of different components ( Granulation is often accomplished using a liquid binder to create a composite structure of fine particles connected by a binder phase. In the granular product, the binder is usually converted into a stable solid phase, for example by drying, cooling, or reaction of the binder with the particulate substrate. The conversion of the binder from a liquid to a solid state can be done as a post-process (e.g., a separate drying step) or it can be an integral part of the granulation process. In the latter case, the rate of the binder transformation from liquid to solid is critical to the granulation process. Binder granulation is typically achieved by adding a liquid binder to small solid particles in a mixer-granulator, fluidised bed, or other appropriate unit operation. The binder can be atomised as individual droplets contacting the particle bed ( Previous work suggests an approach to analyse and optimise binder granulation processes in terms of micro-scale transformations ( In the current work, the authors aim to further the scientific approach to granulation product optimisation and process control through a stochastic modelling framework. This modelling framework provides a multivariate population balance capable of concurrent transformations while tracking multiple product attributes. The output of the model is a set of predictive process trajectories for distributed product attributes including size, granule density, and composition. While the modelling work is still at a research stage, the mathematical algorithms are of reasonable efficiency for application to process optimisation and control. The stochastic modelling framework permits the use of both continuous descriptions (based on empirical approximations applied to the bulk system) and discrete events (based on micro-scale models). Relevant transformations include binder atomisation, binder dispersion, nucleation, granule coalescence, layering, compaction, binder solidification (e.g., by reaction, drying, cooling), and breakage (fragmentation, abrasion). Significantly, the description of transformations as discrete events on a micro-scale allows the direct incorporation of mechanistic models in the overall process model framework. As such, the stochastic method enables a significant bridging of scales from first-principle micro-scale to the process unit operation. A significant outcome of the current work is the incorporation of an explicit binder transformation rate within the granulation process. In practice, binder transformation (e.g., from a liquid to solid phase) is observed in reactive binder systems (reaction rate), agglomeration with concurrent drying (drying rate), and hot melt granulation (cooling rate). In all cases, the relevant rate processes occur on a per granule basis, as a function of the granule composition and process history. Whereas previous empirical models may approximate the effect of such transformations on a bulk scale, the current modelling framework allows the use of detailed mechanistic models on a micro-scale using fundamental physical and chemical properties. Overall, the potential to bridge the micro (i.e., granule) and unit-operation scales using the stochastic modelling approach is a very promising development. Enabling the use of first-principle models as elements in an overall process description can help to supplant the empiricism that pervades much of the current practice in particulate processes ( Historically, particle size has been used as the primary attribute in population balance models ( In general, the current model tracks the volume of solid, liquid, and vapour phases in a representative sampling of individual granules. The solid volume includes the particulate volume associated with constituent particles (original solid) along with any solid reaction products of binders (reacted solid). Liquid binder is partitioned by location, either on the surface of particles or internal to the granule structure. In the latter case, the internal binder occupies granular pore volume. The remaining pore volume is filled with a vapour phase. The shape of a granule is assumed to be spherical. In total, a granule is described by five independent variables. From these it is possible to express other properties such as the total volume (particle size) or the surface area. The vector The granular ensemble changes during the granulation process due to transformations taking place, i.e., events and mechanisms. We consider the following transformations to take place in the current model: addition of binder; coalescence of particles; compaction (porosity reduction); chemical reaction; mass transfer of liquid into the pores (penetration); breakage. In the present case we consider the binder liquid to be added into the process by an implied process of droplet formation followed by contacting the solid particles with the liquid droplets. Together, the particles and droplets are the constituents of the granular ensemble. For the purpose of modelling, the droplets are represented as a special case of a particle; the vector of the independent variables for a droplet becomes For the further modelling it is assumed that the particle system of our granulation process is ideally mixed. The coagulation kernel Coalescence takes place if the critical If the two particles ( The volumes Each collision of particles leads to compaction and will be described by an adapted approach using the findings of In the current model, compaction causes transfer of internal liquid to the external surface once the pores are totally saturated by internal liquid. Chemical interactions between the different components of the granules have to be taken into account for many applications in industrial practice. For example, hydration of substrate powders by aqueous binder systems and acid–base reactions are well known in industry. Variations in the chemical and physical characteristics of the raw materials can have a significant effect on the process. So far, this transformation has not been incorporated explicitly into a general process model framework. For the present case we consider the formation of reacted solid from liquid binder, i.e., the solidification of the material. This continuous process happens when original solid material is present. It is assumed that the incremental conversion is proportional to the reaction interface, i.e., the surface area. Additionally, the reaction rate may be limited by transport across a product layer ( reaction on the external surface: A liquid droplet which coalesces with a “real” particle will increase the amount of external liquid of the new particle. If this particle is porous, external liquid will probably penetrate into the pores. To deal with this process, the following equation for the penetration rate While breakage has been identified to be a significant process in high shear and drum granulation ( For the characterisation of a breakage process, the likelihood of breakage of any particle and the properties distribution (e.g. size distribution) of the newly formed particles have to be known. The likelihood of breakage is described by the breakage frequency The above model can be written in the form of a multidimensional population balance equation with five independent variables. Due to the complexity it is necessary to solve these equations numerically. In principal any methods can be chosen, although finite element approaches/sectional methods have the drawback that the computational effort required to obtain a solution grows exponentially with the number of independent variables ( In this section we show the applicability of our model with a comparison between experimental and simulation results, and perform parameter studies for the reaction rate and the droplet size. Given that the multidimensional model is significantly dependent on binder distribution within the granular ensemble, an experiment was chosen to measure both granule size and granule binder concentration. The size was measured directly by automated image analysis. An optical tracer was added to the binder and granule colour was used as a proxy measure of binder concentration. A reactive binder-powder system is used to investigate the reaction sub-model. To examine the model's capability to describe binder distribution as an event-driven process, we used a binder droplet size that is an order of magnitude larger than the particulate solids. Thus, the full dispersion of binder relies on events leading to contact-spreading. The reliance on contact spreading is common in many industrial applications, especially for fine-powder granulation. The experimental system used anhydrous sodium carbonate particles (FMC Soda Ash Grade 260) and a 25 The anhydrous powder reacts with water in the binder to form a monohydrate phase, effectively converting The experiment started with a dry feedstock of 300 The granulation was performed in four equally timed stages, which lasted about 1 After each interval, the mixer was switched off and a sample was taken to measure the size and the binder amount/coating level of the particles. The sizes of the samples (approx. 20 Simulations with the same conditions and profiles were performed. Many rate constants and material properties are contained in the model. Some of these parameters are known or can be reasonably approximated; others (e.g., breakage functions) require empirical adjustment and/or further investigation. The values of the model parameters used in the presented simulation are summarised in The simulation results also allow the volume mean size and standard deviation of this measure to be deduced. A comparison for both of these characteristics of the particle ensemble is made in From the previous figures it can be concluded that there is close agreement between the trends of the experiment and the simulation (reference case). The characteristic particle measures of the simulation are of the right order of magnitude and follow similar trends. Although there is a remarkable difference between experiment and simulation for the A new feature of the model is the incorporation of chemical reactions in a single granule. As in the present case this can be the solidification of binder. If the reaction rate varies (e.g. due to different process conditions like temperature), the outcome of the granulation process is different from the reference case. The reaction rate constants were decreased and increased by an order of magnitude, so that the evolutions of the volume mean size and the standard deviation as in A reduction of the reaction rate leads to the formation of bigger final granules, whereas a higher reaction rate inhibits the size enlargement process. A possible explanation for this finding might be that a granule with the same composition can undergo more successful collisions in the first case, as more external liquid is present on the external surface. Furthermore, this particle is softer (lower coefficient of restitution), because the amount of internal liquid is higher for a lower reaction rate. These findings are supported by a plot of the mean critical The mean critical Indeed, the dispersion of the binder is of critical importance in the reactive granulation process. One may ask what happens, if the droplet size is changed, i.e., another nozzle configuration is used for the process. If the droplet size is changed by an order of magnitude with respect to the reference case, the results shown in The behaviour of the process can be changed by varying the droplet size. The addition of smaller droplets leads to a bigger mean particle size at the beginning of the process, but towards the end of the granulation process a behaviour similar to the reference case is seen for the mean size as for its standard deviation. These findings are supported by the corresponding mean critical The addition of bigger droplets eventually results in the formation of bigger granules. This means, in addition to the reaction rate, the droplet size gives another opportunity to influence the product granule size. This paper presents a stochastic population balance model for binder granulation. The model is capable of using discrete event-driven sub-models to describe individual micro-scale transformations within an overall process model framework. As such, the stochastic method framework serves as an integrator of transformations within the overall process. A significant outcome of the current work is the incorporation of an explicit binder reaction rate (transformation from liquid to solid phase) within the granulation process as well as the combined dispersion of binder by both droplet atomisation and contact-spreading mechanisms. The particles are described by five independent state properties to describe composition and structure, enabling consideration of multiple concurrent transformations including binder atomisation, dispersion, coagulation, binder–substrate reactions, compaction, and breakage. First comparisons between experiment and simulation show a promising agreement, and further in-silico case studies show significant effect of binder-related transformations on the product distributions, both in size and composition. Overall, the potential to bridge the micro and unit-operation scales using the stochastic modelling approach is a very promising development, and the authors foresee expanding opportunities to use this approach with more complex transformational models.  Andreas Braumann would like to thank Procter and Gamble, and the University of Cambridge for funding. Markus Kraft thanks Churchill College and the EPSRC (grant EP/E01772X/1) for financial support. 