In the present work, the electrochemical behaviors of Lu (III) ions in molten LiCl–KCl and LiCl–KCl–MgCl2 were investigated by cyclic voltammetry, square wave voltammetry, and chronopotentiometry, respectively. Galvanostatic electrolysis was conducted on a molybdenum electrode to prepare the Mg–Lu alloys, while potentiostatic electrolysis was conducted on a magnesium electrode to prepare the Mg–Lu alloy layers. The microstructure and microzone analysis of the obtained deposits were characterized by XRD and SEM–EDS. An intermetallic compound of MgLu was formed by galvanostatic electrolysis, whereas two kinds of intermetallic compound (Mg24Lu5 and MgLu) and Lu metal in the alloy layer.Today, the pyrochemical processes based on molten salts electrochemistry are becoming a more important and promising approach for lanthanides/actinides separation in spent nuclear fuel, because of the radiation resistant, thermal resistant and high solubility of molten salts In the past few years, several studies on the electrochemical behaviors, separation and formation of alloys and alloy layers of lanthanides and actinides have been performed Some researchers have done some beneficial attempt to the co-reduction of magnesium and other metal ions Production of pure magnesium and lanthanide metals by electrolysis is a high energy-consuming process. Furthermore, the traditional approach for the preparation of Mg-RE alloy is principally based on pyrometallurgy, which is another high energy-consuming process. As such, molten salts electrolysis is a promising technology for the co-reduction of Mg and rare earth ions to prepare Mg-RE alloys in one step with energy-saving and cost-saving. In general, with a high current density, lithium could also be reduced with the Mg–Lu alloy under galvanostatic electrolysis. Addition of lithium will improve strength, toughness and stiffness of ternary alloy, which is desirable Thus, it is of great importance to investigate the electrochemical behavior of Lu (III) in LiCl–KCl melts. However, the electrochemical behavior, the formation mechanism of Mg–Lu alloy as well as alloy layer, and some other properties have not yet been clarified. It is significant to expand the basic knowledge of Lu electrochemistry and to separate Lu from spent fuels. Hence, in this work, the co-reduction mechanism of Mg (II) and Lu (III) is demonstrated by employing some electrochemical methods in the LiCl–KCl–MgCl The experiments were performed under purified Ar gas, equipped with a well-type oven. The electrolytic solution was prepared by LiCl–KCl in an Al All electrochemical measurements were carried out using an Autolab AUT302N electrochemical workstation (Metrohm Co., Ltd.) with the Nova 1.10 software package. A sliver wire (d = 1 mm, 99.99% purity, Alfa Aesar) dipped into a solution of AgCl (1 wt %) in LiCl–KCl (50:50 wt. %, Alfa Aesar) melts contained in an Al The samples of Mg–Lu alloys were prepared by galvanostatic or potentiostatic electrolysis. After electrolysis, all samples were washed with ethanol (99.9% purity) in an ultrasonic bath to remove salts and stored inside the glove box for analysis. These samples were analyzed by X-ray diffraction (XRD, X′ Pert Pro; Philips Co., Ltd.) using Cu-Kα radiation at 40 kV and 40 mA. The microstructure and microzone chemical analyses were also measured using scanning electron microscope with Energy dispersive X-ray Spectroscopy (JSM-6480; JEOL Co., Ltd.).  In the reverse scanning direction, anodic signal B′ corresponds to the oxidation process of Lu (0) to Lu (III). In  The number of exchanged electrons in this electrochemical process was also calculated by square wave voltammogram, which can be determined by using the follow equation and measuring the half height width of the reduction peak Moreover, square wave voltammogram observed in     Under potentiostatic electrolysis, the electrolytic current was low, so it is hard to obtain enough quality samples from the melts to carry out analysis. Both Mg (II) and Lu (III) are reduced simultaneously, when both ions are present in the melts, leading the formation of an Mg–Lu alloy. Electrolytic extraction of Lu (III) ions by co-reduction with Mg (II) ions was performed via galvanotactic electrolysis (−2.0 A) in the LiCl–KCl–MgCl The ICP-AES analysis of samples (Mg–Lu alloys) obtained by galvanostatic electrolysis is shown in  To examine the distribution of Mg and Lu elements in the Mg–Lu alloys, a microstructure analysis of the elements was conducted. The formation of Mg–Lu alloys samples were attempted on the Mo electrode by potentiostatic electrolysis, however only one kind of MgLu phase in the alloys. In order to further investigate the deposition mechanism of lutetium and magnesium, an Mg rod (d = 7 mm) was used as the cathode and potentiostatic electrolysis were employed at −2.2 V (vs. Ag/AgCl) for 4, 8, 12 and 48 h, respectively, in the LiCl–KCl-(1 wt. %) MgCl    The electrochemical behaviors of Lu (III) ions on a molybdenum electrode in LiCl–KCl–LuCl The work was financially supported by the