For the common rock-forming minerals, the Joule–Thompson effect produces cooling on compression and heating on decompression. Experimental rock friction studies and seismological evidence suggest that the strength of faults is controlled by high-stress asperities that represent a small fraction of the total fault area. During seismic rupture, the area immediately beneath asperities is inferred to undergo adiabatic compressions and decompressions on the order of 1–2.8GPa. Joule–Thompson coefficients are in the range 261–372°C/GPa, resulting in temperature changes of ±336–880°C. Quartz asperities with a compressive strength of 2.8GPa can produce a heating or cooling of 880°C immediately beneath an asperity. By comparison, frictional heating ‘flash temperatures’ are less than 1000°C for asperity contact areas <300μm2. The Joule–Thompson effect is independent of asperity size and may augment or counteract frictional heating. The paucity of pseudotachylytes in the geologic record and the absence of localized heat flow anomalies on active faults might be explained by the Joule–Thompson cooling effect.Pseudotachylytes are commonly thought to be solely the product of frictional heat during seismic slip ( During high strain rate events there are rapid compressions and decompressions associated with deformation. For example, adiabatic decompression is widely thought to produce melting during meteorite impact ( It is shown here that adiabatic compression and decompression beneath an asperity can result in several hundred degrees heating or cooling, which, provided the asperities are small enough, is of the same order of magnitude as frictional heating. The results suggest that Joule–Thompson adiabatic heating and cooling may play an important role in the temperature evolution of a fault during seismic slip. During brittle faulting it is commonly assumed that frictional processes, such as wear production, frictional heat, seismic behavior, and fault strength, are governed by small areas of contact between the opposing fault surfaces such that these areas (asperities) represent the load-bearing framework of the fault ( Frictional studies on metals and rocks indicate that the real area of contact As the normal stress increases, the real area of contact increases by three processes, namely growth of existing contacts, coalescence of contacts and appearance of new contacts ( During slip, asperities may interact with each other and the opposing fault surface in three different ways ( As an asperity is destroyed (by comminution, shearing or melting), stress may be transferred to an existing asperity, or a new asperity may appear to support the load. More complex asperity behavior is required to explain both time and velocity dependant friction effects (so-called rate/state friction laws), where asperity healing is involved ( A hemi-spherical asperity with a compressive strength of 2 An alternative type of asperity behavior is shown in Other mechanisms whereby normal stress rapidly decreases across a slipping fault involve a component of vibration normal to the fault ( As discussed above, the advance of the asperity over a deformable opposing wall involves either a rapid adiabatic compression or decompression. Depending on the pressure change involved and the properties of the solid, either cooling or heating will occur. The Joule–Thompson coefficient  The compressive yield strength of the common silicates is listed in The heat source on individual asperities will last only a millisecond (for a slip velocity of 1 As pointed out above, the Joule–Thompson coefficient (  It is interesting to compare the estimated flash melting temperature of about 1000 As pointed out above, seismic observations on the San Andreas fault at Parkfield ( Using this fractal model, A long-standing puzzle is the apparent paucity of pseudotachylytes in the geologic record, despite theoretical studies that suggest they should be common ( I thank S. Karner and anonymous reviewers for helpful comments on earlier versions of the manuscript and the editorial help of D. Ferrill. An anonymous reviewer kindly recast Archard's equations into the more tractable form used here. Partly supported by NSF-EAR-0003482.