Background
                  ACL reconstruction is recommended to improve function in subjects with ligament injuries. However, after surgery, some individuals are not able to return to their pre-injury functional level. The mechanisms related to this incapacity are not well understood.
               
                  Study design
                  Cross-sectional study.
               
                  Methods
                  Co-contraction levels were assessed in individuals who returned to their pre-injury functional level and in 10 individuals who were not able to return to full activity after unilateral ACL reconstruction. Electromyography of the vastus lateralis and biceps femoris muscles before and after sudden perturbations applied during the stance phase of walking was used to calculate co-contraction.
               
                  Results
                  The involved limb had lower co-contraction pre-perturbation than the non-involved limb in both groups (p
                     =0.049). The co-contraction level post-perturbation was significantly higher in the limited return group than in the full return group (p
                     =0.03).
               
                  Conclusion
                  Decreased co-contraction in the involved limb before perturbation may be caused by sensorial changes resulting from surgery or injury. Increased co-contraction levels observed in the limited return group after perturbation may be a compensatory mechanism to make up for possible decreased intrinsic stability of the knee joint.
               
                  Clinical relevance
                  Increased co-contraction after perturbation does not contribute to knee stability.Anterior cruciate ligament (ACL) injuries are common in individuals who engage in contact and no-contact sports ( Studies that examined factors related to the success of ACL reconstruction have not fully explained why some individuals adapt to their injury better than others ( The capability of a joint to maintain stability against expected or unexpected perturbation seems to depend on its stiffness ( Initially, 121 individuals who underwent unilateral arthroscopic ACL reconstruction by the same surgeon using the patellar tendon graft method were invited to participate in the study. These individuals were submitted to ACL reconstruction at least two years before their participation in this study. They underwent the same rehabilitation program, which allowed for a full return to sports activities seven months after the operation. Signs and symptoms of advanced osteoarthritis, demonstrated by clinical and radiological examination and the presence of pain during the study procedures, were set as exclusion criteria. Fifty-six subjects declined to take part in the study or were excluded. The remaining 65 subjects who agreed to participate in the study answered a questionnaire specifically designed to confirm that these individuals attempted to return to their pre-injury activities. According to their questionnaire answers, the individuals were classified as individuals who attempted full return to sports or functional activities and those who did not. The latter group ( With respect to associated injuries, six subjects did not have associated meniscus lesions at the time of the ligament injury, three each in the full return and limited return groups. The other subjects had some level of meniscus injury: twelve from the full return group and seven from the limited return group. When indicated, surgical treatment of the meniscus lesion was carried out at the time of the ligament reconstruction or in a prior procedure. The characteristics of the sample are presented in The subjects were informed about the research procedures and voluntarily signed an informed consent form. Muscular co-contraction was evaluated while walking on a platform that could apply a sudden perturbation to the subjects by means of an electromechanical device. Electromyographic (EMG) signals from the After electrode placement, the subjects were asked to walk as naturally as possible in a comfortable and preferred speed on a three-meter walkway formed by two stable platforms and one electromechanical balance board (43 After walking on the platform, the subjects were asked to sit on a dynamometer ( The EMG signals 250 The muscular co-contraction was calculated according to the method described by Two analyses of variance (ANOVA) with one between-subject factor (limited return group and full return group) and one within-subject factor (involved and non-involved limb) were used to compare the dependent variables co-contraction pre- and post-perturbation between groups and limbs. These statistical procedures allowed us to test the main effects group and limbs, as well as interaction effects. Independent The results of the ANOVA concerning pre-perturbation co-contraction revealed a significant main effect of limb ( Analysis of the data on co-contraction post-perturbation revealed a significant main effect of group ( The independent Muscular co-contraction has been suggested to be a stabilizing mechanism that improves the resistance of joints to perturbations ( The co-contraction level prior to joint perturbation is related to how joint stiffness is continuously regulated by the concerted action of the muscles around the joint ( The muscular co-contraction level after perturbation of the knee joint did not differ between the limbs but demonstrated a significant difference between groups. Subjects in the limited return group had higher co-contraction levels post-perturbation than subjects in the full return group. Similarly, In addition to proper joint stiffness, structural factors (joint geometry) and ligament regulation of joint arthrokinematics are thought to be essential to maintain adequate joint stability. For example, The sample was homogeneous concerning the time between ligament injury and surgery. With respect to functional level, the individuals that were not able to return to their pre-injury activity level had significantly lower CKRS scores than individuals in the full return group. However, this study had some limitations that must be pointed out. The presence of meniscus lesions associated with ligament rupture is a condition that may influence joint geometry and reduce joint stability ( After adequate ligament reconstruction, re-establishment of normal joint stability is anticipated. However, it is still not possible to explain why, even after the reconstruction, some subjects cannot return to their pre-injury activity level. Comparisons between full and limited return subjects indicate that co-contraction post-perturbation is a factor that distinguishes between groups. This result indicates that limited return subjects required increased neuromuscular response to compensate for a possible instability. The results of this study suggest that neuromuscular mechanisms such as co-contraction are not sufficient to solely explain why some individuals have persistent instability after reconstructive surgery. The process involved with functional instability is complex and depends on the other factors in addition to the level of muscular activation. In this context, other experimental data associated with those on muscular co-contraction obtained in the present study could help understanding why some individuals do not have the ability to dynamically stabilize the knee joint during functional activities The present study demonstrated that pre-perturbation co-contraction levels are reduced in the involved limb of ACL reconstruction patients in comparison to the non-involved leg. This decreased neuromuscular response may have been influenced by sensorial changes caused by the surgery or by the ligament injury itself. In addition, significant differences were found between groups in co-contraction post-perturbation values. This suggested that limited return individuals needed increased co-contraction levels to compensate for a possible persistent joint instability. This work has been partially supported by the