Vertical roller mills (VRM) have found applications mostly in cement grinding operations where they were used in raw meal and finish grinding stages and in power plants for coal grinding. The mill combines crushing, grinding, classification and if necessary drying operations in one unit and enables to decrease number of equipment in grinding circuits. Sustainable operations and proven benefits of the technology in cement grinding applications attracted interests of the mineral industry. Within the scope of the study, ore grinding performance of the VRM was investigated via a mobile grinding plant and relationships between operational parameters were identified. In this context, gold ore was ground under different process conditions. The samples collected after the test works and size distributions were determined. As a result of the study, effects of operational parameters such as working pressure, and classifier rotor speed on product mass flow and product size were investigated. In addition, correlations of specific energy consumption of the grinding-classifying circuit with product rate and product size are presented. The aim was to develop a VRM performance prediction model that is based on input data from characterization combined with the knowledge of the interaction of the single grinding parameters.Comminution is highly energy consuming and the head operation of the entire processing plant where the target size required for subsequent unit operations e.g., leaching or flotation is produced. Therefore, energy efficient grinding technologies have become the main interest of the industry. Up to now, various types of machines differing in grinding and operating mechanisms have been developed to meet the requirement of the industry. With the introduction of the high compression machines such as High Pressure Grinding Rolls (HPGR), Vertical Roller Mills (VRM) and Horomills, efficiency of the grinding circuits was improved in terms of energy and downstream effects. Among these devices, vertical roller mills have an important position in cement and mining industry. In literature, there are many studies performed in cement plants on comparison of conventional grinding systems and vertical roller mills in terms of energy consumption. It was noticed that 30% energy saving could be provided by VRM for cement grinding ( In recent years, pilot plant tests with the Loesche In addition to low energy consumption, an increased mineral liberation achieved by the in bed grinding principle compared to conventional tumbling mill grinding could be identified. Positive effects on performance of downstream processes like flotation, leaching, etc. could be proven. In a study, flotation recovery of copper and nickel ore was increased from 74% to 84% and from 79% to 86%, respectively ( In this study, pilot scale tests were performed with a mobile vertical-roller-mill grinding plant to investigate the relationships between operational parameters. The identification and quantification of the grinding parameter relationships was carried out to implement these relationships into a computational vertical-roller-mill performance model. The model consists of grinding and separation sections. For the modelling of the grinding operation, breakage rates of the particles are correlated with design parameters and material characteristics. Separation operation of vertical-roller-mill will be modelled by application of current models. The model shall enable the prediction of the throughput, the particle size distributions around the vertical-roller-mill circuit, the specific energy consumption and in a later stage the wear to be expected in dependency of ore treated. The model combines performance data from pilot and industrial plants with mineral characterization methods. The mineral characterization is based on mineralogical studies combined with results from mechanical rock fracture test work like piston and die tests. The model accuracy is going to be increased with further test and mineral characterization campaigns to be carried out. Within this aim, grinding tests were carried out at different operating conditions. At the end of this study, the relations between operational parameters were evaluated to create a first basis for a computational performance evaluation VRM model. Within the scope of the study, grinding tests were carried out by using an LM 4,5 installed in the OGP mobile constructed by Loesche for ore grinding. The installation of the OGP in a gold processing plant is illustrated in Loesche OGP mobile can be operated in two grinding modes characterized by location of the classification systems as air-swept and overflow mode. In this paper, studies performed in air-swept mode are presented. In the air-swept mode, the vertical-roller-mill and a high efficiency dynamic classifier are suited above each other as a single unit ( The grinding test studies were performed in air-swept mode. During the tests, steady state conditions were verified through the control room data. Then samples were collected around the circuit. Totally 16 grinding tests were carried out for gold ore, whose Bond Work Index is 18.5 In this part of the study, the particle size distributions of collected samples were determined. To identify the effect of the final product particle size respectively the degree of mineral liberation in dependency of the product particle size a variety of different product particle sizes has been produced. Initially, dry sieving technique was applied from top size to 150 In addition to particle size distributions, mineralogical analysis with the focus on the degree of mineral liberation and determination of breakage characteristics are part of the vertical-roller-mill performance model study. Mineralogical analysis is a good way to evaluate the effect of vertical-roller-mill on downstream processes. For this specific ore the degree of mineral liberation is still to be determined. In previous works ( In order to evaluate the performance of a comminution process, energy utilization and the necessary degree of mineral liberation and hence the size reduction are the key features that need to be considered for a given device. As to be expected the specific grinding energy consumption is decreasing with increasing product Additional to the grinding energy the classifier motor and the fan motor are consuming energy. The specific energy consumption of the classifier and the fan are determined by a separate scale up procedure and can’t be directly taken over from pilot plant. Hence these values were not given for the pilot plant. In a future case study, they will be given for a possible industrial scenario. The main parameter related with the product rate and product particle size is the classifier rotor speed. The cut size of classification can be controlled by adjusting the speed of the classifier rotor in relation to the volume flow and the grinding pressure. Variation of product rate and product size with classifier rotor speed shown in The differences in the production rate marked in The VRM technology is characterized by the possibility to control and adjust the circulating loading of the internal grinding classifying circuit. The control of the circulating load is achieved by adjusting the pressure drop over the mill comprising out of the gas flow and the solid loading inside the mill. Higher classifier rotor speed reduces the product particle size and hence increases the amount of internal grinding classifying circuits. Adjusting a fixed internal circulating load, defined by the pressure drop over the mill, the product rate decreases. Classifier rotor speed and working pressure are effective parameters on product rate as indicated. When the working pressure is normalized with the classifier rotor speed Within the study, effect of operational parameters on product size and product rate was investigated. For this purpose, pilot plant grinding tests were carried out successfully at different operating conditions. The results showed that specific grinding energy consumption has a correlation with product size and product rate. It is observed that classifier rotor speed has an inverse proportion with product rate and product size. Besides, working pressure is normalized with classifier rotor speed and effect on product rate was presented. The obtained relations between the single grinding parameters will be combined with the results of the mineral characterization to build a first basis for a computational performance evaluation VRM model. The model accuracy is going to be increased by an increase of the data base by additional pilot and laboratory campaigns as well as parallel mineralogical characterization test.