The optimisation of thermal conditions in buildings depends on the physical, chemical and structural characteristics of the building elements, which may include marble tiles Although measurements of the SHC of rock materials are performed more rarely than, e.g., thermal conductivity determinations, some methods, such as the calorimetric method and the differential thermal analysis (DTA) technique for measuring the SHC of rocks, have been described in the literature SHC is one of the major physical properties required when analysing the transient thermal behaviour of building materials and building components, and is defined as the amount of heat per unit mass required to raise the temperature by 1 The calorimetric method presented here makes use of a thermostatically controlled vacuum flask, heater for heating the rocks and differential thermometer to determine the SHC value. The reliability of the results obtained in calorimetric work depends essentially upon the skill of the operator, the conditions under which the experiments are conducted, the precision with which the apparatus is calibrated and the accuracy with which correction constants can be determined. A presentation of the SHC measurement system is given in A simple calorimeter may just consist of a thermometer attached to an insulated container. A vacuum flask having a capacity of 750 Thermometers graduated to 1/100° are used to measure the temperature of the calorimeter liquid. It must be assumed that the values given by the TSE 4048 and ASTM D 2766 for the upper and lower readings of the thermometer are correct. The operators can themselves determine the graduation errors by means of divided threads and, in experiments in which a high degree of accuracy is to be attained, this is desirable. Dimensional properties of the heater must be suitable for heat stability in order to prevent heat changes during the experiment. An electrical heater is used to produce the same temperature change over the same time period in the calorimeter as the reaction being measured. The electrical energy supplied to produce the temperature change is equal to the energy change that occurred in the reaction. Tests were conducted in the laboratory on specially prepared rock samples to determine a relation between specific heat capacity and their physical and mechanical properties. The types of rocks chosen are mainly used in building construction as a natural building, and facing stone for inside and outside walls. Specific heat capacity tests were conducted on 30×35×100 During the tests, a thermostatically controlled, ventilated drying oven capable of maintaining a temperature of 105 The dry weights of the samples and calorimeter are measured and recorded (m). Fill the calorimeter to 2/3 with tap water and measure its mass again. The difference is the mass of water. Select a piece of metal for which the specific heat is known. In this study, the calorimeter is surrounded with steel, and its specific heat capacity value is 0.107 The sample is put into the heater and the initial temperature of the sample must be between 20 and 100 A thermometer must be placed in the calorimeter through the cap hole to measure the initial temperature of the calorimeter. This is the initial temperature of the rock. ( When, after a few minutes, the initial temperatures of the calorimeter and the sample are stabilized and the thermometer shows no changes, in a quick and careful motion, the sample must be withdrawn from the water and placed in the calorimeter ( The gathered data must then be inserted in the thermal equilibrium equation in order to solve for the unknown: In this approach, by the use of water as a calorimetric liquid, the average temperature must be obtained as 60 The thermal properties necessary for design analyses are thermal conductivity and specific heat. Thermal properties and densities of various materials are given in Laboratory scale tests, including uniaxial compressive strength, unit volume weight, water absorption, porosity and P-wave velocity, were performed in the laboratory on different marble samples collected from the factories to determine a relation between SHC values and their physical and mechanical properties. All the rock specimens were oven dried in all tests. To standardize the tests employed and make the results obtained comparable, the International Society for Rock Mechanics (ISRM) provides (ISRM Commission 1979) suggested methods for determining the physical and mechanical properties of the rock material There are various physical factors affecting the SHC of rocks. Some properties like porosity, unit volume weight, water absorption and uniaxial compressive strength have a primary affect on the SHC of the rocks. The relations between these properties and the SHC value was investigated and illustrated graphically in Porosity, as another rock parameter, controls thermal properties, and is related to grain size. It is inversely proportional to the SHC. Uniaxial compressive strength is also one of the important factors influencing the thermal properties of rocks. As seen from the figures, the SHC values of the marbles increase with increasing uniaxial compressive strength of the rocks. Since the SHC values of the marbles are controlled by many factors, the thermal properties of the rocks can be predicted by multiple regression modelling. The basic idea behind regression analysis is to choose a method of measuring the agreement between the data and a regression model with a particular choice of variables. This measurement of agreement is called the merit function, and is arranged so that small values represent close agreement between the collected data and the regression model. In this study, nonlinear methods were used to determine the best-fit parameters for a model by minimizing a chosen merit function. The equation representing the model can be written in the following form: The multiple regression model is defined below by using the statistical results of the model given in Validation of the model was carried out by considering the adjusted determination coefficient, the The adjusted coefficient of multiple determinations can be defined as Ra Although the mechanical properties and thermal properties have generally been treated separately from each other, here, the thermal properties are linked with uniaxial compressive strength via the effective porosity derived from the correlation with unconfined compressive strength. In this study, an approach has been made to predict the SHC of rock through its physical and mechanical properties.