In this contribution, we report the analysis and interpretation of the mechanical property measurements for a new class of SiAlON ceramic. The hardness and indentation fracture toughness were measured on the hot pressed Ba-doped S-SiAlON ceramic using Vickers indentation at varying loads (up to 300N). An important observation was that all the investigated S-SiAlON exhibited the characteristic rising R-curve behavior with a maximum toughness of up to 10–12MPam1/2 for ceramics, hot pressed both at 1700 and 1750°C. Crack deflection by large elongated S-phase grains and crack bridging by β-Si3N4 needles has been found to be the major toughening mechanisms for the observed high toughness. Theoretical estimates, using a toughening model based on crack bridging and deflection by platelet shaped ‘S’-phase grains and β-Si3N4 needles, reveal the interfacial friction of around 200MPa. Careful analysis of the indentation data reveals the average (apparent) hardness modestly increases with indent load in all S-SiAlON samples, with more significant effect for S-SiAlON, hot pressed at 1600°C. This effect has been analyzed in the light of the established model of ‘indentation-induced cracking’ phenomenon. Our experimental results suggest that a modest combination of average hardness of 15GPa and indentation toughness of around 12MPam1/2 could be achieved in Ba-S-SiAlON ceramic and further improvement requires microstructural tailoring.In last few decades, silicon nitride (Si In recent times, Ba/Sr-doped S-phase SiAlON ceramics have received limited attention. The starting powders were the high purity commercial powders of BaCO Microstructural characterization was performed using scanning electron microscope (SEM) (Quanta FEI 200, The Netherlands) with attached energy dispersive spectroscopy (EDS) and transmission electron microscope (TEM) (JEOL 2000 FX). The electron transparent thin foil of S1700 sample for TEM investigation was prepared by the standard preparation route, which involves grinding, polishing followed by ion milling using Ar The fracture toughness ( However, for the Palmqvist type of crack (0.25 Both the indent diagonal and crack length are carefully measured from SEM images of the indented surfaces and the reported hardness and fracture toughness values are the average of at least five indentation measurements. The microstructural characterization of hot pressed S-SiAlON ceramics has been carried out using both scanning electron microscopy (SEM) and transmission electron microscopy (TEM). XRD results indicated the predominant presence of S-phase with the detectable amount of β-Si TEM investigation of the selected S1700 sample was carried out to reveal the finer scale microstructure (see The mechanical properties, in particular hardness and fracture toughness of the material were evaluated through the Vickers indentation technique at varying loads of 100–300 As can be noticed from It is to be emphasized here that the RISE has been reproduced after several careful measurements on various samples, taken from the same hot pressed disc. Since such behavior is reproducible on multiple indentation measurements, we are inclined to believe that such behavior is representative of true material behavior and cannot be attributed to any measurement artifact. It is therefore interesting to analyze the RISE behavior in the presence of complex microstructure in these three samples, while indenting at macro-load. It can be mentioned here that the RISE is observed at very low load (during micro- and nano-indentation) and reported for some semiconductors, like Si (1  Here, we make an attempt to explain the RISE effect from the fundamental indentation theory. In addition to a plastically deformed zone beneath the indenter, the indentation, taken at any given indent load of larger than a critical load, causes cracking in case of brittle ceramics. The indentation energy is generally partitioned to the plastic deformation and fracturing process of the indented material. At higher load, the effect of friction, surface roughness, strain gradient plasticity and the elastic recovery effects can be neglected in comparison to plastic deformation and fracture. In case of indentation cracking, the apparent hardness ( For a perfectly brittle solid After analyzing a larger number of experimentally measured hardness data (0.4–22 In the above expression, both From the above analysis, it is clear that the variation of apparent hardness with load can be attributed to the change of cracking behavior of the materials, which is ultimately controlled by the resultant microstructures evolved during hot pressing. It is obvious that the microstructural features are such that the cracking behavior is different at lower and higher load. At lower load, the plastic deformation is predominant and as a result much of the indentation energy is consumed for material flow and displacement, which lowers the apparent hardness. Whereas at higher load, the cracking is more predominant compared to the plastic deformation and consequently relatively more energy is consumed for crack initiation and propagation. This is supported by the abrupt change of In assessing the toughness data, the results presented in It needs to be mentioned here that R-curves are reported to be evaluated from Vickers indentation cracks for many of the structural ceramics, including alumina, From In order to further understand the operating toughening mechanisms, the interaction of the propagating crack with the microstructure has been studied in the SEM-BSE imaging mode (see From the above observations, it is clear that crack bridging and grain pullout, both contribute to moderately high toughness of Ba-S-SiAlON ceramic. We now analyze this observation in the light of a reported model, which correlates the fracture resistance with microstructure, containing elongated ceramic grains. In the above expression, Since the presently investigated Ba-doped S-SiAlON ceramics characteristically contain two types of elongated phases: S-phase and β-Si In the above expression, In the present case, we have considered the microstructural data and mechanical property values of S1700 sample, to illustrate how the above-mentioned toughening model can be appropriate for S-SiAlON ceramic. Average aspect ratios (AR) of 3.44 and 7.0 and widths ( It is also important to assess how the mechanical properties of S-SiAlON ceramic are comparable with the existing SiAlONs. Like many other ceramics, the properties of various SiAlON ceramics is strongly sensitive to microstructural characteristic, in particular grain shape/aspect ratio, intergranular phase, amount of seed crystals, ratio of α to β phases, etc. (e.g. see In summary, the investigated S-SiAlON ceramic represents a new class of SiAlON material, which offers important combination of In view of the above observations, we believe that S-SiAlON ceramics can be considered for structural application, provided the combination of hardness and toughness property can be further boosted up by microstructural tailoring, for example, by incorporating Si As an additional point of consideration, it needs to be mentioned here that although hot pressing has been largely used in the fabrication of SiAlON samples in research laboratories, the gas pressure sintering with nitrogen gas or sinter-HIPing are the better processing approaches to investigate the industrial scale feasibility for the production of nitride ceramics, like α-SiAlON ceramics. Such experiments with S-SiAlON ceramics are planned in our future investigation. Based on the present investigation it can very well be concluded that hot pressed S-SiAlON, has shown rather promising results in terms of mechanical properties, when compared with other SiAlON ceramics. This optimization of the properties can be attributed to the fully developed and stabilized microstructure, consisting of elongated S-phase grains along with the presence of acicular β′ grains and less amount of glass residue at triple junctions/grain boundaries. The salient points, that emerge from this study include: The mechanical property evaluation using Vickers indentation at varying indent loads (up to 300 Careful analysis of the indentation data reveals the reverse indentation size effect (RISE) in all S-SiAlON samples. The RISE effect has been attributed to the predominance of cracking over deformation at higher load, resulting in an increase in apparent hardness compared to that at lower load. The interplay between cracking and deformation has been explained based on the complex microstructures evolved during hot pressing. An important result has been that the hot pressed S-SiAlON ceramics exhibit pronounced R-curve behavior, i.e. a systematic increase in toughness with increase in crack length. A maximum toughness of 11–12 As far as the crack–microstructure interaction is concerned, the use of a theoretical toughening model based on predominant toughening by platelet shaped S-phase grains as well as contribution from the β-Si One of the authors (BB) wishes to thank Department of Science and Technology, Government of India for ‘BOYCAST’ fellowship. The authors also thank Prof. Rajendra K. Bordia for fruitful discussions during the manuscript preparation.