The incidence of periprosthetic fractures has been reported to be between 1 and 20.9% and appears to be on the rise. Fractures that occur around the femoral stem, particularly when the stem is loose or there is a loss of bone stock pose a technical challenge. These are rare injuries and there is considerable debate regarding their optimal treatment. Reconstruction with large segment endoprosthetic replacement is an acceptable solution for elderly patients who have limited functional demands and where the prosthesis is expected to outlive the patient. The younger patient poses a much greater challenge, the bone must be reconstituted and the femoral canal geometry must sufficiently restored to allow the stable insertion of a prosthesis. There are very few techniques that exist in this scenario. One such technique is impaction bone grafting and revision to a long smooth tapered cemented stem. This allows the restoration of bone stock and the stable insertion of a prosthesis. The aim of this article is to discuss the theory behind impaction bone grafting, the technical aspects and challenges of this technique, including fracture reduction methods, and to appraise all the literature available on impaction bone grafting for periprosthetic fractures.The incidence of periprosthetic fractures found at revision surgery for primary cemented hip replacements has been reported to be between 1 and 3.6% for cemented prosthesis and 3–20.9% for uncemented prosthesis. As one would expect there is also a significant incidence of periprosthetic fractures for revision procedures, with a 6.3% rate during cemented procedures and a 17.6% rate for uncemented procedures The Vancouver classification system is the most widely used and understood system for classifying fractures about the femoral stem In general the accepted treatment of choice for Vancouver B2 fractures is revision of the implant Type B3 fractures pose the greatest challenge. A loose stem within a femur that has insufficient bone stock either due to gross osteolysis or significant fracture comminution has few reconstructive options. There are short to medium published results available on the use of extensively coated femoral components designed to encourage bone on growth onto the prosthesis. The results appear to be promising, however there is concern regarding stress shielding of the proximal femur The technique of impaction bone grafting of the femur for periprosthetic fractures can be used to good effect when there is bone loss around a loose femoral component, Vancouver B3 fractures. It is also a useful technique for Vancouver B2 fractures where the bone stock is sufficient to perform a revision, but reconstitution of the proximal femur with bone and the insertion of cemented stem is considered advantageous. This would typically be a young patient in whom re-revision in the future maybe necessary and restoring the bone stock to as near normal as possible may simplify the procedure. An example of a B3 fracture with a loose acetabular component is shown in The technique of using morselised fresh frozen cancellous allograft bone chips into an area of bony deficiency is not a new concept. It was first described for the reconstruction of acetabular protrusio A detailed literature search was conducted to identify all the relevant articles discussing impaction bone grafting for the treatment of periprosthetic fractures. A Medline search was conducted between 1990 and 2013 using the OVID search engine (REF), with the key words “periprosthetic fracture”, “impaction bone grafting”, “fracture” and “surgery” and with MeSH (Medline/Pubmed's article indexing terminology) subject headings. The inclusion criteria included all reports on surgical treatment of periprosthetic fractures with the use of impaction bone grafting in the English language. Due to the paucity of literature available regarding this technique all articles were included in this review. The technique of impaction bone grafting to treat periprosthetic fractures was first described in the literature in a form of two case reports by Tsiridis and Gie in 2001 A case report published in 2007 discusses the combined use a strut allograft with impaction grafting to treat a complex B3 periprosthetic fracture with a Paprosky IV femoral deficiency At 12 months the fracture had united clinically and radiologically. The authors noted that the use of an intramedullary strut created a narrower stronger tube to contain the impaction bone graft. Tsiridis et al. reported on the results of 106 type B2 and B3 periprosthetic fractures Nine patients who were treated with long stem revision and impaction bone grafting also had additional strut grafts of which three had two grafts inserted. One short stem revision with impaction bone grafting had two strut grafts used to supplement fixation and one patient who had a short stem revision without impaction bone grafting also underwent strut allografting. A retrospective review of the notes and plain film radiographs was performed by two of the authors who were not involved in the surgery. The radiographs were assessed to examine the type of stem, mode of fixation and time to union. The Harris hip score was calculated at 52 weeks post surgery and was available for 66 of the 106 patients at the one-year mark. 88% of the fractures treated with long stem revision and impaction bone grafting successfully united compared with 57.1% of the short stem revisions with impaction bone grafting. The failure rate of the short stems and impaction bone grafting was five times higher compared with long stem prosthesis. Long stem with impaction bone grafting was significantly more likely to unite than without impaction bone grafting. The mean length of union time was 7.44 months (3–12). The mean Harris hip score was 81 (55–91). There were 21 non-unions (19.8%) and 4 infections (3.7%). In 2007 Tsiridis and colleagues reported on the treatment of a series of three patients who underwent revision impaction bone grafting with a Mennen plate for Vancouver B3 periprosthetic fractures. The impaction bone grafting technique was the same as has been previously described in the text with one exception, the Mennen plate was not used in this series to stabilise the fracture but contain the graft during the impaction process and as an aid to fracture reduction while the stem was inserted rather than for osteosynthesis of the fracture Lee et al. reported on the results of impaction bone grafting to treat seven patients’ with B2/B3 periprosthetic fractures around a total hip arthroplasty There are no major case series that solely involve the treatment of type B3 fractures in the literature. They are difficult injuries to treat and have a significant complication rate. There is no one single remedy that is suitable for all patients and each patient's injury should be assessed and a specifically tailored plan to treat their injury should be sought. In the young the restoration of bone stock should be of paramount importance, this can be achieved by impaction bone grafting. This technique will enable the entire femoral canal's bone stock to be restored prior to cementation of a tapered stem. Whereas an uncemented allograft prosthesis composite will not address the proximal bone loss and relies on distal fixation. Strut allografts also require adequate host femur. It is a biologically sound concept and if it incorporates early it will result in a sound biomechanical construct Impaction bone grafting is also a more biological procedure reconstructing the bone from the inside out. This will allow easier revascularisation of the bone and subsequent remodelling Impaction bone grafting cannot only restore proximal femoral bone stock but is also useful when distal fixation cannot be achieved. This is particularly useful where the fracture extends or comminution exists below the isthmus that will not allow a stable distal fix to be achieved using a long cementless stem. This loss of rotational and axial stability is encountered when there is extensive proximal femoral bone loss, less than 4 Periprosthetic fractures in relation to a hip prosthesis are not a new phenomenon and was first described in 1954. Horwitz described a fracture around a hemiarthroplasty that was treated with cerclage wiring and internal fixation The technique of impaction bone grafting was first described by Hastings and Parker in 1975 The technique converts a cavitatory defect into a tightly packed solid form of bone that will allow cementation of a prosthesis. Restoration of bone stock is particular attractive in younger patients, where re-revision is a real possibility. This method can achieve immediate implant stability. It can allow the use of normal implants with a normal cementing technique. The technique is not applicable to all patients. Pelvic irradiation limits the potential for the graft to revascularise and incorporate and therefore this technique is probably not appropriate for this group of patients. The majority of data available for this technique refers to its use for cemented sockets and cages to restore acetabular defects The allograft of choice is morselized cancellous bone. The choice is based on its open structure allowing angiogenesis and subsequent early remodelling. The ideal size of the bone chips appears to 8–10 Compacting the bone graft is probably the most operator-dependant part of the technique and done well increases the initial stability of the implant and can improve the longevity of the revised acetabular component In summary a successful impaction bone grafting technique relies on the appropriate size and quantity of graft, the removal of fat from the graft, the amount of force used to compact it and the number of blows used Impaction bone grafting offers a unique opportunity to restore the femoral bone stock from the inside out and when combined with a cemented long stem can provide consistent and reliable results. There are no conflicts of interest, there are no external sources of finance or relationships with people or organisations that could bias the work.