In this work the microemulsion liquid membrane operation of reversed type water-in-oil was applied to extraction of uranium from phosphoric acid produced at Annaba plant in Algeria. Obtained results show that an extraction yield of more than 90% of uranium present in the phosphoric acid may be reached in three theoretical stages with aqueous/organic phase ratio=12:1 without acid pretreatment for the removal of organic matter. The extracted uranium was precipitated and the microemulsion was recycled for further use as solvent phase.Phosphoric acid produced by the wet dihydrate process contains 40–300 g ranium/ton, depending on the origin of the phosphate rocks from which it is produced. Uranium not recovered will be lost forever and, furthermore, it may be a source of pollution for soil and plants when the phosphoric fertilizer spreads to the soil. At the present time, all known commercial recovery plants of uranium from phosphoric acid are based on solvent extraction Various factors can affect the economic feasibility of the solvent extraction process. Among them the most important, of course, is the uranium price. Actually, owing to the low price of uranium, this method is not considered cost-effective, and an alternative process, surfactant liquid membrane extraction, was developed by Li and his co-workers In a Winsor type II system, the microemulsion consists of an aqueous pool surrounded by surfactant in the oil membrane, in equilibrium with excess aqueous phase. Various types of solutes can be extracted by this type of microemulsion and trapped in the inner aqueous phase microemulsion There are several advantages with the use of a microemulsion liquid membrane over the conventional liquid–liquid extraction system. These include the occurrence of extraction and stripping steps simultaneously under nonequilibrium conditions, the spontaneous formation of the microemulsion and the lack of need for extensive pretreatment of phosphoric acid for the removal of humic acid as it is practiced by the majority of producers. For a solute re-extraction from the internal aqueous phase, the separation may be realized if the internal phase can be separated from the w/o microemulsion. Indeed, in a w/o microemulsion a continuous exchange of solute contained in the aqueous droplets occurs as result of collision, coalescence and breaking of the latter. Therefore, the exchange process depends principally on the rigidity of the interface in the microemulsion In this work we propose the use of a Winsor II microemulsion for extraction of uranium from phosphoric acid. We selected D2EHPA in a synergistic mixture with TOPO as extractants. For microemulsion formulation, two types of nonionic surfactants have been used. Furthermore, the influence of type and concentration of surfactant on the volume of aqueous internal phase was investigated. The re-extraction of uranium trapped in the inner aqueous phase was carried out by two methods: the first is contacting the uranium-loaded microemulsion with a mixture of phosphoric acid (H A water-in-oil microemulsion (w/o) or Winsor II system was prepared by mixing an organic phase containing kerosene, D2EHPA and TOPO, with an aqueous phase containing phosphoric acid (30% P For uranium extraction from phosphoric acid, the microemulsion was brought into contact with industrial phosphoric acid obtained from ASMIDAL plant at Annaba city (Algeria), treated with 0.75 g H The extraction thermodynamics was investigated by studying the influence of variation of extractants and surfactant concentrations on the distribution coefficient (D). The extraction kinetics has been studied using separatory funnels, by determining the variation of extraction coefficient as a function of time for various surfactant and co-extractant concentrations. The extraction rate was also determined in a cell of constant interfacial area with a constant stirring rate of 80 rpm. The effect of various parameters, such as concentrations of surfactant, extractant, alcohol, phosphoric acid and temperature, on the extraction kinetics was studied. As is well known, the mass of the resultant internal phase is a very important parameter which determines the microemulsion capacity for extraction. Thus, in the first series of experiments, the mass fraction of aqueous phase contained in the microemulsion was determined as a function of surfactant concentration. The concentrations of D2EHPA, TOPO and H For studying the effects of different constituents of the organic phase in the microemulsion on the thermodynamics of uranium extraction by liquid membrane microemulsion, it is supposed that the surfactant plays the role of a Lewis base in the overall extraction reaction. Thus we can write: Furthermore, the extraction coefficient may be written as: Defining the distribution coefficient ( And finally: This relation permits one to express the distribution coefficient as: In this paper, an indirect method based on slope analysis is used for determining the stoichiometry of the extracted species. This method provides an approximation only; thus, the obtained values should be rounded to integer values.  It was observed that addition of TOPO to the organic phase increased the efficiency of the overall operation. This is due to the formation of so-called metal addition compounds. It is generally accepted that the neutral organic compounds as TOPO bond to the extracted complexes through the phosphoryl oxygen atom. By plotting the logarithm of the distribution coefficient ( For determination of extraction rate, a cell of constant interfacial area with constant agitation speed of 80 rpm was used. As the influence of surfactant on extraction thermodynamic is excluded, it appears that its influence is limited on the microemulsion formation and extraction kinetics. In The influence of butanol content on the extraction yield was studied within the concentration interval of butanol between 7.1×10 Studying the influence of D2EHPA concentration on the extraction rate shows that the extraction rate varies between 6.25×10 In  After studying the influence of various parameters on the extraction rate and optimizing the ratio of aqueous to microemulsion (organic) phase as 12:1, the distribution isotherm at 25 °C for extraction of uranium contained in industrial H The McCabe–Thiele construction Once the uranium was extracted by the microemulsion and trapped in the inner aqueous phase, various attempts were made for its recovery by precipitation from this aqueous inner phase. Among them, two methods were found to be efficient. In the first, the uranium-loaded microemulsion was brought into contact with an aqueous phase containing phosphoric acid (30% P In the second, the microemulsion after the uranium extraction was mixed with another microemulsion of identical composition but containing 0.6% HF in the inner aqueous phase. Upon mixing, due to coalescence of the droplets, fluoride ions come in contact with uranium and the uranium tetrafluoride precipitate forms. Uranium could be recovered efficiently from phosphoric acid produced at the ASMIDAL plant at Annaba, Algeria, using a microemulsion as the extraction phase. McCabe–Thiele graphical analysis, based on an organic phase of composition 0.3 M D2EHPA, 0.125 M TOPO, 0.26 M surfactant and 0.07 M butanol, and an organic to aqueous phase ratio of 1:12, indicates the number of theoretical stages required for recovery of about 90% of uranium contained in industrial H The stripping of organic phase is very efficient in one stage by contacting the uranium-bearing microemulsion either with 30% P  Aqueous phase Trioctyl phosphine oxide (TOPO) Distribution coefficient Di-2-ethylhexyl phosphoric acid Di-2-ethylhexyl phosphoric acid (D2EHPA) Extraction coefficient Surfactant Trioctyl phosphine oxide Microemulsion Organic phase