Objective
                  The aim of this study was to evaluate functional results and complication rate of patients who underwent medial-dorsolateral plating for intra-articular distal humeral fracture (Müller AO type 13C).
               
                  Methods
                  Twenty-four patients (14 men, 10 women; mean age: 47 years) with AO type 13C distal humerus fracture were included in the study. Mean follow-up time was 28 months. Nine patients were in 13C1 subgroup, according to AO classification system, 11 patients were categorized as 13C2, and 4 patients were 13C3. Final follow-up assessment of outcomes included Broberg and Morrey radiological criteria; Mayo Elbow Performance Score, disabilities of the Arm, Shoulder and Hand (DASH) Outcome Measure, score based on Jupiter criteria; and range of motion (ROM) values.
               
                  Results
                  The mean carrying angle of operated elbows was 11.37° (range: 0-20°). According to Broberg and Morrey radiological criteria, 14 patients, had radiologically normal elbow, 4 patients had mild change, 3 patients had moderate change, and 3 patients had severe radiological change. Mean DASH score was 21.91 (range: 0-50), and mean Mayo rating was 83.37 (range: 55-100). Jupiter criteria evaluation revealed excellent results in 10 cases, good in 12, and fair results in 2. One patient with fair result had open fracture, and the other had previous hemiparesis in the same extremity. There was no instance of nonunion observed at follow-up.
               
                  Conclusion
                  Osteosynthesis with medial-dorsolateral plating is a safe and effective method for the treatment of intra-articular fractures of distal humerus.
               
                  Level of evidence
                  Level IV, Therapeutic study.The overall incidence of distal humerus fracture is 5.7 in 100,000. Distal humeral fracture has bimodal distribution: In younger patients, fracture is often result of high-energy trauma, while simple fall may cause distal humerus fracture in elderly, osteoporotic patients. There are many surgical options for anatomical reconstruction. Parallel and 90–90 plating (2 plates perpendicular to each other) are preferred methods for surgical repair of AO 13C fracture. Comprehensive studies have reported similar results for postoperative elbow function, union rate, and complication rate. There are many classification methods for distal humerus fractures. Among these, Jupiter and Mehne, and Müller AO classification systems are frequently used. The aim of this study was to evaluate functional results and complication rate of medial-dorsolateral plating for AO type 13C fractures. Twenty-four patients with AO type 13C distal humerus fracture repaired with surgical medial-dorsolateral plating between January 2009 and March 2014 were included in this study. All patients were operated on by the same surgeon (CK). Mean follow-up time was 28 months (range: 12–56 months). There were 14 men and 10 women, with mean age of 47 years (range: 18–97 years). Mechanism of injury was a simple fall in 15 patients, falling from height in 5 patients, auto accident in 3 patients, and motorcycle accident in 1 patient. In addition, 2 calcaneal fractures, 1 acetabular fracture, and 1 humeral shaft fracture were present. Comorbidities were as follows: cerebrovascular disease in 1 patient, hemiparesis in same extremity in 1, Alzheimer's disease in 1, hypertension and diabetes mellitus in 3, and chronic renal failure in 1 patient. Also, 1 patient had subdural hematoma. One patient had Type I open fracture and 2 patients had Type II open fracture, according to Gustilo-Anderson classification. None of the patients had compartment syndrome or neurovascular injury. According to AO classification, 9 patients were 13C1, 11 patients were 13C2, and 4 patients were 13C3. Mean time before surgery was 5 days (range: 1–15 days). Patients with subdural hematoma and chronic renal failure were operated on after stabilization of their physiological condition. All patients were managed using standard surgical approach, including same patient position, and the same surgeon performed all operations. Posterior longitudinal incision and V-shaped olecranon osteotomy were performed in customary manner in prone position with tourniquet. Ulnar nerve was exposed and protected. Distal intra-articular fragments were reduced and temporarily stabilized with Kirschner wires (K-wires), and medial and dorsolateral plating was applied. At proximal portion of the fracture, 3 screws were placed medially and dorsally. In distal part of the fracture, interfragmentary and medial-posteriolateral screws were used for fixation. Dorsolateral plate design allowed for additional locked screws to be placed from dorsolateral side to medial condyle ( A long arm splint was used postoperatively by all patients. Splints were removed after resolution of edema at 15–21 day check-up, and subsequently, arm sling was used. Gentle physiotherapy was initiated with one physiotherapist, and standard therapy protocols were implemented immediately after splint removal. Follow-up exams were performed by the same surgeon (CK) every 20 days. Night splint was added in 5 cases due to extension deficit. Final evaluation of outcome included several tools: radiological assessment of elbow using Broberg and Morrey criteria (normal, slight change, moderate change, or severe alteration) NCSS (Number Cruncher Statistical System) 2007 (NCSS, LLC, Kaysville, UT, USA) program was used for statistical analysis. Descriptive statistical methods (mean, SD, median, frequency, and rate) were used for analysis. Wilcoxon signed rank test was applied for analysis of variables when comparing to healthy side. Results in 95% confidence interval and p < 0.05 were considered statistically significant. At last follow-up, mean DASH score was 21.91 (range: 0–50). Mayo rating mean score was 83.37 (range: 55–100). Jupiter criteria yielded 10 excellent, 12 good, and 2 fair results. There was statistically significant difference between ROM values (flexion, extension, supination, and pronation) of operated and healthy elbows ( Two of 3 patients with C3 fractures were classified as fair using Jupiter criteria: a 69-year-old with cerebrovascular stroke in same side and a 50-year-old patient with a type 3A open fracture due to a high-velocity injury. Two patients had second operation due to irritation caused by the K-wires used for fixation of olecranon osteotomy. No instance of HO, nonunion, or reduction failure was observed in any patient, nor was any motor or sensory pathology of ulnar nerve seen. There was 1 instance of superficial infection, which was treated with antibiotherapy and wound care. All patients were previously active and employed, and only 2 had to change their occupation after the operation due to lasting impairment. As result of anatomical properties, distal humeral fractures are problematic for both surgeons and patients. Main surgical principle in repair of these intra-articular fractures is to achieve stable and absolute fixation. In AO type 13C fractures, it is difficult to achieve indirect reduction with plates. Absolute reduction is only possible with direct inspection of the joint. Olecranon osteotomy provides direct visualization of the joint. In cadaver studies, it has been demonstrated that 60% of the distal humeral joint can be visualized with olecranon osteotomy. There are different techniques for olecranon osteotomy. In our study, Chevron osteotomy and tension band wiring were used in standard manner. No nonunion was experienced in these osteotomies, but in 2 cases (8%) we had to remove K-wires due to skin irritation. Coles et al also reported that 8% (5 patients of 67) had K-wire irritation at tension band site. Controversy continues concerning plate position in terms of providing optimal stability for distal humerus fractures. Perpendicular plating systems provide greater rigidity and fatigue resistance than the single Y-plate. In our series, a medial-dorsolateral plating system was used for fixation. This allowed us to use long, locking screws distally from lateral plate to medial condyle, thus providing additional stability to the reconstruction. In the literature, highest complication rate was reported in Gofton's study, Ulnar nerve neuropathy is common complication (up to 51%) after surgical treatment for distal humerus fracture. HO is one of the problems that can reduce functional results in these fractures and rate of HO after surgical treatment is variable. DASH scores of our patient group, as well as flexion measurements, were consistent with the literature. The weakness of our study is relatively small patient group with C-type fracture. Due to comminution, clinical results may differ according to fracture type. It is clear that it would be better to compare different surgical techniques in this type of study, as in the literature, The strengths of the study are as follows: All patients were operated on by the same surgeon, using the same technique and implant. In addition, same physiotherapy protocol was used for all patients. In conclusion, for good functional results, precise preoperative planning, adequate surgical approach, anatomical interfragmentary stabilization, medial-posterolateral plating, and adequate physiotherapy are obligatory for distal humeral intra-articular fractures. This step-by-step approach results in satisfactory functional results.