The application of gradient design concept in armors offers possibilities in the reduction of weight and cost without significant reduction of ballistic resistance. Experimental results of composite backed plates consisting of layers of ceramic spheres embedded in epoxy showed that a ballistic limit of 3000ft/s (1000m/s) can be achieved, as shown in Fig. 1, without weight penalty compared to solid ceramic tiles. The ceramic sphere facing also provides the feasibility for flexible armor manufacturing. The design of such materials includes a plethora of parameters. In order to develop a precise methodology for the optimization of gradient design composite armors, an improved understanding of the relative significance of the design parameters must be developed. One way to study the relative significance of these parameters is through computational modeling. Computational limitations impose compromises in the modeling of both geometry and material behavior. Two types of models are discussed: (a) an approximate fiber/epoxy two-phase model for the backing; and (b) a damage-based, rate-dependent model for the ceramic spheres embedded in the epoxy. The development of a library of fiber architectures based on the unit cell has been initiated, which will open the possibility of the structural optimization along with simulation of the high velocity impact phenomena of advanced composites.The next generation peacekeeping forces and law enforcement officers are under increasing ballistic threats. The development of the light armor materials systems, which would have a significant improvement in penetration resistance, impact energy dissipation, and damage containment, is of great importance in designing of body armors, helmets, and protection against projectile threats in structures such as helicopters, tanks and aircraft. An understanding of the fundamental dynamic response of the material/structural geometry interaction is essential to the development and assessment of new armor systems. Accordingly, the aim of our current study is to demonstrate the feasibility of superimposing a hardened surface with a high symmetry, strong and tough fibrous network to produce highly conformable, high impact resistant armor systems. The finite element (FE) analysis was performed to simulate the structural behavior of composite armors, and assess the effect of materials selection and fiber architecture. The high velocity impact of a projectile with a solid target results in an extremely complex mechanical (and not only mechanical) process that has been examined for the past 200 At the present time, there are three reasonably distinct directions for these investigations derivation of empirical formulas based on extensive testing; development of relatively “simple” models of the perforation process and applying the relevant equations of motion and material behavior; and full numerical solutions based on solving all the governing equations over a spatial grid at successive time increments. Since the general objective of this work is to address the computational modeling of the impact process involving brittle and ductile solids, current approaches to the subject will be briefly reviewed and discussed in the following section. Classical continuum mechanics attempts to describe the dynamics of a continuous media with a set of differential equations established through the application of the principles of conservation of mass, momentum, and energy from a macroscopic point of view. An equation of state relates the density (or volume) and internal energy (or temperature) of the material, with pressure. A constitutive relation describes the particular nature of the material by relating the stress in the material with the amount of distortion (strain) required to produce this stress. The constitutive relation may include work hardening, strain rate effects, thermal softening, etc. The differential equations relate material density The differences between the two sets of equations are inherent in the definition of the total time derivative D/D Two more expressions are required to complete the set of equations. Firstly, an equation of state is necessary to account for the resistance to hydrostatic compression. The increase in internal energy due to thermodynamically non-reversible processes (e.g. plastic work, shock loading), and phase transitions (both solid–solid as well as melting and vaporization) is expressed as: Essential to the development of the constitutive equations is information on the dynamic properties of the material system under study. The establishment of these properties for metals is itself a challenging task; for composites this task is further complicated by the directional dependence of the properties due to the anisotropy of the material system. The design of an armor system to resist projectile perforation requires: the armor to be as thick as possible; high bulk and shear modulus; high yield stress, to maintain the resistance to deformation at high stress levels, resistance to fracture when large tensile stresses occur. When the total weight must be considered, no one material satisfies all requirements because the total areal density of the target must be minimized. This has led to the development of composite armors in which a ceramic-face plate is backed by a material that can resist failure from tensile stresses. The use of materials of different hardness to produce dual hardness armor, take advantage of the ability of the hard, ceramic layer, to break up or slow down the projectile; whereas the softer organic composite backing layer will absorb the remaining impact energy. Due to their high impact resistance and low density, fabric armors are usually employed for personal protection, and considerable research has been directed to the study of the ballistic behavior of laminated, woven, and braided fabric In order to defeat higher velocity threats and address the need for lighter weight and more complex shape structures, the concept of introducing a harden phase in the spherical form or Gradient Design Composite (GDC) was developed Experimental results of a two layer composite armor consists of an aluminum oxide ceramic sphere layer bonded by epoxy and an orthogonal [0°/90°] Spectra Shield composite backing, showed that a ballistic limit of 3000  The conclusion from this experimental work was that ceramic sphere facing provides the feasibility for flexible armor manufacturing without sacrificing its ballistic effectiveness. Contrary to the analysis of a high velocity impact on materials such as steel or aluminum, the simulation of high velocity impact and penetration processes into non-isotropic fiber reinforced material is a more difficult research task. Such analysis may help to understand the complex dynamic interactions between structural components undergoing large deformations and nonlinear material behavior including failure, de-lamination, erosion, etc. In order to simulate the dynamic behavior of composite materials, the constitutive equations must cover the elastic regime, the material failure, and the behavior of the partially or completely failed material. First numerical simulations were performed on a flat target and then on a three-dimensional (3D) curved plate It was predicted Although being just preliminary analyses, these numerical simulations Computational limitations impose compromises in the modeling of both geometry and material behavior. Two types of models have to be addressed: (a) an approximate fiber/epoxy two-phase model for backing; and (b) a damage-based, rate dependent model for the ceramic spheres embedded in the epoxy. In this work we are interested in providing guidelines for the evaluation of polymer–ceramic composites as substitutes of monolithic ceramic facings of textile composites ( In the modeling of the polymer/ceramic facing system, of particular interest are geometric effects, such as the uniformity of penetration resistance, the optimization of packing geometry (in terms of fraction, arrangement, size distribution, etc.), baseline comparisons with monolithic ceramic facing, and later on the optimization of multiple layers. To this end separate models are required for the individual phases. It is well known that the absorption of energy in ballistic situations depends strongly on the evolution of damage in the target and the resulting progressive degradation of its properties during its interaction with the projectile. For this reason, any computational simulation of impact phenomena must integrate in a rational way the dominant damage mechanisms in the target (and occasionally in the projectile). There are three ways that damage can be integrated in a FE simulation:    For simplicity we have selected an element failure model for the polymeric constituent. The role of the polymer backing plate is to transmit load before local failure. After failure, it is postulated that its contribution to impact resistance is negligible. On the other hand, we chose to work on a distributed damage model for the ceramic This section describes the cracking constitutive model for brittle materials used for ceramic facing. This is a “smeared” model in the sense that damage is considered to be homogeneous within an element—even if the length of individual cracks is much smaller that the element size. It is a “fixed orthogonal crack model”, because it considers damage to be described by micro-cracks oriented along mutually perpendicular planes. These cracks are considered to develop in the undamaged material when a maximum principal stress criterion is satisfied. The direction of the maximum principal stress at that time defines the normal to plane, along which the micro-cracks appear. Subsequent cracks may develop along the same plane or two other planes normal to the initial crack plane. The coordinate system defined by the cracks may rotate due to rigid rotation of the elements. Cracks are considered to be irreversible, in the sense that once generated, they will always be there. There is the possibility, however, of partial closure of a previously open crack due to compressive forces normal to its plane. The basis of the model is the work of Hilleborg The total macroscopic strain is partitioned into an elastic part and a crack-induced part: Given a system of cracks, a geometric relation between the stress with respect to the global coordinates and the stress in local coordinates (defined by the crack directions) is: The consistency condition can be written for a plane of cracks for open and closed cracks as follows: In simpler words, for an open crack system, the maximum stress that can be carried in the direction normal to the crack depends on the current crack induced strain (which implicitly represents a crack size). For a crack that is temporarily closed (e.g. due to the application of compressive stress normal to it), the maximum allowed tensile stress depends on the maximum tensile strain attained over the time history of the crack. The model describes the post-cracking behavior of the material on the basis of the brittle fracture concept of Hilleborg In addition a length scale is introduced by assuming that the strain induced by cracking is given by: Mode II behavior, i.e. crack extension due to non-normal stresses with respect to the crack, is only considered in this model in the post-cracking regime. In other words, crack initiation can only be caused by tensile principal stresses while normal and shear stresses with respect to the crack can cause crack extension. This model defines the total shear stress as a function of the total shear strain (shear direction This total stress–strain shear retention model differs from the traditional shear retention models in which the stress–strain relations are written in incremental form: The difference between the total and incremental formulations is best illustrated by considering the shear response of the two models in the case when a crack is simultaneously opening and shearing (see The ductile failure model, used for the polymer matrix composite, provides simple failure criteria, which are designed to allow the stable removal of elements from the mesh as a result of tearing or opening of the structure. The failure model is based upon the value of the equivalent plastic strain. When the equivalent plastic strain at a material point reaches the value defined as the plastic failure strain, The ductile failure model is based on a damaged Von Mises plasticity theory with isotropic hardening. The damage manifests itself in two forms: degradation of the yield stress with damage and damaged elasticity.  Until the initial yield stress, The damage ( The material's elastic response is based on damaged elasticity. The damaged elastic moduli are given by: The damaged plastic yield surface is defined as A set of 3D FE analysis was carried out to evaluate the stiffness constants for a developed plain woven, textile composite unit cell. This mesh has 272 solid elements (eight nodded bricks) and 591 nodes. Both normal and shear loading were considered for computing normal and shear moduli. Six FE cases were run for the same model of a unit cell, corresponding to the six individual strain vectors ( The FE mesh was generated using both, In order to explore convergence of the results, four unit cells with different mesh densities were modeled (respectively: M2, 1067 nodes and 840 elements; M3, 1547 nodes and 1248 elements; and M4, 2123 nodes and 1726 elements), and the results are presented in In the absence of the appropriate experimental results, to validate the present numerical model, comparison is carried out using data available in the literature. The constituent material properties and the unit cell geometries for the examples are listed in  In order to evaluate the baseline performance of the model, the impact on a 2D ceramic plate was simulated ( A cylindrical projectile, with a diameter of 7.62 In the case of the GDC model, consisting of ceramic spheres facing and polymer matrix composite backing, two different impact simulations have been considered: one with the axis of penetration going through the center of the ceramic sphere (both orthogonal and oblique), and one between two adjacent spheres. The time history of the residual velocity as a function of impact site is presented in The reason that side impact gives better penetration resistance in terms of lower residual velocity is probably because of the fact that impact loading is evenly distributed on two spheres, which as a result, spreads impact energy on the larger area of a backing plate. The effect of the ceramic facing size on the projectile residual velocity was investigated (see Work can be further extended to the investigation of relative size and packing factor effect (e.g. At this time, the presented observations are not experimentally validated. The central impact of a spherical projectile onto a polymer matrix composite plate is considered ( High-velocity impact response is dominated by stress wave propagation through the material, in which the structure does not have time to respond, which is leading to very localized damage Two different simulations were performed in terms of the prescribed boundary conditions. In the first model, boundary conditions were free and in the second one the target had constrained edges; and the results showed no effect of the boundary conditions on the target ballistic performance in this case. It can be concluded that boundary conditions can be ignored, because the impact event is over before the stress waves have reached the edge of the structure  After the impact of 40 In order to achieve higher penetration resistance, both experimental results and these simulations show necessity for harder, facing layer, which would first shatter or blunt the armor piercing projectile, and than spread the load over a larger area. The composite backing would, in that case deform to absorb the remaining kinetic energy of the projectile. The application of gradient design concept in armors offers possibilities in the reduction of weight and cost without significant reduction of ballistic resistance. Experimental results of composite backed plates consisting of layers of ceramic spheres embedded in epoxy showed that a ballistic limit of 1000 In order to develop a precise methodology for optimizing the gradient design composite armors, an improved understanding of the relative significance of the design parameters must be developed. One way to study the relative significance of these parameters is through computational modeling. Computational limitations impose compromises in the modeling of both geometry and material behavior. Two types of models are discussed: (a) an approximate fiber/epoxy two-phase model for the backing; and (b) a damage-based, model for the ceramic spheres embedded in the epoxy. For the GDC model, consisting of ceramic spheres facing and polymer matrix composite backing, two different impact simulations have been considered: one with the axis of penetration going through the center of the ceramic sphere (both orthogonal and oblique), and one between two adjacent spheres. Residual velocity and back-plane displacement time history were evaluated as a function of different impact site and the projectile incident angle. Results show better penetration resistance in the case of oblique impact compared to normal impact. The effect of the ceramic facing size on the projectile residual velocity and displacement of the backing plate was investigated, and it was found that projectile impact between two spheres, and smaller facing size compared to projectile size, lower residual velocity and back-plane displacement. The development of a library of fiber architectures based on the unit cell has been initiated, which will open the possibility of the structural optimization along with simulation of the high velocity impact phenomena of advanced composites. Using this approach it will be possible to include more information for the textile composite such as the overall architecture as well as particular geometric characteristics such as crimp, etc. Successful completion of these tasks will facilitate the engineering design of the next generation of multifunctional armors. Accordingly, a library of fiber architectures (orthogonal, woven, braided, knitted), based on the unit cell will be available for structural optimization along with simulation of the high velocity impact phenomena of advanced composites. This work is supported by the US Army Research Office under the Multidisciplinary University Research Initiative on Functionally Tailored Textile Fabrics.