This work presents a computational evaluation of a Tirefond screw used in Brazilian railroads to support the plate on the wood sleepers. This component has been studied because nowadays it is manufactured by a common low carbon steel, and due to the increase of trains speed and the axle load transported it has been failing with a short life time, causing significant economic losses to the companies that control the Brazilian railways. In this context, static and dynamic analysis were performed using the Finite Element Method (FEM) in order to better understand the recurrent failure causes. The obtained results highlighted the critical stress concentration points where the component fatigue life is low, explaining the premature failures. Based on the generated information, it was possible to propose and to evaluate the effects of geometric and materials change on the Tirefond screw fatigue performance. The actual geometry was evaluated but replacing the actual steel by a carbonitrited SAE 1015 and by a quenched and tempered SAE 4340. Geometric changes as the increase of the screw diameter and elimination of the continuous diameter decrease as it moves away from the screw head were tested. The best solution that guaranteed a fatigue life higher than 106 cycles for all critical positions along the screw structure were the combination of the use of a SAE 4340 steel in a higher diameter screw and the use of a carbonitrited SAE 1015 steel with a continuous 22 mm diameter.Due to a significant increase in capacity, size and speed of trains, the Brazilian rail network has demanded special care in the selection of materials and in the prevention of accidents. Unfortunately, some recurrent failures have occurred in this sector, a fact that increases the practice of failure analysis. Some failure examples related to welded rails, sleeper anchors and screws were published by our working group The Tirefond screw is a structural component of the railroads that is part of the fasteners class. It is classified as a rigid fastener responsible for fasten the plate to the wood sleeper. This component has an important function, because, according to some researchers, if a Tirefond screw or other fastener component fail in service and it is not quickly substituted, it allows that the plate moves with degrees of freedom and the rail, supported on the plate, can be strongly bended, increasing the probability of crack nucleation occurrences on the rail, leading it to catastrophic fracture The Tirefond screw is a component used in railways with similar characteristics around the world. It is usually made of a common low carbon steel machined according to some local or continental standard. In Brazil, this component is specified by the NBR 8497:08/2008 standard Each Tirefond screw costs around US$2.00 for Brazilian companies and, for each kilometer there are installed approximately 8600 screws, being possible to estimate around US$17,000.00 invested in this component per kilometer in Brazilian railroads. According to internal reports of Brazilian railway concessionaries, with the increase of the axle transported load and trains speed in the last years, the actual Tirefond screw has presented recurrent failures, with an average life time of only three months. Besides the increase of accident risk, the substitution of failed component may cost around US$80,000.00 per year per railroad kilometer Due to presented points, the failure of this component has been studied in Brazil aiming to better understand its causes and to propose technical and economic viable solutions that may increase the Tirefond life time. Faria et al. Faria et al. In this context, this work presents new results about the failure analysis of the Tirefond screw, with the use of the Finite Element Method (FEM) to simulate the behavior of the material under dynamic loading The screw studied in this work is a low carbon steel manufactured by hot rolling and forging. Its chemical composition is presented in Confirmed the steel fatigue failure The numerical fundamentals of the finite element procedures implemented in Ansys software can be found in Bathe Initially, the Tirefond screw was modeled in the specification and geometry according to the standard currently used in the railway Hexahedral finite elements were used to build the structural mesh of the screw. According to Faria et al. The geometric changes evaluated in this work were: 1) use of a constant diameter Tirefond screw, that is, elimination of the diameter decrease from its head to the end; 2) increase the Tirefond screw diameter, respecting the model number 9 described in the NBR 8497 standard (highest diameter: 24 mm and lowest diameter:16 mm) According to the technical literature, each Tirefond screw under real application condition, must support static loading that could meet around 30kN The dynamic loading was estimated using the Dynamic Increase Factor (DIF), according to:  The mechanical properties of simulated materials were an important input data to the computational simulations. The tensile properties of SAE 1015 steel used nowadays were collected from   Aiming to increase the steel mechanical strength and to mitigate the effects of the geometric stress concentrators, computational simulations were performed substituting the normalized SAE 1015 steel by 1) a carbonitrited SAE 1015 steel; 2) a quenched and tempered SAE 4340 steel, maintaining the same geometry.  Applying the SAE 4340 steel, the component fatigue life was increased. At the same area where the fatigue life time was around 120 cycles, using a normalized SAE 1015 steel, now it was increased to 60,000 cycles. The second screw thread did not indicate anymore low cycle fatigue failure, but the first thread still did. Considering that the use of a SAE 4340 to manufacture a Tirefond screw would increase the Tirefond screw cost to around US$15.00 due to the higher steel cost. It would not be acceptable any low cycle fatigue point. So, the use of a quenched and tempered SAE 4340 steel with the actual geometry would not be economically viable. This topic presents obtained results considering the use of the normalized SAE 1015 steel, but now performing geometric changes to the screw project. This first analyzed condition was the elimination of the diameter decrease along the screw structure. A continuous diameter Tirefond screw was evaluated with 22 mm diameter. Aiming to evaluate the effect of this geometric change on the component fatigue behavior, dynamic simulations were performed. The second evaluated geometric change was to increase the Tirefond screw diameters according to the screw number 9 described by the NBR 8479 standard The first combined change evaluated was the use of a carbonitrited SAE1015 steel with the continuous 22 mm diameter screw.  Based on the obtained results, it was possible to confirm the Faria et al. (2016) Among the studied conditions, the best results were obtained applying: 1) carbonitrited SAE 1015 steel with 22 mm continuous diameter; 2) quenched and tempered SAE 4340 with 22 mm continuous diameter; 3) quenched and tempered SAE 4340 steel with number 9 screw The Finite Element Method (FEM) was efficiently used aiming to evaluate the recurrent failure case of the Brazilian Tirefond screws and to evaluate the effects of geometry and materials change on the component mechanical performance. The actual Tirefond screw used in Brazilian railroads are recurrent failing by fatigue, because the normalized SAE 1015 steel did not have enough mechanical strength to support the static and dynamic loading due to the modern trains passage. The computational simulation converged to the real situation predicting preferential failing points that coincides with the observed in real failures. The combination of geometry and raw materials change can improve the component fatigue behavior, increasing its life time. Among the studied conditions, the best results were obtained applying: 1) carbonitrited SAE 1015 steel with 22 mm continuous diameter; 2) quenched and tempered SAE 4340 with 22 mm continuous diameter; 3) quenched and tempered SAE 4340 steel with number 9 screw. None. The authors would like to thank the Brazilian VLI-FCA Company (Thiago Gomes Viana) for the materials supplying. The authors also are grateful for the financial support received by from