Engineering geological properties and support design of a planned diversion tunnel at Guledar dam site, which was located at the North of Ankara, Turkey were studied in this article. The main purpose of the construction of the planned tunnel is to regulate, drainage and to provide water for irrigation purposes. The diversion tunnel runs mainly through formations of limestone, sandstone and diabase. Rock masses at the site were characterized using Rock Mass Rating (RMR), Rock Mass Quality (Q), Rock Mass Index (RMi) and Geological Strength Index (GSI). RMR, Q, RMi and GSI were determined by using field data and mechanical properties of intact rock samples, measured in the laboratory. Support requirements for the planned diversion tunnel were determined accordingly in terms of the rock mass classification systems. Recommended support systems by empirical methods were also analyzed using 2D Finite Element method. Calculated parameters based on empirical methods were used as input parameters in the finite element models. The results from both methods were compared with each other. This comparison suggests that more reliable support design could be achieved by using the finite element method together with the empirical methods.Empirical and numerical methods are commonly used methods when underground engineering structures are designed. Empirical methods are generally preferred by rock engineers and engineering geologists due to their practicality. In designing tunnel supports, rock mass classification systems, RMR, Engineering geological and rock mechanics studies were carried out at Guledar irrigation dam site. The project area is located 30 km north of Ankara, capital city of Turkey. The dam project is designed to regulate the drainage and to irrigate the agricultural areas. The design of Guledar dam project is under supervision of General Directorate of State Hydraulic Works (DSI), of the Ministry of Energy and Natural Resources, Turkey. The planned length of the diversion tunnel is 310 m, having circular geometry with 3 m diameter. The dam site is located within Karakaya complex formation, which is composed of sandstone, limestone and diabase. The location map of Guledar dam site is given in Both laboratory and field studies were completed. Geological mapping, core drilling, pressured water test and geotechnical descriptions were conducted in the field. Index and design properties of rocks were determined on intact rock samples in the laboratory. These are uniaxial compressive strength ( The properties of rock mass around the opening, tunnel diameter, tunnel depth, geometry and the support characteristics to be used are the basic input parameters for a safe tunnel design ( Karakaya Complex, Cover units and Quarternary deposits crop out at the site. Geological map of the site is presented in A total of 27 boreholes with a total footage of 760 m were drilled at the site. Geological units with location of bore holes and diversion tunnel axis is shown in Quantitative description of discontinuities such as orientation, persistence, roughness, filling and aperture were determined in the field in accordance with the ISRM suggested methods ( Dominant discontinuity sets for limestone are as follows; Set 1: 72/340 Set 2: 48/070 Set 3: 71/279 Dominant discontinuity sets for sandstone are listed below; Set 1: 75/158 Set 2: 56/128 Based on the geological cross-sections, the tunnel alignment is divided into three different zones each of which has different engineering geological characteristics. The rock masses in the tunnel alignment are limestone, sandstone and diabase. The engineering geological properties of these rock masses are given below: Limestone rock unit is yellow, creamy in color, fossiliferous, mostly recristalized and occasionally in the form of marble. Limestone blocks range from a few m Diabase rock unit, crops out in the field, is incompetent and brittle. Fresh part of the diabase is greenish-black in color. Weathered part of the unit is almost gray in color. Pyroxene and plagioclase minerals, observed in subophitic texture in diabase, altered to chlorite. The unit is moderately to highly weathered at the surface and joints are not well developed. At the tunnel elevation, some slight weathered parts are observed. Average RQD for diabase is 28%. The discontinuity survey of diabase, yield a very favourable orientation with the tunnel axis. Sandstone rock unit, more competent than diabase, contains medium-coarse size quarts and plagioclases and also contains quartzite, chert and diabase rock fragments. Sandstone is moderately to highly weathered at surface. The joint spacing ranges from 5 to 20 cm and the joint apertures are filled by soft filling material. Average RQD for this rock unit is 34%. Very favorable discontinuity orientation was observed in the field for the sandstone. Uniaxial compressive strength, deformability, indirect tensile strength, density, porosity and triaxial compressive strength tests were conducted in terms of the ISRM suggested methods ( Rock mass classification evaluates the quality and expected behaviour of rock masses based on the most important parameters that influence the rock mass quality. Rock mass classification systems are important as they provide a consistent means of describing quantitatively the rock mass quality. This in turn has led to the development of many empirical design systems involving rock masses. Tunneling support design, pillar design and rock slope design are all examples of these empirical design systems. Many researchers have developed rock mass classification systems. Most widely used rock mass classification systems such as RMR, RMR rock mass classification system was initially developed at the South African Council of Scientific and Industrial Research (CSIR) by  A stress-free form of  Rock mass index (RMi) was proposed by   The geological strength index, GSI, was developed by RMR Rock mass properties such as Hoek–Brown constants, deformation modulus of rock masses and uniaxial compressive strength of rock mass were calculated in accordance with In-situ determination of For RMR For RMR     For poor rock  Later The deformation modulus of rock masses calculated from above equations are presented in      Rock mass strength was also calculated by using Rock-Lab program developed by Rocscience ( The calculated rock mass strength values for the present work are tabulated in    Hoek–Brown failure criterion for rock masses uses Where, The calculated Hoek–Brown constants are given in Stability analysis based on convergence confinement method was performed. The term convergence confinement was developed in the 1960s and 1970s and this method has been known at least since the paper by To analyze the stability by convergence confinement, a methodology, described by A cylindrical tunnel of radius, In the equation above, If the internal support pressure If the internal support pressure  By using the Excel spreadsheet, the maximum deformations for unsupported tunnel in limestone, sandstone and diabase formations were found to be 0.38, 0.69 and 2.60 mm, respectively. Apart from limestone a plastic zone was developed around the tunnel. The radius of plastic zone for sandstone and diabase were 1.515 and 1.725 m, respectively. Based on the studies of To simulate excavation of tunnels in limestone, sandstone and diabase, three finite element models were generated using same mesh and tunnel geometry and different material properties. These models are as follows: Model I: tunnel runs through limestone Model II: tunnel runs through sandstone Model III: tunnel runs through diabase In order to analyze tunnel stability and deformations in different rock masses and to explore the concept of rock support interaction a very simple model is utilized. A circular tunnel subjected to a hydrostatic stress field was adopted and a 2D plastic finite element program, Phase A 3 m diameter tunnel is excavated at a maximum depth of 41 m below surface. The rock mass properties assumed in this analysis are all obtained from the estimated values given in The outer model boundary was set to be at a distance of 6 times of the radius of tunnel. A number of 3700 three-noded-triangular elements were used in the mesh. Finer zoning was used around the excavation. The enlarged view of excavation and the support systems of Model III are given in Hoek–Brown failure criterion was used to estimate yielded elements and plastic zone of rock masses in the vicinity of tunnel. Plastic post-failure strength parameters were used in this analysis and residual parameters were assumed as half of the peak strength parameters. Vertical stress ( Rock mass behavior was represented as an elastic perfectly plastic material in which failure involving slip along intersecting discontinuities is assumed to occur with zero plastic volume change ( As it can be seen from There is not any yielded element and plastic zone developed around the excavation for limestone. In sandstone, some yielded elements were observed and the thickness of plastic zone was limited as shown in Support elements used are composed of rock bolts and shotcrete as proposed by the empirical methods. The properties of support elements, such as length, pattern of bolts and thickness of shotcrete are similar to those proposed by the empirical methods. Thus for the tunnel section excavated in the limestone, the recommended support system is composed of scaling and spot bolting. In order to obtain tunnel stability for sandstone, 2 m long rock bolts with 1.5 m spacing and 100 mm thick shotcrete were applied. Substantial support was found to be necessary for diabase, so as to minimize the yielded elements and to reduce the size of plastic zone. Therefore, 2 m long rock bolts with 0.5 m spacing and 250 mm thick shotcrete were used as support elements. After support installation, not only the number of yielded elements but also the extent of plastic zone decreased as shown in The radius of plastic zone and maximum total displacements obtained from Phase Based on the collected information in the field and rock properties determined in the laboratory, rock masses were characterized by means of rock mass classification systems. These classification systems were also employed to estimate support requirements for the diversion tunnel. Convergence–Confinement method was employed to perform stability analysis. Based upon the performed stability analysis it was decided to use the support systems recommended by rock mass classification systems. Finite element analysis was utilized to assess the stability of the tunnel and evaluate the performance of support recommended by the empirical methods. The strength parameters necessary for finite element analysis were estimated from the empirical methods and input into the finite element code Phase According to results acquired from the empirical, convergence confinement and finite element analysis no stability problems can be expected in limestone. The empirical methods also showed that there is no need to use support elements for this formation. This result is also supported by convergence confinement and finite element analysis, since there was not any yielded element and plastic zone around tunnel. The empirical methods recommend the utilization of bolt and shotcrete as support elements for sandstone. Convergence confinement and numerical methods showed that small deformations occur and a limited plastic zone develops around the tunnel. When the recommended support systems by the empirical methods were applied, these yielded elements disappeared in finite element analysis. The empirical methods indicate that substantial support was necessary for diabase formation and both convergence confinement and numerical methods agreed that the size of the plastic zone and the deformations increase and reach their maximum values for this formation. However, after installation of support elements recommended by the empirical method, the finite element analysis showed that there is not any yielded element and plastic zone around the tunnel. The results proved that the empirical and numerical methods agree with each other. Thus, it is suggested that when designing a support system for a tunnel driven in rock mass, empirical and numerical methods are to be used together. However, the validity of the proposed support system, obtained from combination of empirical and numerical modeling, should be verified by comparing predictions with actual measurements during construction. The authors wish to express their deep gratitude to DSI managers and site engineers for their help and permission to write this paper. In addition, grateful acknowledgements are due to the Scientific Research Unit of Inonu University, Malatya, for providing financial support (Project No: 2003/06).