In recent years, leaching with chloride solutions has attracted much interest for nickel laterite processing due to its high leaching rate, fast kinetics and the recycling of lixiviant and HCl. However, the presence of large amounts of Fe(III) in the pregnant leach solution becomes a big challenge for the recovery of nickel and cobalt.
                  A solvent extraction (SX) method using N,N-diethyldodecanamide (DEDA) to remove Fe(III) from a synthetic chloride leach solution of nickel laterites was investigated. It was found that using an organic system consisting of 30% (v/v) DEDOA and 30% (v/v) isodecanol (as phase modifier), over 90% Fe(III) was extracted from the strong chloride solution (6M Cl) in a single contact and high selectivity of Fe(III) over other metals was obtained in the pH range tested. The Fe(III) extraction increased substantially with the increase in chloride concentration. High Fe(III) stripping efficiency was obtained using water. The Fe(III) extraction McCabe–Thiele diagram shows that almost all Fe(III) can be extracted using three stages at an A/O ratio of 1.25:1. The Fe(III) stripping McCabe–Thiele diagram shows that almost all Fe(III) can be stripped using two stages at an O/A ratio of 2:1. Extraction and stripping kinetics were very fast and phase separation was good and fast for practical operation.Currently, nickel laterites are processed commercially in sulphate media. High pressure acid leaching (HPAL) using sulphuric acid is commonly used in the industry. However, it suffers from high capital and operational costs. Atmospheric leaching with sulphuric acid generates pregnant leach solutions containing large amounts of iron from which nickel and cobalt are difficult to directly recover. Recently, processing nickel laterites in chloride media has attracted increasing interest because of its advantages over sulphate media such as high leaching efficiency, iron removal as a harmless hematite and hydrochloric acid regeneration ( In the chloride leaching process, a large proportion of iron in the ore is leached, resulting in the leach solution containing high iron concentrations. The removal of iron from leach solutions is a critical step and could lead to difficult operation or high operating cost if, for example, direct precipitation or thermo hydrolysis approaches are employed ( Using solvent extraction to separate iron from the leach solution and then recover it from the loaded strip liquor is an effective alternative. One process was developed using 70% TBP in Shellsol A (an aromatic diluent) as the solvent ( A synthetic chloride leach solution of nickel laterites was prepared containing the following metals (in g/L): Fe(III) 20, Al 10, Cr(III) 0.5, Cu(II) 0.5, Mn(II) 2, Ni 5, Co(II) 0.5, Zn 0.5, Mg 30 by dissolving the corresponding AR grade metal chloride salts in de-ionised water. The synthetic solution also contained 200 N,N-diethyldodecanamide (DEDA) with 98% purity was purchased from Sigma–Aldrich and was used without further treatment. Chemical grade isodecanol was used as the phase modifier and Shellsol D70 (>99% aliphatic) as the diluent. Both isodecanol and Shellsol D70 were supplied by Shell Chemicals Australia. Shake-out tests were carried out in a 250 In the extraction kinetics study, the fresh organic solution and an equal volume of synthetic leach solution were separately pre-warmed to 40 The phase disengagement time (PDT) after extraction and stripping was measured in both aqueous continuous (A/C) and organic continuous (O/C) modes. The organic and aqueous solutions used for PDT tests were pre-equilibrated previously under the same conditions. The tests were carried out with an A/O ratio of 1:1 and at 40 Free acid concentrations were determined by titration using a fixed pH method similar to that reported elsewhere ( The two phases were separated using 1PS filter paper which only allows organic solution to pass through and leaves aqueous solution in the funnel above the paper. Metal concentrations in the aqueous phase were analysed by ICP-AES (Inductively Coupled Plasma Atomic Emission Spectrometry). Organic samples were first stripped using deionised water at A/O of 2:1 and 40 MgCl Clearly, the extraction of Fe(III) was significantly increased with the increase in chloride concentrations ( From The effect of pH on the metal extraction with DEDA was determined by contacting the organic solution consisting of 30% DEDA and 30% isodecanol in Shellsol D70 with the synthetic leach solution at an A/O of 1:1 and 40 It was found that the effect of pH in the range tested on the iron extraction was insignificant, indicating that the DEDA system can be used over a wide pH or acidity range. The pH of the initial synthetic solution was negative and the measured free acid was 0.6 The effect of the composition of the DEDA system on iron extraction from the synthetic solution was investigated by varying the concentration of DEDOA and isodecanol in Shellsol D70 at an A/O ratio of 1:1 and 40 The iron extraction increased gradually with the increase in organic concentration due to the increase in availability of the extractant ( Fe(III) extraction from the synthetic solution for various A/O ratios was measured using the organic system consisting of 30% DEDA and 30% isodecanol in Shellsol D70 at 40 Organic loading is also approaching saturation with the increase in A/O ratio due to the decrease in available extractant. Iron loading in per 1% (v/v) of DEDA at each A/O ratio was calculated and is shown in The HCl concentrations in the feed, raffinates and loaded organic solutions for various A/O ratios were determined and the molar ratios of loaded iron concentrations to those of loaded HCl were calculated as shown in The McCabe–Thiele diagram for Fe(III) extraction with the 30% DEDA and 30% isodecanol system from the synthetic solution was constructed ( The effect of temperature on the Fe(III) extraction was investigated by contacting the synthetic solution with the organic solution consisting of 30% DEDA and 30% isodecanol in Shellsol D70 at an A/O ratio of 1:1 ( From From The McCabe–Thiele diagram was constructed for Fe(III) stripping from the pre-loaded organic solution containing 25 Other metals entering into the iron loaded strip liquors at O/A ratio 1:1 and 2:1 were measured and are shown in The kinetics of Fe(III) extraction was studied by contacting the fresh organic solution consisting of 30% DEDA and 30% isodecanol in Shellsol D70 with the synthetic solution, and the kinetics of Fe(III) stripping was studied by contacting the pre-loaded organic solution and water using an A/O ratio of 1:1 at 40 Phase disengagement rate is a critical property for determining the usefulness of a particular solvent extraction system in hydrometallurgy ( An organic system consisting of N,N–diethyldodecanamide (DEDA) and isodecanol was found to be very effective for the removal of Fe(III) from strong chloride leach solutions. It is shown that the DEDA and isodecanol system could be used to effectively extract Fe(III) from solutions containing more than 200 The Fe(III) species extracted by the DEDA system were proposed to be the complexes of HFeCl Water can be used to effectively strip Fe(III) from the loaded DEDA system. The McCabe–Thiele diagram for Fe(III) stripping showed that 25 Both extraction and stripping kinetics of Fe(III) with the DEDA system were fast with reaching equilibrium within 0.5 The authors would like to thank Drs Keith Barnard and Robbie McDonald for reviewing the paper and providing valuable suggestions. Mr Nicholas Kelly and Mr Karl Bunney are thanked for their assistance to fulfil the test work. The support of the CSIRO Minerals Down Under National Research Flagship is gratefully acknowledged.