In recirculating aquaculture systems (RAS), particulate matter and bacterial communities management are required to maintain water quality. Foam fractionation is a water treatment technology that can be easily applied to water reuse systems to remove bacteria and suspended solids. This study investigated the efficiency of foam fractionation in removing particulate matter and heterotrophic bacteria in a closed recirculating seabass (Dicentrarchus. labrax) system. This system consisted of 10 rearing tanks, a skimmer acting as the foam separation system (SKIM®), a biofilter unit, and an UV unit. The efficiency of SKIM was analyzed for different foam fractionation operation times (5′on/5′off, 15′on/15′off and 30′on/30′off) and for different sizes of particulate matter (>60μm, 60–8μm, 8–1.2μm, and 1.2–0.22μm). The removal of particulate matter was influenced by different particle sizes with higher removal percentages for the >60μm and 1.2–0.22μm categories of 96.8 and 100%, respectively. Nevertheless, these categories represented the lower percentage of total solid compositions in the RAS water studied (>60μm=7.14±2.78%, and 1.2–0.22μm=18.27±2.50%). The removal of heterotrophic bacteria did not correlate with the operation time or particle size and SKIM removal percentages ranged between 32 and 88%.The continuous elimination of toxic metabolites and particulate matter is important when a closed system is used for intensive fish culture. Managing particulate matter and different chemical compounds is a key factor for determining the successful operation of recirculating aquaculture systems (RAS). The presence and accumulation of particulate wastes in RAS (faeces, uneaten feed, parasites, and bacterial flocs) can cause a decline in water quality that can increase the stress on the organisms being cultivated ( In the RAS, bacterial communities are as important as the fish in terms of the processes directly linked to their activity and their effect on water quality ( For a recycling system in which reused water must be of such quality so as to maintain the culture organisms in healthy and fast-growing condition, it is especially important to remove waste products and to control the bacterial community. Managing solids, also through feed design, feeding management, and flow regulation, and removing solids are becoming increasingly important as aquaculture systems are being intensified. Several types of particle separators, or clarifiers, are commercially available for integration into an intensive aquaculture treatment system and can take on the pre-concentrated wastes from tanks. Solids separation technology can be conveniently divided into mechanical and gravitational methods. The most popular method of mechanical particle separation is by using screens and rotating microscreens. However, it is difficult to remove fine solids smaller than 50 Foam fractionation is a water treatment technology that can be easily added to water reuse systems to directly remove dissolved and fine, suspended solids. The process of foam fractionation, also known as flotation, protein skimming, or air stripping, has been described by The aim of our investigation was to evaluate the efficiency of the foam fractionation system for reducing heterotrophic bacteria abundance and removing particulate materials from the water of RAS for different operation times and for different sizes of particulate matter. The closed recirculating system located in the Department of Biotechnology and Molecular Sciences, University of Insubria, Varese, Italy is shown schematically in The fractionation system consisted of a cyclonic foam fractionator ( The skimming efficiency of the cyclonic foam fractionator (SKIM All samples were subjected to a subsequent series of filtration using filters of different pore size: 60 The salt residue on filter was calculated from control filtration carried out on only with salt water (22 Water was sampled by using a sterile procedure and a count of viable heterotrophic bacteria (CFU The variations of particular matter concentrations and heterotrophic bacterial abundances were evaluated after every filtration step from the same sample and not from different sub-samples of the same water, to avoid the possibility to have un-homogeneous samples, even with low particulate concentrations. The SKIM velocities for reducing particulate matter (g/(L The inlet concentrations of particulate matter >60 The mean concentrations at the inlet for the three different operation times were 134.3 The percentages of particles removed by SKIM for the >60 The results of ANOVA did not show any significant differences in removal efficiency ( The 5′ The percentages of bacteria removed by SKIM for the three different operation times (5′ Closed and recirculating production units are subject to the accumulation of particulate matter and require different water treatments to maintain water quality conditions that can support high fish productivity. The foam fractionation system has been considered to be a viable process for treating water in RAS ( The SKIM velocities for reducing particulate matter were similar in the >60 The statistical analysis of SKIM removal efficiency for different particulate matter categories (>60 The mean concentrations of heterotrophic bacteria at the SKIM inlet were highly variable during the sampling period. The mean concentrations of heterotrophic bacteria in unfiltered water recorded at the first trial operation time (5′ The reduction in the mean concentrations of heterotrophic bacteria at the SKIM inlet and outlet confirmed the positive effect of this process in controlling bacterial abundance. The SKIM removal percentages were similar between the unfiltered water and the filtration steps with values ranging between 32 and 88%. The statistical analysis of SKIM removal efficiency in each filtration step (unfiltered water, after 60 The foam fractionation system represents a process for removing particles and heterotrophic bacteria and helps reduce the accumulation of wastewater in RAS systems. For removal of heterotrophic bacteria, the efficiency of SKIM is not related to the operation time or to particle size. Nevertheless, efficiency of the system in removing these particles is influenced by the size of the particle. A higher removal velocity was recorded for the <1.2 This project has been granted by MIPAF with Project No. 6C144. Authors wish to thank Dr. G. Magnanini and Dr. A. Piccinini of Acqua&Co Srl for kindly providing the SKIM, and Ing. Cravedi of Cravedi Srl for technical support in using the continuous monitoring system (Rilheva