Measurements of advancing contact angles (θ) were carried out for aqueous solutions of cetylpyridinium bromide (CPBr) and propanol mixtures at constant CPBr concentration equal to 1×10−5, 1×10−4, 6×10−4, 1×10−3
                     M, respectively, on polytetrafluoroethylene (PTFE). The obtained results indicate that the wettability of PTFE by aqueous solutions of these mixtures depends on their composition and concentration. In contrast to Zisman, there is no linear dependence between the cos
                     θ and surface tension of aqueous solutions of CPBr and propanol mixtures (γ
                     LV), but a linear relationship exists between the adhesion tension and the surface tension of aqueous solutions of CPBr and propanol mixtures which have a slope equal to −1, and between cos
                     θ and the reciprocal of the surface tension of solution. The slope equal to −1 and the intercept on the cos
                     θ axis close to −1 suggest that adsorption of CPBr and propanol mixtures and the orientation of their molecules at aqueous solution–air and PTFE–aqueous solution interfaces are the same. This also suggests that the work of solution adhesion to the PTFE surface does not depend on the concentration of propanol and CPBr. Extrapolation of the straight line to the point corresponding to the surface tension of solution, which completely spreads over the PTFE surface, gives the value of the critical surface tension of PTFE wetting equal to 24.84mN/m. This value is higher than PTFE surface tension (20.24mN/m) and the values of the critical surface tension of PTFE wetting determined by other investigators from the contact angle of nonpolar liquids (e.g. n-alkanes). The differences between the value of the critical surface tension obtained here and those which can be found in the literature were discussed on the basis of the simple thermodynamic rules. Using the measured values of the contact angles and Young equation the PTFE–aqueous solution interfacial tension was determined. The values of PTFE–aqueous solution interfacial tension were also calculated from Miller and co-workers equation in which the correction coefficient of nonideality of the surface monolayer was introduced. From comparison of the obtained values it appears that good agreement exists between the values of PTFE–solution interfacial tension calculated on the basis of Young and Miller and co-workers equations in the whole range of propanol concentration.Wettability of solids plays a principal role in many technological processes and everyday life. However, in the systems including water the addition of surface active agents is necessary to enable them to wet the surfaces of solids. These agents reduce a high surface tension of water and change the solid–liquid interfacial tension Among a very large number of additives alcohols are frequently used as the most common co-surfactants Most surfactants having a long hydrocarbon chain in the molecule can not decrease the water surface tension below the values corresponding to the surface tension of long chain The wetting of hydrophobic low energetic solids by different liquids was studied extensively by several workers However, Owens et al. Our earlier studies In our studies the equivalence condition of adsorption at PTFE–water and water–air of surfactants or surfactant and propanol mixtures suggested by Owens et al. was not checked. Therefore, one aim of these studies was to check whether for other systems of PTFE–aqueous solution of surfactant the adsorption of surface active agents at PTFE–water and water–air is the same by using Lucassen-Reynders method Taking into account that wettability of solids depends on the liquid surface tension and solid–liquid interface tension and that the surface tension of aqueous solutions of surfactants and alcohol mixtures can be described by the Miller and co-workers equation if the molar area of these mixtures can be determined Cetylpyridinium bromide (CPBr) was used as a cationic surfactant because of the application of cationic surfactants as collectors for modification of the wetting properties of minerals or ores in flotation processes The aims of the paper were realized by advancing contact angle ( CPBr (1-hexadecylpyridinium bromide, purity higher than 99%) and propanol (99% purity) were obtained from Sigma–Aldrich. Cetylpyridinium bromide was recrystallized 2× from acetone and freeze–dried The measurements of advancing contact angles for aqueous solution of CPBr and propanol mixture on PTFE plates were carried out using the sessile drop method by the telescope–goniometer system at 25×, in a thermostated chamber at 293 The measured values of the advancing contact angles ( According to Zisman Bargeman and van Voorst Vader It should be emphasized that Zisman and co-workers On the basis of contact angle measurements of the different liquid series on given solids Dann Kitazaki and Hata Thus, it is clear that the obtained values of PTFE is treated by the most investigators Taking into account the contact angle values for water ranging from 106–112° and On the other hand, if we assume that From the Young equation Some authors stated Hu and Adamson The influence of the vapour film behind a solution drop settled on PTFE surface is not sufficiently proved, therefore it seems that another explanation of the difference between the Unfortunately, the presented results can not give complete explanation of this problem. The changes of the contact angles as a function of the concentration of CPBr and propanol mixtures in the solution result from reduction of the water–air and PTFE–water interfaces tension under the influence of adsorption at these interfaces of the surface active agents. Using the Lucassen-Reynders equation According to the Owens et al. Taking into account the Eq. In the case of linear dependence between cos The obtained value of If we assume, that in the case of PTFE–solution drop–air systems weak polar interactions across the PTFE–solution interface occur then according to Fowkes approach the Eq. It is worth noting that in a limiting case the value of the adhesion work of the solution to PTFE surface resulting from Eqs. The contact angles, as mentioned above, depend on the solution–air and PTFE–solution interface tension which changes under the influence of the surface active agents adsorbed at the interfaces. The solid–liquid interface tension can not be determined experimentally. One of the most practical indirect methods for evaluating the solid–liquid interfacial tension is based on the Young equation (Eq. Introducing in the Eq. The best wettability of PTFE by aqueous solutions of CPBr and propanol mixtures takes place in the range of propanol concentration in which propanol molecules are present in an aggregated form. For PTFE there is no linear relationship between cos The interfacial tension of PTFE–aqueous solutions of CPBr and propanol mixtures can be described by Miller and co-workers equation for solution at constant CPBr concentration in the whole range of propanol concentration.