Vertical roller mills (VRM) have been used extensively for comminuting both cement raw materials and minerals like limestone, clinker, phosphate, manganese, magnesite, feldspar and titanium. These mills combine crushing, grinding, classification and drying operations in one unit and have advantages over conventional machines and literature reports that 15% energy saving is achievable in cement grinding operations when compared to ball milling circuit. Such an improved performance in cement grinding operations encouraged the research studies on ore grinding applications. Within the scope of the study ore grinding performance of the vertical roller mill was investigated with mobile pilot plant. In this context, chalcopyrite ore of a plant having rod and ball milling circuit was ground under different operating modes e.g., air swept and overflow, and process conditions, then samples were collected around the system. The collected samples were characterized in terms of size distributions which were then used in comparing the performances of conventional and VRM systems. This study concluded that 18% saving in specific energy consumption was achievable together with the less wear on the internal components.Comminution is the head operation of the entire processing plant where the target size required for subsequent unit operations e.g., leaching, flotation, is produced. Up to now, various types of machines differing in operating mechanisms have been developed. Therefore, attention should be drawn while designing the circuit that directly affects the process efficiency hence the operating costs. Among the several grinding mechanisms defined in the literature, compression rather than impact was found as more energy thus lead to the development of unique technologies. Vertical roller mill (VRM) technology was developed based on that and attracted interests of both manufacturers and researchers. It has been used mainly for cement raw meal grinding applications where crushing, grinding, classifying and drying operations were combined in a single unit. Such a property brings advantages over the rest of the systems since the tertiary or even the secondary crushing stages could be eliminated ( In the literature, several studies have been conducted with the aim of comparing energy efficiencies of VRM and conventional grinding circuits. Promising results obtained from cement industry encouraged the test studies on mineral grinding. Wear rate is another criterion that is needed to be considered. In this context, This study contributes to the literature related with VRM by conducting pilot scale test studies with a mobile plant. Within the scope, different operating modes were tested e.g., overflow and air swept, the system was run at different target size, and the performances of both systems were compared. At the end of the study, the VRM performance was compared with rod-ball mill circuit of the copper plant, of which the ore was tested, in terms of specific energy consumption and wear rate. As indicated previously, the test studies were performed with a mobile plant which is fully automated and manufactured mainly for ore grinding purpose. The mobile plant was manufactured by Loesche GmbH and can be operated at two different modes which are; overflow and air swept modes. In the air swept mode, roller mill and a high efficiency classifier are suited as a single unit in the same system. During the operation, the material is initially fed to the middle of the table rotating then head towards the edge of the table where the rollers exert pressure to grind particles. The ground particles are lifted up to the classification zone where the target product size is obtained and the reject material is reported back the mill body with fresh feed. Simplified flow sheet of air swept mode is illustrated in In the overflow mode there is a two-stage air classification system consisting of static and dynamic types and separate from the mill body ( The mobile plant is fully automated and has a control room where the operational parameters e.g., feed rate (t/h), temperature (°C), pressure (kN/m The grinding test studies were performed for both air swept and overflow modes. Throughout the test studies, steady state condition was established initially. For the air-swept mode, pressure difference is the main parameter that indicates the system is at steady state. Therefore, the variation of this parameter together with the flow rate of the product is followed for a given operating condition then it is decided to commence the sampling of the product stream. For the overflow mode, since the classification system is set up at the outside of the mill body, the flow rate of mill discharge stream conveyed to the static classifier and product stream are followed. Once the steady state condition was established, the final product stream was sampled. For the air-swept and overflow modes, seven grinding tests were carried out for each with chalcopyrite ore. In terms of characterization, the particle size distribution measurements of feed and product samples, chemical assays and bond work index test of fresh feed were undertaken. The size distributions of the samples were determined by combining two different measurement techniques. Initially, dry sieving technique was applied from top size to 150 In order to evaluate the performance of a comminution process, energy utilization and size reduction are the key features that need to be considered for a given device. Since there are two different modes in VRM operation, the performances of them were compared initially. During the comparison, the specific energy consumption and the shape of the size distribution curves at the same mean size were considered.  The product size distribution directly affects the performance of the subsequent operations e.g., flotation, leaching. Within the study, the product size distributions of both systems were compared at the same mean size as illustrated in The flow sheet of the conventional copper grinding circuit is depicted in While evaluating the performance of the whole system, the energy figures together with sump level and hydrocyclone pressure parameters were followed from the control room and rod mill feed together with hydrocyclone overflow streams was sampled once the steady state condition was established. It should be emphasized that the audited grinding circuit was at its optimal conditions since the power draws of the mills, which is a function of media filling, hydrocyclone pressure and feed rate parameters were at their limits. Regarding comparison, specific energy utilization together with wear rates of the entire processes was taken into consideration. As pointed out in the literature section, improved energy efficiency owing to using compression mechanism is the major advantage of VRM over the conventional systems. However, this study also indicates that the wear rate of the internal components of VRM is lower than the conventional circuits.  In addition to specific energy consumption, the wear rates of the internal components were compared as well. In addition to technical evaluations, the economy of the grinding operations should be taken into consideration when comparing the different technologies. In this context, the save in specific energy consumption and wear rate were considered. The assessments showed that, the change in wear rate contributed to the plant economy by reducing the wear cost by 58.7%. From specific energy consumption point of view, VRM application is able to decrease the operating costs by about 38.1%. Overall, these improvements can increase the annual income of the plant by 2.2%. Within the scope of this study, the performance of VRM was compared with rod-ball mill circuit for copper ore grinding application. The VRM tests were performed with mobile plant manufactured by Loesche GmbH and different operating modes e.g., air swept and overflow, were studied. The data from the copper grinding plant was collected at its optimal conditions. At the end, the comparison was made on both energy-size reduction and wear rate basis. The performance evaluation studies of VRM concluded that the grinding results of overflow and air swept modes are close to each other. This observation is valid for pilot scale test works. For the industrial scale operation of air swept mode, owing to increased pressure drop in the mill body, the fan power increases considerably and consequently utilizes more specific energy than the pilot scale. For this reason, overflow mode is expected to be more efficient than the air swept mode. When the product size distributions of both systems are compared, it is concluded that, the size distribution of air swept product is steeper than the overflow mode for the same mean size. Within the context of the study, the grinding performances of VRM and conventional circuit were compared regarding to specific energy-size reduction relationship and wear rate of the internal components. The assessments implied that, VRM consumes 18% less specific energy than the conventional circuit when producing p