The science of sensory analysis is relatively young when compared with the traditional sciences such as physics and chemistry. An early systematic sensory test was the triangular test ( Sensory analysis is very much an interdisciplinary subject and the aforementioned works cover in some detail the basis of human sensory perception related to thresholds of determination of basic tastes, the variance in individual sensory response and some examples of experimental design. The importance of good experimental design cannot be overemphasised in sensory experiments. Two useful texts are those published by Cochran and Cox, As far as the sensory analyst is concerned, sensory assessors are effectively the instruments used to determine the sensory attributes of a food item. The first step in sensory analysis is to assemble a panel. There is the option of using members of staff if there are sufficient numbers available. If this option is chosen, it will be necessary to impress upon line managers and individuals that it is an essential part of their duties to attend panel sessions. The disadvantage of this approach is that, whilst a considerable amount of time and effort is devoted to timetabling the sessions to ensure everyone is available, there can still be problems of nonattendance at panels. This raises the issue of missing data which is a major problem in meat tasting if it has taken up to two years to produce an animal. There is also the related problem of pre-conditioning the panel. This can occur in small companies and research groups where the assessors have a good idea of what the researcher is working on. An alternative to the in-house panel is the recruitment of an external panel. These people are paid to attend sessions and often receive a bonus to encourage full attendance. The advantages and disadvantages of this type of panel have been addressed by Nally Potential sensory assessors are required to undergo a series of screening tests. These procedures have been documented by various standards organisations, notably The British Standards Institution (BSI), The International Standardisation Organisation (ISO) and The American Society for Testing Materials (ASTM). All these organisations publish methods for selecting and training sensory assessors and give details of how to establish the basic taste acuity of assessors. As an example, assessors can be screened according to the It is particularly important to prepare samples carefully when training assessors and assessing consistency of performance. A useful procedure for producing ranges of texture, juiciness and flavour in pork, for example, is to follow the methods outlined by Wood and Nute. 1 = extremely tough, extremely dry, extremely weak 2 = very tough, very dry, very weak 3 = moderately tough, moderately dry, moderately weak 4 = slightly tough, slightly dry, slightly weak 5 = slightly tender, slightly juicy, slightly strong 6 = moderately tender, moderately juicy, moderately strong 7 = very tender, very juicy, very strong 8 = extremely tender, extremely juicy, extremely strong Analysis of variances revealed highly significant (p < 0.001) differences in texture related to endpoint temperature. There were means of 5.1, 4.5, 4.2 for 65°C, 72.5°C and 80°C respectively, with a standard error of the differences of means (s.e.d) of 0.153. Means for juiciness were 5.0, 4.3, 3.5 at 65°C, 72.5°C, 80°C respectively. Means for pork flavour intensity were 3.4, 3.5, 4.1 at 65°C, 72.5°C and 80°C respectively. This approach was tested using different sources of pigs and was found to be consistent in all cases. The assessment of beef uses procedures based on modifying the conditioning period. To produce an example of extreme toughness, it is necessary to remove a section of hot m.longissimus dorsi, vacuum pack and immediately plunge into iced water, followed by blast freezing at − To conduct effective sensory panels, assessors need to be free of distractions and the tests should be carried out in a special room in which there is controlled lighting and good ventilation. Assessors should be seated at separate booths and should not be able to communicate with each other during the assessments. Samples of food should be uniform in size and of the same temperature at serving. They should be coded by a random three-digit number and presented in clean odour-free containers. If more than one sample is to be assessed, then care is needed to ensure that the assessors do not receive the samples in the same order, since this will introduce a bias. Assessors are instructed to rinse their mouths out with water between each sample to remove all traces of the previous sample. There are a range of different types of test: difference tests paired comparison tests triangular tests alternative forced choice/3-AFC tests duo-trio tests ‘A’-’not A’ test ranking tests two from five test. Difference tests are tests where the assessor is presented with a choice situation, i.e., asked to select the odd sample or match the sample to a reference for example. A general consideration when using difference tests for meat is to understand the variances that occur naturally in meat and the complications that arise in the interpretation of the results. It is important not to bias the test. This means that, when presenting samples, it is necessary to ensure that the samples are at the same temperature, cut the same size, presented in the same way and, if colour differences are present, present the samples under red light to mask these effects. The paired comparison test is used to determine differences or preferences between two samples for a specified attribute, e.g., tougher or more tender. These differences may be directional or non-directional. A typical question in a directional test would be: ‘Which sample is more tender?’. Here the method requires at least seven experts or 20 selected assessors. A typical question for a non-directional test would be: ‘Which of these two meat samples do you prefer?’. Directional tests are one-sided (one-tailed tests) whereas non- directional tests are two-sided (two-tailed tests). It is necessary to balance the order of presentation of samples A and B as shown in An investigation into the influence of a decontamination method using lactic acid on broilers was conducted by Van der Marel. In triangular tests, three coded samples are presented simultaneously, of which two are the same and one is different. Assessors are asked to select the odd sample. All six combinations are served (ABB,AAB,ABA,BAA,BBA,BAB). Some assessors will receive two samples of A and one of B, whilst others will receive two samples of B and one of A. If the number of assessors is not a multiple of six then it is necessary to present the six sets to each assessor on several occasions. The probability of selecting the correct odd sample by chance alone is 1/3. To analyse the test results, the number of correct replies at the agreed level of probability is compared with those in the reference table and checked to see if the number of correct replies exceeds that in the table of probability where In tests on meat it is usually not sufficient to assume that the difference between a pair of treatments will be consistent across all animals and treatments and usually the test is repeated using different pairs of animals. The question of whether it is permissible to combine the results of triangular tests has been discussed by Kunert and Meyners Dacremont and Sauvageot This test is similar in the way samples are presented to that of the triangular test with one important difference: the ‘odd’ sample is always the same throughout the test. The probability of selecting the ‘odd’ sample is still The range of sensitivity of individual assessors varied from 0.018 to 0.143μg g The duo-trio test is an intermediate between the duo (paired) and the trio (triangular) test and is statistically less powerful than the triangle test. In this test the assessor receives one sample marked as a reference sample and two other coded samples and are asked which of the two samples matches the reference sample. The probability of selecting the correct sample by chance is 1/2. The presentation order for the duo-trio test is shown in Studies on the influence of chilling method, either water or brine chilled, on the eating quality of chicken breast and thigh meats were investigated by Jankey and Salman. This test is used for evaluating samples having variations in appearance (when it is difficult to obtain strictly identical repeat samples). It can be also used as a  Having completed the test, the results are assembled into a 2 x 2 contingency table: The chi-squared index is calculated using the expression: where E Ranking tests are concerned with putting samples in order according to the strength of stimulus perceived. Ranking tests have the advantage that more than two samples can be compared at the same time, whereas only two samples can be compared in difference tests. However, the disadvantage is that inexact results can be obtained if the differences are very small or the samples themselves have wide variations between them. In this test, assessors are likely to suffer from sensory fatigue and this limits the usefulness of this test for meat. Assessors evaluate a number of samples in random order and are asked to place them in rank order based upon a specified criterion. Assessors are where If an overall difference has been established between samples, the rank sums of each sample can be used to identify the significant differences between sample pairs as follows. Let Despite the problem of sensory fatigue there are still opportunities to use ranking tests in the meat area. Sheard This is a general difference test which can be more efficient statistically than the triangular test since the probability of correctly guessing the two odd samples is 1/10 compared to the triangular test and paired comparison which are 1/3 and 1/2 respectively. Unfortunately the two from five test can be affected by sensory fatigue and this should be taken into consideration before this procedure is selected. The test consists of presenting assessors with five samples where three of the samples are A and two are B or three are A and two are B. There are 20 possible combinations of two from five samples as shown below:  Category scales are often used to rate a number of different stimuli, e.g., texture, flavour and juiciness. They have the advantage that they are easy to use and can cover a number of attributes, as well as up to six samples in a session. For the test to be successful it is necessary to have good experimental design. The results can then be analysed, for example, using analysis of variance techniques to establish the differences between and within the samples. The use of these types of category scales is useful for determining the gross differences in eating quality and is frequently used in animal production experiments that require sensory data. However, this approach may not yield sufficient information if there is a need to identify the individual characteristics of a food, in which case it is necessary to derive a profile of the food. There is often debate on how many scale points should be used in a category test and whether the category approach is the most efficient in terms of reproducibility and discrimination. Work by Lawless and Malone The term ‘rating’ has been introduced as against ‘scoring’. These terms are often interchanged in sensory experiments on meat, but there are important differences between the two terms. Lawless and Malone There is a further aspect to consider on whether assessors are asked to rate or score a sample and this concerns the relationship between a physical measurement produced by an instrument and a psychological or sensory impression given by an assessor. An instrument that gave different values on different days for the same measurement would be quickly disregarded or repaired. Treating a sensory panel as an instrument of measurement has at its In meat science experiments, where the interest is in the major changes that occur, category scales are widely used and there are many examples of their application. In a study on the influence of breed, feed and conditioning time in pork, Wood There are various ways of carrying out descriptive analysis of foods. There are two basic methods of profiling: fixed-choice profiling and free-choice profiling. In the fixed-choice method, the assessors each develop a vocabulary to describe the food under test. One of the assessors acts as panel leader and their task is to discuss the words generated by the other assessors so that a consensus can be agreed. The agreed set of descriptors is then used to describe the food. The free- choice method involves the assessors being given the likely range of samples during a number of training sessions to derive a profile that is unique to them. The assessors then use this profile to describe the foods in the experiment. In both of these methods, it is important that the experiments are well designed statistically since, if they are not, it is unlikely that meaningful results will be obtained. The relationship between sensory and instrumental results is an area of considerable interest. Relating the two is particularly important in such areas as new product development. Sensory analysis can help set the parameters for a new formulation, but instrumental measurements are needed to develop and ensure consistent product quality. Nute Translation. This is a method of standardising the mean ratings for each assessor for each attribute. This effectively removes the variation between assessors locations along an adjectival scale. Rotation/reflection. This takes account of assessors’ usage of different adjectives to assess the same sensory stimulus. A good example is the confusion between the terms ‘bitter’ and ‘astringent’ as documented by Langron. Scaling. The overall variation among samples rated by each assessor is standardised and removes the effect of assessors rating over different ranges of the adjectival scales. In this particular experiment all three steps were highly significant and demonstrated the effectiveness of GPA as determined by a procrustean analysis of variance. It should be mentioned that the calculation of the degrees of freedom is different from a normal ANOVA. With A assessors and D descriptive adjectives, the degrees of freedom are; D(A-1)for translation, A-1 for scaling and D(A-1)(D-1) for rotation/reflection. The overall conclusion showed that the first principal axis accounted for 33% of the total variation and was a contrast between gelatinous appearance and firm texture. The second principal axis, accounting for 17% of the variation, was related to the appearance and flavour of the products whilst the third principal axis was related to colour, fatness and saltiness. Examining the relationship between mechanical and sensory properties showed that firmness increased with shear strength, and that gelatinous and plastic appearance was related to the amount of bound water in the hams. In studies on the effects of fatty acid composition and its effect on eating quality, Fisher Savage The use of sensory panels in different countries often leads to the need to compare results across countries. Work has been done to investigate if results achieved with one panel in one country are the same as in another country. Two early comparisons were completed by Dransfield In a more recent study on lamb meat by Sanudo Sensory analysis is an important tool in meat science and is becoming accepted as a necessary part of meat quality experiments. Advances in computer technology as a means of data capture and analysis facilitates more sophisticated statistical methods to be used by sensory analysts. As new instrumental technologies are developed, for example electronic noses, the interrelationships between these techniques and sensory methods need exploring. Work by Annor- Frempong