In this study, the effect of cone ratio (ratio of the vortex finder diameter to the apex diameter, Do/Du) on by-pass was investigated for small diameter hydrocyclones. Experimental studies were carried out in a closed circuit laboratory test rig for a wide range of operational parameters, such as diameter of cyclone, vortex finder and apex, inlet pressure and solids content of feed pulp. In the tests, 25.4mm and 50.8mm diameter cyclones were used with different vortex and apex units. The results showed that the cone ratio is an important design parameter for cyclones.Since the early 1940s, hydrocyclones have commonly been used in the mineral industry. Due to the simple design, high capacity, low maintenance, low operating cost and small dimensions of the device, hydrocyclones have become an important equipment for the chemical, mineral, coal and powder processing industries. Despite these advantages, the pulp flows inside the cyclone units are quite complex. This complexity makes the modelling of the performance of hydrocyclones difficult. The performance of a hydrocyclone can be simply represented by an efficiency curve. The efficiency curve shows the proportion of a size fraction which reports to the coarse product stream or underflow and selectivity function is used to draw the efficiency curve. The selectivity function, S(d), for any particle size (d) is given by Eq. The value of the selectivity function  Water recovery to underflow (R In this study, the relationship between by-pass and cone ratio (D  There are numerous articles about the design and operational parameters controlling hydrocyclone performance ( The present study used a Mozley C700 hydrocyclone test rig. The rig has a closed circuit cyclone fitted with by-pass line. A valve on the by-pass line was used for pressure control. 25.4 and 50.8 In any sampling operation, some errors are inevitable. These errors may result from the dynamic nature of the system, physical conditions at a particular point, random errors, measurement errors and human errors. Therefore, the data obtained by sampling in a plant or circuit may be inconsistent and therefore require adjustment. Mass balancing involves statistical adjustment of raw data to obtain the best-fit estimates of flow rates and coherent data. Whenever a flow is split into two or more flows; two or more flows are combined to form one or more flows, or; there is a closed circuit processing, mass balancing is required to estimate the flow rates in each stream. The best-fit flow rates are used to adjust the raw data. The test data (size distributions, water and solid flowrates of feed, overflow and underflow) were mass-balanced using mass-balancing software called JKSimMet. The measured and the adjusted size distributions were in very good agreement, showing that sampling was performed successfully. Sum of the squares of the residuals for feed and product steems (31 data for each) are 1.465, 1.097 and 0.004 respectively. Performance of a hydrocyclone is commonly represented by a partition curve, which represents the percentage of each particle size of the feed reporting to underflow against the particle size. Partition curves were prepared from the reconciled size distributions and slurry flowrates. Then B Water split is defined as the ratio of the volumetric water flow rates of the underflow to the feed streams. Many investigators ( As seen from Contrary to the literature, it was found that by-pass was significantly higher than either the recovery of water or the volumetric recovery of feed slurry to the underflow in small diameter hydrocyclones. This was previously reported by Fish-hook is generally observed in performance curve of the small diameter hydrocyclones ( In this study, the effects of inlet pressure on by-pass were also investigated. By-pass is clearly affected by the inlet pressure, as mentioned by The correlations between cone ratio and by-pass, based on feed pressure, are shown in Water recovery to the underflow and by-pass for large diameter hydrocyclones are accepted as similar in many previous studies, and a variety of models ( As seen from The main relationship between cone ratio and by-pass is B Inlet pressure is another important parameter, and increasing inlet pressure increases the by-pass. In addition to these results, it was found that by-pass increases with decreasing cyclone diameter under the same pressure. Although inlet pressure does not significantly affect the water recovery to the underflow, increasing pressure drop causes an increase in by-pass. When the inlet pressure increases, total solid concentration in underflow increases. Therefore, fine particles, along with coarse particles, are captured in the underflow, and hence by-pass increases. There are many approaches in the literature explaining variations in the by-pass. It was found that by-pass decreases with increasing in the vortex finder diameter. Much of the water goes to the overflow, depending on the increase in the vortex finder diameter. A correlation was found between the by-pass and the diameter of vortex finder, defined as B The apex diameter is of vital importance in separation. When apex diameter increases, water recovery to underflow and by-pass increases, since most of the water will go to underflow. In this study, the correlation between apex diameter and by-pass was determined as B The effect of the feed solids content on hydrocyclone performance is rather complex. Parameters such as cut size and sharpness of the separation, which determine the cyclone performance, were affected by the feed solids content increasing the pulp viscosity. In addition, as a result of particle entrainment, countercurrent flow of displaced water, elevated values of pulp density and viscosity due to disperse solid phase, significant changes occur in cyclone performance ( By-pass was found to be similar for 3, 5 or 7% feed solids contents by volume, but decreased for 9% solids content. When the feed solids content was 9% by volume, the amount of solids in the overflow was higher than that of the underflow. Therefore, the volumetric percentage of solids in underflow, and accordingly the amount of by-pass, decreases. The cut size is affected by the apex and vortex finder diameter. In the present study, a linear correlation was observed between the cone ratio and the cut size. Cut size increased linearly with increasing cone ratio. Volumetric recovery of feed slurry to underflow is one of the most important performance parameters for hydrocyclones. A significant result of the present study is that R  As seen from R It was found that by-pass is significantly higher than either the recovery of water to the underflow or volumetric recovery of feed slurry to underflow, and available models did not adequately define this relationship in small diameter hydrocyclones. The results showed that by-pass increases with increasing inlet pressure, depending on the cone ratio. But, water recovery is not depends on the inlet pressure. Therefore, it is wrong to accept that the by-pass equals to the water recovery. When the cone ratio increases, by-pass initially decreases sharply, and then the pronounced effect of this increase disappears for further increases in the cone ratio. According to this behavior, by-pass can be defined as a power function of the cone ratio in small diameter hydrocyclones. It was finally concluded that D  Hydrocyclone diameter (mm) Vortex finder diameter (mm) Spigot diameter (mm) Feed inlet diameter (mm) Classification function Selectivity function By-pass (%) Mass flowrates of solids in the underflow (kg/h) Mass flowrates of solids in the feed (kg/h) The proportions by weight of material of size d in underflow (kg/h) The proportions by weight of material of size d in feed (kg/h) Cut size (μm) Recovery of water to underflow (%) Volumetric recovery of feed slurry to underflow (%) Inlet pressure (bar) Volumetric fraction of solids in feed slurry (%)