Planetary habitation requires technology to maintain natural microbial processes, which make nutrients from biowaste available for plant cultivation. This study describes a 646 day experiment, in which trickling filters were monitored for their ability to mineralize nitrogen when loaded with artificial urine solutions of different concentrations (40, 60, 80 and 100% v/v). Former studies have indicated that increasing urine concentrations slow nitrogen conversion rates and induce growing instability. In the current experiment, nitrogen conversion rates, measured as nitrate production/day, did not differ between concentration levels and increasing instability was not observed. Instead, the buffering capacity of the mussel shells added as buffer system (∼75% calcium carbonate) increased with increasing concentrations of synthetic urine possibly due to the higher phosphate content. The intensified precipitation of calcium phosphates seems to promote carbonate dissolution leading to improved buffering. For space applications, the precipitation of calcium phosphates is not desirable as for the phosphate to be available to the plants the precipitate must be treated with hazardous substances. With regard to terrestrial agriculture the process-integrated phosphate precipitation is a possibility to separate the macronutrients nitrogen and phosphate without addition of other chemicals. Thus, the described process offers a simple and cost-effective approach to fertilizer production from biogenic residues like slurry.Long-term planetary habitation requires biological life support system components with a high degree of closure ( The mineralization process converting biowaste to plant nutrients relies on the metabolism of a variety of microorganisms. For maintenance and utilization of such functional microorganisms in bioreactors, several approaches exist. A very simple and energy saving approach is the use of trickling filters, in which gravity ensures the distribution and aeration of the processed liquid. The only energy consuming element in the system is the pump which constitutes constant recirculation ( Trickling filters are fixed bed reactors. They contain filter material on the surface of which the microorganisms – mainly bacteria and archaea- can form a biofilm. When newly built filters are put into operation, function develops slowly with the growth of the necessary organisms. During the start-up period, it is typical for the accumulation of nitrogen compounds to be observed. First, the concentration of ammonium rises until ammonium oxidizing bacteria are established. Second, the nitrite resulting from ammonium oxidation reaches a concentration maximum until the population of nitrite oxidizing bacteria is large enough to oxidize the nitrite to nitrate at the rate it is produced ( For space applications, the crew time (labour) required for waste processing should be minimized and the microbial communities present in the filter have to be maintained. When trickling filters are applied, batch mode can be considered an operation mode with low maintenance effort and microbial wash-out ( The filters are built of opaque, plasticizer free, PVC tubes ( The pumice used as filter material is called “Rote Eifellava” and is mined in quarries near Cologne. The average elemental composition is given elsewhere ( The synthetic urine was prepared according to an earlier published protocol ( For the test run, 12 filter units (units A – L) were grouped in triplicates. A, B, C received 30 l of synthetic urine (undiluted, 100% v/v). D, E, F received 24 l of the urine diluted with 6 l of tap water, thus the resulting urine solution contained approx. 80% v/v urine (≈ 6220 mg nitrogen per liter). G, H, I received 18 l of synthetic urine resulting in a 60% v/v urine solution with approximately 4670 mg nitrogen per liter. J, K, L received 12 l (40% v/v, 3110 mg N/l). Temperature and pH of the solutions in all tanks were measured three times a week (temperature: WTW Multi 1970i with TetraCon 325; pH: Sentix 41; all WTW, Germany). The 646 day measuring period presented here started with the setup of the tubes. The first processing period is counted as the start-up period of the systems. All ions (NH Figures were created with Excel 2010 (scatterplots) or SPSS 21 ( The processing time per batch is given in days. The overall nitrogen content (g NO3-N) of a batch is calculated on the basis of the nitrogen content of the synthetic urine in g/l (given in As nitrate production curves varied, curve fitting was abandoned and nitrate production rate was calculated as grams of NO3-N produced divided by the processing time in days (g NO3-N/no. of days). In an experiment lasting 646 days, triplicates of filter units were operated with 100% v/v, 80% v/v, 60% v/v and 40% v/v artificial urine solutions. The 100% v/v units (A and B) produced nitrate comparatively slowly while the third 100% v/v unit (C) produced nitrate at nearly double rate. In B, slow nitrate production was accompanied by nitrite peaks that indicated a still developing population of nitrite oxidizers. The pH values averaged 6.5, 6.6 and 6.5, respectively, in the units A,B and C and were comparatively constant over processing time (   The study described in this paper is based on the hypotheses drawn from an earlier experiment, in which filter units of the same type were run with 7% v/v and 20% v/v artificial urine solution ( Considering the entire operation history of each filter unit, filter units within the same concentration level showed similar behaviour. Exceptions are the units which showed contrasting behaviour immediately from start-up. The irregularities continued throughout the complete operation period. From the results of the phenomenological analysis of trickling filter behaviour, hypotheses about the microorganisms active in the filters can be drawn. The results of other studies indicate that each nitrogen concentration has its own specific community of nitrifyers and biofilm structure ( Regarding the buffering system constituted by the presence of calcium carbonate (mussel shells) in the filter tube, the amplitude of pH changes increasing with decreasing concentration was counterintuitive. In the case of insufficient buffer capacity, significant pH variation was expected to occur in the filter units with high urine concentrations, because these produce more acidity and carbonate delivery from the dissolving shells could be too slow. Considering the development of phosphate and calcium concentrations, it can be hypothesized that the dissolution of the mussel shells was not only driven by acidity but was influenced by phosphate concentration. Precipitation of calcium phosphates seems to promote dissolution and the presence of more phosphate in units of high urine concentrations led to better buffering performance. It was concluded above, that nitrate production rate was significantly determined by population size. As the presence of alkalinity is essential for process progress, an effect of mussel dissolution rate cannot be excluded. The long-term nitrification experiment with trickling filters showed that synthetic urine concentration does not influence filter performance in terms of stability and nitrate production rate and therefore dilution is not necessary. Filter units work reliably when the start-up period proceeds undisturbed. The phosphate precipitation induced by the calcium from the mussel shells, which were introduced into the system as a buffer, seems to improve buffering capacity. Considering these findings, it can be hypothesized that nitrate production rate is the result of a complex interplay of precipitation equilibrium, dissolution equilibrium and population sizes. Even though the synthetic urine used in this study simulates the composition of natural human urine, the results of the study have to be substantiated by experiments with natural urine to determine the influence of the microflora usually present in natural substrates. The highest nitrate production rates observed corresponded to urea degradation rates of approximately 4 g urea per day. Assuming that one crew member excretes 15–20 g of urea per day, the filter volume per crew member would be considerably high. In future investigations it has to be tested, if nitrification rate can be accelerated by changes in operation conditions. Mussel shells have been introduced into the system as a bioregenerative buffer system. These proved to be a sufficient buffer when undiluted urine was processed. Dilution led to inadequate buffer performance due to the reduced phosphate content. The option to keep and breed mussels as source of carbonate and protein in space is currently explored. The occurrence of phosphate precipitation induced by the calcium delivered by the shells can be considered problematic for space applications. The precipitated phosphate is not available for plants and can only be dissolved using hazardous substances like sulfuric acid. Thus, operation parameters have to be changed to establish conditions which reduce precipitation, or an alternative regenerative buffer providing a better doseable source of alkalinity has to be used. On the other hand, phosphate precipitation is a possibility to separate the macronutrients nitrogen and phosphate without the addition of further chemicals. In terrestrial agriculture, this may prove to be useful on farms with large livestock, on which the amount of slurry produced is higher than the amount, which can be spread in the fields. The precipitate and the nitrate solution can be dried separately and used for industrial fertilizer production. The authors are very grateful to Birgit Bromeis for her excellent handling of the C.R.O.P. No competing financial interests exist. The described study was part of the project C.R.O.P. Supplementary material associated with this article can be found, in the online version, at doi: 