Influence of surface roughness of the Teflon plates on kinetics of the bubble attachment was studied. Phenomena occurring during collisions of the air bubble, rising in clean water, with Teflon plates, differing only in their surface roughness, were recorded and analysed using a high-speed camera. Variations of the local velocity of the bubble during the collisions and the time of the bubble attachment were determined. It was found that the Teflon surface roughness was the parameter of a crucial importance for the attachment time of the colliding bubble. Depending on degree of the surface roughness the time of the attachment varied by over order of magnitude (from 3 to over 80 ms). In the case the Teflon surfaces having roughness below 1 μm there were recorded four to five “approach–bounce” cycles prior to the bubble attachment. Moreover, after the first collision the rapid pulsations of the bubble shape (within fraction of millisecond) were recorded. For surfaces of roughness ca. 50 μm and larger the attachment always occurred during the first collision—there was no bouncing observed and the time of the attachment was below 3 ms. It was documented that presence of a micro-bubble at the surface facilitated attachment of the colliding bubble.Formation of stable aggregates composed of bubbles and grains of useful components is a fundamental step required for successful flotation separation of the ore components. Prior to the aggregate formation there must occur collision(s) of bubble with grain(s) and the three phase contact; gas/liquid/solid (TPC) formation. Bubble–particle interactions during the collisions are dynamic and pretty complex phenomena. There are simultaneous interactions between three different phases: gas, liquid and solid, leading to the TPC formation when the intervening liquid film, between the air bubble and the solid, ruptures. The film stability and behavior depend strongly on solid properties such as degree of hydrophobicity, homogeneity, roughness, electric charge, etc. For a successful flotation it is necessary that the intervening film ruptures during the bubble and the solid grain collisions and the three phase contact assuring the stable attachment is formed ( Stability of thin liquid film is considered according to the DLVO theory as a balance between the electric double layer repulsions (arising from the surface charges at interfaces and having a range of an order from few up to 100 nm) and van der Waals attractions (having a range about 1 nm). There is quite a lot of experimental evidences that the surface forces of other origin, for example the steric repulsions, can be operative under certain conditions. In addition to the interaction described above a supplementary attractive force was observed and reported by many researchers ( Degree of hydrophobicity of solids is quantified on a basis of the contact angle values. One should remember however, that the contact angles are determined and refer to the equilibrium conditions, while the TPC formation occurs under dynamic non-equilibrium conditions. Solid surface inhomogeneity and roughness are considered to be the main reasons of the contact angle hysteresis and these parameters can be expected to be also very important during the TPC formation under dynamic conditions. When a drop of water on smooth hydrophobic surface forms a contact angle 120°, then increasing the surface roughness can result in increasing the contact angle value even up to 150°. The surfaces showing contact angles of an order 140°–180° are usually termed ultralyophobic ( The paper presents results of studies on kinetics of collisions and attachment of the bubble rising in clean water to Teflon surface of different roughness. Influence of the solid surface roughness on variations of the bubble local velocity during the collisions (bouncing prior to the attachment), formation of the three phase contact and the time-scale of the bubble attachment was determined. Mutual importance of the surface roughness and presence of air at the solid surface have been discussed, as well. The experimental set-up used in the experiments is presented schematically in The bubble velocity variations during collisions with the liquid/solid interface were determined by measurements coordinates of the bubble bottom pole on every consecutive frame of the camera recordings ( Optical microscope photos were taken for characterization of surface roughness of the all Teflon plates studied. In the case of the smoothest Teflon surface (“Teflon I”) the AFM pictures (Nanoscope III — tapping mode) were obtained, as well. All plates used in the experiments were prepared from the same piece of the commercial Teflon. Roughness of the surface of the plates was modified with the help abrasive papers of different grid numbers.  Four-fold distilled water was used in the experiments. The experiments were carried out in room temperature (22  For formation of the TPC and the bubble attachment to solid the intervening liquid layer between the bubble and the solid must thin and reach a critical thickness of rupture ( After substitution into Eq.  It is seen in Let's discuss possible mechanism of influence of roughness of the hydrophobic solid surface on kinetics of the TPC formation and the bubble attachment. In our opinion there are two most important factors, namely: i) local differences in thickness of the thinning intervening liquid layer, and ii) presence of gas at hydrophobic surface. Please note that as evaluated above the thickness of the liquid film reached during the first collision (above 4 μm) refers to the average thickness of the syneresing liquid layer. When the solid surface is not smooth there are crevices (pillars, protrusions) of different sizes (height and width) in different local areas. Thus, the thinning liquid layer between the colliding bubble and Teflon surface can have locally, (on pillars of the rough surface — see A presence of gas submicroscopic bubbles at hydrophobic Teflon surface seems to be the second parameter of crucial importance for kinetics of the bubble attachment. Importance of presence nanobubbles for the forces of interaction between hydrophobic surfaces was reported, as discussed above, by many authors. It was showed there that the long range attraction forces between approaching slowly two hydrophobic surfaces were caused by a presence of nanobubbles. We had also carried out some AFM experiments to check a presence of the submicroscopic bubbles at the “Teflon I” surface, i.e., the smoothest surface studied. There were detected some difference between images of the “Teflon I” in air and water but even this surface was too rough for a clear spotting of the submicroscopic bubbles on the background of the existing cavities. However, we observed and it is showed in Both of these factors are interrelated and their mutual importance can vary and be a function of other factors as for example, size and velocity of the colliding bubble, degree of gas contents in the system, presence of surface active substance(s), type and concentration of the surface active substances, adsorption kinetics in reference to velocity of the bubble shape variations and film thinning, etc. Roughness of the hydrophobic (Teflon) solid surface is of crucial importance for kinetics of the bubble attachment. Depending on degree of the surface roughness the time of the three phase contact formation assuring attachment of the bubble to Teflon surface varied by over an order of magnitude (from 3 to over 80 ms). High hydrophobicity of the solid surface (Teflon having contact angle above 110°) is a necessary but not sufficient condition for the immediate bubble attachment, i.e. during the first collision. It was showed that in the case of the Teflon surfaces having roughness below 1 μm there were recorded four to five “approach–bounce” cycles prior to the bubble attachment. Simultaneously, after the first collision the bubble shape started to pulsate rapidly within time intervals of an order of fraction of millisecond. In the case of the Teflon plates having surface roughness of ca. 50 μm and larger the attachment always occurred during the first collision — there was no bouncing observed and the time of the attachment was below 3 ms. It was found that the presence of a micro-bubble at the Teflon surface facilitated the bubble attachment. Thus, fact that the surface roughness had so crucial effect on the time of the colliding bubble attachment seems to be due to the following: i) higher roughness means larger asperices (pillars) at the surface and higher probability that rupture thickness of the thinning liquid film is locally faster attained, and/or ii) there are larger cavities at rougher surface and larger amount of gas can be present there, what leads to faster formation of a long enough perimeter of the TPC for the bubble attachment.  Gravity acceleration Film thickness Pressure Radius of the bubble Radius of the film Time Induction time Collision time Time of the TPC formation Bubble local velocity   Liquid density Liquid viscosity Liquid surface tension Partial financial support from the Ministry of Scientific Research and Information Technology (grant 3 T09A 092 27) is gratefully acknowledged. The authors thank Dr Krzysztof Skrzypiec of Maria Curie Sklodowska University in Lublin for his valuable discussions and help in obtaining the AFM pictures of the “Teflon I” surface. Financial support of the Scientific Network SURUZ (EU grant INCO-CT-2003-003355) for making it possible to carry out the AFM experiments is gratefully acknowledged.