Core shell nanostructures have endorsed great enhancements in the production of biodiesel with well-controlled size, shape, and surface properties. A simple and reproducible hierarchically porous core-shell CaSO4/Fe2O3-SiO2 material with controllable core morphology was developed. The materials with a well mesoporous structure were prepared by ethanol/H2O media using NaNO3 as the etchant to construct the co-valent bond in Fe2O3 framework, and the CH3COONa was an electrostatic supporter and subordinate reducing agent under mild. Solvothermal conditions. The morphology, porosity and conjugated structure of CaSO4/Fe2O3-SiO2 were measured systematically. The materials of CaSO4/Fe2O3-SiO2 showed remarkable performance in biodiesel production with crude Jatropha curcus and methanol. At suitable state, the biodiesel production reached 94%. Furthermore, the material was easily dispersed in the reaction system, quickly separated from the reaction products without using centrifugation or filtration, and satisfactory catalytic activity maintained after being recycled nine. Controlling the interaction among the active phases of core shell structure might boost structural stability of the material. In addition, the performance was compared with several forms of material in the case of biodiesel production. Therefore, the data are remarkable for offering a new juncture for the fabrication of novel and eco-friendly procedure of hierarchically porous material in the potential biodiesel production. Moreover, the easy separation of material from process fluid and the safe handling were the main impacts to imply the CaSO4/Fe2O3-SiO2 core-shell material for biodiesel production.Global racing towards alternatives to fossil fuels to beat climate change has received great attention recently. The forecasting of global biodiesel production is raised by 14% from 2016 to 2020 to drive the climate change mitigation. The estimated biodiesel production capacity in 2020 is to be 33.2 billion liters, much higher than that in 2016 ( Several studies have been reported for the biodiesel production based on the basic or acidic catalyst under suitable procedures ( Zeolites have been used as carrier material in terms of porosity and accessibility of active phase to the internal surface to ensure the high activity/selectivity. By using FAU-type zeolite catalysts, the transesterification reaction was performed in the reflux condition in methanol at atmospheric pressure for high productivity ( A new advanced application of nanocatalyst is emerging in order to boost the transesterification of vegetable oils ( All chemicals were of analytical grade and used as received without further purification. Ferrous sulphate (FeSO The steps of CaSO The required amount of iron oxide was dissolved in solution with ethanol and distilled water ratio of 2:1. After that 9 mL aqueous ammonia (25 wt%) was dissolved to the mixture to attain pH 9.0. Next, cetyltrimethylammonium bromide (CTAB, 0.2 g) was added to the mixture and tetraethoxysilane (TEOS, 0.625 mL) was added slowly at the end. At room temperature, the mixture was stirred for 24 h and then the nanoparticles were isolated with a magnetic field from the solution and rinsing with water and ethanol, and then dried at 100 °C until complete drying. The calcination of the core-shell composite nanoparticles was performed for 5 h at 550 °C in the presence of atmospheric air ( Dust and all impurities were removed from the Cockle-seashells with deionized water. Detergent was used to eliminate the oil covered surface from the shells. The water from the shell was removed by drying at 110 °C for 12 h. The calcination was performed at 800 °C in an open-tube furnace (Carbolite) for 3 h to convert CaCO Mesoporous silica embedded Fe Infrared spectra analysed using attenuated total reflection-Fourier transforminfrared (ATR-FTIR) spectroscopy was used to measure the functional group of the material (PerkinElmer (PC) Spectrum 100 FTIR spectrometer). The TG/DTA data were recorded by Mettler Toledo thermogravimetric analyser. Crystalline structures of the material were carried out by X-ray diffraction (Shimadzu, XRD-6000). The diffractometer was used CuKα radiation (λ = 1.541 Å) to get the diffraction patterns from powder crystalline samples. The specific surface area (S The prepared CaSO Using response factor, R Internal standard's area, A The methyl ester (ME) conversion was determined by the following equation: where amount of internal standard concentration in the sample, C The biodiesel production (BY, %) of was determined using the following equation: where total quantity of methyl ester (mol) in the sample, M The solvothermal reduction conditions were controlled to obtain monodisperse Fe The isotherms for CaSO The functional group presence on the CaSO The thermogravimetric analysis of core-shell magnetic particle was performed using TGA, as shown in The X-ray diﬀraction patterns of CaSO We used crude Jatropha oil directly as raw material for biodiesel production without a pretreatment step (or esterification). Our previous study ( The reuse data of CaSO  Hierarchically porous, active and recyclable acid-functionalized CaSO The Authors would like to acknowledge the financial grant from the