This study presents the development of a strategy for the quantification of titanium from titanium dioxide polydisperse particles (TiO2) in dry biological tissue. Calf liver was chosen as laboratory testing material. The challenge was to (i) obtain a complete mineralization of the solid material (biological tissue and TiO2) and (ii) ensure the accuracy of the determined concentrations with a sufficient sensitivity. Mineralization was performed using a mixture of concentrated nitric and hydrofluoric acids. Atomic mass spectrometry associated with light-scattering technique was used to control the physical state (dissolved and particle forms) of titanium and reliably estimate the total titanium concentration in calf liver. The monitoring of 46Ti and 49Ti, operating in helium collision/reaction cell mode, and using external calibration with internal standard addition, allowed the quantification of Ti while removing isobaric interferences. The limit of detection and quantification were 0.7 and 2.3μg (Ti)g−1 (tissue) respectively. The mean analytical recovery over the whole procedure was (103±6)% in a range of concentrations from LOD to 200μg(Ti)g−1 (tissue).Since the last decades, there is a large increase in the use of nanoparticles (NPs) in a lot of various products and applications including food, cosmetic and medicine In order to acquire knowledge about the fate and the impact of these particles, the determination of titanium from TiO The food additive E171 in the form of powder of TiO The E171 powder was introduced into ultra pure Milli-Q water (18 MΩ cm) in such a way that a stock suspension of 10 The liver sample was freeze-dried for 48 Because of the absence of certified reference biological material containing TiO According to the literature presented in the introduction, three mineralization solutions were tested in a closed-system microwave (Ethos Touch Control, Milestone). The first one was a solution containing only concentrated HNO Total titanium analyses were performed with an Agilent 7500ce model ICP-MS instrument equipped with a cooled Scott-type spray chamber, a concentric nebulizer (Meinhard) and an octopole Collision/Reaction Cell (CRC). Because of the presence of hydrofluoric acid in some analyzed solutions, the torch and spray chamber were in Teflon-perfluoroalkoxy (PFA). The monitored isotopes were The objective of this part was to evaluate the mineralization process of the sample material in order to ensure repeatable and accurate titanium quantification. For that, samples considered were powders of (i) liver, and (ii) TiO The mineralization of calf liver was completed for each mineralisation solutions used. It was confirmed by DLS analysis from which no solid object was detected. For TiO This set of experiments demonstrates that a complete dissolution of TiO First, it was noted that the ICP-MS signals from blank solutions obtained from the 3 types of mineralisation solutions investigated were statistically identical to the signal obtained from 2% HNO According to the investigations previously presented, the total titanium concentration in calf liver was determined as follows: mineralization of liver powder samples by a mixture 8:2 The limits of detection (LOD) and quantification (LOQ) for titanium (0.7 and 2.3 Then, the 8 test samples with low and high levels of titanium concentration were analyzed. The mean analytical performances calculated from these analyses are presented in The values of recovery obtained for both concentration ranges show that the procedure such as above defined gives accurate total titanium concentrations. The precision of the quantification was evaluated for ICP-MS analysis (called measurement precision) and for the whole procedure from sample preparation to analysis (called procedure precision) respectively. Both evaluations are satisfactory in the considered concentration ranges. In addition, accuracy and precision were found to be statistically the same as those obtained for the quantification of titanium from aqueous standards (recovery: 100%; precision measurement: RSD ≤2%). This confirms that the mineralization of the biological tissue and particles is total, and so that the processes of nebulization and atomization can be considered identical to those occurring for aqueous solution. This also allows validating the quantification procedure by external calibration. The quantification of total titanium brought in biological tissue by TiO Supplementary data associated with this article can be found, in the online version, at The following are Supplementary data to this article: