The aim of this work is to analyze the mechanisms involved on hematite floatability using tetradecylammonium chloride as collector agent. The emphasis of the study is focused on mineral/collector interactions with the aim of optimizing the mineral recovery. In order to obtain better hematite floatability, the tetradecylammonium chloride concentration is relatively high in comparison with its corresponding critical micelle concentration (CMC) value, widely reported in the literature. The optimum was found when surfactant monolayer coverage was attained. Furthermore, if the zeta potential is close to zero or shifts to positive values the mineral recovery is enhanced, possibly due to the counter ions chemically adsorbed on the mineral surface.Large scale flotation processes require a good understanding of the interactions between the three major phases involved. Collector specificity and its role on the separation process at a molecular level is still not well known. Several attempts have been made to elucidate the mechanisms involved, such as bubble–mineral particle attachment ( Iron oxide ore flotation has been a well researched subject, not only at the fundamental level but also at industrial scale. Floatability assessments have been made mainly using highly soluble collectors such as 10 or 12-carbon chain organic molecules ( Hematite is of significant interest due to its variability in chemical and physico-chemical properties, from one sample to another, which modifies, sometimes significantly, its floatability behavior ( The aim of the present work is to understand the mechanisms governing hematite–collector interactions, using the collector tetradecylammonium chloride. Tetradecylammonium chloride salt used in all experiments was produced from tetradecylamine (99% purity) using the experimental methodology described by Natural hematite was used during for all the experiments. The chemical analysis was: Fe The mineral was ground in an agate mill, reducing all the mineral to a particle size below 200 The floatability tests were performed using the original slimed samples and for both zeta potential and adsorption studies the mineral was initially deslimed. Desliming was performed by the settling of the mineral in distilled water for 48 Floatability tests were carried out using a modified Hallimond cell. The porous bottom inside the Hallimond tube had a mean diameter aperture of 10–20 Microprobe analysis was performed to determine the chemical species present in the hematite samples. Further techniques such as scanning electron microscope (SEM) and X-ray diffraction analysis completed the structural characterization of the samples. The surface state was also characterized by measuring the specific surface area for both slimed and deslimed hematite. Rests Method was used to determine the specific surface area ( The equilibrium concentration was measured using UV–Visible spectroscopy ( The hematite used in this work has a maghemite structure (γ-Fe   The characteristic volcano-shape curves shift to more acidic pH values if the collector concentration increases, which is in agreement with the electrostatic nature of adsorbate–adsorbent interactions ( However, hematite floatability starts to increase above pH The volcano-shape curves can also be explained by the chemical nature of the dissolved surfactant species involved: for a higher pH than the isoelectric point, the presence of neutral amine might inhibit the adsorption of cationic amine on the mineral surface. This fact arises from the random orientation of neutral amine on its adsorption, which does not necessarily contribute to hematite floatability. This produces a sharp decrease in hematite recovery at pH   It can be concluded that in order to obtain a defined fraction of hematite covered surface area by cationic collector, a low concentration is required, since the mineral surface charge decreases, even over the isoelectric point. However this effect is more significant in the case of quartz ( Normally, during the flotation tests performed, for collector conditioning periods of 3 In order to enhance hematite floatability, it is important to use relatively high tetradecylammonium concentrations with respect to its CMC, such as 7 The authors are pleased to thank the Laboratoire Environnement et Minéralurgie (LEM) directed by Mr. J. Yvon for having facilitated both the instrumental and technical requirements to accomplish this work. We would like to thank the support obtained from some of the researchers who work at the CNRS UMR 7569 unit.