Snowboarding is one of the fastest-growing winter sports and is associated with a relatively high rate of ankle injuries. Presented is a patient who, after falling while snowboarding, complained of lateral ankle pain and was misdiagnosed with an ankle sprain. Further workup revealed a lateral process of the talus fracture, an injury that is rare outside of snowboarding. A lateral process of the talus fracture should be suspected when there is a history of inversion with dorsiflexion and there is tenderness over the lateral process of the talus. Results of plain films are negative up to 40% of the time, and therefore a computed tomographic scan is the imaging modality of choice. Treatment includes immobilization and not bearing weight for 4 to 6 weeks for nondisplaced fractures or open reduction and fixation for displaced fractures. Up to two thirds of patients with lateral process of the talus fractures report chronic pain. Early recognition may decrease this relatively high rate of morbidity. [Ann Emerg Med. 2003;41:854-858.]Snowboarding is one of the fastest-growing winter sports and is thought to be associated with relatively high injury rates. A 39-year-old man presented to the emergency medical clinic at the base of a ski area complaining of left lateral ankle pain after a fall while snowboarding. He was able to ambulate as well as snowboard down the hill. He believed that he fell forward while dorsiflexing his ankle. He denied any other injury. Physical examination was remarkable for mild swelling about the lateral and medial malleolus; there was mild bony tenderness at the distal fibula. The drawer and talar tilt test were stable. Plain radiograph results were normal except for mild soft tissue swelling. The patient was diagnosed with a Grade 1 ankle sprain and discharged with a lace-up ankle brace and crutches with instructions for weight bearing as tolerated, ice, and elevation. No definitive follow-up plans were given. The patient continued to have lateral ankle pain and still had difficulty bearing full weight without crutches 2 weeks after the injury. The patient sought consultation with an orthopedic surgeon; repeat radiographs were taken and were read as normal except for soft tissue swelling. A computed tomographic (CT) scan of the ankle was obtained (Figure 1), and a fracture of the lateral process of the talus was diagnosed. The patient was treated with a fixed-hinge short leg brace for 4 weeks with no weight bearing and 2 weeks of weight bearing as tolerated. This was followed by 5 months of physical therapy. After that time, the patient was still unable to run or walk for long distances without pain. A follow-up CT scan demonstrated posttraumatic arthritis of the subtalar (talocalcaneal) joint. Arthroscopy was performed, and the joint was debrided of scar tissue. Postoperatively, the patient reported slightly decreased pain but was still unable to resume snowboarding 1 year after the accident. In the general population, the incidence of the lateral process of the talus fracture is rare. A retrospective review of 1,500 ankle injuries cites an incidence of 0.86%. The talus' relationship to its surrounding structures places it at risk for injury. When the ankle is dorsiflexed, the talus wedges into the mortise of the ankle. No muscles or tendons originate or insert in the talus. Avascular necrosis can be a complication for this reason. Most authors believe the most likely mechanism of injury is dorsiflexion of the ankle and inversion of the hindfoot, Lateral process of the talus fractures are most commonly classified according to Hawkins' description and consist of 3 types. As previously mentioned, this is a frequently missed diagnosis. An “ankle sprain” in a snowboarder may be the initial presentation of a fracture of the lateral process of the talus. A history of ankle dorsiflexion with inversion should heighten the emergency physician's suspicion. Direct tenderness over the lateral process of the talus (just inferior and anterior to the tip of the lateral malleolus) is suggestive of an injury, although accurate palpation may be difficult over the acutely injured and swollen ankle. A patient returning to the emergency department with persistent lateral ankle pain should also increase the emergency physician's suspicion for a lateral process of the talus fracture. A patient with a lateral process of the talus fracture demonstrates a possible inaccuracy in the Ottawa ankle criteria. Standard ankle radiographs should be obtained but may not demonstrate a fracture up to 40% of the time. All documented patients with suspected lateral process of the talus fractures evaluated in the ED should be immobilized and made non-;weight bearing until the patient can either be reevaluated by an orthopedist or until imaging by CT scan can be obtained. Early recognition and treatment is thought to decrease the significant morbidity associated with lateral process of the talus fractures. Even with early recognition and treatment, it is thought that lateral process of the talus fractures have a high associated incidence of morbidity. Complications include nonunion, malunion, avascular necrosis, subtalar arthritis, chronic pain, and instability of the ankle. In summary, the increase in popularity of snowboarding has led to an increase in the incidence of lateral process of the talus fractures or “snowboarder's ankle.” Emergency physicians should strongly consider the possibility of a lateral process of the talus fracture in snowboarders who present with lateral ankle pain, particularly those who have tenderness over the lateral process of the talus and give a history of dorsiflexion and inversion. Referral for early definitive treatment may decrease the morbidity associated with this fracture. We thank Daniella Zipkin, MD, for her editing and Ernie Tai for his illustrations.