Common reed (Phragmites australis) beds are frequently considered as aggressive and invasive, being subject to numerous conservation management efforts aimed at their eradication by repeated mowing or more aggressive measures. However, the reed beds are associated with a specific community of reed bed specialists, represented typically by various bird flagship species or by Lipara flies. We show here that the reed beds and particularly the reed galls induced by Lipara flies provide unique habitat serving at least 183 bee and wasp species (amounting to 13.6% of the total bee and wasp species known to occur in the Czech Republic, throughout which the sampling sites were located). The reed galls themselves were found to host 13 species of bees and wasps, five of them red-listed, and some of them considered as reed bed specialists. Pemphredon fabricii and Hylaeus pectoralis were the dominant reed gall aculeate hymenopteran inquilines. Hylaeus moricei, Passaloecus clypealis, Rhopalum gracile and Trypoxylon deceptorium were identified as species tightly bound to the presence of reed galls. Among the other species detected was also one previously considered as regionally extinct (Nysson quadriguttatus), nine were critically endangered, 11 were endangered, and 19 were considered as vulnerable. The species found displayed specific habitat requirements, often requiring not only the presence of reed, but also the presence of loose sandy bedrock below the reed bed. These species, which have nearly disappeared from the surrounding cultural landscape, found their surprising refuge in reed beds occurring newly on the loose bedrock of (post)industrial sites, including gravel-sandpits, ash ponds and tailing ponds. The data obtained challenge the common view of the expanding reed beds as a threat to biodiversity, and highlight the importance of reed beds, particularly those of the oligotrophic nature, for effective conservation of the aculeate hymenopteran reed gall inquilines.Galls represent discrete microhabitats that support relatively closed communities of specialized inhabitants ( In this current study we addressed the value of common reed ( The reed stands serve as an exclusive habitat for four monophagous and univoltine species of the genus While the biology and ecology of In this paper, we address the conservation value of reed galls (and reed beds in general) as an underestimated but critically important resource for the community of aculeate hymenopterans. We compare the data obtained using two independent methods: by rearing of reed gall inquilines from extensive set of reed galls collected, and by the non-selective method based on Moericke traps exposure. We assess the data from near-natural sites as well as from industrial and postindustrial sites. Thus, we perform the first comprehensive survey of aculeate hymenopterans utilizing reed galls correlated with various site-specific variables, providing the evidence to re-assess the case for the conservation of reed beds in European wetlands. The study was carried out in the Czech Republic (Central Europe, 48°39′–50°59′N, 12°19′–18°29′E). Sampling sites were selected to cover four major areas with extensive pisciculture industry or with major remnants of reed beds in the floodplains of rivers and streams. Sedimentary deposits within the study area are extensively exploited by coal and industrial minerals extraction activities, comprising of 10.3% of world kaolin production, 4.2% of brown coal production, 2.0% of feldspar production, 1.8% of diatomite production, 1.3% of quartz sands production, and 1.3% of bentonite production ( We selected 15 sampling sites in near-natural habitats (reed beds in the littoral of medieval fishponds or those along rivers and streams), representing reed beds spanning 0.2–480 The study sites included those in agrarian lowlands (<250 At each of the sampling sites listed in Moericke traps were used to allow comparison of species spectrum obtained by rearing the reed galls with the overall spectrum of aculeate hymenopterans present at the localities examined. Moericke traps have been successfully used for the collection of bees and wasps in a wide range of habitats (cf. Rarefaction curves were computed in PAST v. 2.14 ( Basic diversity indices were calculated for each of the datasets. These included the total number of species found, the total number of individuals found, dominance (expressed as 1 – Simpson index, where 1 indicates complete domination of the single species, and 0 indicates equal representation of all the taxa), equitability (evenness measure, where Shannon diversity is divided by the logarithm of number of taxa; Shannon index itself reflects entropy, ranging from 0 for communities with only a single taxon to high values for communities with many species, each with only few individuals), Fisher’s alpha [parametric diversity measure assuming that the species abundance follows the log series distribution, useful when the ratio of the total number of individuals to the species number exceeds 1.44, and independent of sample size when the number of individuals sampled exceeds 1000 ( From 17,791 reed galls sampled, we reared 2176 individuals of aculeate hymenopterans. Of them 781 individuals emerged from galls collected at near-natural sites (8.9 individuals per 100 galls collected), and 1395 individuals emerged from galls collected at (post)industrial sites (15.6 individuals per 100 galls collected). The lower frequency of aculeate hymenopterans reared from near-natural sites when compared to the (post)industrial sites was statistically significant ( In summary, we recorded 14 species of aculeate hymenopteran inquilines emerging from the The assemblages at both near-natural and (post)industrial sites were highly dominated by The galls hosted a diverse assemblage of aculeate hymenopterans, including seven crabronid species, two species of the Colletidae family, Using the early summer Moericke traps captures we obtained 1743 individuals of bees and wasps including, but not limited to, the gall inquilines. Of that 683 individuals (0.47 individuals per trap-day) were collected in near-natural habitats, and 1060 individuals were collected at (post)industrial sites (0.71 individuals per trap-day). The lower frequency of aculeate hymenopterans captured in near-natural habitats when compared to the (post)industrial ones was statistically significant ( In summary, the Moericke trap captures revealed 178 species of bees and wasps ( Both the assemblages in the near-natural habitats and at the (post)industrial sites were dominated by generalist species which are also dominant in the surrounding landscape, such as The Moericke trap captures revealed 39 red-listed species, of which 18 red-listed species (46%; 88 individuals) were obtained at near-natural sites, while 29 red-listed species (74%; 148 individuals) were collected at (post)industrial sites. Importantly, the (post)industrial sites hosted Of the species proven by the rearing experiment to utilize the reed galls, we detected both the species of the Colletidae family, six of the total seven crabronid species in the Moericke traps (all but Although systematically collected data are limited, repeated incidental findings distinguish two types of reed stem utilization by bees and wasps, both of which were identified in this study. Species of the genera The 183 bee and wasp species captured at the edge of reed stands or reared directly from the reed galls during this study comprised 13.6% of the total 1,343 species reported from the Czech Republic ( The species richness of bees and wasps considered as reed gall inquilines was substantially higher than those recorded in the few earlier studies. In another comparable study utilizing the reed gall rearing technique, Similarly to this study, Among the cuckoo wasps identified from the reed galls, all three species found are known to utilize at least occasionally the genera The distribution of aculeate hymenopterans throughout the Czech Republic is considered as well-known already since early 20 The enormous extent of quarrying activities performed in the Czech Republic provides an attractive basis for studies on the ability of organisms to adjust to the increasingly human-dominated landscape. In this study, we have shown that the reed beds, particularly the reed bed galls, are home to a diverse community of aculeate hymenopteran inquilines, many of which are considered as rare, endangered, and in many cases limited to these sites. These species display specific habitat requirements, often requiring not only the presence of reed, but also the presence of loose sandy bedrock below the reed bed. These species, which nearly disappeared from the surrounding cultural landscape and from the long-time existing reed beds in the vicinity of rivers, streams and medieval fishponds, found their surprising refuge in reed beds occurring newly on the exposed loose bedrock of (post)industrial sites, including gravel-sandpits, ash ponds and tailing ponds. The obtained data challenge the common view of the expanding reed beds as a threat for biodiversity. Interestingly, many rare aculeate hymenopteran inquilines were absent or underrepresented at the Czech near-natural sites when compared to the (post)industrial sites. We assume that reed gall inquilines enriched in the (post)industrial dataset could represent, however, the specialists of river beds growing at the active river terraces, which are freshly formed from sand or gravel-sand. Such habitats are nearly absent in todays’ Czech Republic due to extensive river regulation, and differ from the near-natural dataset examined in their oligotrophic nature similar to the reed beds formed The study was supported by the PRVOUK project P31/2012 from the Charles University in Prague, and by the Specifický výzkum projects 2101/2013 and 2102/2013 from the University of Hradec Králové. We thank Lukáš Nývlt for help with the field sampling, and Pavel Tyrner and Jakub Straka for the revision of several specimens from the families Chrysididae and Pompilidae, respectively. We thank the following museums for allowing smooth access to their collections: National Museum Prague (curator Jan Macek), Moravian Museum in Brno (curator Igor Malenovský) and Museum of East Bohemia in Hradec Králové (curator Bohuslav Mocek). We thank the following persons for supplying information on material in their private collections and/or help with the literature search: Pavel Tyrner (Litvínov), Jakub Straka (PřF UK Praha), Dušan Vepřek (Přerov), Martin Říha (Brno), Zdeněk Karas (Zliv) and Antonín Přidal (MZLU Brno). Last but not least, we thank the landlords, and quarry and ash deposit operators for allowing access to habitats in industrial areas and/or providing data on history of the particular sampling sites, and the nature conservation authorities for allowing the access to the protected areas. Supplementary data associated with this article can be found, in the online version, at 