Leaching experiments were performed in Erlenmeyer flasks containing sulfuric medium (200 mL) agitated on a magnetic stirrer at 50 °C. The addition of carbon black enhanced the kinetics of chalcopyrite leaching. The extraction yield of copper was 90% in 94 h in the presence of carbon black, whereas it was 28% in the absence of carbon black. The acceleration of chalcopyrite dissolution did not occur without contact between chalcopyrite and carbon black, suggesting that galvanic interaction between the two materials is related to the improvement of the leaching rate. In the presence of carbon black, the [Fe(III)]/[Fe(II)] ratio in the leaching solution decreased to below 0.1 in 1 h, whereas it was over 0.1 without carbon black. The redox potential fell to below 600 mV vs. SHE with a decrease in the [Fe(III)]/[Fe(II)] ratio, and the leaching rate of chalcopyrite increased markedly. It remained at nearly 560–570 mV during the chalcopyrite dissolution. The enhanced kinetics of chalcopyrite leaching could be attributed to dissolution reactions at the low redox potential in addition to the galvanic interaction between chalcopyrite and carbon black. The effects of several variables such as pH, dosage of carbon black, and initial concentrations of Fe(II), Fe(III), and Cu(II) on the kinetics of chalcopyrite leaching were examined.Chalcopyrite is refractory in ferric sulfate media. The low dissolution rate of Cu from chalcopyrite may be attributed to the formation of passive layers such as an elemental sulfur layer ( In order to accelerate the kinetics of chalcopyrite leaching in acidic sulfuric media by chemical leaching and bioleaching, the effects of several materials have been investigated, including pyrite (   Since the above-mentioned carbon black experiments showed such positive outcomes, chalcopyrite leaching experiments were conducted at several temperatures in the presence of carbon black without MnO The chalcopyrite flotation concentrate (−102 μm size fraction, hereafter referred to as chalcopyrite) used in this study was provided by the Atacama Kozan Mine in Chile. The chalcopyrite was leached in an as-received condition. An X-ray diffraction (XRD) pattern of the chalcopyrite was determined with a diffractometer (Regaku Corp., Rint2100) at 40 kV and 20 mA. The result is shown in Carbon black powder (hereafter, referred to simply as carbon black) and carbon black granules were used in this study. The carbon black was produced by continuous thermal decomposition of acetylene gas. Leaching experiments were performed using 300 mL Erlenmeyer flasks with 200 mL sulfuric acid solution in water bath at a constant temperature with the use of magnetic stirrers. The sulfuric acid solution was prepared by adjusting pH of distilled water to desired pH value (hereafter, referred to as initial pH) with 9 M sulfuric acid. After the required temperature was achieved, the chalcopyrite and carbon black were added into the flasks. The flasks were sealed with silicon caps and placed on a magnetic stirrer at 200 rpm in the constant temperature bath. When the leaching solution was bubbled with N Total Fe and Fe (II) were analyzed by the traditional and modified o-phenanthroline method ( A ferrous sulfate solution (Fe(II) 10 g/L), ferric sulfate solution (Fe(III) 10 g/L), and cupric sulfate (Cu(II) 10 g/L) solution used in this study were prepared by dissolving reagent-grade FeSO  At 50 °C and 60 °C the redox potential of the leaching solution dropped to below 600 mV and remained at nearly 560 mV. When nearly 80% of the Cu in the chalcopyrite was dissolved at 50 °C and 60 °C, the redox potential increased to over 600 mV. At 40 °C the redox potential gradually decreased and remained at approximately 570 mV during the leaching experiment, whereas it was about 630 mV at 30 °C. Fe ions dissolved from chalcopyrite dominantly occurred as Fe(II) in the leaching solutions. At 50 °C and 60 °C, however, the Fe(III) concentration increased after >77% of Cu in the chalcopyrite was extracted. The XRD patterns of the leaching residues are shown in The addition of carbon black enhanced the kinetics of chalcopyrite leaching at temperatures over 40 °C. Subsequent leaching experiments were performed at 50 °C. This temperature was selected because at heap leaching of copper sulfide ores the temperature inside the heap can reach up to 50 °C ( In order to investigate the effects of carbon black and Cu(II) on the oxidation of Fe(II), experiments were performed using 200 mL of acidic ferrous sulfate solutions containing 101 mg/L of Fe(II) at pH 0.6 with the addition of carbon black and/or cupric sulfate solution. The results are shown in Three experiments were performed by separately adding carbon back, chalcopyrite and a mixture of carbon back and chalcopyrite. The results are shown in In the presence of chalcopyrite only, the ratio of [Fe(III)]/[Fe(II)] present in the solution was over 0.1, whereas it was below 0.1 in the presence of the mixture. As mentioned above, the Fe(II) released from chalcopyrite was catalytically oxidized to Fe (III) by Cu(II). In the presence of chalcopyrite and carbon black, the generated Fe(III) could be consumed via a dissolution reaction of chalcopyrite, which was consistent with a high leaching rate. The [Fe(III)]/[Fe(II)] ratio increased after 76 h. At this time, 75% of chalcopyrite was dissolved. The decrease in the amount of unleached chalcopyrite in the leaching solution could be attributive to the increase in the [Fe(III)]/[Fe(II)] ratio. The oxidation rate of Fe(II) was faster than the consumption rate of Fe(III) after 76 h of leaching, which led to the increase of both the [Fe(III)]/[Fe(II)] ratio and the redox potential.  The redox potential decreased rapidly with increasing carbon black dosage and remained at approximately 560–570 mV until after 72 h of leaching. After this time, the redox potential increased in the presence of carbon black. In the absence of carbon black, the redox potential remained at over 600 mV. Two leaching experiments were performed using carbon back granular (−720 + 500 μm) and a −75 + 53 μm size fraction sample of chalcopyrite that was obtained by sieving the chalcopyrite. One experiment was performed in the regular way. In the other experiment, 0.25 g of carbon black granular was packed into a small bag (30 mm × 30 mm) made from bolting cloth (opening 20 μm, AS One Co. Ltd.), and the leaching test was conducted by suspending the bag in the leaching solution containing chalcopyrite. The opening of the bolting cloth was sufficiently small, so that the chalcopyrite and carbon black were not able to make direct contact with each other. The results are shown in In order to evaluate the effect of the initial pH on the kinetics of chalcopyrite leaching, leaching experiments were conducted by varying initial pH from 0.6 to 1.2. The results in The leaching experiments were performed at the stirring speed of 100, 150, 250, and 400 ppm. The results are shown in The leaching experiments were performed by varying the amount of chalcopyrite (either 1, 2, or 4 g of chalcopyrite) that was added into 200 mL leaching solutions with a carbon black/chalcopyrite weight ratio of 0.5. The pulp density was 0.5%, 1%, and 2%, repetitively. As shown in  Leaching experiments were carried out by varying the initial Fe(III) concentration with addition of acidic ferric sulfate solution (i.e., 0, 110, or 220 mg/L). The results are shown in In order to evaluate the effect of initial Cu(II) concentration on the chalcopyrite leaching, leaching experiments were performed using cupric sulfate solutions containing 103 and 206 mg/L of Cu(II) at pH 0.6. The results are shown in The experiment was performed by injecting air or N The feasibility of reusing carbon black in the residue for treating subsequent charges of chalcopyrite was examined. The first experiment was performed using 0.5 g of chalcopyrite in the presence of carbon black at 50 °C. Upon the completion of the first test (Run 1), the solid was allowed to settle for 10 min and the leachate was extracted from the flask. Another 200 mL of sulfuric acid medium at pH 0.6 was added to the flask and the flask was maintained in the hot water bath at 50 °C. After the required temperature of the medium in the flask was reestablished, 0.5 g of new chalcopyrite was added and the test (Run 2) was restarted. The results are shown in In the presence of carbon black, chalcopyrite leaching kinetics was enhanced at temperatures over 40 °C. The Cu extraction yields at 30 °C, 40 °C, and 50 °C in 94 h were 12%, 49%, and 90%, respectively. Although iron ions released from chalcopyrite occur as Fe(II), Fe(II) was oxidized to Fe(III) by the catalytic ability of Cu(II) dissolved from chalcopyrite in the leaching experiments. It is well known that chalcopyrite is passivated in ferric sulfate leaching, resulting in the depression of ferric sulfate leaching of chalcopyrite. In this study, chalcopyrite dissolved remarkably well within the first hour, but thereafter the leaching rate was very slow, indicating that Fe(III) did not oxidize chalcopyrite in the absence of carbon black. In the presence of carbon black, the [Fe(III)]/[Fe(II)] ratio in the leaching solution decreased to nearly 0.01 in 24 h, where it was over 0.1 in the absence of carbon black, indicating that Fe(III) could be consumed by the leaching reaction of chalcopyrite. Galvanic interactions among electrically conducting minerals are well-known phenomena. When two such minerals are in contact with each other in an acid electrolyte, a galvanic couple is formed wherein the mineral with lower rest potential corrodes at an enhanced rate as the anode of the couple. The mineral with the higher rest potential acts as the cathodic site for oxygen and Fe(III) reduction reactions. The redox potential This equation indicates that decreasing the [Fe(III)]/[Fe(II)] ratio causes the redox potential to fall. In the presence of carbon black, the redox potential fell below 600 mV and remained at 560–570 mV during the chalcopyrite dissolution, whereas it was over 600 mV in the absence of carbon black. The low redox potential in the presence of carbon black could be due to a decrease in the [Fe(III)]/[Fe(II)] ratio resulting from the consumption of Fe(III) by the dissolution reaction of chalcopyrite.   In this study, after the solution potential decreased to <600 mV in the presence of carbon black, the dissolution rate of Cu increased remarkably. The chalcopyrite leaching kinetics could be enhanced according to these reactions in addition to galvanic interactions. The results obtained in this study are summarized as follows: In the presence of carbon black, the kinetics of chalcopyrite leaching was enhanced in sulfuric acid media at 50 °C. The extraction yield of Cu was 90% in 94 h in the presence of carbon black, whereas it was 28% without carbon black. The acceleration of chalcopyrite leaching did not occur without direct contact between chalcopyrite and carbon black. The addition of carbon black decreased the [Fe(III)]/[Fe(II)] ratio in the early stages of leaching and dropped the redox potential below 600 mV vs. SHE followed by an increase in the leaching rate of chalcopyrite. The enhanced kinetics of chalcopyrite leaching could be attributed to dissolution reactions at the low redox potential in addition to the galvanic interaction between chalcopyrite and carbon black. The author wishes to express appreciation to the Japan Oil, Gas and Metals National Corporation for supplying the chalcopyrite concentrate.