This study covers fabrication and characterization of thymol-loaded nanofiber (TLNs) mats and evaluation of their potential to be used as novel antimould surface coating material for limitation of mould development of Aspergillus parasiticus on kashar cheese surface. Different ratios of polyvinyl alcohol (PVA)/whey protein (WP) were electrospun to yield cylindrical and fine (⁓370 nm in diameter) polymeric nanofiber mats. The fabricated nanofibers were characterized in terms of their zeta potential, electrical conductivity, molecular, thermal and morphological properties. These results revealed that there were intermolecular interactions between thymol and functional groups of PVA and WP. The most uniform nanofiber structure with smooth beadless appearance could be observed in thymol-free nanofibers (TFNs) fabricated from 60/40 ratio of PVA/WP. The nanofiber diameter and electrical conductivity values were significantly increased by increase in PVA and WP ratios, respectively. The nanofiber mats had dispersion (−7.60 mV of ζ potential) and good thermal stability (an endothermic peak at ⁓215 °C) properties. In vitro antimould activity tests results showed that TLNs mats could show a higher efficiency against mycelial growth of A. parasiticus than free thymol. In situ test results obtained at the 7th storage day confirmed in vitro test results with respect to visual inspections on coated and uncoated cheese surface, revealing that the coating of kashar cubes with TLNs prevented the growth of A. parasiticus on the coated cheeses. The results of this study shows that TLNs mats can be used an antimould surface material to limit mould growth on coated cheeses during storage period.Moulds produce different mycotoxins after their development in food and dairy products. Presence of Dairy products can be contaminated with aflatoxins in two different ways. In the first way, AFB1 is converted to AFM1 in liver of animals which are fed with forage contaminated with AFB1 and secreted from the mammary glands to milk ( Several strategies have been developed so far on prevention of mould growth in food materials. Use of antimicrobials is among these efforts. Some biologically active compounds that have antimicrobial properties have been successfully tested in this respect. Thymol is one of these biologically active compounds which can show antimicrobial effect against pathogenic microorganisms ( Thymol extracted from So far, different biopolymers have been used to encapsulate antimould bioactive materials in nanofiber mats. Examples are encapsulation of curcumin in zein ( Whey protein (WP), a biodegradable natural polymer (Maybi, Tekirdağ, Turkey), thymol (2-[(CH3)2CH]C6H3-5-(CH3) OH), M.W.: 150.22, Merck, Darmstadt, Germany), Tween 80 (Merck, Germany) and kashar cheese (Yörsan A.Ş., Balikesir, Turkey) were used in this study. To prepare spinning-dope solutions, a single solvent system was utilized. Whey protein (WP) was dissolved in distilled water to achieve homogeneous WP/water solution (30% w/v) by constant stirring for 20 min. Polyvinyl alcohol (PVA) was also used as an auxiliary carrier polymer to get whey protein subjected easily to electrospinning process. The PVA was also solubilized in the pure water (30% w/v) by constant stirring for 30 min at 85 °C. The prepared WP and PVA solutions were mixed with each other at various ratios (PVA: WP; 100:0, 80:20, 60:40, 40:60, 20:80, 0:100). The PVA/WP mixture solutions were stirred at a constant speed for 20 min. The thymol-loaded spinning dope solutions were prepared by addition and dissolving of thymol powder in the amount of 10 wt % thymol based on the total volume of PVA/WP mixture solution to achieve the ratio of 10/30/60 for thymol/PVA-WP /water. Then, the mixture solutions were further mixed at 40 °C for 1 h to achieve homogenization. Then, each solution was taken into 10 mL of injectors (TOP, Japan) equipped with 18-gauga needles. Electrospun nanofiber mats were fabricated using a benchtop electrospinning equipment (Holmarc, Nanofiber Electrospinning Unit, Model No: HO-NFES-043U) ( Steady-shear properties of the spinning dope solutions were determined by using stress and strain controlled rheometer (Anton Paar, MCR 302, Austria) equipped with a peltier heating system. 60 mm diameter of plate-plate configuration was used in order to shear the samples. The shear rate range was set to 1–100 s Nano ZSP (Malvern Instruments Corp., Worcestershire, U.K.) device was used in order to evaluate the zeta (ζ) potential, namely the colloidal dispersion stability (electrophoretic mobility) of the nano-fiber samples. 1 mg of each sample was dispersed in 5 mL phosphate buffer solution (PBS), then transferred into electrode containing zeta potential cell. Each measurement was performed at 25 °C and repeated 10 times. Zeta (ζ) potential of nano-fibers was calculated according to Smoulokowski model equation given below: Chemical structure of free thymol (FT), thymol-free nanofibers (TFNs) and thymol-loaded nanofibers (TLNs) were characterized by using ATR-FTIR (Attenuated Total Reflectance-Fourier Transform Infrared Spectroscopy) spectroscopy. Measurements were taken from 4000 to 600 cm Thermal characterization of FT, TFNs and TLNs were determined using DSC (Differential Scanning Calorimetry) (DSC, Q100, TA Instruments Inc., New Castle, DE, USA) device. In the analysis, 5 mg of sample was hermetically placed into aluminum pan that was heated from 20 °C to 250 °C temperature. Temperature increase was set to 10 °C/min and the analysis executed at constant 20 mL/min flow rate under nitrogen atmosphere pressure. Empty pan was used as a reference. Extrapolated onset temperature (T Surface morphology and dimensions of nano-fibers were revealed using a field emission scanning electron microscopy (SEM, FEI, Quanta Feg 250, USA) with magnifications of 10,000 and 20,000×. Morphological characterization of TFNs and TLNs was conducted under low vacuum pressure, 8 mm distance and under voltage of 20 kV. Before use, The antimould activity of thymol-loaded nanofiber mats was tested based on agar diffusion method, as outlined ( The fungicidal and fungistatic effects of the free thymol and TLNs were also determined as outlined ( Before slicing, surface of kashar cheese samples were sterilized by dipping in the solutions of 1% sodium hypochlorite for 3 min, rinsed with distilled water and allowed to dry at room temperature ( The inoculated cubes taken out from the humidity chamber were subjected to the surface coating process using the electrospinning apparatus. The cubes that were placed on a stand beside the collection plate ( The experimental data were collected twice with three replications. Collected data were subjected to analysis of variance (ANOVA). When a significant (p < 0.05) main effect was found, mean values were further analyzed using t-comparison test (JMP, release 6.0.0). The Ostwald de Waele parameters were calculated with Zeta potential values of the nanofiber mats were measured in order to determine their dispersion stability. Stability of FT (free thymol), TFNs (thymol-free nanofiber mats) and TLNs (thymol-loaded nanofiber mats) were tested by zeta potential measurements. TFNs fabricated from different ratios of PVA/WP represented negative zeta potential values varying from –6.34 mV to –9.43 mV and decreasing as PVA concentration increased ( The conductivity values of FT, TFNs and TLNs were measured to range between 17.70 and 20.3 mS/cm (0.017 and 0.020 μS/cm) (    T    The average diameter of the nanofiber mats fabricated from 60/40 ratio of PVA and WP was 300 nm ( In this study, antimould activity of nanofiber mats was tested against a mycotoxigenic fungi, The enhanced antimould activity of the encapsulated thymol in comparison to the free thymol could be explained based on the reports of The minimum inhibition concentration (MIC) and minimum fungicidal concentration (MFC) values of FT and TLNs against In order to evaluate the In this study, electrospun thymol-loaded nanofiber mats (TLNs) were fabricated. The potential of TLNs to limit mould growth on kashar cheese surfaces as an antimould surface coating material was evaluated. TLNs showed a good stability and yielded in a fine and homogeneous nanofiber structure. The