The amount of waste electrical and electronic equipment (WEEE) will continue to increase in the coming decades, with an expected rate of at least 4% a year, about three times higher than the growth of the average municipal waste because the market of electrical and electronic equipment (EEE) is growing very fast in the world. WEEE is part of urban mining for valuable recyclable products such as metals, plastics, wood, and others. Their separation can be performed by using mechanical-physical processing, which is an indispensable technology in the practice of recycling WEEE. The transfer of mineral processing techniques to WEEE recycling has just started in this field. Mechanical-physical processing such as shredding, screening, shape separation, magnetic separation, eddy current separation, and electrostatic separation must be adapted to treat various forms of spent materials efficiently. This chapter describes most of physical separation techniques usually used in recycling and processing of WEEE and presents some examples of processing of different WEEE categories.Urban mining is the process of recovering compounds and valuable elements from end-of-life products, buildings, and other wastes. Waste electrical and electronic equipment (WEEE) has become a very important and promising recycling resource in the past decade, because of the rapid increase in quantities and the valuable components contained in it that must be recovered. WEEE is considered to be postconsumption wastes of consumer and business appliances such as computers, flat screens, mobile phones, TV sets, monitoring appliances, and kitchen devices According to the physical and physicochemical properties of different products present in WEEE, the physical sorting techniques enable the separation or isolation for reuse or suitable treatment or disposal. Most of these techniques are used in recycling industries to separate plastics, metals, and wood, and to purify the effluents. Several processes have been developed to improve the quality of the recovered products. Currently, the sensor sorting technique is integrated in these processes, with devices such as the REDWAVE equipment that is integrated in a WEEE separation process to recover purified fractions of various plastics. REDWAVE separation is based on a near infrared (NIR) spectrometry identification of the main polymers of the plastics, followed by the particle air-blasting to a dedicated container. This equipment can be programmed to isolate one or more specific polymers in a global flux passing past the sensor. The ground heterogeneous WEEE stream required an important technological development to separate different products selectively. The technical innovation has been developed in the regions of the world that have set up special regulations to recycle WEEE Mechanical-physical processing is an indispensable technology in the practice of recycling of WEEE. In recent years, this kind of treatment has been drawing the attention This chapter will present challenges in physical separation processes and some examples in WEEE recycling as well. During the collection of WEEE, the monitoring of industrial waste forms must be set up before sorting by categories ( According to European directives, we distinguish five variants of WEEE treatment Reuse of all equipment, which needs preparation for reuse. Reuse of parts or subsets of the equipment, which needs sorting of parts. Recycling of matter. Incineration with energy recovery, which needs energy valorization. Elimination, which needs deposits. The minimum valorization, reuse, and recycling rates differ from one category to another. As shown in Physical separation methods can be divided into two categories: dry process and wet process. As shown in Manual dismantling to recover all hazardous components (eg, mercury in batteries, chlorofluorocarbon [CFC] in refrigerators). This step deals with depollution and recovers some valuable components before the shredding operation. Shredding of WEEE into small particles in order to liberate metals from plastics and wood. Low-intensity magnetic separation (overband) to recover ferrous metals. Eddy current separation to recover nonferrous metals. Optical sorting to recover PCBs, or separation of brominated from nonbrominated plastics. Other separation techniques: air table, screening, fluidized bed separation, image processing, X-ray sorting, laser-induced breakdown spectroscopy sorting, ballistic sorting, wire sorting, electrostatic sorting. The wet separation process includes: Sink float to recover different types of plastics and metals. Flotation operations to separate different types of plastics. Heavy medium hydrocyclones, jigging, and shaking tables to separate metals from plastics. Once separated, these products are directly treated or purified using other treatment operations before their recycling. The material flow of WEEE goes through several The different steps involved in both dry and wet physical separation processes are described next. The disassembly of WEEE is mainly performed manually but sometimes mechanically. The main objective of this step is to upgrade valuable substances contained in these e-wastes while eliminating nonvaluable and hazardous wastes for careful disposal. The intended WEEE for recycling is treated with these two methods that differ in the recovery of the integrated products. Some parts of WEEE such as engines must be dismantled with special tools. The loss of resources is avoided by the complete extraction of materials from the waste. Entering WEEE is first sorted manually into several categories or transferred to another recycling unit. According to Jennifer Namias This process is widely used to treat the huge volume of WEEE and obliges direct human contact with waste that contains toxic compounds. It is often necessary before mechanical treatment to remove toxic substances such as mercury, batteries, and CFCs, and to remove the components present in devices by hand using tools. As the amount of WEEE for dismantling is increasing, it is necessary to automate this stage of the treatment process of some types of waste in order to decrease the effort involved and to have a very flexible and low-cost dismantling process. Several technologies are under development that are designed to protect human health by minimizing human contact with waste. A new robotized dismantling is one of these technologies. It could replace human work by robotized tools with a repeatable action during the dismantling process Mechanical dismantling includes successive physical sorting techniques that vary from one installation to another, but the principle is rather similar in all of them. The mechanical dismantling process has been developed in order to minimize manual sorting The shredder called a toothed roll crusher is usually used to release the interconnected materials by physical force after their depollution. It is used to reduce big pieces to small sizes by a combination of compression and ripping or smashing and cutting. The most common shredder used in the WEEE recycling process is shown in This equipment was first used to shred the end-of-life vehicle (ELV), and now it is established in the recycling process of WEEE to liberate components contained in home appliances such as refrigerators, freezers, washing machines, and computers. In some cases, due to different embedded materials, two types of mills can be used to liberate metals from plastics and from ceramics The theoretical capacity of rolls To avoid the generation of low-quality products from the shredding process, a smasher has been developed for the initial opening of electrical and electronic devices and the separation of components without crushing and destroying harmful substances and components ( Recyclers call this equipment the washing machine. This technique improves the valorization rate (about 20–30%) and limits energy consumption. It should be noted that the smashing drum requires three times less power than a standard crusher to The presorted WEEE is introduced into the smasher and auto-fragmented to separate the components. The principle consists of breaking apart by an autonomous impact process without using cutting tools, and with no shearing. It breaks up big pieces of equipment housing, large assemblies, and single components. Equipment and parts of it that were not reduced to the desired size or dimensions may either be reintroduced into the smasher for another round or be disassembled manually. Equipment or parts not containing any hazardous substances can be further reduced in size by suitable shredders, granulators, or similar machines. Other techniques such as underwater explosion were developed for liberation of the mounted parts from PCBs to avoid the loss of metals WEEE is a mixture containing various products with different forms and particle sizes. In the process of recycling this kind of material, screening is needed to classify these products by size and sometimes to eliminate the nonvaluable materials they contain. The screening equipment is usually used for classification of pieces separated by shredding. The feed material is sorted into at least two size fractions called: Undersize material that passes through the screen at a determined cut size. Oversize material that remains on the screen surface. There are many different types of industrial screens for minerals (static or moving screens). However, only one kind of screen can be found in the established WEEE treatment process. The screening is carried out just after shredding to classify the separated components. To choose the efficiency of the screen in order to incorporate it into the process, we have to consider the following equations: Efficiency of the screen can be calculated as follows: Several types of screens used in mineral processing can be used in the WEEE recycling process. A vibrating screen shown in The trommel is a screened cylinder which was manufactured to separate materials by size ( The hydrocyclone can be employed continuously in the process. It is based on centrifugal force to speed up the settling of particles and is very efficient for fine particle sizes For example, the hydrocyclone can be used for recycling used fluorescent powders present in lamps. These powders are composed of several phases containing rare earth elements such as halophosphate, BAM, CAT, YOX. The process developed by BRGM in France in collaboration with Solvay-Rhodia, Veolia VERI, and Géoressource (Nancy) consists of a preconcentration step using the hydrocyclone separation technique to recover the majority of fluorescent powders at a particle size lower than 20 μm. This technology is capable of eliminating more than half the percentage of halophosphate consumed by reagents and can then facilitate the selective recovery of rare earth elements by a hydrometallurgical route. As WEEE contains materials with different magnetic properties, recyclers can take advantage of this to separate them. The materials have one of the following magnetic properties: ferromagnetic (iron scraps), paramagnetic (some alloys), and diamagnetic (other composites). The iron scraps can be easily recovered by using low-intensity magnetic separation, which is commonly used in the WEEE recycling process. The magnetic materials stick onto the magnet poles and are easily separated. Just after WEEE shredding, the most common pieces of equipment used are on the overband and drum magnetic separators as schematized in The eddy current separator is the most suitable technology for recycling nonferrous metals such as copper, aluminum, and others from industrial wastes and municipal solid wastes (MSW). Nowadays, eddy current separation is extensively used in recycling industries for automobiles (ELV), electronics (WEEE), demolition (D&CW), bottom ashes, and MSW, and for the material processing of nonferrous metals The principle of eddy current separation is that an electric charge is induced in a conductor by changes in magnetic flux cutting through it. Such changes in magnetic flux can be achieved by using a rotating permanent magnet, and magnetic flux intensity The electrostatic separation method is mostly used in mineral processing to separate minerals exhibiting differences in electric conductivity. In practice, this technique has shown its limits and has the greatest use in separation of some minerals The eddy current separation is widely studied. According to some researchers, this technique is suitable for separating metals (non-ferrous) from nonmetals present in WEEE. It can be efficient only for materials with particle size between 0.6 and 1.2 mm  The electric field is created between two electrodes connected to a high-voltage generator and a rotating electrode (drum), which is grounded. The products put on the Ionic bombardment for insulating particles. Electrostatic induction for conductive particles. The insulating products charged by ionic bombardment in the corona discharge zone stick onto the drum and are collected in a nonconductor container. A brush is then used to remove stuck products. However, the conductive products lose their charge very quickly through the drum by electric induction and receive the opposite charge to the high voltage of electrode potential. These products are collected in the conductor container. The density separation technique was developed for enrichment of the minerals in mineral processing. Nowadays, it has been transferred to recycling industries for treatment of different kinds of waste such as wood, plastics, and glass. The capacity of equipment used is proportional to the deck surface and depends on several parameters, such as particle size, density of particles, and moisture in treated waste. This equipment is usually called a pneumatic table or air table ( A significant part of the materials in electronic scrap are plastics with density generally lower than 2.0 g/cm According to Gent et al. The heavy medium separation or so-called sink–float separation technique is the most suitable approach; it is extensively utilized to characterize the density separation of minerals and serves a wide variety of purposes even though some heavy liquids are costly and hazardous The gravity separation or shaking table technique, illustrated in Flotation is a separation technique based on differences of hydrophobicity of the particle surfaces to be separated. It is used in ore processing to separate minerals, and in the treatment of wastewater to eliminate greases. To perform this technique, the following reagents are used: Collectors to activate the particle surfaces so that they become hydrophobic. Collectors’ efficiency depends on the pH of the pulp and solid concentration. Foaming permits to generate the compacted foams, which are often composed on alcohols. These foams decrease the surface tension as well as the coalescence. The foams increase the probability of collision between bubbles and particles. Activators to modify the particle surfaces of valuable products. Depressing to get hydrophilic particle surfaces. Dispersants to avoid particles agglomeration. This technique is implemented in WEEE recycling process to separate several types of plastics that are difficult to separate by density separation techniques. Sorting of metals and plastics may be performed by using an optical sorting system. In the past decade, some machines were integrated in the recycling process of WEEE, such The REDWAVE NIR sorting system ( The mixture of plastics from WEEE was tested by NIR devices. According to Joana Beigbeder et al. Cathode ray tubes (CRTs) include three parts: the neck, the funnel, and the face plate. In black-and-white CRT face plates, fluorescent material is present as a layer containing a pigment that will glow when the electron beam hits it. However, the design is more complex for color CRT, which contains three different fluorescent powders The process includes manual dismantling to remove the CRT from the display. Monitor body and PCBs and other electronic devices are sent to the WEEE processing line to recover valuable materials. The panel and funnel glass are separated, the coating is removed, and the glass is cleaned for recycling. The US company Envirocycle developed a process to recycle all glasses contained in CRTs. This process includes cleaning and sorting glass. The separated products are mostly reused for manufacturing a new CRT glass, or several industries use the pulverized glass from CRTs in smelting processes as slagging material instead of sand or slag From more than 13 billion lamps produced annually for lighting, world production of energy-saving lamps (ESLs) is more than 2 billion units. The ESL household market is expanding by 15% a year because this technology is 5 to 7 times less energy-consuming than conventional light bulbs, and life expectancy is estimated to be between 6 and 12 times longer. The interest in such a substitution is therefore clear. However, if these lamps are to be used in an ecologically sound manner, it is imperative to manage their recovery and recycling, taking into account the presence not only of mercury but also of the other metals. Almost all of the components of these lamps (glass, metals, mercury, plastics) are indeed adjusted, except fluorescent powders that represent 1–4% by weight of the lamps. Their particle size is less than 20 μm. The recycling of these powders would, however, reduce the risk of pollution due to their disposal in current landfills, and treat these expensive materials to be used in the production and manufacture of ESLs from rare and expensive substances. Fluorescent powders present in compact fluorescent lamps contain very costly materials, which are difficult to elaborate. The current global guidelines for the promotion of ESLs will amplify the need for phosphors. For this reason, several projects focus on the development of a process for upgrading these used powders. Two dismantling techniques of these lamps have been developed and used. The first technique involves a grinding stage of the lamps and the various components as well as a sorting step by screening (“crushing” or “grinding” technology). The second technique involves a disassembling step of the lamp by means of automated machines. After retrieving the electrical connections, lamps are emptied of their fluorescent powders (“end cut” technology). It should be noted that this technology is used to treat only the lamps with tube forms. These two techniques enable the recovery of more than 90% of glass, which is recycled entirely to make new tubes, abrasives, or insulation. Metals (aluminum and copper mainly) are recycled in the metal industry. Mercury in metallic form is present in very small quantities and is treated by specific mercury processing.  As some of these products contain banned ozone-depleting substances (ODS) such as CFCs, hydrofluorocarbons (HFCs), and hydrochlorofluorocarbons (HCFCs), the first stage applied is the depollution to remove these substances, which are destroyed in a special treatment process. Actually, the recycling process for refrigerators is well developed and established in different plants. For instance, the Sims Recycling solution The transfer of mineral processing techniques to WEEE recycling is recent. The mechanical-physical separation techniques are usually used upstream of the material recovery process from WEEE. This stage is considered as a preconcentration step for WEEE recycling. The main advantage of these technologies is their simplicity to operate and their high separation efficiency. The choice of the equipment depends on physical and physicochemical properties of WEEE materials. Mechanical-physical processing such as shredding, screening, shape separation, magnetic separation, eddy current separation, and electrostatic separation must be adapted to treat various forms of spent materials efficiently. Almost all of the equipment used to separate different materials contained in WEEE are well described in this chapter. As shown in the examples, each WEEE category must be treated by a specific process according to the physical and physicochemical properties of the treated products.