Electroelution of loaded polymeric resins immersed in aqueous solutions consists of the removal of metal ions adsorbed to the resin using an anode and cathode set connected to a power supply of a regular electrolysis cell. Experimental results for yttrium and rare earth recovery using electroelution of a cation-exchange polymeric resin IR-120P (Rohm & Haas-USA) in chloride medium are presented in this work. In yttrium and rare earth case, there was no metal deposition on the cathode. The resin was loaded with leach liquor from the metallurgical processing of a Brazilian xenotime ore. The optimum experimental conditions determined by statistical procedures were 53°C, 32.6 A m−2 and 417 g L−1 HCl for maximum yttrium recovery (22.5%) while for maximum erbium elution (49%), they were 60°C, 32.6 A m−2 and 417 g L−1 HCl. The maximum terbium (35.3%) and dysprosium (56%) recovery could be achieved at the following conditions: 52°C, 1.08 A m−2 and HCl 403 g L−1. The chemical elution contribution to the elements' recovery by electroelution was insignificant.Ion exchange using polymeric resins and solvent extraction have become the most useful procedures for extraction and separation of yttrium and rare earth elements. Electroelution of polymeric resins has been studied as a potential alternative for the stripping stage of the ion exchange procedure for metals recovery Electroelution of metal loaded polymeric resins immersed in aqueous solutions consists of the removal of metal ions adsorbed to an ion exchange polymeric resin working as the electrolyte of a regular electrolysis cell: The electroelution technique seems to improve the ionic migration from the adsorption sites in the layers and pores of the polymeric resin to the bulk of the electrolyte. The electroelution also enhances the breakage of chemical bonds between the functional groups of the resin and metal ions adsorbed to the resin. So, considering the reactions occurring in the electrolysis cell, the predominant anodic reaction is the production of oxygen. Simultaneously, hydrogen gas is formed on the cathode surface as shown in Empirical observation showed that intense gas formation on the cathode surface caused by use of high cathodic current density should be avoided to elute rare earth and yttrium from the loaded resin. In yttrium and rare earth case, there is no metal deposition on the cathode. Experimental results for yttrium and rare earth elements recovery using electroelution of cation-exchange polymeric resin IR-120P (Rohm & Haas-USA) in chloride medium are presented in this work. The resin was loaded with leach liquor from the metallurgical processing of a Brazilian xenotime ore. This experimental work was carried out according to a statistical planning of experiments by the factorial design method Yttrium and rare earth oxides used for preparing the aqueous solution, which loaded the resin, were obtained from the Brazilian xenotime (Pitinga-Amazonas) processing operation. The yttrium and rare earth oxides concentration is presented in Yttrium and rare earth oxides were solubilized in concentrated HCl, diluted with distilled water and used for loading the resin. The loading procedure was carried out by percolation with a HCl solution containing 4 g L The resin used during the electroelution experiments was the cation-exchange polymeric resin IR-120P from Rohm & Haas (Brazil). The conditioning of the resin for metals loading consisted of washing with distilled water followed by filtration and drying in a vacuum oven (1.76 kg cm The experimental unit (see Samples taken from the electrolyte after the experiments were used to determine the eluted mass of yttrium and rare earth. There was no metal electrodeposition in the electroelution system under study. Yttrium and rare earth element concentrations in the aqueous feed solution were determined using a plasma induction spectroscopy system (ICP-ARL model 3410).    Changes in HCl concentration of the electrolyte (C) had the greatest influence on metals recovery for all elements (see Analysis of the experimental results for yttrium recovery showed that increase in temperature (A), current density (B) and HCl concentration (C) had a positive effect on the results. However, the last parameter had the highest influence, as previously noted. The interaction of variables AB had a negative effect only in the yttrium recovery. Taking into consideration the factorial design method results, the ascent path method for the optimisation of the parameters involved allowed determination of the optimum experimental conditions for maximum yttrium recovery (22.5%), i.e., 53°C, 32.6 A m Concerning the erbium recovery, the results showed that only the interaction AC had a negative effect on the experimental response. As a matter of fact, the negative effect on the response exhibited by the interaction AC was detected for all elements. It seems to occur because the increase in the HCl concentration of the electrolyte results in more H The optimum conditions for maximum erbium recovery (49.2%) were similar to those obtained for yttrium, except for the temperature that should be increased to 60°C. Terbium and dysprosium had similar statistical analysis and optimization results. The current density (B) increase had a negative effect on the response because these two elements seemed to be weakly bonded to the functional groups of the resin. On the other hand, an increase in the current density enhanced the H The optimum experimental conditions determined by the ascent path method for maximum terbium (35.3%) and dysprosium (56%) recovery were the same for both elements, i.e., 52°C, 1.08 A m Tests at laboratory bench scale using the optimum conditions statistically determined for maximum yttrium, erbium, terbium and dysprosium recovery by electroelution were carried out to confirm the validity of the statistical evaluation. Tests were carried out to evaluate the chemical elution contribution to metal recovery by electroelution. The same optimum experimental conditions applied to the electroelution experiments were used in the chemical elution tests, except that no electric power was supplied to the set of electrodes of the electroelution cell. Concerning the high HCl concentration in the electrolyte, additional research work should be undertaken to reduce the acid concentration in the electrolyte. Possible solutions include the use of resins of other chemical functional groups and adoption of smaller particle size resins allowing smaller distances between electrodes of the cell. These differences might increase the percentage of metal recovery while reducing the acid level in the electrolyte. The optimum experimental conditions for maximum yttrium recovery (22.5%) were 53°C, 32.6 A m Other important variables, such as, chemical composition of the electrolyte, granulometry of the polymeric resin, presence of elution agent in the system and characteristics of cell design were not investigated in this work. However, the electroelution technique for yttrium and rare earth recovery from the polymeric resin IR-120P loaded with leach liquor from a Brazilian xenotime ore showed results to justify additional test-work for better evaluation of this technique. The authors are grateful to the Brazilian Science Foundation (CNPq) and Programa de Apoio a Núcleos de Excelência do Ministério da Ciência e Tecnologia-PRONEX/Brazil for financial support.