Face centred cubic Ti–10 and 20Mg and Ti–6Al–4Mg (wt.%) alloy powders have been produced by high energy ball milling, under argon, of elemental powder mixtures containing a process control agent (PCA). Milling leads to a multi-disperse particle size distribution without affecting the particle morphologies. This affects the thermal stability of the powders and the green densities of compacts. The green densities varied in tandem with the d
                     10 sizes of the powders and went through a minimum at 20h of milling. Milling for 20h could be detrimental to powder consolidation and further processing.Light weight structural materials are increasingly being used for electronics, automotive and aerospace applications. The aerospace industry in particular aspires to decrease the densities of materials used for components because reducing density is the most effective way of lowering the overall weight of a structural component The alloying of Ti and Mg has a number of challenges that have already been noted in literature (e.g., The powders produced by mechanical alloying are consolidated by powder metallurgy (PM) techniques, where they are pressed to form “green compacts,” also “green bodies” and then sintered at an appropriate temperature-time combination. The PM process is affected by the characteristics of the powder being processed. On the other hand, the characteristics of the powder are affected by, in this case, the milling parameters. There is currently an appreciate volume of literature on the mechanical milling of Ti–Mg-based powders, e.g., Refs The nominal composition of powders were Ti–10Mg, and Ti–20Mg and Ti–6Al–4Mg (all compositions in wt.%). The powder mixtures were made from elemental titanium powder (~ Carefully weighed elemental metal powder and process control agent (PCA) mixtures were milled at room temperature in a Simoloyer CM01-2l high energy ball mill using a rotation speed of 800 Milled powders were characterized for phases using a Phillips PW 1710 X-ray Diffractometer equipped with a Phillips Analytical X'pert Highscore software for identifying phases. A monochromatic The thermal behavior of the powders was determined in the range room temperature to 660 The powders were compacted at room temperature using a hand operated uni-axial press set to either 27 or 33 The XRD patterns of milled Ti–10Mg and Ti–20Mg powders are given in Reitveld analysis showed that the milled Ti–Mg powders all had a face centred cubic (f.c.c.) crystal structure ( The XRD patterns of milled Ti–6Al–4Mg are shown in The formation of f.c.c. solid solutions in both the TiMg and Ti–6Al–4Mg powders observed here is similar to milled Ti–Al powders The XRD peaks of the f.c.c. phase formed after milling were broadened and similar to other milled powders All the milled powders had a collection of both small and large particles. The particle shapes was a mixture of globular, granular and irregularly shapes, similar to literature   The The evolution of particle size during milling observed here, as in other milling work, is a function of two competing processes: particle fragmentation and agglomeration through cold welding The slight agglomeration observed on milling beyond 20  The thermal behaviors of the Ti–6Al–4Mg powders were similar to those of the Ti–10Mg powders. The powders milled for 16, 24, and 32 The very broad exothermic peaks on the thermograms of all the powders at lower temperatures can be associated with the occurrence of recovery processes, which help release the strain energy stored in the powders due to the milling process The endothermic peaks at approximately 359 The green densities after compaction went through a minimum at 20 The variation of green density with milling time ( The green density is an important parameter for materials processed by the powder metallurgical route because it affects the properties of the sintered components. Ideally, the green density needs to be as high as possible This work has shown that high energy milling of Ti–10Mg, Ti–20Mg, and Ti–6Al–4Mg powder mixtures lead to the formation of f.c.c. Ti-based alloy powders whose crystallite size decreases with milling time. The particle size distribution is dependent on the milling time and Mg content. Milling for 20 The