The aim of this investigation was to determine the efficacy of covellite bioleaching using pure cultures of Acidithiobacillus ferrooxidans or Acidithiobacillus thiooxidans and a mixed culture composed of At. thiooxidans and Leptospirillum ferrooxidans. The experiments were carried out in shake flasks with or without iron(II) (1 g/L as ferrous sulphate) at pH 2.0. Inocula of both iron-oxidising bacteria were obtained from cultures with iron(II) as the sole energy source, whereas At. thiooxidans inoculum was taken from a culture growing on sulphur. The solubilisation of copper in flasks inoculated with At. thiooxidans was greatly enhanced in the presence of additional iron(II) achieving 62% copper extraction in 30 days. This result agrees with a mechanism proposed recently. On the other hand, the effect of supplemental iron was not so important for covellite leaching by the At. ferrooxidans culture and the mixed culture. Copper solubilisation by the At. ferrooxidans culture was nearly the same as that for the mixed culture (51% versus 55%).For many years, Although bacterial populations composed of The aim of this investigation was to determine the efficacy of copper bioleaching from synthetic covellite using pure cultures of A strain of An Synthetic covellite (99% pure, particle size <74 μm) from Strem Chemicals (Newburyport, USA) was used throughout the study. Leaching experiments were carried out in 250-mL flasks with 100 mL of iron-free 9 K medium or modified 9 K medium (with 1 g of ferrous iron per litre) at pH 2.0 and 0.20 g of covellite (0.20% w/v pulp density). Each flask was inoculated with The flasks were periodically analysed for pH and Eh. Dissolved copper and total soluble iron were analysed by atomic absorption spectrophotometry. Ferrous iron concentration was determined using the Changes in copper(II) concentration and unattached bacterial population with time during bioleaching in the absence of iron are shown in Copper dissolution in the Samples taken from solid residues of the In the presence of iron, which was there only in the Changes in pH and soluble iron(II) with time in the bioleaching experiments in the presence of 1 g/L of iron(II) are reported in As expected, the pH increased as a result of ferrous iron oxidation reaching the maximum value between 5 and 10 days. After this time, pH decreased progressively as a result of iron hydrolysis and the consequent precipitation of ferric compounds. Jarosite was confirmed as the main phase by X-ray diffraction patterns of the solid residues. The gradual increase of pH value for the sterile control was caused by the progressive iron(II) oxidation and the acid dissolution of covellite. As noted in  The kinetics of copper dissolution is presented in In contrast, the presence of iron significantly enhanced copper dissolution in the sterile control and in the Ferrous iron was partially oxidised by the action of air (as in the sterile control). Covellite was oxidised by ferric iron (as in the sterile case) forming a sulphur layer on the covellite. The rate of chemical leaching of covellite is partially limited by diffusion of ferric iron through the porous sulphur layer. This was confirmed by SEM and EDAX analyses of particles of covellite from the sterile control and from  Covellite was further oxidised by ferric iron. The same mechanism could occur in the presence of As can be seen in The In conclusion, we have shown that a mixed culture containing the iron-oxidising In medium without the initial addition of iron(II), small amounts of iron were detected in the cultures containing iron-oxidising bacteria; this iron was probably complexed in the EPS layer. Under these conditions, copper extractions were similar to those found in medium supplemented with iron, indicating that the role of iron-oxidising bacteria was the oxidation of ferrous iron. Additionally, On the other hand, we confirmed that E. Donati and G. Curutchet are research members of CONICET (Argentine Research Council). Financial support from Agencia Nacional de Promoción Cientı&#x0301;fica y Tecnológica (PICT 13-06040) is acknowledged.