In patients with osteoporosis, alendronate treatment causes an increase in bone mineral density (BMD) and a decrease in fracture incidence. Alendronate acts by changing the bone remodeling process. Changes in bone remodeling resulting in decreased remodeling space, increased bone balance per remodeling cycle, and increased mineralization (ash mass/bone mass) have all been associated with alendronate treatment. Understanding the relative contributions of these parameters to BMD increases could help predict the utility of long-term (>10 years) or intermittent treatment strategies, as well as treatment strategies in which another pharmaceutical is administered concurrently. We have developed a computer simulation of bone remodeling to compare the contributions of focal bone balance and mineralization on BMD by simulating alendronate treatment using a bone balance method (decreased remodeling space, increased focal bone balance, uniform bone mineralization) and a mineralization method (decreased remodeling space, neutral focal bone balance, varying bone mineralization). Although both methods are able to predict BMD increases caused by alendronate over short periods, our findings suggest that the mineralization method may be more descriptive of long-term alendronate treatment. This implies that mineralization may be a larger contributor to BMD changes caused by alendronate than the focal bone balance. Based on this finding we offer a hypothesis to describe how remodeling space, focal bone balance, and mineralization each contribute to alendronate-induced BMD changes. Future analyses with this method could be used to identify improved dosing regimens and to predict which osteoporosis treatments would best complement each other.Osteoporosis patients treated with alendronate experience increased dual-energy X-ray absorptiometry (DXA)-derived areal bone mineral density (BMD) and reductions in vertebral fracture incidence of up to 50%. Bone remodeling is a focal phenomenon involving groups of osteoclasts and osteoblasts known as basic multicellular units (BMUs). Each BMU resorbs a small portion of bone and, soon after, forms new bone. Net changes in bone mass can occur when either the focal bone balance (a measure comparing the bone volume formed to that resorbed by each BMU) is modified or the rate of bone turnover changes (the size or number of BMUs is modified). Alendronate treatment causes a significant decrease in bone turnover and a possible increase in the focal bone balance. The second important consequence of reduced bone turnover involves the mineralization process in bone. A slower rate of bone turnover allows bone to accumulate more mineral before being resorbed in a succeeding remodeling cycle, thereby increasing the average ash fraction of the bone tissue and the overall bone mass. Recently, it has been demonstrated that animals subjected to alendronate treatment have an increased ash fraction compared with placebo-treated controls. Previously, Heaney and colleagues illustrated how alendronate treatment could be simulated as a decrease in bone turnover and an increase in focal bone balance. The primary objectives of this study are to compare the bone balance method and mineralization method with regard to their ability to predict BMD changes caused by alendronate. To meet this objective we develop a model of the bone remodeling process utilizing quantitative histologic measurements of BMU activity. The model is implemented in a computer simulation using both the bone balance method and the mineralization method. Each of these methods utilizes one influential parameter value that has not yet been measured definitively in humans (the change in focal bone balance caused by alendronate for the bone balance method and the length of the secondary mineralization period for the mineralization method). The unknown parameter values are determined parametrically based on comparisons to the results of clinical studies. The two simulation methods are compared both by predictive ability (correlation with clinical results) and how they predict trends in BMD increases. A computer simulation of BMU activity in cancellous bone is used in this study. The model describes BMU activity in an arbitrary volume of cancellous bone defined by its bone volume fraction (mineralized bone volume/bulk volume). Nine independent remodeling parameters are used to describe the progression of BMUs and the resulting resorption and formation of bone (see We express the focal bone balance as the ratio of bone volume formed to that resorbed per remodeling site (the bone balance ratio, ΔBMU.Rt). The bone balance ratio is therefore dependent on the total volume of bone resorbed and formed at each site (V Bone turnover is evaluated experimentally using a two-dimensional histologic measurement known as the activation frequency (the rate of appearance of a BMU in a two-dimensional section, per day). In this model we use a more physiologic, three-dimensional descriptive parameter known as the origination frequency (number of new BMUs per square millimeter of bone surface/day) to represent the birthrate of new BMUs on the cancellous bone surface. Quantitative values for the origination frequency are calculated using a relationship between activation frequency and origination frequency that has been derived previously. The rate at which mineral accumulates in newly formed bone tissue is the final parameter that influences BMD predictions. A volume of osteoid becomes mineralized bone when small mineral crystals first appear within spaces between the collagen molecules. Over the first few days of mineralization, crystals appear throughout the mineralized bone, taking space that was previously occupied by water. This initial deposition of mineral occurs very quickly and is referred to as the primary mineralization phase. After the primary mineralization phase mineral continues to accumulate, most likely due to further increases in the number or size of crystals. During this secondary mineralization phase, mineral is added at an exponentially decreasing rate. All model simulations were performed on a Silicon Graphics O2 workstation (SGI, Mountain View, CA) using functions defined for use with Matlab (Mathworks, Natick, MA, USA). An initial equilibrium state for the model was determined by starting the simulation with a neutral focal bone balance, no initial remodeling activity (no osteoid), and a bone volume fraction (0.20) typical of cancellous bone in the lumbar vertebrae. After the simulation was initiated, new BMUs originated, and resorption and formation occurred, removing and replacing bone volume and bringing the system to an equilibrium state. The equilibrium state was used as the initial state from which model parameters were modified to simulate alendronate treatment. Results are expressed in terms of percent change in BMD from the equilibrium state. Alendronate’s effects on BMU activity were modeled using both the bone balance method (decreased remodeling space, increased focal bone balance, and uniform bone mineralization) and the mineralization method (decreased bone remodeling space, neutral focal bone balance, and varying bone mineralization). Chavassieux et al. showed that the activation frequency decreases by 87% after 2 years of daily treatment with 10 mg oral alendronate. Alendronate simulations using the bone balance method predicted greater increases in BMD as the bone balance ratio became larger ( Simulations using the mineralization method showed that longer secondary mineralization periods resulted in greater increases in BMD ( In this work we developed a computational model of bone remodeling and alendronate treatment. The model was designed to determine reasonable values for unknown parameters in the bone balance and mineralization methods and determine how well each model can predict the BMD increases measured clinically. We found that the bone balance method, using a bone balance ratio of 2.0, and the mineralization method, using a secondary mineralization period of 6 years, can each predict the BMD increases observed in clinical studies of daily alendronate treatment. The model presented in this work is based on our current understanding of the process of bone remodeling and uses parameter values based on histology data. It is therefore limited by the assumptions upon which those data are based. We presented two different methods of simulating alendronate’s effects on bone remodeling. Both methods showed similar sum-of-squares for error (SSE = 24.65 for the bone balance method, and SSE = 33.01 for the mineralization method), suggesting that either method could be used to predict BMD changes over the treatment periods that have already been studied (up to 7 years). The two methods gave considerably different predictions for longer treatment periods. The bone balance method predicted a steady increase in BMD with alendronate treatment because the focal bone balance caused small increases in bone volume during each remodeling cycle. The mineralization method predicted that there is a maximum possible BMD increase because there were limits on the degree of mineralization of bone Our results support the findings of recent studies suggesting that the degree of mineralization contributes more to the BMD increases caused by alendronate than the focal bone balance. Chavassieux et al. showed that patients taking alendronate for 2–3 years do not show significant increases in bone volume fraction, Heaney and colleagues attributed part of the increase in BMD caused by alendronate to the remodeling space and another part to the focal bone balance With proper validation the model used in this work could predict changes in bone mass caused by a number of different agents. What we have presented here, however, is a useful tool for comparing ideas of how alendronate affects bone mass. Future simulations based on this model could be used to identify improved dosing regimens and to predict which other osteoporosis treatments (hormone replacement, parathyroid hormone, and exercise) would best complement alendronate treatment. This work was supported by the Department of Veterans Affairs (A2424P) and a Dissertation Fellowship from the Ford Foundation (C.J.H.). The BMU-based simulation examined here is adapted from a model presented previously. The initial values for the local formation and resorption rates are calculated from