Periprosthetic femoral fractures can be a difficult management problem. Proximal femoral fractures with a loose component are managed best with revision arthroplasty. We reviewed the midterm follow-up of 14 proximal femoral fractures managed with a long-stem extensively porous-coated femoral component. The average follow-up in this series was 8.2 years (minimum, 5.3 years). Fractures were treated with open reduction and internal fixation, supplemental cortical strut grafting when required, and a canal-filling implant. All fractures achieved union with an average time to union of 4 months. There have been no component failures requiring revision. Twelve prostheses achieved stable bone ingrowth, 1 component showed stable fibrous ingrowth, and 1 component was not stable but was not symptomatic enough to warrant revision.Fractures of the ipsilateral femur in patients with total hip arthroplasties are a challenging problem. The most important factors in decision making are location of the fracture, stability of the implant, and bone quality Options for treatment include nonoperative management, open reduction and internal fixation, and revision arthroplasty. In the clinical setting of a periprosthetic fracture with a loose femoral component, the recommended treatment of choice is revision arthroplasty. Several authors have discussed the use of a proximally coated long-stem cementless component A consecutive series of all patients with a proximal femoral fracture with an associated loose femoral prosthesis that presented to the senior author (W.G.P.) between 1986 and 1992 were included. Each patient was treated with open reduction and internal fixation of the fracture, supplemental bone grafting if required, and a long-stem extensively porous-coated prosthesis (Solution Stem, Depuy, Warsaw, IN). There were 14 fractures in 13 patients (9 men and 4 women) treated with this reconstruction. The average age of the patients at the time of fracture was 63.6 years. The average follow-up was 99 months (minimum, 63 months). The time from the previous total hip arthroplasty to presentation with fracture averaged 9.4 years. Fractures were classified according to the criteria of Johansson et al Significant femoral defects were present in many of the affected femora. The femoral defects were classified according to a previously published classification system The surgical technique involved a standard posterolateral approach to the hip. The fracture was exposed, with attempts made to minimize soft tissue stripping. The loose femoral components and all cement were removed. Two solid bone-ingrown acetabular components without polyethylene wear were not revised, and the remaining 12 acetabular components were revised for loosening (8 components) or significant polyethylene wear (4 components). Femoral prosthesis selection was as outlined in Table 2. All reconstructions showed radiographic union. The average time to union was 4 months (range, 3-6 months). There were no delayed unions and no further surgeries to achieve union (Figs. 1-3). Obtaining maximal canal fill was 1 of the goals of surgery, and femoral canal fill was evaluated carefully from the postoperative radiographs. Canal fill averaged 97.1% (range, 87%-99%) in the anterior-posterior plane and 94.5% (range, 86%-98%) in the medial-lateral plane. Two cases showed unsatisfactory canal fill of <90%. The femoral component bypassed the fracture or the most distal lytic lesion by 10.5 cm on average (range, 8-13 cm). Prosthesis stability was judged using the Engh and Massin criteria These are large reconstructions, and postoperative complications did occur. One patient suffered 2 posterior dislocations. This patient was treated successfully with bracing. A nonfatal myocardial infarction occurred in another patient. Anterior femoral cortical perforation from eccentric reaming was noted on the postoperative radiographs of a patient who was treated subsequently with toe-touch weight bearing for 4 months, then gradually increasing weight bearing for the next 2 months. No distal fracture occurred, and the patient had no long-term sequelae of this complication. Periprosthetic femoral fractures have known risk factors. Multiple authors have described a high incidence of stress risers contributing as possible causes of the fractures. These stress risers can take the form of screw holes; missed perforations, either iatrogenic or secondary to component loosening and migration; eccentric reaming and cortical lysis; and bone erosions. Larson et al Many treatment options have been evaluated in the management of postoperative femoral fractures. The most important considerations are fracture location, stability of the implant, and bone quality. Traction generally has less favorable results, as shown by Johansson et al Several groups report overall satisfactory results using various techniques of open reduction and internal fixation Cemented long-stem prostheses have been used successfully by various authors Cementless long-stem extensively porous-coated implants can be used successfully in the management of periprosthetic femoral fractures. Moran Extensively porous-coated femoral implants are highly successful in revision total hip arthroplasty Long-stem extensively porous-coated femoral implants can be used successfully in the management of periprosthetic femoral fractures. Predictable fracture union and bone ingrowth of the components was achieved. There have been no late component failures to date.