The differences of the plastic flow and deformation homogeneity between underaged and peak-aged 6061 aluminum alloys during equal channel angular pressing were investigated. The inhomogeneity of plastic flow was appreciably influenced by the hardening behavior of underaged and peak-aged 6061 Al alloys. More homogeneous deformation, both microscopically and macroscopically, was observed in the presence of strong precipitates in the peak-aged 6061 Al alloy.Equal channel angular pressing (ECAP) has been the subject of intensive investigations in recent years due to its capability of producing large full dense samples containing an ultrafine (or nanometer scale) grain size by repeating the process while maintaining the original cross-section of the workpiece Horita et al. Extruded 6061 Al alloy was solution treated at 550 °C for 2 h and water quenched to room temperature and artificially aged. The underaged condition was obtained by heat treating at 178 °C for 30 min. The peak-aged condition was obtained by heat treating at 178 °C for 8 h. Mechanical testing was performed to examine the effect of aging condition on the stress–strain responses using united tensile testing machine. ECAP processing was conducted using a solid die with an internal angle ( The tensile stress–strain responses of underaged and peak-aged 6061 Al alloys are plotted in    The presence of the larger corner gap is known to enhance the deformation inhomogeneity during ECAP. The geometry changes of flow net in One interesting observation in this study is the presence of the deformation bands in the underaged 6061 Al alloy. Deformation banding is a process in which different regions of a deforming crystal gradually rotate to different orientations as deformation proceeds Based upon a study of the microstructural evolution and plastic flow during ECAP, the following conclusions can be drawn: The plastic flow behavior of 6061 Al alloys during ECAP is appreciably modified by the modification of the microstructure. The difference of flow behavior of underaged and peak-aged Al alloys can be related to the hardening behavior, which is strongly influenced by the nature of the interaction between dislocations and precipitates. The corner gap was more pronounced in the underaged alloy than in the peak-aged alloy. In the underaged alloy with a greater work hardening rate, the local flow stress is strongly dependent on the inhomogeneity of local strain, which induces a stronger flow stress gradient and a larger corner gap with a slight change of local strain. The local effective strain generally decreases from the top surface to the bottom surface of the sample. The effective strain is lower at the bottom since the presence of the corner gap lowers the local shear strain. The more rapid decrease of the effective strain from the top to the bottom in the underaged alloy can be associated with a larger corner gap in the underaged alloy. Deformation bands and microscopic inhomogeneity were observed in the underaged alloy. The absence of deformation bands and more homogeneous deformation in the peak-aged alloy is due to strong precipitates in the matrix, which renders the saturation behavior of the flow stress. This work was supported by grant no. 2000-1-30100-013-3 from the Basic Research Program of the Korea Science & Engineering Foundation.