Imidacloprid (IMI) is very harmful to human health and cause problems. Recently, plants have been considered as potential agents for protection against these disorders. Urtica urens L. (UU) is very useful for relieving rheumatic pains and there is no scientific evidence justifying its use, which lets us think of its direct effect on the bone. This study aimed to investigate the protective effect of UU against toxicity effects of IMI in female rat. Rats were divided into control group, 3 groups treated with IMI at 50, 200 or 300mg/kg/day and 3 groups co-treated with IMI (50, 200 or 300mg/kg/day)+100mg/kg/day of UU. We studied bone remodeling through histological, histomorphometry and biochemical analyses.
                  In IMI- treated groups, we have noted, following histomorphomotric analysis, significant decreases in cortical, trabecular thicknesses and osteoid surfaces. Elsewhere, IMI intoxication significantly decreased serum vitamin D and hydroxyproline levels in the groups treated for 60days. IMI intoxication increased significantly calcium, phosphorus contents, MDA and AOPP levels and the rate of calcification. It decreased significantly GSH, GPx, SOD, CAT, 17b-Estradiol and vitamin E levels, induces a tendency of rarefaction and increases of intrabecular spaces. The co-treatment with UU improved all biochemical parameters (hydroxyproline, MDA, AOPP, GSH, GPx, SOD, CAT, 17b-Estradiol, vitamin D, vitamin E calcium, phosphorus). UU leads to a significant increase in cortical, trabecular thicknesses, osteoid surfaces, a decrease in the intrabecular spaces and the rarefaction of bone.
                  In conclusion, IMI inhibits bone remodeling and enhances bone formation. A significant antioxidant activity was also observed in UU and a total of 6 compounds were identified. Co-administration of UU provided a significant protection which might be due to its antioxidant property.The bone is a tissue of the body which formed and resorbed continuously, it's starting in the embryo and continuing in adult life. Bone remodeling is an adaptive mechanism that controls bone mass and microarchitecture throughout life. It is supported by the coordinated action of osteoblasts and osteoclasts in the time and space. Bone disorders are one of the main adverse health effects of several factors, including xenobiotics intoxication in humans and animals Imidacloprid, 1(6-chloro-3-pyridinyl)methyl)-N-nitro-2-imidazolidinimine, is a systemic chloronicotinyl insecticide, which blocks the nicotinergic neuronal pathway in animals. It is a General Use Pesticide (GUP) classified by the US-EPA as a toxicity class II and class III agent (EPA)  The present work focuses on the Confidor Aerial parts of The powder was extracted by using maceration with ethanol. 50 The yield of the extract under study was calculated by the following equation. The total phenolic content (TPC) in the UU ethanol extract was determined calorimetrically using the Folin-Ciocalteu method The total tannin content was determined from UU ethanol extract using the potassium iodide test The total flavonoid content was measured by the colorimetric assay developed by Zhishen et al. LC–MS/MS analysis of the UU ethanol extract was carried out using an Agilent 1100 LC system consisting of degasser, binary pump, auto sampler, and column heater. The column outlet was coupled to an Agilent MSD Ion Trap XCT mass spectrometer equipped with an ESI ion source. Data acquisition and mass spectrometric evaluation were carried out in a personal computer with Data Analysis software (Chemstations). For the chromatographic separation, a Zorbax 300 The phenolic compounds were identified using a combination of high performance liquid chromatography (HPLC) with diode array detection and liquid chromatography with atmospheric pressure chemical ionization mass spectrometry (ESI-LC/MS/MS) on the basis of their ultraviolet (UV) spectra, mass spectra and by comparison of the spectra with those of available authentic standards. Sixty-four Animals were provided standard laboratory diet (MEDIMIX, Sfax, Tunisia). They were housed per group, eight per cage. The experimental protocols were conducted in accordance with the guide for the care and use of laboratory animals issued by the University of Sfax, Tunisia, and approved by the Committee of Animal Ethics (Protocol no. 94–1939). Adult females rats were divided into 8 groups (n Group 1: control received 0 Group 2: received 50 Group 3: received 200 Group 4: received 300 Group 5: received 100 Group 6: as group 2 and co-treated with 100 Group 7: as group 3 and co-treated with 100 Group 8: as group 4 and co-treated with 100 The period of treatment was 60 Signs of toxicity and death were observed once daily throughout the period of exposure. The animals were sacrificed under anaesthesia by an intraperitoneal injection of imidazolan and ketamin. The blood was obtained from heart puncture. The blood obtained was placed in heparinized tubes for biochemical analyses. The samples were centrifuged for 15 The femurs and diaphysis lengths were measured. Calcium and phosphorus levels were determined in bone, plasma and urine using commercial reagents kits (SYNCHRON CX Hydroxyproline content of bone samples was estimated according to the method of Edwards and O'brien Femur protein contents were measured by the method of Lowry et al. The femur lipid peroxidation (MDA) was estimated by the method of Draper and Hadley The femur AOPP contents were determined by the method of Kayali et al. The femur GSH contents were determined by the method of Ellman −Catalase activity (CAT). CAT activity was assayed by the method of Aebi −Superoxide Dismutase activity (SOD). SOD activity was determined by the method of Beauchampand Fridovich −Glutathione Peroxidase activity (GPx). GPx activity was determined by the method of Flohe and Gunzler The extraction of vitamin E was done according to the method described by both Katsanidis and Addis Vitamin D levels in bone and in UU were measured by colorimetric methods using commercial reagent kits (Ref: 20151 and 20091) respectively, purchased from Sigma-Aldrich (Darmstadt, Germany). 17b-Estradiol was measured by a commercial immunoassay kit (Biomerieux, French, VIDAS Histomorphometry allows us to quantify the structure of bone tissue. The right femur of each rat was dissected out, defleshed and fixed in 10% formaldehyde for 24 The investigated parameters included the bone volume (BV/TV, expressed in%), and surface (OS/BS, expressed in%), the thicknesses of trabeculae (Tb.Th, expressed in μm), the growth plate thickness (GP.Th, expressed in μm) and the trabecular separation (Tb.Sp, expressed in μm) were determined by a point count method Tetracycline double labeling of bone is used to calculate the calcification rate (μm/day). Tetracycline derivatives were administered to each rat at a dose of 25 These measurements were performed on an average of 6 double tetracycline labels per animal. Calcification rate was calculated by dividing the interlabel distance by the time interval between administration of the two tetracycline markers (day 9 and day 14). It has been calculated by measuring the distance between two successive fronts of calcification (1 and 2) fluorescently labeled. Data are expressed as mean and standard error of the mean (mean Statistical analysis were performed using SPSS (SPSS Inc, Chicago, IL, USA) statistical software package. The nominal statistical significance level was set at 0.05. The yield of extractable components relative to the weight of dried plant material was 4.768%. Therefore, the phenolic, flavonoid and tannin contents in the UU ethanol extract were determined. With 4.768% of yield in the UU ethanol extract, the results of the phytochemical analysis showed the quantitative values of UU 31.41 We noted that the concentrations of vitamin D was 1.45   When compared to controls, food consumption was reduced by 40, 60 and 80%, respectively, in the IM-treated groups ( Death was observed in experimental groups during the treatment period (60 Body weight of IMI-treated groups decreased by 19%, 37% and 58%, respectively at the end of treatment. Our results showed also that body weights decrease significantly by 7%, 27% and 37%, respectively in the (IMI Weight gain was higher in the control group (58.59%) compared with the IMI-treated groups. The reduced weight gain was very masked for the IMI After sacrificing the animals, the bone were removed and weighed at the end of the study with a focus on the variation of their absolute weight (AW) and related weight (RW). The relative organ weight of each animal were calculated as follows: Elsewhere, the relative weight (RW) of the rats treated with IMI and UU was slightly higher than in the control group, the differences were statistically significant ( The femoral length varied between 2.633 and 3.766 The exposure of rats to IMI altered the bone mineral composition. Indeed, a decline in calcium (12, 40, 56%) and phosphorus (24, 34, 48%) contents in femurs were noted when compared to controls. However, the injection of UU caused a moderation of these alterations. We noted a significant decrease in calcium (8.7, 7.89, 18.49%) and phosphorus (9.45, 9.33, 11.07%) for (IMI Also, calcium levels increased by 3.08, 5.70 and 14.86%, respectively in plasma and increased by 73.24, 76.33, 86% in urine, and phosphorus levels increased by 15.90, 31.33 and 40.86% in plasma and increased by 40.71, 70.77 and 74% in urine ( The injection of UU ameliorated these parameters. So, we noted a significant decreases in calcium (-4.22, −0.67, −1.61%) and phosphorus (-5.38, −6.85, −5.57%) levels in serum, when compared with the same IMI −treated groups. Also, our results show significant decreases of calcium (-0.21, −7.54, −25.28%) and phosphorus (-2.77, −5.57, −12.54%) levels in urine. Hydroxyproline is a major component of the protein collagen. Therefore, hydroxyproline content might be used as an indicator to determine collagen content. As reported in  Our results revealed also a decrease of MDA of the (UU    SOD activity of IMI- treated rats decreased by −40.92, −46.10, −59.41%, respectively. However, these decreases, induced by IMI treatment, were restored by the UU injection (17.98, 22.68, 5.85%, respectively) when compared to the IMI-treated groups ( CAT activity decrease was noted in female rats exposed to IMI (-39.83, −59.77, −67.34%) when compared to controls. The injection of UU was ameliorated this enzyme activity in the (IMI GPx activity decreased significantly in the IMI-treated groups by −48.04, −68.17, −72.37% when compared to controls. The injection of UU ameliorated this enzyme activity in the (IMI Our results ( Our results (  Our results showed that the 17β-estradiol levels decreased in IMI-treated groups (-18.87, −9.86, −8.30%) when compared to controls. The UU injection ameliorated this hormone in the (UU Histological examination conducted on femur included in methyl methacrylate and colorated with Goldner trichrome showed a normal appearance in the controls ( We also noted a tendency of rarefaction and an increase of intrabecular spaces in treated group with 50 Besides, we noted a decrease in trabecular bone volume (BV/TV) and an increase in Tb.Sp and in Tb.Th data. These changes could be attributed to bone resorption and a loss of connectivity ( Tetracycline double labeling of bone is used to calculate the calcification rate. Tetracycline binds to newly formed bone at the bone/osteoid (unmineralized bone) interface where it is shown as a linear fluorescence. If a second dose is given 9–14 Our results ( Our results ( The aim of the present study was to evaluate the protective effect of UU against the toxicity of IMI, a neonectinoid pesticide which acts on the nervous system of insects by blocking irreversibly acetylcholine receptors, on bone remodeling using histological, histomorphometric and biochemical assays (Vitamin D, hydroxyproline, calcium and phosphorus). In our study, rats exposed to IMI exhibited decreases in rat’s body, femur weights and both diaphysis length and weight when compared to controls. This could be attributed to a decrease in food intake. The body growth of the different groups of rats during the treatment period revealed also a significant change in weight gain. There was also a decrease in the food consumption, which suggests a loss of appetite in the IMI-treated rats. This could be due to an increase in blood urea concentration since some studies The collagen concentration, as represented by hydroxyproline level, is considered to be a sensitive marker of bone resorption Moreover, levels of MDA and AOPP were considerably increased in the femurs of IMI-treated rats. This could be an additional cause that enhanced osteoclastogenesis (“increased osteoclasts number and activity” OR “enhanced osteoclastogenesis”) in the bone In addition, similar results were obtained in a study on female rats exposed to tetradifon In fact, the estrogen deficiency is a predisposing factor for osteoporosis, which induces excessive bone resorption Thus, the greater hydroxyproline concentration, increased of MDA and AOPP, decreased of GPx, SOD, CAT, mineral content, vitamin D and E observed in these groups are indicative of a mineralization defect These results confirm that subchronic intoxication in high doses of IMI could lead to an osteoporosis. These data concurred with recent studies by Sharifi et al. On the other hand, histological examination conducted on femur included in methyl-methacrylate without previous decalcification showed an onset of bone depletion the treated group with 50 The protective role of UU on IMI-induced osteoporosis has not yet been investigated. So, in the present study, we have investigated the protective effects of UU against the IMI toxicity. According to the literature, UU has anti-inflammatory effects In our study, we demonstrated that UU administrated to rats provoked a significant decrease in serum, bone and urine calcium and phosphorus in the (UU The Injection of UU with IMI could protect the bone osteoporosis induced by IMI as indicated by the coloration of sections with goldner’s trichrome which identified an homogeneous appearance of the trabeculae that start to form is greatest in the (UU Our results show that the group treated with 300 To understand these perturbations at the bone remodeling, after IMI treatment, we have studied the stereochemistry of this product. On the structural plane, the IMI can easily carry out a chemical bond between its active center, which is represented by the chloride atom and the OH atoms on the bone. Indeed, according to the literature and the previous work of El Feki et al. Quantitatively, and according to the amount of IMI adsorbed on the bone, one can have an alternation on the axis between the ions OH To understand the reaction mechanisms of interaction between IMI and UU, we have studied the stereochemical composition of the compounds of UU. The results of LC–MS indicated a dominant phenolic compound identified in UU ethanol extract: chlorogenic acid (21.34%) and three moderate phenolics: Myricetin (19.72%), Japonic acid (19.22%) and So, the UU injection in the presence of IMI in the bone causes a release of the pesticide. This amelioration could be attributed to these bioactive compounds. Our study showed also a significantly amelioration of CAT, SOD, GPx and MDA, AOPP, GSH levels. This finding appears consistent with the results of some other studies conducted by Fukai and Ushio-Fukai Moreover, these results are in good accordance with those obtained by Gargouri et al. We suggest that IMI has an adverse ecological impact on mammalian animals as it induces female rat bone damages due to the increase of lipid peroxidation antioxidant capacities the significant decrease of antioxidant capacities, osteoid surfaces and trabecular thickness in treated animal compared to controls. Our biochemical findings confirmed the microscopic examinations. In fact, IMI seems to disturb the mineral composition. We have found that the injection of UU with IMI reduces the toxicity of this insecticide in rats due to its richness in vitamins, flavonoids and polyphenols, thus confirming the protective role of the plant. The authors declare that they have no conflict of interest. This research was supported by the Supplementary data associated with this article can be found, in the online version, at The following is Supplementary data to this article: