The influence of milling time on the structure, morphology and thermal stability of multi-walled carbon nanotubes (MWCNTs) reinforced EN AW6082 aluminum alloy powders has been studied. After structural and microstructural characterization of the mechanically milled powders micro- and nano-hardness of the composite powder particles were evaluated. The morphological and X-ray diffraction studies on the milled powders revealed that the carbon nanotubes (CNTs) were uniformly distributed and embedded within the aluminum matrix. No reaction products were detected even after long milling up to 50h. Nanotubes became shorter in length as they fractured under the impact and shearing action during the milling process. A high hardness of about 436±52HV is achieved for the milled powders, due to the addition of MWCNTs, after milling for 50h. The increased elastic modulus and nanohardness can be attributed to the finer grain size evolved during high energy ball milling and to the uniform distribution of hard CNTs in the Al-alloy matrix. The hardness values of the composite as well as the matrix alloy compares well with that predicted by the Hall–Petch relationship.The increasing emphasis on the requirement of high performance materials for critical load bearing structural applications has led to the development of metal matrix composites with enhanced physical and mechanical properties. Among the potential reinforcement materials, carbon nanotubes (CNTs) have recently emerged as a suitable and ideal reinforcement for metals/alloys In the present study, gas atomized EN AW6082 Al-alloy powders and 2 The gas atomized aluminum alloy powders (grade EN AW6082 with 99% purity) having particle size <75 The fraction of the CNTs in the EN AW6082-MWCNT mixture was kept at 2 The X-ray diffraction analysis of milled powders was carried out using an automated D8 Discover Bruker diffractometer using Cu Kα ( The X-ray diffraction patterns of EN AW6082-MWCNT composite powders, milled for different durations, are shown in The effect of milling time on the crystallite size and lattice strain for composite powders is shown in The particle size distribution of the nano-composite powders milled for 50 The as-received EN AW6082 powder particles had an irregular spherical shape with the size distribution as shown in    The influence of milling time on microhardness of the nanocomposite particles was evaluated and is presented in The increase in hardness which is a measure of mechanical property involves combination of strengthening mechanism namely: (1) lattice strain, which increases as a result of a large amount of deformation during ball milling and introduces a high dislocation density in powder particles. The dislocation density contributes to the strengthening of the material and can be calculated on the basis of the Taylor equation The higher microhardness values were attained for EN AW6082/MWCNT composite powders as a result of the repeated fracturing of CNTs and its refinement. In particular, this increase in hardness is due to the presence of extremely refined hard nanoscale CNTs embedded and uniformly distributed in the Al-alloy matrix To verify the relation between microhardness and grain size, particularly in the present case of nanoscale structures, a combination of classical Hall–Petch (H–P) equation The assessment of modulus was done using nano-indentation hardness measurements. The typical load–displacement curves for unreinforced alloy and composite powders, milled for 50 In the present investigation, EN AW6082 Al-alloy was successfully reinforced by the dispersion of 2 The reinforced composite powders showed a drastic crystallite size refinement from 165 The presence of nanoscale CNTs led to a two fold increase in the hardness and modulus of EN AW6082 alloy. The microhardness and nanohardness of the composites displayed significant increase for the composite reinforced with 2 The authors wish to express their gratitude to Dr. Ashit Kr. Pramanik, Dr. Ansu J Kailath and Dr. Suman Kumari Mishra, CSIR- NML, Jamshedpur, India for their valuable support and suggestions.