Apatite concentrate is an important source of phosphate and contains significant amounts of rare earth elements (REEs). In this study, the possibility of selective phosphoric acid leaching of phosphate and calcium from the Esfordi (Yazd province, Iran) apatite concentrate, containing 16.3% phosphorus, 37.1% calcium, 2.9% iron and 1.2% REEs was investigated. REEs concentrated in the leaching residue were processed using acid baking and bicarbonate precipitation methods. In the phosphoric acid leaching process, almost all the Ca and phosphate of the concentrate were leached from the concentrate, whereas only about 1% of the REEs were leached. By leaching the concentrate with 25% phosphoric acid at 90 °C and 1200 rpm, a residue containing 17.5% REEs, 4.8% phosphorus and 28.5% iron was obtained. The residue was acid baked, water leached and processed for removal of iron and recovery of REEs. Acid baking at 270 °C with acid to solid ratio of 2 (w/w) for 5 h led to 95% leaching of REEs. By increasing the pH of the leachate to 3.9, all the iron and phosphate were precipitated within 2 h. Finally, REEs were precipitated from the iron-free solution by using the bicarbonate precipitation method, and a product containing 39% of total REEs was produced. The results demonstrate that the three-stage process is an elegant method for processing of the Esfordi concentrate to produce phosphoric acid and an iron-free REE carbonate concentrate.The rare earth elements (REEs) are a group of 17 elements of lanthanides plus scandium and yttrium, which have similar chemical properties. REEs are used in the production of permanent magnets, catalysts, alloys, electronics and glasses ( Igneous phosphate ores and concentrates contain about 1-2 wt% REE ( In the conventional wet processing of phosphoric acid production ( However, during sulfuric acid leaching of the apatite concentrate, most of REEs present in the concentrate are precipitated in the phosphogypsum residue by substitution with calcium ion or as REEPO Several studies have been conducted on the leaching of phosphate minerals with mineral acids ( In the case of hydrochloric acid leaching, due to the high solubility of calcium in hydrochloric acid, the apatite concentrate is almost completely dissolved ( The process of phosphoric acid production through the dissolution of apatite concentrate in nitric acid ( Despite the high solubility of REEs in the process solution, they are not recovered and report to the phosphoric acid product. Sandstrom and Fredriksson (2012) investigated REE recovery from nitrophosphate leach liquors by precipitating both REE and Ca by ammonia addition and careful control of the pH. They further purified REEs from Ca by re-dissolving the precipitate with nitric acid and extracting of REE by Cyanex 923 ( Few investigations have been conducted on leaching of phosphate ore with phosphoric acid. Studies have mainly focused on the kinetics and thermodynamics of phosphoric acid leaching at the laboratory scale (  One important feature of phosphoric acid is that its ability to dissolve phosphate compounds is low because of the common ion effect between REE phosphate minerals and phosphate anion present in the phosphoric acid ( In the Part I paper of the present series ( Orthophosphoric acid solution (MILLIPORE SIGMA, 85%) was used for the leaching of concentrate samples. Analytical grade sulfuric acid (Merck Millipore Company, 95–97%) was used in the baking process. Analytical grade magnesium oxide (MgO ≥ 97%) from Merck Millipore Company was used for increasing the pH. Further increasing the pH in the Fe/phosphate and REE precipitation stages was carried out by ammonium hydroxide solution and ammonium bicarbonate (NH The major mineral phases in the leaching residue sample were identified by using X-ray diffraction (XRD) method. The residue sample was prepared for XRD. A Bruker D8 X-ray diffractometer with a Bruker Vantec detector from the Department of Chemical Engineering at the University of Cape Town was used to analyze the samples. Operation parameters included 2Theta rotation from 4 The sample used in this study was obtained from the Esfordi fluorapatite concentrate production plant located in the Yazd province in Iran. A 250 kg sample with P80 of 54 μ was obtained from the Esfordi flotation plant. The sample was riffled into 10 kg lots by using a Jones riffler. It was further homogenized and riffled to 1000 g lots and stored in plastic bags for further splitting by Retsch® PT100 automatic sample divider just prior to experiments. Elemental analysis of the Esfordi concentrate sample ( The leaching experiments were performed inside a stirred 1-l glass reactor immersed in a thermostatically controlled water bath. For better mixing, four baffles were spaced evenly inside the vessel. Required leaching solution was prepared using reagent-grade phosphoric acid and deionized water. Fluorapatite concentrate sample was added to the leaching solution as the temperature reached the pre-set value (90 °C). After completion of the leaching experiment (3 h leaching), the pulp was filtered, and the solid residue was washed 3 times with 1% phosphoric acid and dried until a constant weight was obtained. The pH, redox potential and elements concentration in the filtrate were measured. The leaching experiments were conducted at 5, 10 and 15% ( Appropriate amounts of residue obtained from the phosphoric acid leaching stage were subjected to two stages of washing with DI water to remove any soluble precipitates and other impurities. The residue was baked in a Lindburg furnace with concentrated sulfuric acid (98% w/w) at a constant temperature of 270 °C, acid to solid ratio of 1 to 2.5 ( The purpose of this stage was to precipitate iron and phosphate in the form of iron phosphate and iron hydroxide. At first, water (5 times the volume of the solution) was added to the solution to reduce the ionic strength and increase the pH. Further increase in the pH of the diluted PLS (to between 3.5 and 4) was accomplished by adding 20% magnesium oxide solution. The pH of the post-neutralization solution was increased from about 3.5 to about 6 using ammonium hydroxide solution containing 25% NH Equilibrium diagrams were used to predict and support the results of leaching and precipitation experiments. The thermodynamic information of REE complexes and main impurities within the phosphate solution were obtained from the database of the Spana software (Ver 1, June 2015). For known complexes whose equilibrium constant values were not available in the initial Spana database the log K solubility constants was recalculated using their standard Gibbs free energies. Results of the leaching of the concentrate with 25% phosphoric acid and solid to liquid ratio of 5% ( Fe does not originate from the fluorapatite, but hematite, so it involves leaching from another mineral with slower kinetics. Hence the Fe extraction proceeds more gradually, but simultaneously to fluorapatite leaching. Increasing the leaching time increased the leaching efficiency of iron but did not have a significant effect on the leaching efficiency of fluoride. Fluoride originates from the fluorapatite and it is expected to show the same leaching behaviour as chloride. Fluoride precipitation of REEs could be a reason for this lower leaching efficiency. This is discussed further in the following sections. Results of the initial leaching tests showed that 3 h were sufficient for the leaching of calcium and phosphate from the concentrate. Additional tests were conducted to investigate the effect of phosphoric acid concentration at 5, 10 and 15% ( The effect of the acid concentration on the leaching efficiency of Ca, P, Cl, F, Fe is also shown in Iron separation from REEs has always been an important challenge in the REE processing industry ( As shown in reactions (9) to (11) for the reaction of chloride ligand with iron and in reactions (12) to (14) for the reaction of fluoride ligand with iron, the reaction of both ligands with iron ions is stable and according to the related equilibrium constants, fluoride complexes are significantly more stable than chloride complexes. In the case of iron leaching with phosphoric acid, The weight ratio of the residue to the concentrate was 6.81%, which indicates that the fluorapatite (88.7% of the concentrate), calcite (2.3% of the concentrate) and part of iron minerals (4.8% of the concentrate) were leached and REEs were concentrated in the residue. According to As mentioned in the previous section, the dissolution of REEs in the phosphoric acid solution was negligible. It was concluded in the Part I paper ( Concentration of phosphate, calcium, REEs and impurities in the PLS and leaching residue are shown in Results from modeling of solution speciation showed that the formation of REE fluorides depends greatly on the amount of fluoride in the fluorapatite concentrate. It should be emphasized that the leaching efficiency of chloride is higher than that of fluoride. This phenomenon can be due to the precipitation of fluorine with REE or release of fluoride as HF or SiF Considering all the compounds present in the concentrate, fluoride and phosphate ions could potentially have precipitated REEs leached from the fluorapatite. In order to investigate this possibility, the speciation diagram of lanthanum species in the phosphate solution was analyzed (The speciation diagram of other rare earths are similar to that of La). As shown in One of the most important points in choosing the acid for leaching of apatite concentrate is the ability of acid to be regenerated, which depends on the reaction product of Ca as the major constituent of the concentrate with the anion ligand of the acid. This can be presented as a two-stage process. In the first stage Ca and phosphate are leached with a mineral acid other than sulfuric acid, and in the second stage, the acid is regenerated by sulfuric acid addition. As mentioned, fluorapatite mineral accounts for about 88.9% of the concentrate. Results showed that, when the concentrate is leached with 25% phosphoric acid and solid to liquid ratio of 5% (w/w) at 90 °C, fluorapatite is more or less completely dissolved. According to A speciation diagram of the main species of Ca in phosphate solution of the leaching of concentrate with phosphoric acid is shown in Under appropriate physical and chemical conditions of a solution containing calcium and phosphate ions, various types of calcium phosphate including di‑calcium phosphate dihydrate (DCPD- The calcium phosphate solution produced from phosphoric acid leaching of the fluorapatite concentrate can also be used to regenerate the leaching agent (phosphoric acid) after mixing with sulfuric acid to precipitate calcium as gypsum. After leaching of the concentrate with 25% phosphoric acid, the PLS contains about 99.4 g/L phosphorus ( Values of equilibrium constants ( As shown in Results show that increasing the baking time from 1 to 5 h at an acid to solid weight ratio of 2 at 270 °C increases the baking-water leaching efficiency of cerium, lanthanum, neodymium and yttrium from 58.1 to 94.6%, 57 to 93.9%, 59.12 to 94.1% and 60.7 to 96.2%, respectively. The effect of increasing baking time on the yttrium leaching efficiency was higher than the other REEs. Given that xenotime is the only mineral containing yttrium, 4 h baking was sufficient to decompose this mineral. However, given that the cerium, lanthanum and neodymium, which are mainly in the monazite mineral, need longer to dissolve, 5 h was selected as the optimum baking time. The effect of acid to solid ratio on the baking –water leaching efficiency of the residue is shown in The concentrations of phosphate, calcium, REEs and impurities in the PLS of the baking-water leaching step is shown in The effect of increasing pH (by adding MgO solution) on the removal by precipitation of phosphate, iron and REEs is shown in The remaining iron was precipitated as iron (III) hydroxide. At the same time <3% of total REE in the solution were precipitated under these conditions. Details of the effect of the molar ratio of iron (III) to phosphate was presented in the Part I paper ( After the precipitation and removal of phosphate and iron from the solution, the pH of the remaining REE-rich solution was increased further by ammonium hydroxide, and REEs were precipitated in the form of carbonate by the addition of solid ammonium bicarbonate ( In the carbonate precipitation of REEs, the effects of the ammonium bicarbonate to REE molar ratio and the precipitation time were investigated. Effect of the molar ratio of bicarbonate to TREE in the PLS (after removing iron and phosphate) is shown in The effect of the precipitation time on the carbonate precipitation of REEs at a molar ratio of bicarbonate to TREE of 3 is shown in According to Taking into account all the steps presented in this paper, a flowsheet for the production of phosphoric acid and carbonate concentrate of REEs is presented in The results of using phosphoric acid for selective leaching of calcium and phosphate from the Esfordi fluorapatite concentrate showed that, while almost all calcium and >90% of phosphate were leached into solution, the leaching efficiency of REEs was about 1% and they were concentrated 14.6 times (total REE grade increased from 1.2% to 17.5% in the leaching residue). Moreover, as the iron leaching efficiency was low in the leaching process, in the iron and phosphate precipitation process, the iron (III) to phosphorus ratio was 3.41 and when the pH was increased to about 3.9, iron and phosphate were precipitated with a minimal amount of REEs precipitated in this stage. Total REEs were precipitated in the form of carbonate and a concentrate containing about 39% total REEs was obtained which is an appropriate product for separation of REEs. The major advantage of using phosphoric acid for the leaching of phosphate ore containing REEs is that the crystallization and precipitation of gypsum and leaching of REEs can occur in separate stages. This means that in the leaching process most of calcium enters the solution and the residue contains REEs. Calcium can be precipitated as gypsum by adding sulfuric acid to the leach solution after filtration. In this way, phosphoric acid can be regenerated and reused in the leaching stage with the excess purified as the phosphoric acid product. The authors would like to thank the