The chapter discusses the recovery of gold as a by-product from copper smelters and from the other base metal industries. There are often platinum group metals (PGMs) that are also recovered as a component of the byproduct. Gold is mostly recovered in copper smelters and the processes to recover gold from refinery anodic slimes are varied; just a few typical examples have been presented in this chapter. The fundamental reasons for the successful recovery of gold in the copper industry are, on one hand, the preferential association of gold with copper in sulfide ores (which makes for high gold content in copper concentrates), and, on the other hand, the natural concentration of gold in a very small mass (anodic slimes). This translates into a concentration factor of about 4 through the copper smelter, followed by a concentration factor of 100-200 in the electrorefinery. The result is a high gold-grade feed to the precious-metals plants. The same can be said for the gold in copper–nickel concentrates and PGM concentrates.Although most of the gold produced each year originates from primary gold ores or concentrates, a significant amount of gold is recovered as by-product from the production of base metals and from the recycling of scrap. From a current gold world production of approximately 2,600 tonnes, about 10% is recovered as a by-product ( This chapter discusses the recovery of gold as a by-product from copper smelters and from the other base metal industries. There are often platinum-group metals (PGMs) that are also recovered as a component of the by-product; more detailed discussion of gold recovery with PGMs may be found in Chapter 36, although The current chapter will focus on commercially applied processes, while also considering proposed new processes and emerging technologies. Previous chapters in this book (32 and 33; see also 12) deal with the recovery of gold from copper ores at the mine-site. Gold is often associated with chalcopyrite in ore deposits, and efforts are therefore obviously made at the mine to maximize the recovery of both gold and copper, either using a combination of gravity and flotation techniques, or flotation alone. Using available techniques, some of the gold can be recovered directly as a gold concentrate, using, for example, gravity techniques in the grinding circuit, but usually, significant quantities remain within the copper concentrate. Gold can be present in the copper concentrate as free gold particles or in solid solution in the chalcopyrite itself. For example, at Norilsk, the chalcopyrite has been measured to contain between 1 and 7 During the smelting operation, gold, silver and other PMs remain closely associated with copper, first within the matte and then within the blister. Finally, during electrorefining of the copper blister, gold is concentrated and collected with the anode slimes. The composition of anodic slimes varies from smelter to smelter, depending on the types of feeds and the operation. During the smelting of copper concentrates, gold and other PMs are almost quantitatively collected within copper. In the blister anodes, gold is exclusively present in solid solution. Most of the copper in the anode dissolves during electrorefining and approximately 5–10 Anodic slimes contain significant amounts of copper, lead, silver, selenium, nickel and tellurium, and various smelters have over the years elaborated a multitude of schemes to separate gold from all the other components in the slimes. Various examples are presented in the following sections of processes used to recover gold from copper anodic slimes. Most copper concentrates also contain small, but not insignificant, quantities of PGMs. These eventually find their way, together with gold and silver, into the copper refinery anodic slimes (see Chapter 36). Most large copper refineries, therefore, normally operate a precious-metal (PM) plant where anodic slimes are treated. The process used can vary from plant to plant. In 1998, Noranda CCR Division commissioned a new anode slimes treatment plant ( The process to recover gold from the Moebius cell mud had remained largely unchanged since the 1930s. Disadvantages of this process included a high (30%) circulating load of Pd through the acid leach of gold mud from the Moebius cell, and significant gold in-process inventory. A new process, developed at the Noranda Research Centre, has been installed to overcome these problems. A simplified process flowsheet of the new installation is illustrated in The incoming gold mud typically assays 45% Au, 35% Ag, 14.2% Pd, 1.5% Cu and 0.5% Pt. The new process generates 99.99% Au, and 90% Ag cement for recycling to the Doré furnace, and a Pd/Pt concentrate assaying 90.8% Pd, 3.2% Pt, 2% Cu, 1.35% Pb and 0.66% Se. In 1988, the silver refinery produced 801 The process used at Pori ( The electrolyte slimes undergo a series of stages: decopperizing by oxidative leach followed by filtration; nickel removal by pressure leaching at 160°C; selenium removal from the slimes, followed by Doré smelting of the resulting slimes; electrolytic silver refining in a Moebius cell; gold mud is further purified (H In 1983, Outokumpu Pori refinery produced 38 The new refinery recently commissioned to treat Phelps Dodge's anodic slimes has been described in detail ( Very pure products are achieved using this new process, 99.95% and 99.995% for silver and gold, respectively. After 2 years of operation, Phelps Dodge refinery was producing 3.1 The main nickel-bearing sulfide mineral, pentlandite [(Fe,Ni) Some of these nickel deposits can contain significant PGMs (Merensky Reef, UG-2 Reef in South Africa, Norilsk), but gold is also found as a minor constituent in these ores. In the Merensky Reef ores, gold is found almost exclusively as metallic gold or electrum [Au Palladium–gold associations are also identified in other deposits, such as the Lac des Isles deposit in Ontario (Canada), as shown in Depending on the relative ratio of nickel and precious metals in a concentrate, it will be processed in a nickel or a precious-metal smelter. The recovery of gold from PGM concentrates is discussed in Chapter 36. In the following sections, examples of the PMs recovery from the nickel ores for the three major nickel producers in the world are presented ( The Inco process for the treatment of its Sudbury ores has been well described ( Starting from a low PGM grade (∼1 The final refining step consists of transforming the high-grade PM concentrate into high-purity (>99%) individual elements (Pt, Pd, Ir, Os, Ru, Rh), as well as recovering the gold and silver accompanying the PGMs. Several papers describing the chemistry and principles underlying the refining of the PGMs have been published ( The classical refining process used for many decades by Inco at its Acton refinery in the UK is illustrated in simplified form in The process described in Because of the factors described above, the industry was forced to introduce new separation technologies, namely SX. Due to the selectivity and efficiency of the SX process, several refineries have opted for a total leach approach followed by a sequential metal separation with the aid of SX. The process used at Acton by Inco is presented in a simplified form in Falconbridge in Sudbury treats ores similar to Inco's but the approach to recover base metals and the PMs is completely different ( The nickel and the cobalt are fully recovered to pure metals from a chloride system; the copper is roasted to form sulfates and is recovered conventionally from sulfate solutions. The PMs are concentrated in the sulfuric acid leach residue. The residue is reduced to metal using hydrogen, and leached with chlorine under controlled redox potential to minimize the dissolution of PMs. The solid residue is the primary PM concentrate; it is smelted to matte in an electric furnace; the matte is granulated and leached with HCl/Cl The Mining and Metallurgical Company, Norilsk Nickel (MMC Norilsk Nickel), is one of the largest producers of nickel and PGMs in the world. Norilsk has operated a metallurgical complex to treat its ores for many years. The present process is illustrated in A new process, developed in-house by Norilsk Nickel to overcome the shortcomings of the present operation and make use of the most modern technology, is given in At the smelter, a high-copper converter matte would be produced, with a copper-to-nickel ratio of about 2:1; the matte would be granulated, wet-ground, and then treated in the new base-metal refinery that would be using a new sulfuric acid leaching technology composed of an atmospheric decopperization process whereby matte is used to decopperize the nickel anolyte; atmospheric iron hydrolysis using nickel or sodium carbonate (under oxidizing conditions); and an oxidizing pressure leaching stage, followed by autoclave refining of the copper concentrate. This new process would result in a copper concentrate containing all of the copper (70%–71% Cu grade), little iron (0.2%–0.6% Fe), little nickel (0.4%–0.7% Ni), (26%–28% S) and practically all of the PGMs (in addition to gold). This concentrate would be autogeneously smelted in Vanyukov furnaces to copper blister at the Nadezhda smelter and the PMs recovered in the anode slimes during electrorefining of the copper blister. A simplified flow diagram of the new enrichment process is illustrated in Significant improvements would also be incorporated in the new PGM refinery: Pressure leaching would be used to process both the copper and the nickel anode slimes. Refinery wastes (rich in Rh), used catalysts and gravity concentrates would also be treated in separate lines. All resulting PGM concentrates would be blended and smelted to matte in a Kaldo furnace. The resulting matte would be pressure-leached, and eventually will produce a silver concentrate (AgCl), a PGM concentrate No. 1 (Pt+Pd) as leach residue, as well as a PGM concentrate No. 2, by precipitation with thiourea and refining to 35% (Rh+Ru+Ir). Gold is sometimes found in association with sphalerite [(Zn,Fe)S], although the association is rather rare. When the mineralogy is favourable and the concentration of gold warrants it, the possibility of separating gold from the zinc at the concentrator is real. One such example is given by Minera El Toqui in Chile ( At Minera El Toqui, the zinc ore from the Doña Rosa mine assays 9% Zn and 1.93 Zinc metal is won from zinc sulfide concentrates via a variety of processes, some pyrometallurgical, but mostly hydrometallurgical. The most commonly used process, the so-called roast-leach-electrowinning (RLE) process, does concentrate the PMs in one stream, as illustrated in Gold and silver in the original concentrate accumulate in the leach residue, together with the lead. Due to the mass losses during roasting and leaching, the PM content of the leach residue is increased several fold. As an example, gold and silver in the Brunswick Mining and Smelting zinc concentrate increases from 0.3–0.4 Processes have been developed to recover silver and gold when the value of these elements in the leach residue warrants it. At the Balen plant of Vieille Montagne in Belgium, the hot-acid leach residues are being floated to selectively recover first a silver–gold concentrate using a standard sulfide promoter, followed by lead sulfate flotation using a laurylamine or sulfonate collector ( At the Iijima Refinery of Akita Zinc Co., treating a zinc concentate assaying 1.2 Leach residues are also floated at the Zhuzhou Smelter in Hunan, China, ( Direct leaching of the zinc leach residue has also been proposed, and various lixiviants have been suggested, such as cyanide and thiourea ( Leaching of a zinc residue assaying 20–23% Zn, 1–1.5 Another approach to recover gold and silver from jarosite leach residues from the zinc industry was proposed by Tecnicas Reunidas of Spain; in the Plint process, summarized in Dynatec (formerly Sherritt Gordon) has developed a zinc pressure-leach process to directly leach sphalerite [(Zn, Fe)S] without prior roasting. Several commercial installations have been operated successfully for many years. The process can be simply described as illustrated in The overall process chemistry can be represented as The pressure-leach residue can be further treated by floating the elemental sulfur and residual unreacted sulfides (e.g., chalcopyrite and pyrite), the so-called S–S flotation. During the pressure-oxidation process, most of the silver is converted into argentojarosite [AgFe Direct cyanidation of the S–S flotation tailings could recover up to 90% of the gold but only 20% of the silver (locked as argentojarosite), with high consumption of cyanide (due to CNS formation) and lime ( Eventually, the silver enhancement treatment (SET) process was developed to destroy the jarosite by reaction with lime at 90°C ( After sulfur melting and filtering, the S–S concentrate represents, in the case of the HBMS plant in Manitoba, only 6% of the weight of the original zinc concentrate feed, and it assays 1.8% Cu, 14.8% Fe, 24.7% Zn, 54.6% S A process developed by Canmet to recover gold and silver from that product is summarized in Using this approach, 93–100% of the gold could be recovered in the matte. As an alternative to matte smelting, several hydrometallurgical approaches were also evaluated, including thiourea leaching, acidic chlorination and cyanidation. Only cyanidation gave gold extractions high enough to be retained: gold extraction as high as 91.5% (silver extraction of 57%) but with a cyanide consumption of 48 In cases where zinc and lead smelters are fully integrated, such as at Cominco's Trail or Korea Zinc's Onsan Operations ( Eventually, the gold and silver in both zinc and lead concentrates end up in the anodic slimes from the lead electrorefinery, and are recovered from there in the PMs refinery. The association of silver with lead minerals, in particular galena [PbS], is well known and documented, but gold is also frequently found in lead concentrates, and its recovery follows closely that of silver. Galena concentrates are usually smelted to produce lead bullion. Smelting techniques are numerous, ranging from the traditional blast furnace to the more recent Kivcet, QSL and Ausmelt processes. The affinity of gold and silver for lead metal has been known since ancient times, and gold and silver are well collected in the metallic lead phase during smelting, irrespective of the type of melting process employed. Studies of PMs deportment in slags during smelting have confirmed the efficiency of the collection of PMs (gold+silver) by lead bullion ( The bullion is then processed to metallic lead using either thermal or electrometallurgical techniques ( During the pyrometallurgical refining of lead bullion, silver and gold are removed to the target <10 Typical lead bullions assay between 1,000 and 4,500 Depending on the operation, the PMs Zn alloy composition varies between 6 and 25% Ag. The alloy is then melted in a Doré furnace and the Doré silver is usually electrorefined in conventional Balbach Thum cells to produce 99.99% silver cathode, with the anodic slimes periodically collected and leached to produce a 98% gold product ( During electrorefining, the composition of the lead anode slimes will vary depending on the starting lead anode composition; at Cerro de Pasco for example, anode slimes contained 35% Sb, 22% Bi, 14% Pb, 9% Ag and 1000 Various hydrometallurgical processes have been developed to produce lead from galena concentrates without going through a smelting stage. Cyprus Metallurgical Processes Corporation (Cymet) piloted a dry chlorination process that is illustrated in a simplified form in The results presented indicated extractions of 99% for both lead and silver. No mention of gold was made. Ferric chloride leaching of galena has been investigated as early as in the 1920s. The main reactions involved are presented below: This was the basis of the Minemet process ( Variants of the ferric chloride leach for galena concentrates include the Canmet FCL process and the USBM process ( A recent process has been developed by Engitec that allows direct leaching of galena concentrate coupled with electrowinning of the lead directly from the leach solution ( The chemistry underlying the FLUBOR (b) Metallic lead is produced at the cathode, while the ferrous fluoborate is reoxidized to ferric fluoborate at the anode, as per the following half-reactions: Cobalt has traditionally been recovered as by-product of copper (in Central Africa) and nickel. Gold is only rarely associated with cobalt minerals, but the occurrence exists. One such example is the NICO deposit in Canada where gold occurs associated with cobalt arsenides and cobaltiferous arsenopyrite. A process was developed to recover gold and cobalt from the NICO deposit, as indicated in Using that process, 95% of the gold can be recovered using standard CIL on a pressure-oxidation residue. This process is currently being piloted for a pre-feasibility study. Electronic scrap is normally recycled to copper smelters, and therefore its PMs content is eventually recovered within the Cu refinery anodic slimes ( Further information on the recovery of gold from secondary sources, including spent autocatalysts and sweepings, may be found in Chapter 36. Present-day technology to treat high-grade PGM concentrates (smelting to matte, base metals refinery) is effective and well established. There are a few situations, however, where it is not suitable: (i) the concentrate is too low-grade or contains too many deleterious minerals for the smelter ( Because of these potential issues, much effort has been devoted to the development of alternative process routes. Because hydrometallurgical plants are best suited for small operations, this is the direction usually taken by the organizations searching for alternative processes. A few of these emerging new technologies will be described in the following pages; several other more recently developed processes may well have some potential, including the Panton process (roast/leach; A discussion of the application of hydrometallurgical processes in PGM This process was developed to recover PMs (Gold+PGMs) from the oxidized portion of the Hartley deposit in Zimbabwe ( The following were the recommended process parameters: Roasting: 300–700°C, 60–90 Leaching: 70°C, 2 10 24–40% solids. Under those conditions, recoveries were 90% Au, 85% Pt and 70% Rh. This process was developed at Lakefield Research in the early 1990s ( The PLATSOL™ process was developed at Lakefield Research in the late 1990s by International PGM Technologies to treat PolyMet's NorthMet (formerly Dunka Road) deposit within the Duluth Gabbro in Minnesota, USA ( Gold and the PMs in the leach solution can be recovered directly from the acidic liquor by sulfide precipitation, activated carbon or ion exchange ( As a by-product, gold is mostly recovered in copper smelters, and processes to recover gold from refinery anodic slimes are varied; just a few typical examples have been presented in this chapter. The fundamental reasons for the successful recovery of gold in the copper industry are, on one hand, the preferential association of gold with copper in sulfide ores (which makes for high gold content in copper concentrates), and on the other hand the natural concentration of gold in a very small mass (anodic slimes). This translates into a concentration factor of about 4 through the copper smelter, followed by a concentration factor of 100–200 in the electrorefinery. The result is a high gold-grade feed to the precious-metals plants. The same can be said for the gold in copper–nickel concentrates and PGM concentrates. Gold in lead concentrates, although low in tenor, follows silver closely to the bullion into the Parkes concentrate or the anodic slimes, and is therefore well recovered. The case of gold from zinc concentrates is different – gold tenor is typically fairly low in the concentrates; moreover, in existing processes, there is no stream wherein gold is well concentrated (except maybe the super-hot leach residue), and as expected, iron products (jarosites, basic iron sulfates and others) are the main contaminants. Notwithstanding, processes have been developed to recover gold from zinc concentrates, economics permitting.