This paper describes synthesis of spherical and highly mono-dispersed ceria coated silica nanoparticles of size ∼70–80nm for application as abrasive particles in Chemical Mechanical Planarization (CMP) process. Core silica nanoparticles were initially synthesized using micro-emulsion method. Ceria coating on these ultrafine and spherical silica nanoparticles was achieved using controlled chemical precipitation method. Study of various parameters influencing the formation of ceria coated silica nanoparticles of size less than 100nm has been undertaken and reported. Ceria coating over silica nanoparticles was varied by controlling the reaction temperature, pH and precursor concentrations. Characterization studies using X-ray diffraction, scanning electron microscopy, transmission electron microscopy and Energy Dispersive X-ray analysis show formation of crystalline CeO2 coating of ∼10nm thickness over silica with spherical morphology and particle size <100nm. Aqueous slurry of ceria coated silica abrasive was prepared and employed for polishing of oxide and nitride films on silicon substrates. Polished films were studied using ellipsometry and an improvement in SiO2:SiN selective removal rates up to 12 was observed using 1wt% ceria coated silica nanoparticles slurry.Chemical Mechanical Polishing (CMP) processes are being utilized to achieve global planarization of substrates with surface coatings of varying thickness ranging from nanometres to several micrometres, with desired selectivity and minimum defects Employment of technologies like shallow trench isolation (STI), which isolates neighbouring semiconductor devices in an IC circuit, critically depends on the planarization capacity of CMP process In CMP, mono-dispersity and morphology of abrasive particles are identified as important factors which affect the polishing rates Synthesis of ceria coated silica nanoparticle enables modulating selectivity of the CMP process to tap into potential Shallow Trench Isolation (STI) market A popular and widely reported method for silica nanoparticle synthesis is Stober method In micro-emulsion method tetraethyl orthosilicate (TEOS) was used as a source of silica, Triton X-100 was used as surfactant, cyclohexane was the organic phase and hexanol was used as co-surfactant Mono-dispersed silica nanoparticles synthesized using micro-emulsion methods were used as a core particle for further coating with CeO Polishing tests were carried out on Ecomet 4+ Automet polishing machine manufactured by Buehler using groove pads made of polyurethane. The rotation speed of the pad was set at 80  During precipitation reaction of ceria on silica particles, pH and temperatures was varied, to obtain different extents of ceria coating on silica. The precipitation of ceria from cerium nitrate depends on the reaction pH. Beyond pH 6, the nitrates undergo an exchange reaction with hydroxyl ion as shown in Eq. Full coating of silica particles by ceria nanoparticles as shown in Polishing experiments were carried out on thermally grown silicon oxide and nitride films on silicon wafers (Noel Technologies, Campbell, CA) and were polished on a Buehler Phoenix-beta polisher using IC-1400K Groove pads made of polyurethane (Rodel Inc., Phoenix, AZ). Before each experiment, the polishing pad was conditioned for 1 The polishing rates for SiO A study of particles collected from used slurries after the polishing experiments revealed that ceria coated over silica at pH 10 and 95 This study demonstrates synthesis of highly spherical and mono-dispersed, ceria coated silica nanoparticles for application as abrasive particles in selective CMP. Coating of ceria over silica was done using precipitation method. Precipitation reactions were carried out by varying the pH and reaction temperature. A uniform and adherent coating of ceria over silica was obtained for reaction carried out at 95 This work was supported by Applied Materials Inc. through the Annual Sponsored Projects Program. The author acknowledges Dr. Rajeev Bajaj and Dr. Uday Mahajan from Applied Materials Inc. for providing the reference silica and ceria slurry and all the technical discussions and guidance during the project. Authors thank SAIF, IIT-Bombay for TEM images.