Fe-Ru bimetallic catalysts for Fischer–Tröpsch (FT) synthesis were prepared by co-impregnation of Fe nitrate and Ru acetate salts on purified carbon nanotube (CNT) supports. The Fe-Ru/CNT catalysts were promoted with potassium and/or copper using an incipient wetness procedure in which the promoter was added at the same time as the Fe-Ru. The structures of the CNTs and sizes of the Fe-Ru metal particles (on average 2.1nm) were determined by high-resolution TEM and HAADF-STEM. The reducibility of the catalysts was studied by temperature-programmed reduction (TPR) and the expected promoter effects (K, Cu on Fe) were observed. All the catalysts were used for the FT synthesis in a fixed-bed microreactor (275°C, 8bar, H2/CO=2/1). The effect of Cu and K on CO conversion, product selectivity and FT synthesis activity was investigated. The observed behaviour of the small particles obtained in this study followed similar trends to what has been observed before for Fe promoted catalysts suggesting that support interactions do not strongly affect the promoter properties of the metals. All the catalysts were found to be stable in the FT reaction (ca. 120h) indicating that the Fe-Ru clusters possess remarkable stability in the FT reaction when supported on carbon nanotubes. This resistance to sintering is attributed to the metal support interaction characteristic of CNT supports.Bimetallic catalysts play an important role in many industrial catalytic processes and represent an area of intense research activity. The addition of a second metal component to a catalyst allows for the possibility of systematically altering the size and/or the electronic structure of a catalyst. The presence of a second metal component can also make its influence felt by modifying the absorption characteristics of the catalyst surface, changing the reducibility of the catalyst or in certain cases altering the catalyst deactivation behavior. This has proven to be beneficial in bimetallic reforming catalysts Among the various bimetallic systems investigated, those of iron with noble metals such as Ru have drawn considerable attention over the decades because of their possible importance in the Fischer–Tröpsch (FT) synthesis In many heterogeneous reactions, the active phase is spread on a support. A catalyst support is not merely a carrier but it may also contribute to the activity of the catalyst. Earlier studies have indicated that using carbon as a support to provide an inert, poorly interacting surface could moderate the catalytic behavior of metals such as iron and ruthenium Tubular carbon, as a support, exists in a number of forms including plates In a previous study, we have reported the use of carbon nanotubes as a support for iron catalysts in the Fischer–Tröpsch synthesis While Ru has been supported on CNTs and the materials have been investigated in many catalytic reactions CNTs were synthesized by the catalytic decomposition of C The carbon products of twelve CNT synthesis reactions were combined and thoroughly mixed to provide a homogeneous support material. Catalysts containing 10% iron supported on carbon nanotubes and promoted by 0.25% Ru were prepared by the incipient wetness (IW) impregnation process. In this method, Fe(NO Keeping the Fe:Ru molar ratio the same, at 7.24, two other catalysts containing 5 and 2.5% Fe, i.e. 0.125 and 0.0625% Ru (5Fe/0.125Ru and 2.5Fe/0.0625Ru) were also prepared by the incipient wetness (IW) impregnation method. For the preparation of these catalysts, Fe(NO All the samples prepared were further dried in an oven (120 ICP Optical Emission Spectroscopy (ICPOES) analysis of the catalysts revealed that the metal ratios obtained on the CNT support are very close to those predicted from the catalyst preparation procedure ( A JEOL 2010F scanning transmission electron microscope was used to obtain scanning and high-resolution transmission electron microscope (STEM and HRTEM) images. To measure the particle size distribution of catalyst particles on the CNTs, high-angle annular dark-field STEM operating at 200 The surface areas of the carbon nanotubes and the prepared catalysts were determined using the BET method. Approximately 0.25 The catalytic measurements were carried out in a fixed bed microreactor as described previously Samples of the purified CNT material was analysed by TEM. The purified product is comprised of an interwoven matrix of tubes ( In general, the BET surface areas ( TPR analyses were performed to evaluate the effect of Ru, Cu and K on the reducibility of the Fe/CNT material ( The TPR data reveal the classical effects expected on addition of traditional Fe promoters to the Fe-Ru catalyst. Thus, the addition of Cu lowers the reduction temperature while K has little effect relative to the unpromoted catalyst. It has been proposed that the reduction of iron catalysts, promoted by Cu, is the result of H A set of TPR experiments on different unpromoted catalysts ( As the metal loading decreased for the complexes that had the same Fe:Ru ratio, the peaks in the TPR profiles were shifted to higher temperatures. For the 10Fe/0.25Ru catalyst the first peak is situated at ca. 340 In general, it is known that dispersion increases as the metal loading decreases The TPR profiles for the 5Fe/0.25Ru and 10Fe/0.25Ru catalysts reveal a shift of the TPR peaks to An attempt was made to determine the effect of promoters on both the activity (reactions carried out at constant flow rate) and selectivity (reactions at constant CO conversion). The initial CO conversion for all the catalysts studied increased and then stabilized within 15 After an initial increase, the CO conversion remained steady for the catalysts (104 Addition of Cu to the 10Fe/0.25Ru (10FeRuCu catalyst) resulted in a significant increase in CO reaction rate, CO As shown in A comparison of the selectivities at similar conversion was made ( A comparison of the data in The effect of keeping the Fe:Ru ratio constant on the FT CO conversion is shown in FT reactions involving the catalysts 10Fe/0.25Ru and 5Fe/0.25Ru were also compared in terms of activity data ( A comparison of the 5Fe/0.25Ru and 10Fe/0.25Ru catalysts at approximately the same flow rate ( Kaminsky et al. WGS and FTS rates for the 5Fe/0.25Ru and 10Fe/0.25Ru catalysts are also shown in Comparison of our data with similar iron, ruthenium and iron-ruthenium based carbon supported catalysts reported in the literature ( In this study it has been shown that Fe-Ru bimetallic catalysts supported on carbon nanotubes are stable catalysts in FT synthesis. This implies that small particles (<4 The small particle Fe-Ru CNT supported catalysts show behaviour typical of Fe supported catalysts when (i) promoted with K and Cu and (ii) when Fe-Ru loadings and ratios are varied. The catalysts have the added advantage of a support interaction with the carbon that does not hinder reduction and yet produces a catalyst which does not sinter significantly in the FT reaction. It is thought that the moderate metal support interaction accounts for the catalyst stability. We would like to acknowledge financial support from THRIP, SASOL, the DST, the NRF and the University of the Witwatersrand. We wish to thank Dr. X. Liu for assistance in making the carbon nanotubes and Impala Platinum Holdings Limited (Dr. I. Bratt) for donating the ruthenium salt used to make the catalysts to us.