Background
                  The optimal treatment of large anterior glenoid rim fractures is still a matter of debate. The purpose of this study was to evaluate the clinical and radiologic results of an arthroscopic reduction and fixation of acute displaced large solitary or multifragmented anterior glenoid rim fractures using anchors or bioabsorbable compression screws.
               
                  Methods
                  Twenty-three consecutive patients (7 women, 16 men; mean age, 47.9 [15-74] years) were treated. The patients were followed up clinically (range of motion, instability testing, and shoulder outcome scores) and with conventional radiographs (true anterior-posterior, axillary, and Bernageau views).
               
                  Results
                  With a minimum follow-up of 24 months, 21 patients could be evaluated. The average Constant score was 84.5 points, the Rowe score was 90.8 points, the Melbourne Instability Shoulder Score was 96.2 points, the Western Ontario Shoulder Instability Index was 89.2%, and the subjective shoulder value averaged 92.1%. No patient had suffered recurrent instability. The radiologic evaluation revealed signs of osteoarthritis in 7 cases, which was pre-existing in 1 patient. Patients with osteoarthritis were on average 10 years older at the time of surgery compared with patients without osteoarthritis. A postoperative step-off of the glenoid was detected in 7 cases and averaged 2 (1-3) mm. We could not find a correlation between the step-off and the presence of osteoarthritis.
               
                  Conclusion
                  Arthroscopic reconstruction of acute large solitary and multifragmented fractures of the glenoid rim shows good and excellent clinical results. In the majority of cases, an anatomic reduction and healing of the glenoid fracture can be achieved. The rate of osteoarthritis needs further investigation.Fractures of the anterior glenoid rim are known to occur after shoulder dislocation. A variety of arthroscopic procedures for the treatment of anterior glenoid rim fractures have been introduced in the last 2 decades. Cameron The small number of patients reported in the literature and the need for a precise analysis of the varying fracture types observed in our practice make further investigation necessary. Therefore, the purpose of this study was to evaluate the clinical and radiologic results of an arthroscopic reduction and internal fixation using anchors and bioabsorbable compression screws of acute large and displaced solitary or multifragmented anterior glenoid fractures. In this retrospective case series, we treated 23 consecutive patients with an acute large solitary or multifragmented anterior glenoid rim fracture through an arthroscopic approach. All procedures were performed by a single surgeon (M.S.). There were 7 women and 16 men with a mean age of 47.9 (range, 15-74) years at the time of surgery. The average time from injury to surgical treatment was 12.4 (0-17) days. The most common reason for the time interval between trauma and intervention of >14 days was a delayed appearance of the patient in our outpatient department. An indirect trauma mechanism with a fall on the extended arm or an abduction/external rotation trauma was present in 13 patients. One patient had a severe car accident with multiple concomitant injuries. In 19 patients (82.6%), the initial trauma was accompanied by a shoulder dislocation. The dominant shoulder was affected in 13 patients. None of the patients reported any history of shoulder dislocation or previous shoulder surgery. We calculated the size of the glenoid lesion according to Itoi et al. A recently published classification for anterior glenoid rim defects was used in this study. It is based on the Bigliani classification and distinguishes between acute and chronic defects. In addition, it incorporates the fragment and erosion type of defects published by Sugaya et al We included patients with an acute fragment-type lesion with a large solitary (type Ib) or multifragmented (type Ic) glenoid fracture into this study. All resulting glenoid defects were >21% of the glenoid length, with an average of 27.5% (21.5%-36.5%) according to the calculation by Itoi et al. We indicated a surgical treatment of the glenoid fracture on the basis of the patient's instability feeling as well as a fragment displacement ≥3 mm or a decentered humeral head. General anesthesia with perioperative antibiotics is used in all patients. All procedures are performed in the lateral decubitus position with 5 kg of horizontal and 3 kg of vertical arm traction to allow better visualization of the glenoid. A standard posterior portal is established and a diagnostic arthroscopy performed. Hill-Sachs lesions are graded according to the classification of Calandra et al After the diagnostic arthroscopy, an anteroinferior working portal just above the subscapularis tendon using an outside-in technique is established and a transparent 8.25 mm × 7 cm Twist-In cannula (Arthrex, Naples, FL, USA) inserted. Next, an anterosuperior (suprabicipital) portal is established, the camera is switched to this portal to allow direct visualization of the anterior glenoid rim, and a second transparent Twist-In cannula is inserted into the posterior portal under direct visualization. A shaver is introduced through the anteroinferior portal, and the fracture hematoma is evacuated. Smaller loose fragments located in the comminution zone are removed. Next, the fragment is mobilized with a rasp, and a trial reduction is performed with a probe. Depending on the size of the fragments and the integrity of the labral ring, a screw osteosynthesis or an anchor fixation technique is performed. In 5 patients, the glenoid fracture was reconstructed with screws only. In another 5 cases, a combination of an anchor and screw fixation technique was performed. The remaining patients were treated with, on average, 2.9 (range, 2-4) anchors ( For an isolated or combined screw/anchor osteosynthesis ( If the fragment is too small for screw osteosynthesis, reconstruction with suture anchors or knotless anchors is performed as described by Sugaya et al In case of a multifragmented glenoid fracture (type Ic) ( We could detect concomitant injuries in 78.3% (18 of 23) of the cases. Four patients had a full-thickness supraspinatus tendon tear that was graded type I according to Bateman in 1 patient and type II according to Bateman in 3 cases. One patient had an articular-side supraspinatus partial tear without significant footprint exposure. Five patients showed a traumatic or degenerative lesion of the long head of the biceps tendon, 1 patient had a superior labral anterior-posterior type IV lesion, 1 patient had an additional posteroinferior labral tear, 1 patient had a nondisplaced acromion fracture, 1 patient had a nondisplaced coracoid fracture, 1 patient had a grade IV central osteochondral lesion, and 8 patients showed a Hill-Sachs-Lesion (1 grade I, 2 grade II, and 5 grade III according to the Calandra classification We advised the patients to wear a sling for 4 weeks. From the second postoperative day on, passive mobilization of the shoulder up to 60° of flexion, 60° of abduction, 60° of internal rotation, and 10° of external rotation was started. From week 4, passive range of motion was increased up to 90° of flexion, 90° of abduction, free internal rotation, and 10° of external rotation. Carefully active assisted exercises in the pain-free range of motion were started. From week 7, free range of motion was allowed. At the time of follow-up, a physical examination including range of motion We used the Wilcoxon test to compare the means of the range of motion of the affected shoulder with the healthy contralateral side and the Mann-Whitney After an average follow-up of 33.2 (range, 24-59) months, 21 patients were available for final evaluation (follow-up rate, 91.3%). We were not able to contact 1 patient, and 1 patient refused to participate in this study. With a minimum follow-up of 24 months, the average CS was 84.5 (69-95) points, the RS was 90.8 (70-100) points, the MISS was 96.2 (80-100) points, the WOSI was 89.2% (53%-100%), and the SSV was 92.1% (75%-100%) ( The radiologic evaluation revealed signs of osteoarthritis in 7 cases. One of the 7 patients had a mild (grade I) pre-existing osteoarthritis, which showed no progress at the time of follow-up. Of the 6 patients with post-traumatic osteoarthritis, 3 showed an inferior humeral osteophyte of 1 to 3 mm corresponding to a grade I and 3 patients of >8 mm corresponding to a grade III osteoarthritis according to the Samilson and Prieto classification. Radiologic evaluation showed healing of the fragments in all cases without signs of nonunion. We could detect a postoperative step-off of the glenoid in 7 cases averaging 2 mm (1-3 mm). Four of the patients with a detectable step-off did not show signs of osteoarthritis ( We could not detect specific complications like neurovascular lesions, postoperative hematoma, infections, or postoperative shoulder stiffness related to the surgical technique. The treatment of anterior glenoid rim fractures and the indications for an operative intervention are still a matter of debate. This study shows good and excellent clinical results and a high patient satisfaction after arthroscopic glenoid fracture reconstruction in cases of large solitary and multifragmented anterior glenoid rim fractures. To our knowledge, this is the largest case series of arthroscopically treated glenoid fractures with an average of 27.5% of the glenoid length according to the calculation by Itoi et al. Tauber et al Bauer et al In 2005, Sugaya et al Millett and Braun The rate of osteoarthritic changes in our patient collective is not negligible. However, comparable rates of osteoarthritis have been reported for open reduction and internal fixation using suture anchors or metal screws in glenoid rim fractures. As there was no nonunion or recurrence in our population of patients, it remains unclear whether glenohumeral stability is achieved by anatomic reconstruction and fracture healing or whether it is a result of post-traumatic or postoperative scar formation, which can be seen in the restrictions in external rotation. Finally, the question remains open as to when to operate on large glenoid rim fractures. Maquieira et al One limitation of this study is its retrospective character. In addition, the number of patients reported is small, and the patient collective represents a heterogeneous group because of a high rate of concomitant lesions. However, this study still represents the largest case series in the literature with anterior glenoid rim fractures >21% of the glenoid length. We calculated the size of the fragments using the method described by Itoi et al, Arthroscopic reconstruction of acute large solitary and multifragmented fractures of the glenoid rim using anchors or compression screws showed good and excellent clinical results. In the majority of cases, we could achieve an anatomic reduction and healing of the glenoid fracture. The post-traumatic rate of osteoarthritis needs further investigation. Markus Scheibel received royalties and consultant payments from Arthrex that are related to this work. All other authors, their immediate families, and any research foundations with which they are affiliated have not received any financial payments or other benefits from any commercial entity related to the subject of this article.