Underground mining is going to be deeper gradually because near surface resources are going to be depleted. Therefore, risk of seismic events in underground mines is escalating. Additionally, existence of the large ratio of horizontal to vertical stress, could be a potential reason for high-stress condition and occurrence of dynamic activities. Depending on various parameters such as the level of induced stress, rock properties, etc., ground demand changes and it is difficult to estimate. On the other hand, under seismic condition, energy dissipation and deformation capacity of supports is the most important factors, however, rock support performance factors in dynamic conditions are still under investigation. Expanding the knowledge of reinforcement behaviour and capacity, specifically that of the rockbolt as a primary element in seismic conditions, would help to develop a suitable, safe and economic support design. This paper contains various methods to estimate ground demand including the intact rock properties approach, failure thickness and ejection velocity estimation, and rockburst damage potential method. It also covers measurement methods of rockbolts energy dissipation capacities such as drop test, blasting simulating, back calculation and momentum transfer measurement methods. A large-scale dynamic test rig is also explained. Based on the findings, a table and a graph to show the applicable range of each type of rockbolts were presented. Suitable rockbolt types for various ground energy demand and deformation capacity range were categorised in the table and the graph. The presented support selection method facilitates the selection of a suitable reinforcement system at the preliminary stages of design and guides the designer to adjust the support reinforcement system based on observed ground and support reaction.Deeper underground mining exploitation is increasing worldwide because near surface mineral resources become gradually depleted. In-situ stress increasing in rock is the main difference between rock stresses at depth compared to the rock near the surface, and dynamic activities are direct consequences of such a condition. Seismic events such as the rockburst might occur below 600–800 m depth and more likely passing 1000 m depth. Such phenomena are not limited only to deep mines as many shallow mines in Australia experience such events due to the presence of high horizontal to vertical stress ratios. Hard rock mining is experienced at a depth of about 2 km in Australia, more than 3 km in Canada, and a depth of about 4 km in South Africa highlight the importance of ground stability at such depths. Finding a practical support design requires determining the rockmass energy demand and rock support energy dissipation capacity. Numerous unknowns, uncertainties in geomechanical parameters and randomness occurrence of seismic events increase the complexity of the rock demand determination and consequently extend the complication of an effective support design. Though a significant amount of work has been done to estimate energy dissipation capacity of support elements, this subject is not much known. Additionally, the role played by other mechanisms of loading, like dynamic shear loading, in the support system is also not clearly understood. To achieve stability and safety at deep and rockburst prone conditions, appropriate support and reinforcement design is necessary. The support system should not only be able to tolerate the static rock load and potential dynamic load due to induced stress, but it should also not lose strength over a wide range of deformation. It could be concluded that the energy dissipation capacity of support elements individually, as well as the ground support as an integrated system, needs to be found. Ground energy demand cannot accurately be determined or calculated, but some estimation might be achieved to help engineering judgment. Some of the methods, based on intact rock properties, have attempted to find a relationship between rockmass properties and their potential to burst, and the real condition of rockmass under stress Along with ground demand during dynamic events, much effort has been expended in determining the rock support energy dissipation capacity. Rockbolt as the primary element to transfer the energy of the displaced volume of surface rock to the ground in depth has been the focus. Several approaches including the drop test, blast simulation, back calculation and momentum transfer method have been developed in order to examine rockbolt performance In this research, at first, a short explanation of different mechanisms of rockburst and rock ejection and various methods of ground demand estimation and rockbolt energy dissipation capacity, are illustrated. Then, suitable rockbolt type selection is recommended for different ground demand levels. The method is simply presented by table and graph which is easy to use in practice. The presented methods can assist the selection of appropriate rockbolt type at the preliminary stages of mine design. Additional to the rockbolt selection, some further considerations for the selection of other support elements is given as well. Seismically active underground mines are those which are prone to dynamic rockmass failure. As mining progresses, the natural stress equilibrium of the rockmass is disturbed. Stresses concentrate around the edges of an excavation or in pillars of rock between excavations left unmined for support, due to low grade or other reasons. Stress may also be increased or relaxed on pre-existing planes of weakness such as faults, shears or lithological contacts. These stress changes cause the accumulation of potential energy in the unmined rock. This energy may be gradually dissipated, or it may be released suddenly during the process of inelastic deformation and radiates detectable seismic waves. Rockmass varies from massive, layered and jointed to heavily crushed conditions. In addition, dynamic loading has a broad range of frequency, amplitude, and wavelength. Therefore, ground behaviour varies widely considering the rockmass and dynamic loading conditions. The most common types of strain burst and seismic failure mechanisms in different ground types are categorised into four primary ejection types based on various factors as shown in     Therefore, considering the wide range of rockmass and dynamic load conditions, various types of failures such as spalling, rock ejection and block fall can be expected. When a dynamic load propagates in the excavation, rock deformation occurs and cause an energy release. Estimating the magnitude of released energy is important to design a suitable reinforcement system. Although several methods have been developed to estimate the ground energy demand, they can be categorised into three groups namely, Intact rock property approach (IRPA), Estimation of failure volume and ejection velocity, Rockburst damage potential. A brief illustration of each method is given in the following subsections. When a volume of energy that should be tolerated within the rockmass exceeds its capacity (Strength), sudden failure happens, and energy is quickly released. Although all factors such as discontinuities and their infilling material properties, and the presence of underground water and its effects are important, intact rock properties have significant roles in this phenomenon. As a matter of fact, the intact rock energy absorption capacity could determine the upper limit of energy absorption capacity or in other words, the potential releasable energy of the rockmass. Some criteria have been defined to estimate the potential of rockburst based on intact rock properties including Index of strain energy, Potential energy of elastic strain An excess of energy during the post-peak deformation stage conclude in violent rock fracturing Investigations demonstrate that the potential energy of elastic strain (PES), in other words, the elastic strain energy which is stored in a unit volume of rockmass, is another criterion that could scale the shock and rockburst occurrence The third criterion is the index of rock brittleness which is defined as following: In which The fourth criterion considers both the state of in-situ stress in the rockmass and the mechanical property of rock is expressed by: In Eq. A summary of these criteria is shown in Four indexes are available in this table indicating whether a rockburst event will be low, strong or violent based on estimated or calculated amount of each index. The indexes on the left side of the range indicate low potential, and on the right side of the range indicate strong or violent potential of rockburst. Estimation of failure thickness and ejection velocity will allow the estimation of ground demand by calculating the potential energy release (stored energy in flying rock) by the prospective volume of ejected rock and the estimated velocity of ejection. The energy demand on ground support due to a block ejected from the backs, wall or floor could be calculated by the following Eq. In this equation: The second term in Eq. If we consider the energy demand per square meter of excavation surface and substituting Therefore, the critical factors required for energy demand are: peak particle velocity, which is assumed to equal the velocity of ejection ( The excavation closure (or ejection distance) “ The fracturing due to induced stress, blast damage, geological structure or a combination of all these three factors can form the failure volume or mass of ejected rock which loads the support system. Failure volume can be estimated by various methods in an excavation. A borehole camera survey can help to find the potential discontinuities for ejection and hence the probable volume of rock. Numerical modelling also can be used for the estimation of the failure mass by measuring the overstressed zone surrounding an excavation, in other words, the zone around an excavation in which the stress exceeds the rock strength. Empirical estimation methods are also available.  Heal Excavation vulnerability potential (EVP) is proposed as an index to empirically quantify the effect of local site conditions on rockburst damage. It makes use of four of the five mentioned factors, those not related to the source of the seismic event:     The empirical EVP index proposed makes use of these two components: In order to consider the distance and magnitude of the seismic event involved in each case history, the EVP data was compared to the fifth factor, peak particle velocity (PPV) to create a single index called rockburst damage potential (RDP), as shown here: The respective distributions of these factors show that, in general, an increasing level of rockburst damage is associated with: Increasing stress conditions ( Decreasing ground support system capacity ( Increasing excavation span ( Decreasing geology factor ( Increasing peak particle velocity (PPV). The above-explained procedure can be used to predict the level of rockburst potential. This method needs more experiments and practical feedback to prove or modify. In most cases, it is difficult to carry out a specific design because the rockmass factors that define demand cannot be dependably evaluated. Therefore, the rockmass demand can be described qualitatively. As explained in The reinforcement and support system is a critical measure to prepare a safe workplace as well as increase the longevity of a stable opening. An effective support system influences the safety of workforces and equipment along with the economical mine extraction. Different sorts of reinforcement and support systems are required for a particular application rely on a few elements including: the geometry of the excavation, the strength of the rockmass, stresses present in the rock, corrosion and weathering processes, and blasting practices. The primary method to lighten the impacts of mine seismicity is the design of a practical geometry and appropriate mining sequence. A rock support plan would be a complementary step intending to mitigate the rockburst impact. A ground demand-energy dissipation capacity approach is a vital step in such circumstances. Therefore, acquiring the knowledge of energy dissipation capabilities of elements of a support system including the reinforcement, surface support, connecting elements and faceplate & nut is necessary as well as a whole support system as an integrated system. Implementation of a dynamic resistance support system is the most common method of stabilising an underground opening in mines. Rockbolts along with surface support comprised of mesh and shotcrete, play a crucial role as one of the main elements of a support system. A tunnel that experiences seismic activities like a rockburst needs to be supported by appropriate elements, capable of tolerating dynamic loading. This area in geotechnical engineering is still under development. In other words, the dynamic capacity or energy dissipation capacity of the rock support is under investigation by researchers “Drop testing” has been under the attention of researchers to convey kinematic energy to ground support elements in order to measure energy dissipation capacity The drop test rig is a controlled laboratory facility to investigate the dynamic behaviour of ground support elements submitted to a seismic event simulated by sudden loading of a dropping mass from a predetermined height A rockbolt or cable bolt, cement or resin encapsulated in thick-wall steel pipe to replicate the rockmass, is frequently used in the drop testing experiments. Despite the fact that a specific thickness and measurement of steel tube were given to provide similar confinement of the in-situ rockmass with the same magnitude, the steel pipe cannot completely replicate the rockmass which may introduce an error of some degree into the estimation In spite of the fact that there have been critical enhancements made to the drop testing mechanical assembly, it is still not illustrative of in-situ conditions. The drop test technique has numerous presumptions that would influence the performance of the support elements contrasted with their genuine performance in the field. Moreover, the drop tests deliver results of individual support elements that need to be compiled and consolidated to design the support system. It is helpful to take the outcomes from the different reinforcement elements and the surface support and assemble them together. However, providing a cost effective, controlled and repeatable procedure for estimating the support elements’ properties in a laboratory is its outstanding advantage. Blast simulation experiments have been performed in-situ trying to recreate the seismic event via the blasting to measure the consequences on most common ground support systems It is worth mentioning that the movement of ground in blasting is not similar to that of a rockburst because of seismic events. The gas pressure is not available in the rockburst condition while in blasting it is accompanied by the shock wave, as sometimes the generated gases quickly expand and may conclude to unpredictable results at the test location. On the other hand, the wave characteristics, including wavelength, amplitude and frequency created by blasting are different to those produced by large seismic events. Normally, the wavelengths in the seismic events are longer and frequencies are lower in comparison to those in blasting. Obviously, to investigate and understand the behaviour of rockmass and ground support elements, a reproducible or repeatable simulated dynamic event would be a great success. Many researchers have tried to employ the blasting method for simulation of a rockburst, but there are few or small number of successful experiments. Distortion by gases and not enough generated energy to produce premeditated destruction have been the main reasons of ineffective experiments. Nevertheless, the behaviour of the whole support system as an integrated system can be investigated with this method. The momentum transfer concept has been employed by the Western Australian School of Mines (WASM) via a dynamic loading system in order to find out the energy dissipation capability of the ground support elements or system. This equipment utilises a sample of reinforcement attached to a mass to apply a dynamic impact to the sample by dropping them from a certain height and measurement of deceleration after impact. The testing facility is capable of testing different types of rockbolts, cable bolts, or reinforcement systems, prepared sample of surface support or a mixture of both, to be able to assess the mechanism of dissipation of the energy by a ground support system and interaction between the surface support and reinforcement and the mechanism of the transfer of the dynamic load The concept of this facility is illustrated in Characteristically, the investigation of a sample of reinforcement or support system has to be based on first impact loading that can be a single large dynamic impact. Therefore, the testing equipment has to have sufficient energy or enough capacity to be able to exceed the strength of the sample with a single impact. Based on previous experiments, it has been proved that the multiple loading cause the measured result to overestimate the capacity in comparison to the results of a single large impact. The WASM testing equipment is capable of applying 120 kJ of kinetic energy to the sample It is practical to calculate the dynamic force-displacement diagram of the support element via a well instrumented and monitored system. The portion of the applied kinetic energy, which is dissipated by the prepared sample of support, would be determined by calculation of the area under the force-displacement graph. Another portion of energy that is absorbed by buffers can be calculated separately for every test. The accelerometers assist in evaluating and computing the deceleration response of the system. Alternatively, it can be calculated by a fast computerised video camera, measuring the relative displacement of a target by object tracking software. Finally, the underground ejection velocity is considered as the relative velocity between the loading mass and the dropping beam. The ejection phenomenon happens and a block of rock, which was at rest or stationary under the stress at the wall or vault of the tunnel, quickly accelerates and reaches a peak velocity. The velocity returns to zero if the ground support system tolerates the dynamic impact. Compared to a strong ground support system, a weak or soft support system would be a reason for larger displacement and greater ejection velocity. The most important aspects of the ground support design that has to be considered in a mining operation is the maximum permissible deformation of the reinforcement system and ensuring that the surface support has enough toughness to tolerate the displacement Back analyses of the actual rock ejection and the associated support system is potentially a way of estimation of the dynamic capacity of the ground support. The problem is predicting the location of an ejection due to its randomness and other uncertainties, and consequently lack of sufficient monitoring to collect enough data regarding the event, for example, velocity of the ejected mass. Therefore, back analyses of driven events like blasting would be an appropriate method to address this issue. A comparison between the test results of simulated rockbursts with back analyses of absorbed energy in some case studies has been performed by Heal In order to examine the ground support as an integrated system, Geobrugg Company has constructed a dynamic test rig. Using this rig, it is possible to apply a dynamic load to a sample of a complete support system containing a 3.6 m × 3.6 m sample of surface support combined with four dynamic rockbolts. Because the large sample includes all support elements, it is capable of demonstrating the performance of the surface support and the reinforcement in combination together as well as the connecting and terminating elements As it can be seen in the figure, a horizontal chain link mesh is connected to the main steel frame using lacing wire ropes, while the mesh is held by four dynamic rockbolts. Surface support simulated by shotcrete or concrete slab could be poured over the wire mesh engaged with the four rockbolts via terminating and connecting elements. Some natural rock boulders and gravel are placed on top of the slab sample to simulate broken rocks during a rockburst event contained by surface support. An impact platform made of steel is placed over the gravel to distribute and transfer the impact of a dropped block to the gravel layer, natural rock boulders, and simulated surface support. The mass of the dropped block is 6280 kg and it can be lifted and dropped from a maximum height of 3.25 m limited by a guiding rail. One of the four bolts is instrumented by two load cells at both ends. Two high-speed cameras are installed in front of the main frame, the upper one for the filming of the test block movement and impact and the lower one to monitor the support with several measuring targets on the mesh and bolts with a computer tracking program to evaluate the displacement, velocity and acceleration of the targets. Dissipated energy can be calculated by the difference in potential energy of the test block before and after the impact Testing a large scale of the support sample as an integrated system submitted to a dynamic impact is the strong point of this testing rig. Engineers, to some extent, can evaluate energy dissipation capability of a ground support system exposed to dynamic impact and compare the compatibility of the elements in the prepared sample. The result would help the designer to avoid leaving a weak link in a support system because the weakest link in a support system affects and limits the maximum capacity of the whole system. One weak point of the system is that a single drop would not cause the support system to fail under test and multiple drops can conclude in an overestimation of the energy dissipation capacity of the rockbolts or even the whole support system. There are not many published results of this testing facility and perhaps this is due to a limited number of support systems tested. Therefore, the performance of it can only be evaluated after publication of more test results and comparison to real case studies. On the other hand, it seems that the monitoring data is not enough to calculate the portion of energy dissipated by a support sample because the steel frame absorbs a part of the potential energy of the testing block by deflection and vibration that cannot be measured or calculated by the predicted monitoring system. It is also worth mentioning that the testing facility does not completely replicate the seismic phenomenon that happens in the ground. In this part, the most common types of rockbolts are discussed and divided into different capacity categories. It is assumed that the surface support system (including shotcrete, mesh and nut) are acting appropriately and transfer the load to the rockbolt. Then the rockbolt would be the central element absorbing and dissipating energy. Typical load–deformation behaviours of different rockbolts under the loading test are collected and illustrated in An important fact related to high yielding rockbolts is that they show different behaviour depending on loading conditions and other environmental circumstances. Loading velocity is one factor that can change the load and deformation capacity of yielding bolts and the quality of installation is another important factor. As it can be seen in the graph, one of the Conebolts tolerates more than 300 mm deformation and absorbs or dissipates 60 kJ of the ground released energy. In comparison, two other Conebolts tolerate less than 150 mm and less than 300 mm and can dissipate 20 kJ and 35 kJ, respectively. Grout quality is a major factor for Conebolts because a strong cement grout could lead to higher initial loading and early rupture while soft cement grout leads the rockbolt to early sliding and not reaching its maximum load capacity. In both cases, energy absorption capacity of a rockbolt dramatically drops. So before starting to implement a ground support scheme, it would be necessary to plan a test program to determine the conditions for optimum performance of the rockbolts. Examples of influencing parameters include grout mix design, curing time and preloading. The result of the test program should be used to develop a quality control plan. Considering rockbolts’ energy absorption as shown in  Based on the expectation of the deformation and energy demand of a location, the ground demand relates to the relevant categories in this table. The range of suitable reinforcement for the category is proposed in the “Rock Bolt Types” column. The expected deformation and ground demand are complicated though and come from the methods explained in Section The reinforcement connects to the surface support by linking and terminating arrangements like nuts and bearing plates, split set rings, or the sealing weld and soft ferrule on Swellex. The ejected mass applies the dynamic load to the surface support or containment support. The load needs to be passed via the linking and terminating arrangements and transferred to the ground through the reinforcement. Everyone of these elements have to be able to tolerate the applied dynamic load independently and if any of them failed, the load would no longer transmit to the ground and ejection would occur from in-between the rockbolts Some experiments show that the capacity of the bearing plate under a dynamic loading condition is much less than their nominal load capacity Ground support system design in a seismically active ground or rockburst prone area needs specific consideration regarding evaluation or estimation of the released or transferred energy to the surface of the opening on one hand, and knowing the energy absorption or dissipation capacity of the support system on the other hand. Design of a support system at a certain location underground requires an evaluation of both ground demand and support capacity, in order to design a reliable support system. The presented methods in the evaluation of ground demand have a large degree of uncertainty while the testing methods of the support system are not entirely capable of simulating the real conditions occurring in the ground. Having an estimation of both factors, the ground demand and the support capacity, is essential, therefore, even with a large amount of uncertainty, designers can compare these two factors to define a factor of safety. In addition, the methods could be modified and calibrated in a certain area by the probable occurrence of seismic activities similar to observational methods. Comparison of the support systems tested by multiple facilities assists with promoting the design for the next step. Under seismic conditions in mines, the idea of improving, conserving, and mobilising the inherent strength of the ground to be self-supported is not valid enough while energy dissipation capability and large deformation capacity of support system is the primary objective. In this research, the ground demand and likelihood of a dynamic event have been estimated using different methods. Despite the low accuracy of these estimation methods due to many assumptions, they can assist in the selection of a relatively appropriate support system at preliminary design stages. The design can be modified with observations during construction progress. Stiff behaviour at the beginning of the loading, along with high strength and yielding capability by increasing deformation, are essential qualities of the support components under dynamic loading conditions in order to dissipate a sudden release of energy. To estimate the capacity of rock support systems exposed to seismic events, a number of estimation methods including laboratory drop tests, simulated rockbursts, back calculation, momentum transfer concept and large-scale dynamic test were discussed. Although various assumptions and interpretations are needed to employ the results of dynamic tests, more dynamic capacity measurement of support elements is required to cover the wide range of possible energy released and resulting deformation. On the other hand, ground support reacts in different ways under different circumstances. The velocity of ejection (dynamic loading velocity), quality of grouting of rockbolts and appropriate linking between all elements are some of the known factors that affect the performance of the ground support system. The arrangement of a test program before finalising the design is vital to ensure a successful design. Ground demand is estimated using the methods discussed along with an associated degree of uncertainty. However, to begin with, the potential for rockburst could be assessed through laboratory tests on intact rocks. Estimation of failure thickness and velocity of ejection could support the assumptions and results of the laboratory tests. Using rockburst damage potential, the previous result could be cross-checked, and this could also be summarised into a qualitative description. Using ground demand – support energy dissipation capacity (