Poly(vinyl chloride) (PVC)-based membranes of silacrown end grafted carbosilane dendrimer (I) with sodium tetraphenylborate (NaTPB) as an anion inhibitor and dibutylphthalate (DBP), dioctylphthalate (DOP), dibutyl (butyl) phosphonate (DBBP) and 1-chloronaphthalene (CN) as plasticizing solvent mediators were prepared and used as Na+-selective electrodes. Optimum performance was observed with the membrane having I–PVC–NaTPB–DOP in the ratio 1:33:1:65 (w/w). The electrode works well over a wide concentration range 1.5×10−6–1.0×10−1
                     M with Nernstian compliance 56.0mV/decade between pH 5.8 and 9.2 with a fast response time of about 15s. The selectivity relative to alkali, alkaline earth and transition heavy metal ions is good. The selectivity coefficient values towards potassium ions have been calculated to be 2.3×10−4 by utilizing Fixed Interference Method. The proposed electrode could be used for at least 2months without considerable alteration in its potential. The effect of nonionic surfactants Tween 20, Tween 80, Triton X 100, Span 20 and Span 60 on the potentiometric properties of the sodium selective membrane was also studied.Dendrimers are perfect and unified macromolecules with regular and highly branched architectures that are obtained from a repetitive procedure All reagents used were of analytical reagent grade and were used without further purification. High molecular weight poly(vinyl chloride) (PVC) was obtained from Aldrich, USA; sodium tetraphenylborate (NaTPB), BDH, England; dibutylphthalate (DBP) and dioctylphthalate (DOP), Reidel, India; dibutyl (butyl) phosphonate (DBBP), Mobil, USA, 1-chloronaphthalene (CN), E. Merck, Germany; Tween 20, Tween 80, Triton X 100 were obtained from S d fine chemicals, India; Span 20, Span 60, Loba Chemie, India and tetrahydrofuran (THF) was obtained from Ranbaxy, India. Sodium nitrate, potassium nitrate, rubidium chloride, ammonium nitrate, cadmium nitrate, cobalt nitrate, nickel nitrate, zinc nitrate, lead nitrate, copper nitrate were obtained all from Merck, India. Metal (nitrates and chlorides) solutions prepared were standardized according to appropriate methods. Silacrown end grafted carbosilane dendrimer used as the ionophore (I) in this work was synthesized by Chandra and Lang The PVC-based membranes were prepared by the method of Craggs et al. Potentiometric measurements were carried out at 25 The main ingredient of plasticized PVC membranes is the incorporated carrier i.e. the ionophore (I) that defines the selectivity of the electrodes by selectively forming a complex with the ion of interest. Dendrimers have always been regarded as interesting candidates for applications in host–guest chemistry The performance characteristics like slope, response time, etc. for all membrane electrodes are recorded in The practical response time of the sensor was calculated by measuring the time required to achieve 95% of the equilibrium potential from the moment of addition of 1.0 The membranes were used over a period of 2 The dependence of electrode potential response on pH was tested over the range 2.0–11.0 for 1.0 The use of surfactants in biomedical applications is often unavoidable to wash out the adsorbed proteins, cells, and other particulates from the surface of ISE membranes. Thus, there are certain demands for sodium selective membranes that exhibit least surfactant effects. The type of nonionic surfactant present in the sample solution decides the extent to which the surfactant will effect the performance of the ISE membrane. Thus, to study the effect of nonionic surfactants, the performance of the proposed membrane electrodes was investigated in solutions containing the nonionic surfactants: Tween 20, Tween 80, Span 20, Span 60 and Triton X 100. The results showed that the addition of ⩽5.0 The most important characteristic of any ion-selective electrode are its response for the primary ion in the presence of other cations. So, the design and development of Na The comparison of the selectivity coefficients obtained with the proposed sensor along with those reported before The electrode was successfully applied to the direct determination of sodium ions in an oral rehydration sachet. 4.2 The membrane assembly prepared using silacrown end grafted carbosilane dendrimer as membrane ingredient with plasticizers (DOP) and anion excluder (NaTPB) exhibited linearity over a wide concentration range (1.5