31 year old male who presents to the emergency department with an ankle injury after twisting it while going down several steps at work. He immediately had difficulty bearing weight and is complaining of sharp stabbing non-radiating pain in his right ankle. He denies all other review of systems. Vital signs include the following: BP = 143/61, HR = 80, RR = 18, SpO2 = 99% on room air and Temp = 98.5 F. Pertinent positives on physical exam include the following: Obvious deformity of the right ankle (lateral angulation to approximately 45°), tenderness along entire lower foot and worst at the lateral malleolus with some swelling. Range of motion is limited due to pain. Patient is neurovascularly intact with adequate pulse, motor and sensation of all metatarsals ( Supplementary data associated with this article can be found in the online version at   An 18-year-old male presents with a closed ankle injury that has obvious deformity. He is becoming belligerent due to extreme pain. Pulse, motor movement and sensation are all intact. Which of the following is the best next step? Immediately reduce using the appropriate technique while he is under conscious sedation and reassess. Consult orthopedic surgery. Administer pain medication and reassess. Administer pain medication and obtain plain films of the affected extremity. Give patient an anxiolytic, splint and obtain plain films of the affected extremity. A 27-year-old female presents with a Hawkins Type III Talar Injury seen on plain films. Pulse, motor and sensation are all present. Which of the following is the next best step in the management of this patient? Splint and discharge with an orthopedic outpatient follow-up appointment Attempt anterior dislocation reduction under conscious sedation and consult orthopedic surgery to assist if it fails Attempt posterior dislocation reduction under conscious sedation and consult orthopedic surgery to assist if it fails Administer pain medications, splint, consult ortho and wait to hear their recommendations. Notify orthopedic surgery to prepare the OR while informing them you will attempt posterior dislocation reduction under conscious sedation What percent of Hawkins Type III Talar Injuries are associated with Avascular Necrosis according to the most recent literature? 5.7% 12.1% 18.4% 33.3% 44.7% Which of the following best describes the Hawkins Sign? The angular degree of talar displacement that helps classify fractures and determine care Talar neck comminution seen on initial injury associated with worse functional outcomes Presence of subchondral atrophy 6–8 weeks after injury Radiographic sign seen when the anterior portion of the talus is displaced Inferiorly and used to confirm the diagnosis of a fracture Accumulation of soft tissue swelling surrounding the superior aspect of the talar body and used as a reliable predictor of avascular necrosis.  Administer pain medication and obtain plain films of the affected extremity. Explanation: It is important to control the patient's pain first as this is the cause of his belligerence. After doing so, initial plain films of the affected extremity are of the highest priority. Following review of the diagnostic imaging, an appropriate treatment plan then can be made. Notify orthopedic surgery to prepare the OR while informing them you will attempt posterior dislocation reduction under conscious sedation. Explanation: Early identification of a talar fracture is vital. Although this patient has intact pulses, motor and sensation, a Hawkins Type III fracture has a high rate of morbidity and complications. In his original 1970 study, Hawkins identified 91% of Type III fracture cases to result in avascular necrosis. Although that number has decreased today, patients with these types of fractures must be evaluated immediately. Furthermore they may also result in unsuccessful reductions when performed in the emergency department and thus may need more immediate surgical intervention. 44.7%. Explanation: A systematic review done in 2013 avascular necrosis occurred in 5.7% of Hawkins type I fractures, 18.4% of Hawkins type II fractures, 44.7% of Hawkins type III fractures, and 12.1% of Hawkins type IV fractures. Reference: Jason J. Halvorson, S. Bradley Winter, Robert D. Teasdall, Aaron T. Scott, Talar Neck Fractures: A Systematic Review of the Literature, In The Journal of Foot and Ankle Surgery, Volume 52, Issue 1, 2013, Pages 56–61, ISSN 1067–2516, Presence of subchondral atrophy 6–8 weeks after injury. Explanation: The presence of subchondral atrophy following an injury helps predict perfusion of the talus. Disruption of the blood supply to all or a portion of the talar dome results in absence of the sign and thus should raise high suspicion for underlying avascular necrosis.