Wettability and electrokinetics of kaolinite, illite, pyrophyllite and diaspore were measured in the context of reverse flotation using cationic collectors. The results were interpreted by crystal structure analysis of the minerals. The point of zero charge (PZC) was calculated using crystallographic parameters of the minerals and compared well with the corresponding iso-electrical point (IEP) determined experimentally. The decreasing order of the measured IEP or calculated PZC from diaspore to kaolinite, illite and finally pyrophyllite correlated well with decreasing the number of broken Al–O bonds and the ratio of broken Al–O to Si–O bonds. The electrostatic interaction was identified as the main driving force for cationic collector adsorption on the minerals. Satisfactory separation of aluminosilicates from diaspore was achieved by reverse flotation.Bauxite remains a major source for alumina/aluminum production. Although high grade bauxite of an Al Flotation is known to be a highly versatile separation technology and has been widely used for industrial mineral processing ( In diasporic bauxite flotation, the minerals involved all contain broken Al–O bonds, although aluminosilicates also contain broken Si–O bonds. The challenge for flotation separation in this type of flotation systems is that the separation has to be based on subtle differences on the fractured surfaces among various minerals. These differences are often dictated by mineral crystal structures. In this study, the contact angles and electrokinetics of aluminosilicate minerals and diaspore are measured in the absence and presence of collectors. The results are correlated to mineral flotation characteristics and interpreted in view of mineral crystal structures. Lumps of diaspore and kaolinite were taken from Henan deposits, while pyrophyllite and illite, from Zhejiang deposits, China. The purities of the single minerals used in this study were all above 90%. Two bauxite ores were taken from Henan and Shanxi deposits. The mineralogical analysis showed that the major gangue minerals in the ore from Shanxi deposits were kaolinite (about 20–30%wt of total ores) along with a small amount of illite and pyrophyllite. The aluminosilicates in Henan bauxite deposits were predominantly pyrophyllite (14.7–17.4%), illite (16.5%) and a small amount of kaolinite (3–3.5%). The mineral lumps were crushed and ground in a laboratory porcelain mill. The −98 μm size fractions were collected and used in flotation tests. For zeta potential measurement, the single mineral samples were further ground in an agate mortar to −5 μm. Chemical grade oleate, dodecylamine (DDA) and an alkyl quarterly amine salt (DDTA) were used as collectors, while analytical grade NaOH and HCl were used as pH modifiers. Double-distilled water was used in all the tests unless otherwise specified. Contact angle of water on various polished minerals was measured using a sessile drop method. Carefully selected mineral chunks were cut to desired sizes and polished with various grade polishing papers to a mirror-like finishing. The samples were then cleaned in an ultrasonic bath and rinsed with distilled water. Whenever needed, the cleaned samples were immersed in a given collector solution for 10 min. The treated samples were washed with ample amount of distilled water to remove residual collector solutions from the treated surfaces. The samples were then air-dried at ambient temperature. In the contact angle measurement, the treated sample was placed in a rectangular glass cell and a water drop of 3–4 mm base diameter was created on the sample using a micro syringe. During the measurement, the needle was maintained in contact with the drop. The advancing contact angles were measured through liquid phase on both sides of the drop. At least four fresh drops placed at different sample locations were measured and the average contact angle value was reported. Using this sample preparation procedure, the measurement variation in contact angle was found to be within 5°. Single mineral flotation tests were conducted in a 40 ml micro flotation cell. For each test, 3 g of mineral samples were added into 35 ml of water under agitation with a magnetic stirrer. After sequential addition of pH modifiers and collectors, the suspension was conditioned for 1 and 3 min, respectively. Flotation time was fixed for 4 min. The ore flotation was conducted in a 1.5 l Denver flotation cell. The locked-cycle flotation tests were performed at a pulp density of 33.3% solids. Zeta potentials were measured using a Brookheaven Zeta Plus zetameter (USA). The suspension was prepared by adding 50 mg of mineral samples to 100 ml desired solutions containing 1 mM KNO  When the minerals were treated in anionic oleate collector solutions, the wettability of these minerals changed drastically. The treatment in a 0.2 mM oleate solution over a wide pH range, for example, caused an increase in contact angle from 0° to >80° for diaspore and from 20° to above 60° for kaolinite, as shown in The treatment of minerals in a 0.2 mM DDA solution caused an increase in contact angle to about 65° for pyrophyllite and 40°–50° for illite and kaolinite, as shown in  The reverse flotation of aluminosilicate minerals from diaspore is tested using two diaspore bauxite ores. The results from laboratory locked-cycle flotation tests are summarized in To better understand collector interactions with various minerals, electrokinetic phenomenon of mineral suspensions was studied. Kaolinite, pyrophyllite and illite are all layer-structured aluminosilicate minerals. Their crystal structures are shown in Based on mineral cell parameters, the wettability and electrokinetics of the cleaved surface can be quantitatively evaluated by calculating the number of broken inter-layer bonds. Let For pyrophyllite, the number of oxygen atoms per unit cell on (0 In considering the effect of broken bonds on wettability and flotation of layer-structured aluminosilicates, one must pay attention not only to the face of the stacked sheets but also to the edges. For aluminosilicate particles, the atomic structure of the edges is totally different from that of the basal planes. At the edges, the tetrahedral silica sheets and octahedral alumina sheets are destroyed, resulting in a surface of broken Si–O and Al–O covalent bonds. The presence of these broken bonds affects the physicochemical properties of the resultant surfaces and their interactions with flotation reagents, which in turn determines flotation separation performance. In addition to the easily cleavable basal planes (0 Let The above crystal structure consideration suggests that if the cleavage or breakage of various crystal planes can be controlled by selective comminution, the wettability and floatability of kaolinite, pyrophyllite and illite may be modified. For diaspore, on the other hand, the broken bonds on various surfaces are more or less fixed to be Al–O bonds. The comminution of diaspore is anticipated to result in a surface of high energy featuring Al The surface electrokinetic properties of oxide and silicates depend directly on the kind and extent of broken bonds on the surface. For a given solid, the point of zero charge (PZC) can be calculated using the following improved PZC equation proposed by Yoon, Salman and Donnay ( Crystal structure analysis showed that the most easily cleavable (0 The authors would like to thank the China’s Important Basic Research Program (G1999064901) and National Fund for Distinguished Young Scholar (59925412) for the financial support of this research.