Norbixin is a carotenoid with antioxidant properties. It is commonly used as a natural coloring in processed products; however, its chemical structure makes it susceptible to environmental factors such as light, oxygen, and temperature. The microencapsulation technique is used to improve the stability and solubility of the compound. The process efficiency depends on the encapsulation agents and operational parameters. In this study, Gum Arabic (GA) and Maltodextrin (MD) were used in different proportions as wall materials. All formulations were prepared with the same ratio between the core and wall material. The formulation 0:100 (MD:GA) showed the highest microencapsulation efficiency with 40% of total soluble solids (TSS) (74.91%–226.40μg/g) and a good process yield (61.07%). The norbixin microcapsules (MCNs) showed a uniform particle diameter, good homogeneity, high solubility (>90%), low moisture (2.86±0.81%) content and antioxidant activity (77.77±0.59μmol TE/g dry sample). The study of stability was carried out in the aqueous model system at temperatures of 60, 90 and 98°C for 300min. Thermal degradation kinetics followed a first order kinetic reaction. The activation energy (Ea) required for degradation of MCN (Ea
                     =15.08kcal/mol) was twice as high as that required for norbixin non-encapsulated (Ea
                     =7.61kcal/mol). The microencapsulation by spray-drying improved a thermal stability of norbixin. Therefore increases in the shelf life of this bioactive compound and MCNs can be considered as an additive with high potential for use as a natural coloring in foods and beverages.Norbixin, an apocarotenoid (9′- Bixin and norbixin are chemically similar compounds; however, they exhibit differences in their solubility and stability due to its chemical structures ( Norbixin is used as a natural additive in processed foods since it has no adverse toxicological effects on humans when ingested in minimal quantities on a daily intake ( Besides its color capacity, norbixin has antioxidant properties due to its long system of conjugated double bonds ( Spray-drying microencapsulation techniques for natural pigments is an effective way of improving stability and solubility of compounds, causing a better conservation and an increase in shelf life ( Wall material is a determining factor in microencapsulation efficiency and stability of the obtained powders ( With the aim of improving the stability of carotenoids, several studies have been carried out to obtain microcapsules of bixin ( Kinetic degradation of bixin, both free and encapsulated in model aqueous systems, was studied by The aim of this work was to study the spray-drying microencapsulation of norbixin using blends of MD plus GA as wall materials at different MD:GA ratios, to evaluate the process efficiency, to characterize the resulting powders and to assess the kinetics of thermal degradation in model aqueous systems, this in order to define an estimated shelf life for applications as a natural coloring in processed foods. Annatto seeds were purchased at a local market in Porto Alegre, RS, Brazil. The edible polysaccharides Gum Arabic SYNTH (Porto Alegre, Brazil) and Maltodextrin DE20 Vallens (Porto Alegre, Brazil) were used as wall materials. All reactants were of analytical grade and suitable for High Pressure Liquid Chromatography (HPLC). The extraction of bixin was carried out as instructed by Finally, 10 The extract with high norbixin content was prepared through saponification of bixin as previously described by First, the norbixin dried crystals were dissolved in ethanol (99.7%), and an aliquot (5 γ  Based on previous microencapsulation studies of bixin extracts, performed by Subsequently, after it was carried out, the study of characterization of the norbixin microcapsules obtained and evaluated the encapsulation efficiency for each formulation. Based on these previous results two additional formulations were prepared using the proportion MD:GA (0:100) with 40% TSS content and 30 The drying process was carried out in a Mini Spray Dryer Büchi B-290 (Flawil, Switzerland). The values of operation parameters established for the drying process were: 0.39 A gravimetric method was used to determine the microencapsulation process yield (PY). It was defined as the ratio of the mass of MCN, obtained at the end of the spray drying process, to the mass of initial solids (GA and MD) presents in each formulation, based on dry matter content ( MCN In order to evaluate the microencapsulation efficiency (ME), the norbixin retained on the surface (NS) and inside (NR) of the MCNs was quantified, according to the method described by NR NS MCNs were analyzed using a thermal scale OHAUS MB25 (São Paulo, Brazil) immediately after each experiment. A sample of 1 The water solubility index (WSI) was defined as the degree to which the MCNs were solubilized in an aqueous medium. It was determined according to the procedure described by Color was measured using a Chromameter CR-400 Konica Minolta colorimeter (Tokyo, Japan), with the parameters ( Particle size distribution was measured with a Mastersizer 2000 Malvern Instruments Ltd. (Worcestershire, UK) to which a dry dispersion module Sirocco 2000 was attached, using the laser diffraction technique. The volume-weighted mean diameter was expressed as diameter The morphology of microparticles was evaluated by SEM using an equipment Carl Zeiss EVO MA 10 (Berlin, Germany). First, the MCNs were attached in stubs with a two-sided metallic adhesive tape. The stubs were coated with a fine layer of gold and examined at 2.50 Analyses for norbixin quantification were performed according to For quantification of norbixin a standard curve that was developed previously with different norbixin concentrations was used. The limits of detection and quantification values were 0.0304 The antioxidant activity of norbixin present in MCNs was evaluated after the spray-drying process, the extraction of norbixin was performed from MCNs following the procedure described by Subsequently, the 2,2′-azino-bis(3-ethylbenzothiazoline-6-sulfonic acid) (ABTS) scavenging capacity of the MCN samples was determined according to a modified method previously described by Heating experiments were carried out in a model aqueous system. Each 100 Results were expressed as mean value Purified bixin crystals were saponified, and conversion of 100% to norbixin was achieved (100% recovery). After the drying process, the results of HPLC analyses of norbixin crystals and MCNs showed a 100% of purity at 450 When the microencapsulation process is used by spray-drying, it is important that the compound of interest remain inside of microcapsule and minimal quantities outside on the surface. One main factor that influences in the microencapsulation efficiency is the high solubility of the core material and its low viscosity when a high content of solids are used ( In consequence, ME is significantly affected by the addition of GA, increasing from 22.52% (without GA) to 50.02% according to the proportion of wall materials, the final concentration of norbixin was 192.76 and 196.21 Specific wall material properties, emulsion characteristics, operational parameters (inlet and outlet temperatures, feed flow, air flow and moisture, powder particle size, etc.), and the core to wall material ratio are factors with considerable influence on ME during microencapsulation of bioactive compounds ( Properties of wall materials depend on their chemical structure. GA is formed by a ramified carbohydrate chain and a small amount of glycoproteins linked by covalent bonds. This allows GA to interact with both hydrophilic and hydrophobic sections of the molecule, and therefore it is an excellent emulsifying agent in a wide pH range. It is compatible with a great variety of polymers, and it has a great film-forming capacity, which allows it to better retain the encapsulated molecule ( When the higher%TSS is used, it resulted in a higher viscosity of the emulsion. Probably, this increase in ME was due to the reduction of the time required for the formation of a semi-permeable membrane on particles surface during drying ( Process yield is a value determined by the efficiency to recover the powder from the system, about the amount of total soluble solids content in the feed. A high process yield enables the establishment of a cost-benefit relation that determines the viability of the spray-drying technique and a specific MD:GA ratio to encapsulate norbixin. In a similar way, PY shows a variation between 59.48% and 91.35% and it was significantly influenced by the MD:GA ratio and%TSS ( Powder loss was mainly caused by adherence of semi-moist drops to the chamber walls, adherence of dry powder to cyclone filter walls, and the recovery difficulty of cyclone filter. Based on these results, an additional spray-drying experiment was performed with a formulation 0:100 (MD:GA). The TSS content and the core:wall material ratio were modified (40% TSS and 30 The results of moisture content, solubility, volume-weighted mean diameter The moisture content of powders had a variation between 1.50 and 3.50%. Although the final moisture content values were statistically different for all formulations, the average value achieved was very low. This parameter content is a very important parameter that could significantly affect the quality of powders; low moisture prevents its fast deterioration during storage. In general, samples did not show significant differences in diameter when different wall materials were used. The average value Diameter does not depend on the type or proportion of wall materials ( Therefore, a higher inlet temperature permits to obtain the lower particle diameter. When the diameter of powders developed with 0:100 (MD:GA), 40% TSS and 30 The particle size distribution was narrow monomodal with a unique population. All of the norbixin microcapsules showed a rounded outer surface when different wall materials were used. The microcapsules exhibited differences in size and shape when%TSS was increased, the same behavior was observed in MC-empty. According to SEM micrographs, the microcapsules showed a nearly spherical form, typical of spray-dried particles. The morphology irregularities (cavity formation) on the surface of microcapsules could be attributed to the fast evaporation of liquid droplets, which causes shrinking of the particles with the release of small quantities of air that were trapped inside of the microcapsules during the drying process ( The WSI was > The same tendency was observed by The MCNs obtained after each treatment showed significant differences (p MCNs with 50:50 (MD:GA) showed the highest The MCNs with different formulations showed statistically significant differences in Hue angle values (p Antioxidant activity of MCNs depends on the amount of norbixin retained inside of the microcapsules, which means that it has a direct correlation to ME. Other studies involving microencapsulation of natural colorings with different wall materials found that the powders with high ME showed good antioxidant activity as a consequence of this, especially when GA was used in major ratio than MD ( Heating experiments were previously performed with purified norbixin crystals (Free-N) at 60 and 75 The Thus, in this study it was demonstrated that norbixin is more stable when is encapsulated than when it is exposed to heating in free form. For all experiments, the losses were higher for Free-N, showing that the microencapsulation techniques offer greater protection to norbixin (  The use of GA as a wall material to carry out microcapsules by spray-drying increases According to On the other hand, The thermal degradation kinetic study for commercial norbixin solutions, performed by  Most stability studies for bioactive compounds use accelerated treatments with extreme temperature conditions to ease the shelf life estimation, however, Other studies on thermal stability of spray-drying microencapsulated bioactive compounds proved that it exists a higher compound loss by degradation when exposed to high temperatures in free form compared to its exposure as microcapsules; such is the case of lycopene (46%) ( The norbixin crystals can be encapsulated with blends of MD and GA at different ratios as wall materials by spray-drying. It was found that the use of GA as the only wall material led to a high microencapsulation efficiency (≈75%) and an acceptable process yield (>60%). The high microencapsulation efficiency resulted in a high antioxidant activity for the norbixin microcapsules. Therefore obtaining a water-soluble natural coloring with antioxidant properties and excellent solubility. It was possible to assess the kinetics of thermal degradation of norbixin microcapsules. The activation energy required for degradation was much higher (double) than the energy required for free norbixin when both were compared using the same aqueous model system. Therefore, it was proven that spray-drying microencapsulation using Gum Arabic as wall material is an excellent alternative to enhance the thermal stability of norbixin and thus offer a longer shelf life. This turns norbixin microcapsules into a promising and attractive natural additive to be incorporated into food matrixes, especially in processed beverages due to their hydro-solubility. This research was partially supported by Secretary of Higher Education, Science, Technology and Innovation of Ecuador (SENESCYT). The authors are grateful to Eletronic Microscope Center (CME) of Federal University of Rio Grande do Sul (UFRGS) for technical assistance. Supplementary data associated with this article can be found, in the online version, at The following is Supplementary data to this article: