A new, unique technology of vacuum granulation of ceramic powders has been presented in this paper. Due to such granulation where the grain is of a few micrometers, it is possible to obtain die-stamping of apparent density equal 85% of theoretical density, while pressing the typical powder granulated products allows to obtain die-stamping density (including isostatic die-stamping) of not more than 55–63% of theoretical density. Such a high degree of powder material concentration, not possible with other methods, gives very good economical and technological results during burning process. Apart from detailed description of a device for vacuum granulation of ceramic powders, the paper presents the results of granulation, compacting/concentration and sintering ceramic powders.
                  Presented technology is available for industry and has been tested on many powders applied in production of ferrites, refractory and traditional ceramics and cermets.Degree of powder concentration during forming process significantly influences speed and effectiveness of sintering process. From technological point of view, however, the most important problem is contraction of sintered material. It is obvious, that the lower degree of powder concentration, the higher contraction and problems of shape precision, dimensions and generation of mechanical stress connected with it. On the basis of literature, it is possible to state that the initial sintering stage, characteristic for pore evolution, featuring minimisation of their surface without visible contraction, is not connected with any specific concentration. At this stage, influence of initial density upon its course is not to be expected. The second stage, called intermediate stage, when the biggest microstructure changes occur (minimisation of porosity) is connected with a specific level of concentration. For different types of initial stages (die-stamping density 45–60% of theoretical density TD,  Powder sintering of 83% initial density TD, may differ from die-stampings sintering of conventional density. The most interesting, however, is possibility of significant reduction of volumetric contraction in sintering process of materials obtained from powders. Technology of vacuum granulation is based on joining a few technological processes; intensive mud drying (slurry from granulated powder), granulation of concentrated slurry, mechanical granules concentration and removing damp. In this technology EVACTHERM The basic material for vacuum granulation is slurry, for instance, prepared from the fine powder. The slurry can also be the end product of a wet grinding process. The slurry is dried by superheated steam in the vacuum mixer. The resulting solid matter is transformed into granules. The mixing principle of the Eirich Intensive Mixer with rotating and inclined mixing pan is also shown in The rotating mixing pan moves the material into the zone of the eccentric quick-running mixing tool. The mixing pan as well as the mixing tool are equipped with own drives enabling the adaptation of the speeds to the individual application and to the process material In the upper cover of the mixing pan, material and process gas supply openings as well as vapor extraction openings are positioned, well above the process material surface. By maintenance doors in the vacuum-tight pressure-proof casing and in the mixing pan, easy access is guaranteed to the interior of mixer for maintenance and cleaning works. Depending on the condition of the material to be dried, considerable wear must be expected. Special care was taken in the design and construction of the mixing reactor parts exposed to wear. Wall and bottom of the rotating mixing pan are equipped with highly wear-resistant plates which can be easily replaced if necessary. In addition, the highly wear-resistant mixing blades can be removed without any great problems from the rotor shaft and replaced Depending on the product properties and the available transport logistics, there are various possibilities for feeding the mixing reactor. The sludge can be fed into the mixing pan, for instance, directly from containers via a vertical fall shaft with a vacuum-tight slide or it can be metered from sludge storage bins by pumps or screw conveyors Depending on the plant concept and the planned process control, the process material which normally has ambient temperature, can then be heated to evaporation temperature by introduction of externally generated saturated steam or the circulation of hot gas. In the first case, it is necessary to provide a steam generator or a low-pressure steam network. The addition of externally generated saturated steam leads to rapid heating of the process material to boiling temperature with the adjusted pressure as a result of the condensation of steam and the latent heat released in this process. However, in this case, condensate is added to the sludge which must be removed again by drying. Alternatively, the process material can be heated by the circulation of hot gases which is a much more time-intensive process. In the preheating phase, a change in the partial pressure causes the gas to be ejected by the vapour of the liquid to be dried so that at the end of the preheating phase only vapour remains in the circuit. Which of these two heating variants is more cost-efficient, depends primarily on the initial moisture of the sludge, on the quantity of liquid to be removed by drying and, therefore, on the drying time and the required drying rate. After the material has been heated up, the process material is dried and conditioned into granules by means of circulatory convection drying with superheated steam. The material is dried with a slight under pressure to prevent the uncontrolled escape of harmful or odorous gases from the plant. The process gas is sucked in a closed system by means of a radial-flow fan at the vapour filter and recycled back into the mixing reactor via the flow heater. In smaller plants, the process gas is heated directly in an electric flow heater and in larger plants in natural gas or oil-fuelled heat exchangers with flue gas recirculation to a maximum temperature of 450 The superheated steam cools down to approximately 110–150 Due to the process gas recirculation in connection with vapour compression, the energy included in the drying gas remains in the system, leading to a considerable improvement in economic efficiency. Only such energy must be added in the flow heater which has been converted into vaporization of liquids in the mixing reactor including the low heat losses owing to plant insulation. With the installation of a top-mounted pulse-jet vapour filter on the mixing reactor, the filter dusts can be directly fed and incorporated into the process material as soon as the filter is cleaned. An external handling of the dust with additional plant equipment is, therefore, not requested. The discontinuous operation of the process allows offline cleaning of the filter. The combination of membrane filtration with high-pressure blower and offline cleaning enables the use of very compact, cost-efficient filters with very high-separation rates. The vaporized liquid is discharged from the gas circuit by means of the condenser and the vacuum pump. In the condenser, the steam is fully condensed and the condensate is under cooled to prevent vaporization when the pressure is lowered. The occurring condensate is collected in a condensate weighing receptacle and can, thus, be used to draw a balance of the drying process for process control. The leakage gas that cannot be condensed is sucked in by a water ring vacuum pump which maintains plant pressure at a constant preset level by means of the by-pass regulation. In contrast to the build-up granulation of powdery substances by means of the addition of liquid, paste-like sludge (slurries) are granulated as a result of the progressive removal of liquid during drying. With continued removal of liquid, the content of dry substances in the process material increases, which leads to changes in the sludge's material properties. The slurry that was of low viscosity at the beginning, gets more and more viscous as the drying process advances. The viscoplastic sludge is torn apart by the mixing tool and kept circulating by the rotating mixing pan. When reaching a certain content of dry substance, a characteristic figure for each material, the coherent, still pasty mix will fall apart, it then enters a so-called transition or adhesive phase. The removal of liquid from the material has now progressed so far as to allow lumps and clods to form that are still moist in themselves, but lack sufficient moisture to form a coherent phase with other lumps. The clods formed in this way are comminuted into increasingly smaller pieces by the beaters of the fast rotating rotor tool, which are arranged in a star formation. As further liquid is removed, granulation commences. By the inclined, rotating arrangement of the mixing pan, a rolling movement – similar to the movement on a disk pelletizer – takes place. The granules produced from the pasty phase show a very high density as well as abrasion resistance and green strength. By modifying the design of the rotor tools and by adaptation of the rotor speed during the granulating phase, granule size can be influenced. Production of granules with a mean size of up to some millimetres is possible. A classification system of the granules installed downstream of the drying process and a possibly required comminution of oversize grains, as it is an absolute must in case of many other drying processes, is generally not necessary if the EVACTHERM During drying, if the sludge undergoes a pronounced adhesive phase, the drive torque of the central shaft increases in a moisture range characteristic for the product to a multiple of the drive torques required before and after the adhesive phase for product circulation and transport. Moreover, the generally steep increase in torque is also characterized by wide variations in the load absorption. These high increases in drive torque mean many driers can only operate inefficiently or cannot be used at all. Due to the eccentric rotor tool and the comparatively small diameter of mixing blades the treatment of such sludge does not present any problems in the EVACTHERM In most combined granulation and drying processes, at the end of the drying process, a hot granule is produced that must be cooled in downstream cooling systems as for example helical cooling screws to enable unproblematic further processing and storage. In the EVACTHERM Verification of presented conception was carried out in the granulation process of aluminium oxide powders (Alcoa T-60 and CT 1200, The basic powders were dry-grain size distribution of investigated powders are shown at the First, the ceramic powders were added to the mixer. Then, followed a short dry mixing phase during which maximum homogeneity was achieved in a distributive mixing process, thanks to the field-tested EIRICH principle of intensive mixing. Then, the dry mix was moistened by adding water until a consistency within the plastic range was achieved. In the plastic phase, the shearing forces generated by the mixing tools of the Intensive Mixer were able to disintegrate small agglomerates (depressive mixing). The energy input of shearing forces was subsequently intensified by evacuating the vacuum-tight mixer to 80 In order to start the drying process the evacuated vacuum mixer was flushed with superheated saturated steam and set to an absolute pressure of 800–900 In the process of drying the body enters the moisture range in which granulation occurs. This moisture range is characteristic for each material and depends on the specific surface of the solid matter. The solid matter produced in drying is disintegrated by means of the mixing tools. The desired grain spectrum was adjusted via the peripheral speed of the mixing tool. Granulation that starts from a plastic phase and develops in an atmosphere of steam produced granules with very little porosity. By acting upon the material the beaters of the mixing tool bring about an additional compacting effect and an increase in stability. This allows the addition of binders was reduced to zero. At the end circulation drying was stopped and the mixer was evacuated to an absolute pressure of 80 In the course of many technological tests of vacuum granulation of alumina powders, granulated products of 1900–1990 Very high-specific gravity of granulated products obtained in vacuum is due to almost perfect grains packing seen in micro photographs of single granulate fracture ( Usability of that new vacuum granulation technology, not only as a process of obtaining characteristic property changes of powders, but mainly as a mean to increase volumetric density of die-stampings, defines the effectiveness of transferring, without losses, thick granulated product microstructure into the product of pressure moulding. Granulated product was tested in different ways before it was press formed in steel matrix, but every time the result was close to the level of granulated product density ( The idea of using vacuum granulation for effective increase of die-stamping density from ceramic powders proved to be successful. New granulation technology makes it possible to obtain granulated products of concentration equal 80–86% of theoretical density, and thus, reduces burning process, eliminating all negative effects so typical for conventional technologies of high, powder, more than 10% linear contraction. This technology is available for industry and has been tested on many powders applied in production of ferrites, refractory and traditional ceramics and cermets.