Background
                  Varus collapse is a common failure mode of proximal humerus fracture (PHF) fixation. The purpose of this study was to analyze predictors of varus collapse of PHF after open reduction, internal fixation (ORIF).
               
                  Methods
                  All patients who underwent ORIF of a PHF from January 2008 to July 2018 were identified. Known predictors of fixation failure were assessed, including calcar distance, calcar ratio, and calcar restoration. Additionally, the presence of cross-threaded screws was determined. The primary outcome analyzed was varus collapse of the fracture defined as a change in neck shaft angulation to less than 120°.
               
                  Results
                  There were 112 patients identified who underwent ORIF of a PHF that met inclusion criteria. The population was 75.0% female (84/112), average age was 62.5 ± 10.4 years (range 40.0-87.9), and average body mass index was 28.0 ± 5.5 (17.5-46.4). There were 17 with varus collapse. In 11 of the 17 patients (64.7%), there was screw cross-threading (vs. 31/95 [32.6%] in those that did not collapse); P = .012. In addition, 8 of the 17 (47.1%) did not have restoration of the calcar (vs. 16/95 [16.8%]; P = .005).
               
                  Conclusion
                  This study identifies 2 surgeon-controlled variables that can contribute to varus collapse after ORIF of PHFs. Cross-threading of locking screws and failure to restore the medial calcar can be a function of implant design, surgeon technical skill, and/or bone quality.Treatment of proximal humerus fractures (PHFs) with open reduction, internal fixation (ORIF) is becoming increasingly common in the United States. The common mechanism of failure of ORIF in these fractures is varus collapse. Locking plates have been used with increasing frequency in osteoporotic fractures and comminuted fractures. In these constructs, the screw is secured, or “locked,” into the plate in addition to achieving fixation in the bone. By engaging the plate, screw pullout of conventional plating is mitigated by more even distribution of the load throughout the length of the plate. The benefits of a locking plate system rely on correctly engaging the locking mechanism. Prior biomechanical analysis has found that off-axis engagement of a screw into a locking plate (cross-threading) substantially weakens the entire construct and substantially decreases the load to failure. Following approval by our Institutional Review Board, retrospective review of all ORIF of PHFs was performed. These were collected from our institutional shoulder surgery database from 2008 through July 2018. The primary shoulder surgery database was assembled by International Classification of Diseases, Ninth and Tenth Revisions, Clinical Modification (ICD-9-CM) codes and Current Procedural Terminology codes. The codes used were 79.31 (open reduction of fracture with internal fixation, humerus), S42.2__ (all codes for fracture of upper end of humerus) and 23,615 (open reduction with internal fixation of proximal humerus). Any cases without preoperative radiographs, without radiographs at 12 weeks or later, with diaphyseal extension, with previous shoulder fracture or malunion, without an anatomic or surgical neck component of the fracture, or fixed with an implant system that did not use a locking plate construct in which the screws thread into the plate were excluded. Furthermore, because this study aimed to assess varus collapse (from an anatomic reduction), any PHFs that were malreduced on immediate postoperative radiographs were excluded. Additionally, reduction quality has already been demonstrated to correlate with fixation failure. There were 5 plate-and-screws constructs used across all patients: Zimmer Periarticular Proximal Humeral Locking Plate (Warsaw, IN, USA), Integra Proximal Humeral Fracture Plate System (Plainsboro, NJ, USA), Synthes Proximal Humerus Plate (both standard and periarticular) (Westchester, PA, USA), and DePuy S3 Proximal Humerus Plate (Vista, CA, USA). These plates all use a locking mechanism in which the screw head threads into the plate. Clinical variable Early postoperative radiographs taken both in the postoperative recovery room or at first follow-up (2 weeks postoperatively, if immediate postoperative films were inadequate) were used to assess a number of postoperative variables. Known predictors of fixation failure were assessed, including calcar distance, Descriptive statistics were calculated for all preoperative and surgical variables. The cohort of patients with PHFs that sustained varus collapse were compared to those that maintained anatomic alignment. These 2 groups were compared by univariate analysis of age, cortical density, calcar distance, calcar ratio, presence of screw cross-threading, and number of cross-threaded screws to identify any potential predictors of varus collapse. Continuous variables were compared between the 2 groups by 2-sample There were 112 patients identified who underwent ORIF of a PHF with full preoperative radiographs, 12-week postoperative radiographs, and met all 3 reduction criteria postoperatively. The population was 75% female (84/112), the average age was 62.5 ± 10.4 years (range 40.0-87.9), and it had a mean body mass index of 28.0 ± 5.5 (range 17.5-46.4). Regarding preoperative radiographs, there were 48 Neer type 2 fractures, 33 Neer type 3 fractures, and 31 Neer type 4 fractures. Medial hinge displacement was observed in 48/112 patients (42.9%), and 28/112 (25%) had medial comminution. In 41 patients, the initial fracture pattern was in varus; in 40, valgus; and in 31, it was neutral. There were 17/112 (15.2%) shoulders that went from an anatomic reduction to varus collapse (<120°) within 12 weeks postoperatively. Among the 95 patients who did not undergo varus collapse, there were 41 Neer type 2 fractures, 28 Neer type 3 fractures, and 26 Neer type 4 fractures. There were 37/95 (38.9%) with medial hinge displacement and 21/95 (22.1%) with medial comminution. There were 32 patients whose initial fracture pattern was in varus, 37 in valgus, and 26 that were neutral. Postoperatively, among these 95 patients without varus collapse, 31 (32.6%) had screws that were cross-threaded. The average calcar distance was 8.9 ± 6.3 mm (0-28.6 mm) and the average calcar ratio was 18.2% ± 12.7% (0.0%-65.4%). Seventy-nine of 95 (83.2%) had the integrity of the calcar maintained postoperatively. Additionally, the average cortical density of this population was 5.2 ± 1.1 mm (3.3-8.0 mm). Among the 17 patients who did undergo varus collapse, there were 7 Neer type 2 fractures, 5 Neer type 3 fractures, and 5 Neer type 4 fractures (χ Regarding reviewer agreement, the kappa value for whether or not a fracture underwent varus collapse was 0.822 (95% confidence interval: 0.670-0.975) and for screw cross-threading was 0.717 (95% confidence interval: 0.550-0.885). Any cases in which there was disagreement, the authors reviewed together and agreed on a result by consensus. As ORIF of PHFs becomes increasingly common, strategies to prevent fixation failure become increasingly important. The focus of this study was assessment of the most common mode of failure, varus collapse. The importance of fully seating locking screws is well known. Although avoiding screw cross-threading may be important for the integrity of the fixation construct, in some cases screws may be intentionally placed off axis in order to better capture different fragments depending on the fracture pattern. The trade-off may be an inability to completely engage the locking mechanism. Because we believe that screw cross-threading may be a surrogate for poor bone in the humeral head, it may not be the actual cross-threading of the screw that is a predictor of fixation failure. It is difficult to conclude in this retrospective analysis whether the higher failure rate in a cross-threaded construct is the result of a mechanical disadvantage of the poorly locked plate, a correlation with poor bone quality, or some combination of the two. Currently, there are no intraoperative or preoperative methods by which to directly quantify local bone density in the head of a fractured humerus. Surrogate factors such as combined cortical thickness, Additionally, this study again demonstrated the importance of the calcar to PHF ORIF. Both initial calcar displacement and failure to achieve calcar restoration were significant predictors of fixation failure. The importance of calcar restoration had been previously described by Ponce et al in a cadaveric analysis. The findings of this study must be viewed in conjunction with the limitations. First, this is a purely radiographic study. Therefore, the clinical implications of varus collapse from the perspective of patient-reported outcomes, strength, range of motion, and long-term arthritis progression are beyond the scope of this analysis. Second, there is some difficulty with assessing cross-threading on plain radiographs as this is dependent on a high-quality series of radiographs. In some instances, multiple radiographs of the same patient had to be reviewed to determine if there truly was any cross-threading. In order to mitigate reviewer bias and ensure that screw prominence on postoperative radiographs was the result of cross-threading rather than the nature of that plate-and-screws construct, all radiographs were compared to publicly available technique guidelines for each system and to radiographs taken of sawbone-and-plate constructs in anteroposterior and axillary orientations. Assessment of the actual screw placement at the time of surgery by the authors was not possible. In an effort to mitigate this limitation, 2 independent reviewers assessed all radiographs. Kappa agreement was strong for presence of varus collapse and moderate for presence of cross-threading. Any cases of disagreement were resolved by cooperative interpretation of all pertinent radiographs by the 2 reviewing investigators together. Additionally, this is a purely retrospective study that carries with it all of the limitations of a retrospective study, including the inability to only establish correlative relationships rather than causal relationships. Despite these limitations, the results of this study are clinically relevant. This is the first analysis that has a high rate of screw cross-threading in PHF fixation and an association with varus collapse. This study demonstrates that failure to restore the medial calcar and locking screw cross-threading is associated with varus collapse after ORIF of PHFs. More than one third of the constructs in this analysis had at least 1 cross-threaded screw on postoperative radiographs. Further biomechanical and clinical analysis is necessary to determine whether the cross-threading itself or the association with poor local bone quality predicts fixation failure. Surena Namdari receives research funding from