Pure mineral flotation experiments have demonstrated that quartz can be floated without a collector, in solutions containing an inorganic acid (e.g. H2SO4) and sodium fluoride (NaF). Excellent quartz recoveries, similar to that of previous investigations with aqueous solutions containing hydrofluoric acid (HF), have been achieved with lower fluorine concentrations and a more optimal F/H ratio when combining separate sources of H and F instead of using only HF.Quartz is an important industrial mineral with various applications, and its flotation with anionic collectors when activated with cations, or with cationic collectors, have been well-known for quite some time ( A high purity quartz was used in this study ( Particle size distributions of the quartz fractions were measured with a Malvern Mastersizer 3000 (laser diffraction), using a refractive index of 1.54 and an absorption index of 0.01. Particle size distributions of the samples are shown in Hydrofluoric acid, 48% HF (Sigma-Aldrich), sulphuric acid, 96% H Flotation was performed with a self-aerated mechanical flotation machine from Maelgwyn Mineral Services, using a 1.2 L Plexiglass cell. A 50 g of quartz was conditioned with chemicals and 900 ml deionized water for 20 min (unless otherwise stated). A frother solution was then added, followed by a further 1 min of conditioning, prior to air introduction at a superficial gas velocity of 0.55 cm/s (5 L/min). Water was added to maintain a pulp level during flotation, while flotation was performed until barren froth. pH was measured prior to flotation using a Metrohm 744 pH meter. A Biolin Scientific Sigma 700 force tensiometer was used to measure the capillary force liquid weight gain on −38 µm non-treated and chemically treated samples. All chemically treated samples were conditioned for 20 min (unless otherwise stated), filtered and dried at 40 °C prior to measurements. The capillary constant of the sample material was determined by first measuring weight gain with the heptane wetting reference liquid (contact angle,  In    The investigations demonstrate that quartz can be floated in solutions of an inorganic acid (e.g. H Wettability measurements showed an increase in the contact angle of quartz after conditioning with H The authors wish to thank the Department of Geosciences and Petroleum, NTNU, for the use of its laboratory resources. Supplementary data to this article can be found online at The following are the Supplementary data to this article: