The electrolytic oxidation of Ce(III) to Ce(IV) at the anode and the simultaneous deposition of copper powder at the cathode were investigated in an electrolytic membrane reactor in sulfuric acid media. The performance of the electrolytic reactor for the oxidation of Ce(III) and copper powder production was optimized by studying the effects of current density, copper(II) and acid concentrations in the catholyte; and various combinations of current density on current efficiency and cell voltage. Experimental results show that copper deposition at the cathode improves the anode current efficiency for the oxidation of Ce(III). Under the optimized conditions, a maximum Ce(III) conversion ratio of 99% was achieved with a current efficiency of 80%. In addition, ∼95% Cu was deposited in the form of powder with a current efficiency of 91%. The oxidation of Ce(III) and simultaneous deposition of copper powder can reduce the cell voltage and increase anodic current efficiency.Cerium is one of the most important rare earth (RE) elements due to its specific functional applications. It is very important to choose an appropriate method to separate cerium from other RE elements, since cerium accounts for nearly 50% (w/w) of all rare earth elements. The way of separating cerium affects the technical flowsheet and the production costs of RE. The most convenient method of separating cerium from other RE elements involves the oxidation of Ce(III) to Ce(IV) followed by precipitation or liquid–liquid extraction( Electrochemical oxidation is one of the simplest and cheapest methods since it does not use a chemical oxidant and does not introduce external metals into the electrolyte. The electrochemical oxidation of Ce(III) to Ce(IV) is usually performed in nitric acid media ( Almost all RE elements are treated in sulfuric acid media during their production from ore in Chinese plants; accordingly, the oxidation of Ce(III) to Ce(IV) in nitric acid media is not appropriate for Chinese manufactories. In sulfuric acid media, the electrochemical oxidation of Ce(III) is associated with several problems, such as lower current efficiency and higher electricity consumption, due to lower Ce(III) concentrations compared with nitric acid media. In Chinese plants, the principal raw material is a light rare earth mineral, which is typically decomposed by roasting in concentrated sulfuric acid at high temperatures. The leaching solution comprises of rare earth elements, in which the Ce(III) concentrations range from 15 The oxidation of Ce(III) at the anode in sulfuric acid media is accompanied by the evolution of hydrogen at the cathode. A sulfuric acid mist is generated by hydrogen bubbles forming at the cathode and bursting at the electrolyte surface which causes severe environmental problems. Furthermore, the hydrogen evolution overvoltage leads to an increase in cell voltage. If a metal deposition reaction having more positive potential occurs, instead of hydrogen evolution, environmental pollution and the cell voltage will be reduced. Moreover, another by-product can be obtained on the same production line. Therefore, we chose to produce copper powder as the cathode reduction product. The reactions for the electrochemical oxidation of Ce(III) and simultaneous deposition of copper powder are as follows ( At the cathode: These equations show that the oxidation of Ce(III) to Ce(IV) and the simultaneous deposition of copper powder must occur in a divided membrane or diaphragm cell to minimize the carry-over of Ce(IV) from the anolyte to the catholyte and the carry-over of copper powder from the catholyte to the anolyte. An anion-exchange membrane is preferred due to its selective permeability of anions, so experiments were performed in an electrochemical membrane reactor. The electrolysis process in the electrochemical membrane reactor involves the two main electrode reactions above; and the migration of sulfate ions passing through the anion-exchange membrane is controlled by an electric field. Water electrolysis is considered to compete and lower the current efficiency as cerium oxidation is less than 100%. The consumption of H A dimensionally stable anode (DSA) is generally employed as the anode in the electrochemical oxidation of Ce(III). This type of anode is made from a titanium mesh coated with noble metal oxides (RuO In order to develop an energy-saving and environmentally friendly process which is economical, the electrochemical oxidation of Ce(III) and simultaneous deposition of copper powder are investigated in this study. Constant and variable current electrolysis were used and the electrochemical and solution composition parameters were optimized. PE-203, purchased from Shanghai Qiulong Chemical Company, Ltd., was employed as a strong base anion-exchange membrane with polyethylene as the substrate and RN The electrochemical oxidation of Ce(III) and the simultaneous deposition of copper powder were carried out in a divided cell, which was fabricated in our laboratory. The anolyte vessel was charged with 0.45 The roasted rare earth ore used in this study was kindly supplied by the Gansu Rare Earth New Material Limited Company. The mixed rare earth sulfate solution was obtained by leaching the roasted rare earth ore in the usual way ( Preliminary studies showed that the appropriate initial H The catholyte was prepared with analytical cupric sulfate and sulfuric acid using demineralized water to achieve the desired concentration. Other chemicals used were analytical grade reagents from Shanghai Boer Company. During the experimental process, samples were collected at specified time intervals. Concentrations of Ce(IV) and Cu(II) were checked by potentiometric titration with standard ferrous sulfate solution and sodium thiosulfate, respectively. From the concentrations of Ce(IV) and Cu(II) and the weight of copper powder, the current efficiencies of both the anode and cathode, the conversion efficiency or ratio of Ce(III) to Ce(IV), and the efficiency or ratio of copper powder production were calculated. All current densities relate to the apparent surface areas of the electrodes. The current efficiencies were calculated using Eq. In Eqs. In Eqs.  The conversion ratio of Ce(III) to Ce(IV) was calculated using Eq. The cathode compartment was filled with a solution of copper(II) sulfate and sulfuric acid of known strength, and the anode compartment contained a solution of 0.50 The DC current (WYK-3020 constant current regulator, 0–20 The cell was fabricated from a stainless steel tank with an anode compartment [180 The experiments were carried out with different initial H  This phenomenon can be explained by SO  To examine the effects of varying the mode of electrolysis on the cell voltages, three experiments were performed: (a) oxidation of Ce(III) at the anode and simultaneous evolution of hydrogen at the cathode, (b) deposition of copper powder at the cathode and simultaneous evolution of oxygen at the anode, and (c) oxidation of Ce(III) at the anode and simultaneous deposition of copper powder at the cathode. All experiments were run for 30 The experimental results, presented in For a given current density and temperature, the theoretical voltage, electrical resistances and overvoltages together determine the Comparing line a and line c in  To estimate the effect of copper powder deposition on the anode current efficiency, two experiments were performed. The same anolyte was employed in both experiments and one catholyte was a sulfuric acid solution of 1.50 It is clear from Oxygen evolution always accompanies the reaction as the standard electrode voltages of reactions To completely separate cerium from other rare earth elements and to reduce energy consumption, it is very important to obtain a high conversion ratio of Ce(III) and to improve the current efficiency for the oxidation of Ce(IV). To do so, there are two methods: one is to increase Ce(III) concentration to inhibit oxygen evolution by adjusting leaching parameters; and the other is to decrease the current density gradually according to the Ce(III) concentration. Because the solubility of RE sulfates is low, the first method is not feasible; therefore the second method is the only option. Consequently, a variable current electrolysis was investigated by adjusting the current density step by step according to the Ce(III) concentration. The electrochemical oxidation of Ce(III) and simultaneous evolution of hydrogen was performed first, employing the same 1.50  The variable current density electrolysis does not have much impact on the formation of copper powder at the cathode, because the decrease of the Cu(II) concentration during electrolysis is accompanied by the decrease of the current density. However, the decrease in the mean current density leads to a decrease in the ratio of copper powder production and current efficiency for copper powder, as found in experiment 8. Under conditions of comparatively low current density, only a small amount of copper powder was formed, despite the higher current efficiency, presumably because of air oxidation and chemical re-dissolution of the copper powder in acid. Thus, with regard to copper powder, its current efficiency is lower. It can be concluded that if the combination of current density is appropriately adjusted, the oxidation of Ce(III) and simultaneous deposition of copper powder can performed satisfactorily in the electrochemical membrane reactor. Based on the above experiments, optimum conditions were identified for the electrochemical oxidation of Ce(III) to Ce(IV) and the simultaneous deposition of copper powder in the electrochemical membrane reactor. The H Four experiments were performed under the same conditions and the results listed in The electrochemical oxidation of Ce(III) and simultaneous deposition of copper powder in sulfuric acid media was investigated using an electrochemical membrane reactor. The conventional Pb–Sb alloy was successfully used as the anode. The anode current efficiency was found to be strongly dependent on the initial sulfuric acid concentrations in the catholyte and on the current density applied. The reduction of Cu(II) and formation of copper powder at the cathode can slightly improve the anode current efficiency and significantly decrease the overall cell voltage. Based on constant current electrolysis, the optimum conditions for the catholyte were 1.50 The authors would like to thank Wei Lan in Jinan University, PRCfor her efforts in developing a grammatical and cohesive manuscript.