Potassium hydroxide alkaline pretreatment of a refractory gold–silver ore containing 20g/t Au and 220g/t Ag was investigated with the purpose to evaluate its effectiveness on the extraction of gold and silver. The presence of antimony minerals such as stibnite (Sb2S3), zinkenite (Pb9Sb22S42) and andorite (Sb3PbAgS6) is the main reason for the refractory nature of the ore. Silver occurs as andorite, a Au–Ag alloy, tetrahedrite [(Cu,Fe,Zn,Ag)12Sb4S13] and in minor amounts in zinkenite whereas gold is associated with quartz and the antimony minerals. Cyanidation tests of the as-received ore show that the extraction of gold and silver is consistently low (i.e. ≤49.3% and ≤18.7%, respectively) over the leaching period of 24h. The effects of potassium hydroxide concentrations (0.5–5mol/L), temperature (20–80°C) and particle size (5–50μm) on the removal efficiency of antimony were investigated. Accompanying the removal of antimony, gold and silver recoveries improved with increases in the KOH concentrations (5mol/L) and temperature (80°C), and a decrease in the particle size (5μm). Gold and silver extractions during subsequent cyanidation were improved to 87.6% and 94.5%, respectively, corresponding to 85.5% Sb removal by alkaline pretreatment. The antimony removal is also evidenced by the disappearance of stibnite, zinkenite and andorite which formed 4.57wt.% of the original ore. The residual amount of antimony is due to the presence of unreactive Sb oxide and Pb–Sb sulphate minerals, sphalerite and tetrahedrite in the ore and Sb-bearing Pb sulphate compound(s) that formed during pretreatment. These findings indicate that potassium alkaline leaching can be an effective pretreatment method for refractory antimonial gold–silver ores.Refractory gold ores which do not respond to direct cyanidation require pretreatment to liberate the contained gold and silver prior to cyanidation so that gold and silver extractions can be improved ( An additional practice has been the use of alkaline sulphide leaching as a pretreatment step for the recovery of silver as well as the removal of the hazardous or penalty elements such as As and Sb from the ores and concentrates ( Potassium hydroxide (KOH) is the most vigorous alkaline reagent among reagents such as NH The Akoluk ore deposit with approximately 1 This study was designed to evaluate alkaline leaching using potassium hydroxide as an alternate pretreatment process to alkaline sulphide or sodium hydroxide leaching techniques. The effect of potassium hydroxide concentrations, temperature and particle size on antimony removal and the gold and silver recoveries were investigated. The antimony-rich refractory gold–silver ore consisted predominantly of quartz, the illite/kaolinite group of clay minerals and barite with lesser amounts of pyrite, stibnite, sphalerite, zinkenite and andorite ( The samples were crushed and ground by a rod mill. Fine grinding (80% passing size, d The ground samples (d Cyanidation leaching procedure was described in detail by Pretreatment and cyanidation leach solutions were analysed by ICP-MS method. Solids were analysed by ICP-ES after a strong 4-acid digestion. The solid samples were characterized by a HITACHI variable-pressure SEM with a Link microanalysis system at CANMET. Microanalysis of the mineral grains was performed by a JEOL JXA 8900 electron probe X-ray microanalyser (EPMA) at CANMET utilizing five wavelength dispersive spectrometers (WDS) operated at 20 Previous studies have shown that andorite is an important silver mineral in the ore and that the gold particles associated with quartz also contain silver ( At a constant solution temperature of 80 The effect of temperature (20–80 The influence of particle size of the feed (d The effect of the potassium hydroxide alkaline pretreatment prior to cyanidation was shown to be effective for the decomposition of the dominant antimony minerals. These findings imply that KOH concentration, temperature and particle size are the influential factors in the potassium hydroxide alkaline treatment process as with sodium hydroxide ( The silver extraction was improved from 22.3% to 94.5% with increasing antimony removal following pretreatment ( Compared to untreated ore, the higher gold and silver extractions confirm that a large portion of the gold and silver was refractory in nature because gold and silver occurred either as solid solution components in antimony minerals or as unliberated (i.e. locked) inclusions in the host antimony minerals and framboidal pyrite that are apparently insoluble in cyanide solutions. During cyanidation tests after pretreatment, consumption of cyanide was observed to be 4.3–5.7 During alkali pretreatment using potassium hydroxide (5 Small amount of gold can be extracted during the alkaline sulphide leaching used to decompose certain antimony and arsenical minerals ( Antimony releases occurred from the decomposition of antimonial minerals such as andorite, stibnite and zinkenite. Decomposition of antimony minerals by hydroxide would release antimony in the form of species such as SbO According to the quantitative mineralogical characterization results, the as-received ore is composed essentially of barite and silicates (quartz, muscovite/illite and kaolinite) with minor amounts of sphalerite, pyrite, stibnite, zinkenite and andorite ( Potassium hydroxide pretreatment of the antimonial refractory gold–silver ore from the Akoluk deposit revealed that most of the antimony can be removed by increasing the molar concentration of KOH, temperature and decreasing the particle size. While gold extraction was about 49.3% by direct cyanidation of the ore, the gold extraction was improved to 87.6% following the alkaline pretreatment. Silver extractions attained 94.5% from low levels of ≤ The experimental results suggest that potassium hydroxide pretreatment is an effective extractive metallurgy technique and may prove to be a more environmental-friendly method for refractory antimonial gold and silver ores. Accordingly, a flow-sheet as illustrated in The authors acknowledge the contributions of Anatolia Minerals Development Ltd. for kindly providing the ore samples and