Effect of calcium (Ca) addition in a novel magnesium (Mg) alloy including zinc, aluminum, and manganese from multimodal approaches was investigated to achieve a high strength and low corrosion rate material. Tensile and compression tests were carried out to measure the mechanical properties and precise analysis such as hydrogen evolution, weight loss, electro-chemical and scanning kelvin probe force microscopy to realize the corrosion behavior of the prepared Mg alloy. Ca addition had a significant effect in the ultimate strength of the alloy through second phase formation, effective grain refinement, and texture strengthening. However, it decreased the corrosion rate after long immersion time due to the secondary phase formation. Furthermore, low Ca content can be incorporated in the alloy because of the solubility limit of Ca in the matrix, which slightly increases the corrosion rate adjusting the optimum values of both strength and corrosion resistance.Researchers have achieved magnesium (Mg) alloys having unique physicochemical properties including low density as well as high strength [ There are several parameters affecting the mechanical properties and corrosion rate of Mg alloys. Strengthening can generally be impacted by solution treatment, precipitating, grain size etc. The corrosion rate has also been modulated by composition and corrosion products which may alter the corrosion rate [ Zinc (Zn) and aluminum (Al) are two pivotal elements that can be highly dissolved in Mg for strengthening the mechanical properties of the Mg alloy. Their effect on texture and c/a ratio in HCP materials can highly enhance the formability of the produced Mg alloy. Al can also widen the freezing range facilitating casting process of the alloys fabrication in addition to the enhancement of strength and hardness of the produced alloys [ Although manganese (Mn) has limited solubility, it is generally utilized in Mg alloys as a trace element because of its impressive effect on reducing the impurities (e.g., Fe) [ Ca has a low density (1.55 g/cm3) and maximum solubility of 1.34 wt% [ To prepare the extruded alloys with the composition given in The micrographs of the etched samples with the picral acid (4.2 g picric acid, 10 ml distilled water, 10 ml acetic acid and 70 ml ethanol) were studied using a Zeiss optical microscope. In addition, a field emission scanning electron microscope (FESEM, Mira3 Tescan, Czech Republic) equipped with an energy dispersive spectroscopy detector (EDS: DXP-X10 P digital X-ray processor) was utilized to study the microstructural and elemental map of the samples. JMatPro commercial software was used for the thermodynamic calculation of the formed phases versus temperature. X-ray diffraction spectroscopy via an X'pert pro XRD instrument (Cu Kα lamp, λ = 1.54 nm) was employed to analyze the texture of the prepared samples on the surface perpendicular to the extrusion direction. Electron backscatter diffraction (EBSD) method was performed using another FESEM (SU70 Hitachi, Japan), for the further investigation on the microstructure and the texture of the same surface with the XRD analysis. Mechanical tests were carried out with the strain rate of 2 × 10 Microstructures of three prepared alloys have been shown in Optical micrographs of the extruded samples are presented in Besides the role of Ca in refining the microstructure of the extruded alloys, the higher amounts of Ca may also influence the texture of the extruded alloy as it can be conducted from the optical micrographs images ( Secondary phases may also present different behavior through extrusion process. As it can be clearly seen in Although the similar Al8Mn5 precipitates are found in the microstructure of Ca-contained samples, as it can be clearly seen in Illustrating the DRV and DRX processes as well as texture investigations, XRD and EBSD techniques were applied on samples. Pole figures of basal and prismatic planes of the alloys have been shown in the  The effects of dislocations should also be considered in the mechanical behavior of the alloys. Although the dislocation density of the samples depends on several parameters, the presence of the precipitates as well as the grain size and texture structure are known as the major influencing parameters in dislocation movement and density. While the finer microstructure can lead to improved YS outcomes, grain boundaries play a critical role in dislocation movement. It can cause higher dislocation interactions, and then intensify the work hardening rate. Therefore, the alloys with finer microstructures may experience accelerated work hardening. This effect can be accompanied by the effects of higher volume fractions of the precipitates, and causes lower formability (higher brittleness) of the alloys. On the contrary, larger grains although may result in poor YS outcomes, provide longer distance for the dislocation movement and may postpone the dislocations interactions. Therefore, consequent work hardening may be delayed, results in better formability outcomes. As can be seen, ZA42 sample which has the lower fraction of precipitate and larger grains, presents the best ductility, while this sample shows the lowest YS. Similar trend can also be found through compressive test ( In addition to the aforementioned discussions, the plastic deformation behavior of Mg and Mg-based alloys is not only controlled by slip mechanism, but also twining activation. Several research works have indicated that the twinning activation is very favorable during compression test. In other words, although tensile tensions commonly promote dislocation movement and slip, compressive tensions imply both slip and twinning activation [ The mechanical behavior of the samples can be more clarified through fractographical investigations. Based on According to When the calcium content of the alloy is duplicated (ZAX422, Corrosion behavior of the alloys was analyzed using immersion and electrochemical tests. The corrosion rate using weight loss and hydrogen evolution methods was measured based upon the experimental procedure which have been explained elsewhere [ The hydrogen evolution of the alloys in the 3.5 wt% NaCl saturated with Mg(OH) The electrochemical studies were run using open circuit potential (OCP) and impedance test. The obtained curves are presented in The ZAX421 alloy which is contained 0.6 wt% of Ca has high resistance at the beginning of immersion (0D) which is almost higher than the other samples but corrosion resistance decreases with immersion time ( In the case of alloy contains 1.2 wt% Ca ( To understand the quantitative and qualitative role of secondary phases, scanning kelvin probe force microscopy was utilized. The area fraction measurements and the identification of the phases for the SKPFM analysis were carried out based on the image analysis methods of SEM images and the shape of the phases (See A short time immersion study was carried out to understand the effect of Ca addition on the corrosion behavior of ZA42 Mg alloy. In fact, since at the initial stages of corrosion the surface is not damaged severely, the initiation sites and progress pattern of the corrosion on the exposed surface can be distinguished here. In the The magnified FESEM image of the corroded surfaces of the samples after removing the corrosion products are presented in   The mechanism and progression of the corrosion are conclusively presented through schematic drawing of The effect of Ca addition on microstructure, texture, mechanical properties and corrosion behavior of ZA42 alloy were analyzed and the following results were obtained: With increasing Ca addition, grain size was intensively reduced and fraction of secondary phases was increased. Moreover, the intensity of prismatic and basal planes was increased with increasing Ca addition due to deformation of the material within the secondary phases which are working as micro-molds. Yield and ultimate strength of both compression and tensile type tests were increased while elongation decreased due to significant grain refinement, texture enhancement and precipitation hardening. Corrosion rate which was obtained after seven days immersion was increased by addition of Ca where highly increase was observed after addition of Ca from 0.6 to 1.2 wt%, in fact from ZAX421 to ZAX422 alloys. EIS study shows ZAX421 alloy has high corrosion resistance at the beginning due to quasi-passive layer which is formed at the beginning but in long term EIS study shows higher resistance for ZA42 alloy showing more stable layer. The authors declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this paper. Authors appreciate the helps and supports of National Elites Foundation of Iran. The raw/processed data required to reproduce these findings cannot be shared at this time as the data also forms part of an ongoing study.