Elemental analyses of food samples require several pre-treatment steps that constitute a great potential source of errors. In this study, the influence of cryogenic, ball and knife mill devices and also sieving using different sizes of sieve (100, 300 and 500 μm) was evaluated for samples of bivalves, coffee and cowpea beans. A two-factor ANOVA was performed in each sample to test for differences between macro, micro and trace element concentrations determined by ICP OES. Results showed that the efficiency of the particle size reduction and sample homogeneity depends on the milling device and the nature of samples. Food samples may present segregation after comminution, and sieving might become a necessary step. Nevertheless, the sieve aperture has to be chosen cautiously, once it might influence the final element concentration. Overall, the expected results by employing cryogenic grinding, such as rapid sample homogenization and small particle size generated were also observed for ball mill. Contamination can be a critical issue for some elements and need to be evaluated individually.Comminution represents one of the most important steps in sample treatment, and one of those that most likely contribute to erroneous results. Comminution refers to the grinding of large particles into a powder. Generally, the comminution is based upon the collision between sample and mill surface, which might result in sample contamination There is a number of different grinding equipment available commercially. The models can differ in the technique used for grinding (e.g. cutting, pressure, friction, and impact of two surfaces), the material (e.g. tungsten carbide, agate, or steel), capacity and particle size distribution obtained Especially for trace element analysis, the comminution, in any kind of mechanical grinding equipment and sieving procedures might contaminate the samples being ground The aim of this study was to evaluate the use of three milling devices (cryogenic, ball and knife) for the homogenization of coffee, cowpea beans and bivalves for the determination of major, minor and trace elements by inductively coupled plasma optical emission spectrometry. The influence of sieving, using different sizes of sieve (100, 300 and 500 μm) was also evaluated. The results are discussed in terms of the potential of contamination and fractioning of samples, loss of volatile elements and particle size generated. Three milling devices were tested. A cryogenic mill model MA 775 (Marconi, Brazil), with a polycarbonate grinding vial supplied with two stainless steel plugs, immersed in liquid nitrogen and ground with an alternating magnetically driven steel impactor. A conventional stainless steel knife micro-mill, model MA 630 (Marconi, Brazil) and a ball mill, model 8000 M (Spex Sample Prep, USA) with a tungsten carbide vial set and tungsten carbide ball. A closed-vessel microwave digestion system (ETHOS EZ, Milestone, Italy) was used for sample decomposition. An inductively coupled plasma optical emission spectrometer (ICP OES) with axially viewed configuration (VISTA PRO, Varian, Mulgrave, Australia) equipped with solid state detector, cyclonic spray chamber, and concentric nebulizer was employed for Al, As, Ba, Ca, Cd, Co, Cr, Cu, Fe, K, Mg, Mn, Ni, Pb, P, Sr, Sb, Se and Zn determinations. The operating conditions are summarized in Nitric acid, 65% w/w, and hydrogen peroxide, 30% v/v (Merck, Darmstadt, Germany) were used for sample decomposition. Ultrapure water (Milli-Q®, Millipore, USA) with resistivity lower than 18.2 MΩ cm was used throughout. The multi-element reference solutions were prepared daily from 1000 mg L Three different homogenized food samples were employed for evaluating grinding and sieving procedure performance: roasted coffee beans ( The certified reference material Oyster Tissue (NIST SRM 1566b; National Institute of Standards and Technology, Gaithersburg, MD, USA) was used to check the accuracy of sample decomposition and element determinations. There are no certified reference materials available for coffee and cowpea beans. Bivalve samples were freeze dried, and maintained in a dessiccator at room temperature. Coffee and cowpea beans were kept under refrigeration. For the grinding of samples the first aliquot was discarded. A two-step program was used for cryogenic grinding. Samples were frozen for 5 min and ground for 2 min. Three grinding cycles with a cooling step of 1 min between cycles were applied. Three cycles of 2 min were used for grinding samples in the ball and knife mills. Aliquots of ground samples were sieved in nylon sieves of 100, 300 and 500 μm. After grinding and sieving, approximately 250 mg of each sample was digested, in the microwave oven, using 7.0 mL of HNO A two-factor analysis of variance (ANOVA) was performed on each sample type (i.e. bivalves, coffee and cowpea beans) to test differences between element concentrations in samples ground in cryogenic, balls and knife mills, and sieved in 100, 300 and 500 μm sieve. Factors in these analyses were “Mill” (fixed; three levels) and “Sieve” (fixed and orthogonal; three levels). Cochran's test was used to test the homogeneity of variances. If variances were heterogeneous, the data was transformed Initially, experiments were performed to characterize the composition of each sample (i.e. bivalve, coffee and cowpea beans). The concentration ranges of the studied elements for bivalve, coffee and cowpea beans, after samples being ground and sieved, are presented in The three studied matrices were not only different in composition but also in texture, hardness, and fat content, which made these food samples good matrices to test artifacts regarding sieving and grinding procedures. The accuracy of the procedures was evaluated using the certified material Oyster Tissue (NIST 1566b — National Institute of Standard and Technology). The results, showed in Samples of coffee beans, cowpea beans and bivalves presented significant variation in major and minor element concentrations after sieving and grinding in cryogenic, ball and knife mills ( Coffee beans were the matrix that presented the smallest number of significant interactions between sieve and milling devices ( The analysis of cowpea beans showed that almost all elements presented significant interactions between the milling device and the sieve, Al, Mo and Ni being the only exceptions ( For bivalves various elements (i.e. As, Ba, K, Mg, Mo, Ni, and V) did not show significant artifact effects due to comminution and/or sieving processes ( The NIST SRM Oyster Tissue is a homogenized powder, ready to be dried and digested. Nevertheless, aliquots of this sample were also processed in the three studied milling devices, but they were not sieved. Comparing the results of the aliquots analyzed without comminution and the ones ground in ball, knife and cryogenic mills, a contamination with Cr and Fe could be observed when cryogenic mill was used. The contamination of samples with Cr, Fe and also Ni is well documented for cryogenic grinding The homogeneity of bivalves, cowpea and coffee bean samples was evaluated considering the mean relative standard deviation (RSD%) for Ca, Cu, P, K, Mg, Mn, Sr and Zn obtained using the three tested grinding procedure for each matrix ( Comparing the three studied food samples, it is clear that the cowpea beans were the matrix that presented the highest variability ( The bivalves and coffee beans presented similar RSD values for cryogenic and knife mills. The performance of the ball mill was slightly better for coffee beans than for bivalves. Moreover, the difference in the RSD values among tested milling devices for coffee beans were also the smallest, suggesting that this matrix is more easily comminuted, and that the milling devices tested would have similar effects on sample homogeneity. It is important to note that for this study roasted coffee beans were used. The commercialized roasted coffee undergoes a series of processes. For instance, raw coffee beans are dehydrated, the shell is eliminated and the beans are roasted (≈ The grinding procedure converts the solid sample into a powder, drastically changing particle size and morphology. It can be seen from the micrographs ( The cowpea beans ( It was not possible to observe structural differences in coffee samples milled in the different devices ( Bivalves comminuted in all tested devices presented polyedric structures of sharp angles. The polyedric structures were more abundant when the sample was ground in the knife mill, whereas a more rounded shape was observed when they were comminuted in the ball mill ( Cryogenic, ball and knife mills can be used to reduce particle size and obtain homogeneity in food samples. The performance of each mill varies with the texture and hardness of the samples, and sieving might be a necessary step to suppress the effect of segregation in samples such as cowpea beans. Moreover, the aperture of the sieve used may influence significantly the final concentration of elements. The choice of the type of milling device should take into account the availability of mills, sample type and elements to be determined, once the occurrence of contamination can be a critical issue. Overall, the ball mill presented a good performance for all sample types and it is an interesting alternative to the cryogenic mill, once maintenance costs are much lower. Nevertheless, the contamination of Co by the ball mill was detected in all three studied food samples. The research grants and scholarships provided by CNPq and FAPESB are gratefully acknowledged. The authors wish to thank Dr. Z. N. da Rocha for his help with the electron microscopy analysis, Dr. D. Santos Júnior for his help with grinding samples in the cryogenic mill, and Dr. B. Welz for his helpful suggestions that improved an early version of this manuscript.