The TiO2/UV photocatalytic degradation of methylene blue (MB) has been investigated in aqueous heterogeneous suspensions. In addition to a prompt removal of the color, TiO2/UV-based photocatalysis was simultaneously able to oxidize the dye, with an almost complete mineralization of carbon and of nitrogen and sulfur heteroatoms into CO2, NH4
                     +, NO3
                     − and SO4
                     2−, respectively. A detailed degradation pathway has been determined by a careful identification of intermediate products, in particular aromatics, whose successive hydroxylations lead to the aromatic ring opening. These results suggest that TiO2/UV photocatalysis may be envisaged as a method for treatment of diluted waste waters in textile industries.About 15% of the total world production of dyes is lost during the dyeing process and is released in the textile effluents Among the new oxidation methods or advanced oxidation processes (AOP), heterogeneous photocatalysis appears as an emerging destructive technology leading to the total mineralization of most of the organic pollutants Absorption of efficient photons ( Oxygen ionosorption (first step of oxygen reduction; oxygen’s oxidation degree passes from 0 to −1/2) Neutralization of OH Neutralization of O Transient hydrogen peroxide formation and dismutation of oxygen Decomposition of H Oxidation of the organic reactant via successive attacks by OH Direct oxidation by reaction with holes In the present article, it was attempted to establish the degradation pathway of a dye present in colored aqueous effluents from textile industries. The model dye chosen was methylene blue (MB). The kinetics of its disappearance was already studied in Methylene blue was supplied by a textile firm and used as received. Solutions were prepared using water from a Millipore Waters Milli Q purification unit. The photocatalyst was titania Degussa P-25 (anatase/rutile=3.1; Two types of Pyrex reactors open to air were utilized. Reactor 1 (90 Reactor 2 (1 A volume of 20 Before analysis, the aqueous samples were filtered through 0.45 Intermediate compounds were identified by GC/MS and LC/MS (photodiode arrays and API-ES negative). A CP-Sil 5CB ( The kinetics of MB adsorption in the dark performed in reactor 1 for different initial concentrations is represented in According to the Langmuir model, the coverage  To obtain relevant information about the photocatalytic degradation, it was necessary to carry out experiments from which direct photolysis was excluded. Experiments were made in the absence of TiO The kinetics of disappearance of MB is represented in The catalytic quantum yield is defined as the ratio of the reaction rate These similar values underline the intrinsic character of the quantum yield. They are quite in good agreement with a previous value given by Matthews The degradation leads to the conversion of organic carbon into harmless gaseous CO The shape of the curves of sulfate and ammonium ion evolution indicates that both products are initial ones with a non-nil initial formation rate. Heteroatom S seems to undergo a direct oxidation from the oxidation degree −2 to the highest final stable +6 one in SO  Therefore, the initial step of MB degradation can be ascribed to the cleavage of the bonds of the C–S The mineralization of organic carbon was followed by TOC disappearance ( Simultaneously, the oxidative mineralization process was followed by chemical oxygen demand (COD) disappearance ( The pH is a complex parameter since it is related to the ionization state of the surface The intermediates generated during the degradation process were analysed by GC/MS and LC/MS and identified by comparison with commercial standards and by interpretation of their fragment ions in the mass spectra. It has been attempted to identify the main aromatic metabolites resulting from MB decomposition. They are presented in The titania-based photocatalytic oxidation Oxidation of water by holes Transient formation of hydroperoxide radicals The sulfoxide group can undergo a second attack by an OH Concerning the mineralization of the three nitrogen-containing groups in MB molecule, two cases have to be examined. First, the central imino-group undergoes a NC double bond cleavage induced by the cleavage of the double bond of the –S The other two symmetrical dimethyl-phenyl-amino groups undergo a progressive degrading oxidation of one methyl group by an attack by OH Subsequently, the phenyl-methyl-amine radical is degraded, probably by successive attacks by OH Many other hydroxylated intermediates have certainly been formed but they were difficult to detect because of their poor extractibility owing to their hydrophilic character. Methylene blue could be successfully decolorized and degraded by titania-based photocatalysis at room temperature. A detailed reaction mechanism could be presented from the initial step of adsorption involving the cationic functional group of MB molecule, which is probably adsorbed perpendicularly to the surface down to the final products (CO This work was supported by a CMCU Project (99F1201). J.M.H and C.G. thank Dr. M.F. Grenier-Loustalot and Mr. O. Paisset for LC/MS assistance.