Fe isotope compositions of mineral separates and bulk samples from Xinqiao Cu–S–Fe–Au skarn type deposit were investigated. An overall variation in δ57Fe values from −1.22‰ to +0.73‰ has been observed, which shows some regularity. The δ57Fe values of endoskarn and the earliest formed Fe-mineral phase magnetite are ca.1.2‰ and ca. 0.3‰ lower, respectively, relative to the quartz–monzodiorite stock, indicating that fluid exsolved from the stock is enriched in light Fe isotopes. Moreover, spatial and temporal variations in δ57Fe values are observed, which suggest iron isotope fractionation during fluid evolution. Precipitation of Fe-bearing minerals results in the Fe isotope composition of residual fluids evolving with time. Precipitation of Fe (III) minerals incorporating heavy iron isotopes preferentially leaves the remaining fluid enriched in light isotopes, while precipitation of Fe (II) minerals preferentially taking-up light iron isotopes, and makes the Fe isotopic composition of the fluid progressively heavier. The regularity of Fe isotope variations occurred during fluid exsolution and evolution indicates that the dominant Fe source of Xinqiao deposit is magmatic. Overall, this study demonstrates that Fe isotope composition has great potential in unraveling ore-forming processes, as well as constraining the metal sources of ore deposits.The stable isotopes of transition metals have recently attracted much attention as possible tools for monitoring geochemical processes. Previous studies have investigated Fe isotope compositions of different types of deposits, including banded iron formations (BIFs) (e.g., In the study of Grasberg Cu–Au porphyry deposit, In this paper we present iron isotope data from the Xinqiao Cu–S–Fe–Au skarn deposit in Tongling district, China. The main purpose of this work is three-folds: (1) to further characterize Fe isotope distribution of magmatic hydrothermal deposits; (2) to better understand the behavior of Fe isotopes during fluid exsolution and subsequent mineralization; (3) to further examine whether Fe isotopes can be used in tracing the metal source. The Xinqiao Cu–S–Fe–Au deposit is situated 24 The sedimentary rocks that crop out in the area are from the Middle–Upper Silurian to Lower Triassic in age but the Lower-to-Middle Devonian is absent ( The Xinqiao quartz–monzodiorite (also called Jitou stock) constitutes the main igneous in the Xinqiao deposit area. It is a multiphase intrusion with an ellipsoidal surface area of 0.5 There are two main mineralization types in the Xinqiao deposit, i.e., skarn and stratiform. The skarn-type mineralization is developed at the contact zone between the Jitou stock and the Middle–Upper Carboniferous limestone and dolomite. The endoskarn and exoskarn are both garnet skarn consisting predominately of garnet, wollastonite and subordinate pyroxene. The retrograde altered rocks, which overprint the skarn, are composed of actinolite, tremolite, chlorite and epidote. The mineralization, in turn, overprints garnet skarn, consisting of disseminations and veinlets of pyrite and chalcopyrite, with local massive magnetite. The stratiform mineralization developed along the discordant boundary between the Upper Devonian sandstone and the Middle–Upper Carboniferous limestone and dolomite, where it is thought to be a detachment surface during Middle to Late Triassic post-collisional processes ( The origin of Xinqiao deposit has been discussed by many previous workers and the genesis of the skarn orebody has been widely accepted. However, the origin of stratiform orebody remains controversial. The colloform pyrite in stratiform orebody, has been interpreted by some researchers as a syngenetic ore layer formed in the Variscan, then acting as source-bed of ore-forming elements for the Mesozoic mineralization associated with granitoid intrusions ( Some important geological features indicate an epigenetic origin of the stratiform orebody. Of these features, the most important is the occurrence of the stratiform orebody along a discordant boundary. In addition, the δ Twenty-six samples including stock, skarn and various minerals from the skarn orebody and nine samples including colloform pyrite and granular pyrite from the stratiform orebody were collected from the open pit and underground at − The colloform pyrite pervasively replaces and cuts massive magnetite aggregates, suggesting that colloform pyrite formed later than magnetite ( Moreover, a mineral zonation is observed. Magnetite Based on the above observations, a paragenetic sequence may be defined as follows: magnetite → colloform pyrite → fine-grained pyrite → chalcopyrite The mineral sequence observed above provides new constraint on the genesis of stratiform orebody. A key issue about the origin of the stratiform orebody is whether the colloform pyrite formed earlier than other mineral phases and whether it has been served as the element source to form other mineral phases, such as magnetite, pyrite and chalcopyrite. As described above, colloform pyrite formed later than magnetite, showing that magnetite cannot be a reworked product of colloform pyrite. This, together with above-mentioned geological and geochemical features, suggests an epigenetic hydrothermal genesis of stratiform orebody. Iron-bearing minerals were carefully handpicked and cleaned ultrasonically in purified Milli-Q H The purified samples were measured for Fe isotope compositions on a Nu Instruments multiple collector plasma source mass spectrometer at high-resolution mode using a standard-sample bracketing approach. Solutions of standard and samples were introduced into the mass spectrometer through a DSN-100 desolvating nebulizer at 5 The Fe isotope results are expressed as deviations of an Fe isotope ratio of a sample from that of the reference material IRMM-14: Long-term repeatability of Fe isotope ratio measurements at high-resolution mode is better than 0.05‰ Bulk samples of quartz–monzodiorite, endoskarn, exoskarn and wall-rock (limestone and marmorized limestone) were measured for Fe isotope compositions and their δ Mineral separates of magnetite, granular pyrite, colloform pyrite and chalcopyrite have been analysed, and an overall range of − It is an important issue whether Fe isotopes fractionate during the process of fluid exsolution from magma, as this kind of information is crucial in tracing the metal source and mineralization processes, and in understanding the evolution of Fe isotope systematics during magmatic processes. This study provides a good opportunity to examine this issue. Skarn is the metasomatic product of the interaction of magmatic fluids with carbonate country rock. Magnetite in Xinqiao deposit is among the earliest iron minerals precipitated from the ore-forming fluid. As described above, the δ A question arises as to whether the light Fe isotope composition of the ore-forming fluid resulted from isotope mass fractionation during fluid exsolution from the stock, or simply caused by mixing with the country-rock whose Fe isotope composition might be even lighter. As shown in The detailed mechanism of Fe isotope fractionation during fluid exsolution remains to be investigated. However, it was speculated that deuteric fluids exsolved from magma may be enriched in the light Fe isotopes, as some highly evolved granites show heavy Fe isotope enrichment ( The recognition that significant Fe isotope fractionation occurs during fluid exsolution provides support for that scenario. It seems indeed, at least for some cases, that fluids exsolved from igneous stocks show light Fe isotopes enrichment. More importantly, the understanding of Fe isotope behavior during fluid exsolution lays an important foundation in using Fe isotopes as a tracer for Fe pathways from magmatic to hydrothermal system. Magnetite, colloform pyrite, fine-grained pyrite, coarse-grained pyrite and chalcopyrite selected on a paragenetic order were measured for their iron isotope compositions, confirming a temporal zonation ( Granular pyrite selected from endoskarn, orebody and exoskarn also reveals a clear spatial zonation from endoskarn to exoskarn. As shown in These temporal and spatial zonations may result from two mechanisms: 1) incorporation of Fe from host rocks during hydrothermal metasomatic processes; 2) Fe-isotope fractionation during fluid evolution. The δ Based on the above arguments, we propose that the Fe isotope zonation is the result of Fe-isotope fractionation during fluid evolution. It has been documented both theoretically and experimentally that Fe (III) phases are enriched in the heavy Fe isotopes relative to Fe (II) phases ( The fact that Fe isotope fractionation takes place during fluid evolution makes Fe isotopes a valuable tool for tracing flow pathways and mineralization sequences, as suggested previously by The source of metals is a fundamental issue in metallogeny. For Xinqiao Cu–S–Fe–Au deposit, various geochemical methods (e.g., As discussed in It should be emphasized that the Fe isotope compositions of Xinqiao ore deposit are strongly dependent on and highly characteristic of fluid and precipitation histories, and their variations are much larger than those of sedimentary strata and the quartz–monzodiorite stock ( Fe isotope variations in Xinqiao deposit have been investigated. A number of first-order observations and conclusions can be made: The δ Spatial and temporal zonations of Fe isotopes both between and within mineral phases from Xinqiao deposit are observed. For sulfides, early formed sulfide is enriched in light isotopes while δ The iron isotope systematics indicates strongly that Fe in Xinqiao deposit is predominantly from igneous source. This study provides direct evidence for the first time that Fe in the skarn ore is sourced from igneous rocks. In summary, the systematic variations of Fe isotope composition observed in this study show that Fe isotopes have a significant potential for unraveling metal transport and depositional processes in hydrothermal ore deposits, and for constraining metal sources of an ore deposit. Furthermore, the recognition that significant Fe isotope fractionation occurs during fluid exsolution lays an important foundation in using Fe isotopes as a tracer for Fe pathways from magmatic to hydrothermal system. This research was jointly supported by the Projects