Generally, longwall mining-induced stress results from the stress relaxation due to destressed zone that occurs above the mined panel. Knowledge of induced stress is very important for accurate design of adjacent gateroads and intervening pillars which helps to raise the safety and productivity of longwall mining operations. This study presents a novel time-dependent analytical model for determination of the longwall mining-induced stress and investigates the coefficient of stress concentration over adjacent gates and pillars. The model is developed based on the strain energy balance in longwall mining incorporated to a rheological constitutive model of caved materials with time-varying parameters. The study site is the Tabas coal mine of Iran. In the proposed model, height of destressed zone above the mined panel, total longwall mining-induced stress, abutment angle, induced vertical stress, and coefficient of stress concentration over neighboring gates and intervening pillars are calculated. To evaluate the effect of proposed model parameters on the coefficient of stress concentration due to longwall mining, sensitivity analysis is performed based on the field data and experimental constants. Also, the results of the proposed model are compared with those of existing models. The comparative results confirm a good agreement between the proposed model and the in situ measurements. According to the obtained results, it is concluded that the proposed model can be successfully used to calculate the longwall mining-induced stress. Therefore, the optimum design of gate supports and pillar dimensions would be attainable which helps to increase the mining efficiency.With the development of the mechanized longwall mining methods, underground coal mining has been improved from both production and productivity points of view. However, there are still certain risks in mining that can result in unacceptable level of safety. Generally, one of the hot issues relates to roof fall and ground control ( In the case of longwall mining, accurate estimation of stress level in surrounding rock mass is important for the stability analysis and evaluation of optimum shape and support requirements for longwall panels and side entries ( There are several methods for evaluation of the stress distribution around a longwall panel, i.e. in situ measurement, laboratory physical simulation, numerical modeling, and analytical modeling. In situ measurements and laboratory physical simulation are time-consuming, difficult, and expensive ( In the present study, a new time-dependent analytical model is developed to determine the mining-induced stress and the coefficient of stress concentration (ratio of secondary to primary stress) over gates and pillars based on the strain energy balance in longwall mining. For this purpose, the height of destressed zone above the mined panel is firstly calculated in long-term condition. Then, based on the back-calculated abutment angle, stress transferred to the gates and pillars is determined. The theoretical analysis in this research is supplemented by a specific example of model application to calculate the coefficient of stress concentration over gates and pillars in Tabas coal mine of Iran. Due to the extraction of the coal seam in longwall mining, state of stress equilibrium in the surrounding rock mass is disturbed and the stress redistribution occurs. The portion of the overburden weight over the destressed zone that is not supported by the extracted area (goaf) is transferred to the adjacent solid abutments, such as gates and pillars. This stress is transferred due to longwall mining and called “mining-induced stress”. In the past, a number of attempts to utilize field observations, theoretical, empirical and numerical approaches were made to understand the nature and amount of mining-induced stress variation in and around an underground excavation due to longwall mining. Considering an infinite, elastic, isotropic and homogenous nature of coal measure formations,   According to the above-mentioned works, there are some analytical equations to evaluate the stress distribution around a longwall panel, as shown in Extraction of coal seam in the longwall mining causes disturbance of the energy balance within a system enclosing mine openings and surrounding rocks. Therefore, the energy transfer takes place in the rock mass during a transition from one equilibrium state to another, which is assumed to be an elastic continuum. In this research, state I is considered as the primary status before the coal seam extraction and state II is considered as the final extraction of coal seam inside a panel ( In the system of longwall mining enclosing the longwall panel and its surrounding rock mass, the equilibrium between its energy components should be kept during mining. Due to extraction of the coal seam within a considerable panel width and after advancing the hydraulic jacks, the immediate roof of the mined panel is unsupported and hence is allowed to collapse and cave in some distance behind the hydraulic jacks or in the goaf area. This leads to release of the stored strain energy in the mined rock (coal), transferring to the panel roof rock strata. The released energy increases the strain of the roof rock strata and causes fracturing, caving and destressing of those layers. This process is continued until the final extraction of a longwall panel. At the end of panel extraction and after thorough compression of caved materials over the time, a defined zone with the height of Considering the above descriptions, it can be concluded that the total strain energy stored in the mined rock (coal) is released and consumed in fracturing, caving and destressing the panel roof rock strata. Therefore, the stored strain energy in the mined rock (coal) should be equal to the stored strain energy in the destressed zone: For construction of the time-dependent model to evaluate the mining-induced stress over gates and pillars in this research, the height of destressed zone above the mined panel is firstly estimated in the long-term condition based on the strain energy balance in the longwall mining. After that, total induced stress is determined by the difference between the overburden weight and the weight of destressed zone. Then, vertical component of induced stress is determined using the back-calculated abutment angle. Finally, it is possible to calculate the coefficient of stress concentration over gates and pillars based on the vertical component of induced stress. Calculations related to the above components are given in the following subsections. To calculate the height of destressed zone (  Since no permanent supports are used in longwall mining, the effect of body forces can be ignored ( The traction vector acting on a surface in state I ( The substitution of Eqs. According to the parallel-axis theorem in statics, we can write The substitution of Eqs. According to Finally, the substitution of Eqs. In general, the stored strain energy of caved materials within the destressed zone ( In this research, the rheological properties of the caved materials are considered according to the nonlinear rheological constitutive model introduced by The nonlinear rheological constitutive model is described as follows: Discussions of a problem are algebraically simpler in two dimensions than in three dimensions. In most instances, no generality is lost by considering the two-dimensional (2D) case. Furthermore, many problems in rock mechanics are essentially 2D; in the sense the stresses do not vary along one Cartesian coordinate. The most common examples of such problems are stresses around boreholes, or around long tunnels. Many other problems are idealized as being 2D so as to take advantage of the relative ease of solving 2D elasticity problems when compared to 3D problems ( In Eq. The initial elastic modulus ( The following equation is also used to calculate the strain of caved materials which is developed to describe the stress-strain behavior of caved materials by The maximum possible strain ( The substitution of Eq. When substituting Eq. A similar approach is used to calculate the viscoplastic strain energy ( When substituting Eqs. In conclusion, the total stored strain energy in the caved materials within the destressed zone ( According to Eq. In Eq. Calculation of the overburden load above a longwall panel that is not carried by the goaf but is transferred to the adjacent structures is very important to design of gateroad supports and pillar dimensions. Indeed, beyond the height of destressed zone, the overburden pressure will be transferred towards the front abutment, the adjacent access tunnels, the intervening barrier pillars as well as the panel rib-sides ( The substitution of Eq. As previously mentioned, it is important to calculate the load above the longwall panel that is not carried by the goaf but is transferred to the gates and pillars. This is referred to as the abutment load and it is typically calculated as the weight of material defined by an abutment angle, also referred to as the shear angle. In other words, this angle helps to easily quantify the overburden load above a goaf that is carried by adjacent gates and pillars known as the side abutment (see To back-calculate the abutment angle in this research, the situation (1) as shown in Determination of the vertical component of mining-induced stress is required for proper design of gate supports and pillar dimensions. To calculate this stress component, situation (2) as shown in Substituting Eqs. According to trigonometric relations, we can write: Substitution of Eq. To calculate the coefficient of stress concentration over gates and pillars, the secondary stress should be estimated. The secondary stress over the gates or pillars ( Accordingly, the coefficient of stress concentration due to longwall mining is determined as follows: Finally, substitution of Eqs. In this research, Tabas coal mine is selected as the case study which is the largest and unique fully mechanized coal mine in Iran. This mine is located in the central part of Iran, 75 km south of Tabas in South Khorasan Province. The mine area is a part of Tabas-Kerman coalfield. Large volume of the coal reserve and appropriate geometry of the coal seams in Tabas have created suitable condition for application of longwall mining method. The Tabas coal deposit includes three minable seams including C1, B1 and B2. The C1 seam is the most important coal seam in Tabas and mined using mechanized longwall mining method. The thickness of coal seam ranges from 1.8 m to 2.2 m (averaging 2 m). The overburden depth varies from 100 m to 600 m. In this study, average value of 350 m is considered as the overburden depth in the modeling calculations. The width of longwall panels ranges from 200 m to 220 m (averaging 210 m) and their length is about 1000 m. The immediate roof rock above the panel is weak and contains 0.1–0.2 m thick mudstone and siltstone/sandstone interlayers. Also, sandstone channels in some areas within 3 m have potential water-bearing risk. The floor is about 1–1.3 m of weak seatearth/mudstone, and there is a stronger mudstones and siltstones/sandstones layer under it (see As a practical engineering example, the proposed model is utilized to calculate the coefficient of stress concentration over gateroad and pillar adjacent to the longwall panels of Tabas coal mine. The utilized constant values of experimental parameters in energy model calculations are considered according to To evaluate the effect of proposed model parameters on the coefficient of stress concentration, sensitivity analysis is conducted based on the actual data of Tabas coal mine ( It can be concluded from According to To evaluate the estimation capability of the proposed energy model, its result is compared with the results of the available formulas given in the literature. For this purpose, the coefficient of stress concentration is calculated using the equations of It was mentioned before that the proposed time-dependent energy model predicts the coefficient of stress concentration in the range of 1–1.91 according to A new time-dependent analytical model was developed in this study to calculate the longwall mining-induced stress and the coefficient of stress concentration. For this purpose, the height of destressed zone was firstly determined based on the combination of the strain energy balance in longwall mining and a rheological model of caved materials to determine the total mining-induced stress. Then, the vertically induced stress and the coefficient of stress concentration over gates and barrier pillars were estimated using the back-calculated abutment angle. The proposed model was also used to determine the coefficient of stress concentration over gates and pillars of the Tabas longwall coal mine. Considering 1.5 years from the first caving in the main panel of this mine, the coefficients of stress concentration of 1.62 and 1.61 over the maingate and its adjacent pillar were obtained, respectively. Sensitivity analysis of the proposed model showed that Poisson's ratio, uniaxial compressive strength and bulking factor have significant influences on the coefficient of stress concentration. On the contrary, distance from the panel edge, abutment angle, height of destressed zone, extracted coal seam thickness, elastic modulus, unit weight and pressure time of the caved materials have negative influences on the coefficient of stress concentration. Unlike the two above categories, coefficient of stress concentration has a parabolic relationship with depth of cover. To assess the proposed model performance, its results were compared with the results of existing analytical, numerical and empirical models as well as with the results of in situ measurements. The comparative results confirm the agreement that exists between the proposed model and in situ measurements. Generally, the main significance of the proposed time-dependent energy model is that it incorporates the effects of geometrical and geomechanical parameters as well as pressure time of caved materials in estimating mining-induced stress. Finally, the key consequence of this study is that there is potential to determine the longwall mining-induced stress in long-term condition. This facilitates the optimum design of gateroad supports and pillar dimensions. Therefore, safety and performance of these structures will be guaranteed during mining operation. The authors wish to confirm that there are no known conflicts of interest associated with this publication and there has been no significant financial support for this work that could have influenced its outcome.