The mean degree of mineralization of bone (MDMB) was measured by quantitative microradiography on transiliac bone biopsies taken from 53 postmenopausal osteoporotic women who had been treated with alendronate (ALN; 10 mg/day) during 2 (9 patients) or 3 years (16 patients) or with placebo (PLA; 15 and 13 patients, respectively). In the same patients, bone mineral density (BMD) values were obtained by dual-energy X-ray absorptiometry of the lumbar spine and femoral neck at the beginning and end of treatment. Histomorphometric parameters and activation frequency of new remodeling units were also measured on the iliac biopsies. After 2 years of ALN, MDMB in compact bone was 9.3% (p = 0.0035) and in cancellous bone was 7.3% (p = 0.0009) higher, respectively, than PLA. After 3 years of ALN, MDMB in compact bone was 11.6% (p = 0.0002) and in cancellous bone was 11.4% (p = 0.0001) higher, respectively, than PLA. After 2 and 3 years of ALN, and compared with the corresponding PLA, the distribution of the degree of mineralization in compact and cancellous bone showed a clear shift toward the highest mineralization values and a decrease in the number of bone structure units having low values of mineralization. The between-group differences in MDMB were similar to those of BMD at the lumbar spine BMD (+8.7% after 2 years and +9.6% after 3 years, respectively), suggesting that MDMB augmentation probably accounted for the majority of the increase in BMD seen with ALN. The data support the hypothesis that the reduction in activation frequency caused by the antiresorptive effect of ALN is followed by a prolonged secondary mineralization that increases the percentage of bone structure units having reached a maximum degree of secondary mineralization and, through this mechanism, MDMB. That these effects contribute to improved bone strength is demonstrated by the reduction in fracture incidence previously demonstrated in these patients.Bone strength is determined not only by the volume of bone tissue and the microarchitectural organization of the bone, but also by the degree of mineralization of bone matrix. In osteoporosis, there is a negative imbalance between bone resorption and bone formation, resulting in bone loss and microarchitectural deterioration of the trabecular network. In women, these changes are induced mainly by the increase in the activation frequency of new remodeling units, which occurs at menopause and persists until the end of life. This increased bone turnover reduces the mean degree of mineralization of bone by shortening the duration of secondary mineralization of basic structure units (BSUs). Some BSUs, in a setting of increased remodeling, are resorbed before having fully completed their secondary mineralization. As it is visible on microradiographs, “young” BSUs, which are less mineralized (about 50%–60% of the expected complete mineralization), appear more radiolucent than the more highly mineralized “old” BSUs. Extensive phase III clinical trials have shown that osteoporotic women treated orally with ALN for ≥3 years had substantial increases in bone mineral density (BMD) of approximately 5%–10% at the hip and spine, together with an approximately 50% reduced incidence of vertebral and osteoporotic nonvertebral fractures. Following preliminary observations made in baboons The present study was performed using a subset of 53 of the patients previously studied for long-term histomorphometric effects of ALN Transiliac bone biopsies were taken with a 7.5-mm-inner-diameter trephine, then fixed in 80% alcohol, dehydrated in absolute alcohol, and embedded in methylmethacrylate without previous decalcification. The apparatus used for contact microradiography was a Philips X-ray diffraction unit (PW 1830/40, Limeil Brévannes, France) equipped with a diffraction tube (PW 2273/20) and a copper anode. It was operated at 25 kV and 25 mA. A nickel filter reduced the primary polychromatic Cu-Kα radiation to an approximately monochromatic radiation of 1.54 Å. The focus-film distance was about 30 cm. High-resolution film (Eastman-Kodak, Rochester, NY) was used. The film was exposed for 20 min, processed in Kodak D19 for 5 min at 20°C under constant stirring, and fixed for 5 min at 20°C in Ilford Hypam. For quantitative evaluation of the absorption of the X-rays by the ground section, a reference system made of aluminum with known absorption was exposed on the same microradiograph (aluminum was chosen because it has an atomic number not far from the effective atomic number of apatite). The system was constructed as a rectangular frame (staircase) with aluminum foil layers (Strems Chemical Ltd., Strasbourg, France) arranged in steps, containing from one to nine layers (i.e., 1–9 steps). The mass of a single layer of the foil was calculated to be 0.003366 g/cm MDMB was quantified separately in compact (i.e., cortical) bone and in cancellous bone, using a new combined contact microradiography-microdensitometry computerized method, briefly described as follows. For automated analysis of the gray levels of microradiographs we used custom-developed software V As previously reported, BMD was measured by DXA of the lumbar spine at the beginning and end of treatment in the patients who had a transiliac biopsy after treatment. Values are reported as mean ± SEM. Comparisons between two means (different groups or subset vs. group) were performed by Mann–Whitney Mean values are reported for each group of patients After 2 and 3 years of ALN, MDMB in compact bone was 9.3% ( It is not possible to measure MDMB at other skeletal sites, such as the spine and hip. Because iliac bone most closely resembles vertebral bone in terms of the high rate of bone turnover, presence of hematopoetic bone marrow, and a high proportion of cancellous to cortical bone, the changes in MDMB in the iliac bone were compared with the mean increase in lumbar spine BMD relative to PLA in the same patients (+8.7% and +9.6% after 2 and 3 years, respectively). These results suggest that the majority of the increase in BMD induced by ALN treatment is explained by augmentation of bone mineral density at the tissue level. However, among the patients treated with ALN, there was no significant correlation between the changes in MDMB and BMD, perhaps due both to the variability of the measurements and the potential that different skeletal sites (lumbar spine and ilium) could respond differently, even in the same patient. As previously reported for the overall population studied with bone biopsy, The present data support our hypothesis that ALN, by reducing activation frequency and bone remodeling activity, induces a prolongation of the secondary mineralization phase, which increases mineral bone density at the tissue level (MDMB). This may contribute to improved bone strength, as proven by the reduced fracture rate observed in the studies of alendronate. Our results are in agreement with the preliminary observations we made from three sexually and skeletally mature female baboons, It is suggested that the increase in BMD and the substantial decrease in vertebral and nonvertebral fracture rates observed in osteoporotic patients treated for 2 and 3 years with ALN could be induced, totally or at least substantially, by an increase of the mean degree of mineralization of bone due to the reduction in the turnover rate. This increase does not exclude a mild augmentation of bone matrix volume; given that the remodeling space (temporary deficiency of bone matrix due to resorption cavities that have not yet been refilled) is real, any antiresorptive therapy must increase bone matrix volume. This was not detectable, however, through the measurement of cancellous bone volume after 2 or 3 years of treatment with alendronate, These concepts suggest that the principal effects of antiresorptive treatments to increase bone mass at the organ level (assessed as “bone mineral density” using DXA) may owe more to the increase in BMD than to increased bone volume at the tissue level. In fact, we speculate that there is a sequential effect of ALN on bone at the tissue level. First, and at the beginning of treatment, ALN would favor partial refilling of the remodeling space with a moderate increase of bone matrix volume, which undergoes primary mineralization with a resulting rapid increase in BMD. Subsequently, ALN increases the duration of the secondary mineralization phase by inducing a progressive increase in MDMB that is clearly observable as soon as 2 years after start of treatment. This does not exclude some continued positive bone balance at the level of individual BSUs, due to a possible effect of reducing the average volume of bone matrix resorbed relative to the average volume of bone formed at each site. Together, these effects are likely to be responsible for the increase of BMD at the organ level as measured by DXA. The explanation for the increase in MDMB by prolonged secondary mineralization, making the bone tissue mature and well mineralized, is in agreement with data using Fourier-transform infrared (FTIR) microspectroscopic analysis. These findings may have implications with respect to the effects of ALN on bone strength and fracture incidence. If bone strength is diminished by the incomplete mineralization induced by high remodeling, it may be one reason why the high turnover, as assessed by biochemical markers, appears to be an independent predictor of fracture risk. In addition to MDMB and BMD measurements, bone mineral density distribution (BMDD) has been assessed (only in cancellous bone) by quantitative backscattered electron imaging, In conclusion, quantitative microradiography provides access to the mineral dimension of bone tissue, which has been insufficiently taken into account until now as an important determinant of bone strength and quality of bone. This approach could lead to a partial reappraisal of the mechanisms inducing changes of BMD in many bone disorders and in response to treatments influencing bone turnover. The authors thank Prof. Charles-Albert Baud for his constant support and the long-term loan of the original microradiographic cameras. We also acknowledge Dr. Gideon A. Rodan (Merck Research Laboratories, West Point, PA) for fruitful advice, Prof. Jacques Bejui (Laboratoire d’Antomie, Faculté de Médecine R. Laennec, Lyon, France) for collaboration during the preparation of bone sections, and Annie Buffet and Catherine Simi for expert technical assistance.