Purpose
                  To compare clinical, radiological and functional outcomes of percutaneous K-wires and lateral titanium plates and screws in the management of unstable extra-articular proximal and middle phalangeal fractures.
               
                  Methods
                  In a randomized controlled clinical trial, 40 patients with unstable transverse, long oblique or spiral diaphyseal fractures of the proximal and middle phalanges were divided into 2 groups: the K-wire group (20 patients), which included 12 proximal and 8 middle phalangeal fractures fixed by percutaneous K-wires; and the plate group (20 patients), which included 13 proximal and 7 middle phalangeal fractures treated with open reduction and internal fixation with a lateral titanium plate and screws. The patients were observed for at least 6 months (mean [range], 6.9 [6–8] months). Results were evaluated by total active motion (TAM), grip strength, fracture union, pain assessed by visual analog scale and the Quick–Disabilities of the Arm, Shoulder, and Hand questionnaire, and complications.
               
                  Results
                  Clinical and radiological union was achieved in all patients except one in the K-wire group. Mean TAM was significantly better in the plate group than in the K-wire group. Both groups were similar in terms of postoperative loss of grip strength compared with the opposite healthy hand, and as assessed by visual analog scale and the Quick–Disabilities of the Arm, Shoulder, and Hand questionnaire. Fewer complications occurred in the plate group (2 of 20 patients) compared with the K-wire group (5 of 20 patients).
               
                  Conclusions
                  Fixation of unstable proximal and middle phalangeal fractures using a titanium plate and screws through a midlateral approach is a reliable and safe method for most fracture types and is associated with higher TAM and fewer complications.
               
                  Type of study/level of evidence
                  Therapeutic II.