Introduction
                  We describe a minimally invasive technique to stabilise unstable ankle fractures by inserting a 100mm screw up the fibula medullary canal along with percutaneous screw fixation of the medial malleolus if required. This technique is utilised in patients with poor soft tissues and significant co-morbidities where the fracture cannot be adequately controlled by a cast alone.
               
                  Patients and methods
                  Retrospective review of 23 patients the average age being 70 years (29–89) and 74% had significant co-morbidities. Postoperative radiographs were examined for adequacy of reduction using the method described by Mclenna and Ungersma. Patient based functional and health questionnaires were performed, reviewed and scored.
               
                  Results
                  Six patients were lost during the follow-up period due to death caused by issues unrelated to the ankle fracture. There were no reported intraoperative complications, no postoperative wound infections and no non-unions. There was two complications one loss of fixation, and another required removal of the screw due to irritation.
                  Radiographic reduction was good in 52%, fair in 44% and poor in 4%.
                  Patient questionnaire results were 70 (20–100) for the Abbreviated Olerud and Molander score and the SF-12 physical component score was 42 and mental component was 44.
               
                  Conclusions
                  With appropriate patient selection percutaneous screw fixation is an excellent technique supplementing cast immobilisation of unstable ankle fractures with poor soft tissues.The incidence of ankle fractures is increasing in the elderly population, particularly in females These soft tissue problems in association with other significant co-mobidities, frequently make it difficult to maintain an adequate fracture reduction using cast immobilisation alone. However the alternative of operative intervention in patients greater than 80 years of age using traditional plating techniques are associated with a risk of superficial wound infection of 7% and deep wound infection of 4.6% In patients with unstable fractures with associated poor soft tissues we employ a method of closed reduction and insertion of a long, fully threaded, intramedullary screw through a stab incision placed distal to the tip of the fibula. If the fracture pattern includes a medial malleolus fracture this is also fixed in a similar manner. The purpose of this study was to evaluate our method of treating unstable fractures in a cohort of patients, assessing radiological, clinical and functional outcomes. Between the years 2005 and 2013, 23 patients with unstable fractures underwent single screw fibula fixation either in isolation or in conjunction with medial malleolar fixation if additional fracture stability was judged to be required. These were primarily performed by the senior author but also under guidance by two other orthopaedic consultants. Clinical notes and radiographs (intraoperative and post operative) were retrospectively reviewed. Nineteen subjects were female and four were males, the mean age was 70 years (range 29–89 years). 78% lived independently in their own home without the need of assistance with activities of daily living. 17% came from their own home but had been requiring assistance with activities of daily living and 4% were admitted from a residential home. The prevalence of co-morbidities is demonstrated in The mechanisms of injury included; a fall from a low height (20 patients), a fall from a height (two patients) and following a motor vehicle collision (one patient). The fracture patterns identified are shown in Some medial malleolar fractures were stabilised with a percutaneously inserted partially threaded cancellous screw if additional fracture stability was judged to be required. Post-operative radiographs were examined for adequacy of reduction using the method described by McLenna and Ungersma Questionnaires including the abbreviated Olerud and Molander Score (OMS) and the Short-Form 12 (SF-12) The patient is positioned supine with a sandbag beneath the ipsilateral buttock to internally rotate the leg to permit the ankle and foot to sit in neutral. Appropriate antibiotics as per local guidelines should be administered, a tourniquet is not required for this technique. Fluoroscopy is required throughout the procedure and should be position on the contralateral side to the injured limb to improve the access for the surgical team. The distal fibular fracture is reduced closed with manipulation and placing the heel on a bolster (e.g. kidney dish) which holds the reduction of an oblique Weber B type fracture. Confirmation with fluoroscopy is made in the anteriorposterior plane only. A 1 If the medial malleolus requires fixation percutaneously this should be addressed following fibula fixation. The bolster is moved proximally to the level of the achilles tendon leaving the foot unsupported reducing the medial malleolar fracture. A 1 Post operatively the patient remains non weight-bearing or toe touch weight bearing for a total of 6 weeks with a cast change, wound check and removal of sutures at 2 weeks. If the patient is unable to comply with strict touch weight bearing the patient may progress to partial weight bearing following discussion with the operating surgeon. In general we have fewer concerns regarding partial weight bearing if they have sustained a bimalleolar fracture which has been fixed with the above technique rather than a isolated fibular fracture and associated deltoid ligament injury. The patients should be prescribed chemical venous thromboembolic prophylaxis as per local protocol. Postoperative radiographs (anteriorposterior and lateral views) are taken at 2 weeks and then at 6 weeks in the fracture clinic to confirm maintenance of position and fracture healing ( Of the 23 patients six patients (26%) died during the follow-up period due to deaths caused by issues unrelated to the ankle fracture. None of the 23 patients were reported to have had either a superficial or deep wound infections. Two patients had complications following their surgery one had failure of bimalleolar fracture fixation due to excessive weight bearing following a post-operative episode of acute alcohol withdrawal. One required removal of the screw due to implant irritation, this screw was placed too anterior and medial to its recommended entry point at the tip of the fibula. Radiographic analysis of the post operative radiographs according to the technique described by McLenna and Ungersma demonstrated good reduction in 52% patients, fair in 44% and poor in 4%. As may be expected with this technique all transverse fibula fractures produced a good reduction but there was no further correlation between obtaining a good reduction and the orientation or comminution of the fibula fracture ( 50% ( Unstable fibula fractures in patients with poor soft tissue and multiple medical comorbidities are at risk of complications when traditional open reduction and internal fixation is undertaken using a lateral plate and screws. For this reason many clinicians have investigated methods to reduce the insult to already compromised soft tissues. Alternatives to open reduction and internal fixation with plating include minimally invasive plate osteosynthesis (MIPO) and intramedullary devices. There is little in the literature about the use of MIPO techniques, but from what is available this technique is technically demanding and is associated with problems of maintaining fracture reduction and stabilising small distal fracture fragments. In one study Based upon the intramedullary Rush nail technique, multiple intramedullary devices have now been developed, some with variable distal locking and some allowing syndesmotic fixation through the nail. The Acumed fibula nail has been investigated most recently by Bugler et al. Alternative forms of fixation have been described for fragility fractures of the ankle in elderly patients permitting immediate weight bearing. One such option is described by Al-Nammarj et al. Childress External fixators have been used to treat unstable ankle fractures with poor tissues as a temporising treatment to hold the fracture in a reduced position until swelling allows more formal open reduction internal fixation. Definitive treatment with external fixators have been orientated more around the treatment of Pilon type high energy injuries rather than elderly osteopenic ankle fractures but this treatment option can be extrapolated into this scenario if a good anatomical position is achieved. Historically there have been concerns with the risk of pin site infections though rates are relatively low Due to the limited number of patients in our study who were available for follow up, it is difficult to make comparisons, however in terms of the patient reported outcome scores the mean abbreviated Olerud and Molander joint-specific score for our patient group (OMS 70) was better than those treated with a fibula nail (OMS 62.2) Our method is a cheap and effective solution with a low complication rate. The wound is very small and distal to the zone of injury. The fully threaded screw affords control of superior migration and rotation of the distal fragment. The bend in the screw produced by the 100 Apart from low numbers our greatest limitation is the low follow up with functional scores. A large proportion lost to follow up died of unrelated causes; this illustrates the degree of co-morbidities present in this cohort of patients. These patients necessitate a short anaesthetic time but also a low surgical insult to their already compromised soft tissues. Intramedullary screw fixation of distal fibula fractures with or without additional percutaneous medial malleolar screw fixation, is an excellent technique supplementing cast immobilisation of unstable ankle fractures with poor soft tissues when conservative management alone is likely to fail. We would only recommend this technique in patients that are likely to comply with post-operative weight bearing instructions. The technique minimalizes further soft tissue trauma with good final radiographic and functional results along with a low complication rate. With the ever increasing age of our population it can only be expected that the number of low energy, unstable ankle fractures, complicated with poor soft tissues and multiple co-morbidities will only increase. Our study confirms the place for intramedullary fibula screw fixation as part of a surgeon's armamentarium to surgically treat these injuries. With respect to the work titled above no author has any conflict of interest to disclose.