The «hardness» (η) of an inorganic ligand that behaves as a Pearson base depends on the electronegativity of the central atom of a ligand and increases in the following order: NO3
                     - (η = 4.7) < Cl- (η = 4.9) < SO4
                     2- (η = 5.5) < F- (η = 7.0). As the «hardness» of an inorganic anion-ligand increases, the mole fraction of the metal anion complex [MeAn
                        x
                     ](
                     
                        z−nx
                     
                     )- – a Pearson acid – increases. In the presence of «hard» Pearson bases, the solubility of silicate minerals in acidic media increases due to the formation of soluble complexes and the breakdown of the gel structure of silicon oxide. Due to the increasing «hardness» of the anion, which behaves as a Pearson base, the effective Gibbs energy of the formation of complexes with oxygen-containing organic reagents increases, as shown through the example of extraction equilibria. On the one hand, this behaviour decreases the extraction of metals from aqueous solutions; on the other hand, it contributes to the growth of the separation factor.The combination of unique physical and chemical properties of rare-earth elements (REEs) predetermines the possibility of their wide use in various areas of industry in two main directions: 1) the use of non-separated REEs and 2) the application of individual REEs ( A special feature of REEs is their high chemical affinity to harmful impurities in steel, such as oxygen, sulfur and other nonmetallic inclusions. REEs have had a great influence in decreasing the content of harmful impurities in steel by their transformation from active forms into passive forms. The addition of 0.06-0.08% of REEs reduces the content of nonmetallic inclusions (sulfur, nitrogen, phosphorus, etc.); the amount of sulfides decreases by 6-fold, while the general content of nonmetallic inclusions decreases by more than 5-fold. These additives reduce the anisotropy of the mechanical properties of steel due to the formation of fine dendritic patterns during crystallization. For temperatures less than 0 °C, this approach leads to a 10–20 % increase in the viscosity, a 10–30 % reduction in the cold-shortness threshold and a 20–25 % increase in the plastic properties. Most high-grade rare-earth raw material is located in China: monazite- and bastnaesite-containing ores are found in the North, while ion‐adsorption clays are found in the southern part of the country. Additionally, large REE deposits are found in the USA, i.e., the famous bastnaesite-containing Mountain Pass ( Lanthanide minerals are usually formed during the late stages of the differentiation of endogenous formations and are associated mainly with alkaline and granitic rocks. Typically, the REEs found in rare-earth minerals can be classified into one of the following subgroups: the cerium (light REE) or yttrium (heavy REE) groups. The industrially significant rare-earth minerals monazite, bastnaesite, and loparite (located in Russia) are composed of light REEs, while evksenite and xenotime contain yttrium. The selective concentration of REEs found in minerals is associated with a decrease in the ionic radius in the direction from lanthanum to lutetium, and the strength of the resulting complexes tracks in the same direction. Therefore, the natural rare-earth elements are redistributed and selectively concentrated in minerals. The ionic radius of a REE also influences the selective concentration in minerals by the isomorphic substitution of rare-earth ions with other metal ions: in minerals with large cations (Sr, Ba, Th), i.e., monazite or loparite, the metal ions are mainly replaced by the cations of rare-earth elements of the cerium group, while in minerals with small cations (Mn, Fe, U, Zr), i.e., evksenite, the cations of rare-earth elements of the yttrium group are mainly concentrated. Eudialyte has a very complex structure and is classified as a cyclosilicate mineral. It possesses ion-exchange properties and is characterized by the presence of zeolite-like cavities with different volumes. The chemical formula of eudialyte is Na It should be noted that the content of oxides of rare-earth elements in eudialyte is much lower than those found in other minerals ( However, the comparison of the content of oxides of rare-earth elements in eudialyte ores and those found in ores from other deposits ( The rare-earth industry, which is subdivided into the mining sector and the sectors responsible for the mineral processing of the raw materials, produces the mixed and individual (separated) REEs. The processing of rare-earth ores includes the following main stages ( Acidic leaching is typically used for the decomposition of ores or ore concentrates. Eudialyte contains more than 46% of SiO The aim of this paper is to determine the effect of the anion nature on the acid decomposition of aluminosilicate raw materials and solvent extraction processes ( This research is based on the Pearson «hard-soft» acid-base theory ( extraction by quaternary ammonia salts, and extraction using carboxylic acids, The phase separation was carried out using a Koehler K61002 centrifuge. Note that the increase in pH causes an increase in the separation time. Trigonometric titration using arsenazo III as an indicator in an automatic Mettler ToledoT70 titrator with a light-sensitive Mettler Toledo DP 5 Phototrode electrode was used to analyse the concentration of lanthanide ions in the water liquor before and after extraction. The computer simulation of the acid dissolution of eudialyte showed that the mineral decomposition is incongruent and limited by the solubility of ZrSiO The thermodynamic simulation demonstrating the influence of the nitrate ion concentration on the acid dissolution of eudialyte is shown in The influence of chloride ions on the eudialyte decomposition is shown in More than 70% of zirconium was extracted into the solution at a molar ratio of chlorine to zirconium of at least 70 at a temperature of 100 °C. The replacement of nitric acid with hydrochloric acid does not lead to an increase in the solubility of eudialyte. At high concentrations of chloride ions ( Note in The influence of fluoride ions on the eudialyte decomposition using nitric and sulfuric acid media is shown in The addition of fluoride additives into the pulp during leaching leads to the destruction of the acidic silica gel and increases the filtration rate of the silica residue. Thus, the factor that determines the completeness of the eudialyte decomposition is the molar ratio F:Zr. The influence of the anion on the solvent extraction of zirconium and rare-earth elements by different types of extractants is shown in A decrease in the distribution coefficient was observed in «hard» anionic media for TBP and carboxylic acids. An increase in the degree of extraction (and distribution coefficient) from «hard» anionic media was observed only for the quaternary ammonium salts. The «hard» acidic zirconium forms strong complexes with «hard» Pearson bases: sulfate, chloride or fluoride ions. For these anions, the «hardness» of the chloride ion is only slightly larger than that of the nitrate ion, which explains the slight difference between the zirconium recovery rates at comparable molar ratios [NO The destruction of the silica gel and, consequently, better filtration rate ( In the acidic decomposition of the eudialyte concentrate, the presence of impurities should be considered. The ore concentrate may contain a small mixture of loparite, sphene and aegirine due to the proximity of the mineral deposits. The use of nitric acid or hydrochloric acid leaching results in not only the nearly complete dissolution of non-radioactive eudialyte but also the contamination of the solutions with a mixture of thorium contained in the loparite. This situation will lead to a concentration of thorium present in the commercial products, thus making it unsuitable for use. The addition of fluoride ions at a [F The silica residue resulting from the sulfuric acid decomposition can easily be divided into three fractions according to their specific gravities. The mass fraction of the lightest fraction of the silica residue is 83%. This value is based on silicon oxide (which has a mass fraction greater than 90%). The mass fraction of the average density fraction is less than 12%. Its main component is calcium sulfate with a mass fraction of approximately 60%. In this fraction, the presence of a light REE with a mass fraction of at least 10% expressed in terms of oxides was detected. The phase composition analysis showed that light lanthanides replace isomorphic calcium in gypsum. The mass fraction of heavy REEs is less than 5%. The heavy REEs are a mixture of loparite, which has a mass fraction greater than 70%, with sphene and aegirine. The loparite portion is suitable for processing at plants in Russia. The «hardness» of the anion ligand influences the formation of complexes with organic reagents ( A change in the form of the REE that is present in an aqueous solution occurs in accordance with Pearson’s hard-soft acid-base principle. The «hardness» of a Pearson base depends on the electronegativity of the central atom of the anion-ligand: The zirconium (IV) cation is a «harder» Pearson acid than the yttrium cation ( In a medium containing a «hard» base, for example, the sulfate ion and the yttrium cation form predominantly anionic complexes. At the same time, anionic cerium complexes are present in small amounts and exist as monosulfate CeSO In the presence of salts of chlorides, yttrium exists mainly in the form of YCl When the pH of the solution is greater than 4.5, the rigorous hydrolysis of the lanthanide cations results in the formation of LnOH In a series of nitrate-sulfate-chloride anions for REE and nitrate-sulfate-fluoride anions for zirconium, the Gibbs energy of the extraction with tributylphosphate and carboxylic acids decreases ( The Gibbs energy increases in the following order for the TBP and carboxylic acid extraction: F The solvent extraction of neutral metal complexes by tributylphosphate is carried out by the formation of semipolar bonds. In this case, an increase in the negative charge density on anion ligands leads to an increase in the inductive effect on metal-anion bonds, which is followed by a decrease in the negative mesomeric effect on the phosphoryl group and a decrease in the semipolar bond between the metal ion and TBP. In this case, the Gibbs energy increases and the extraction activity decreases. The solvent extraction by trialkylbenzylammonium salts is carried out according to the ion exchange reactions. Thus, an increase in the negative charge density on the anion ligand (NO The extraction process with carboxylic acids is carried out according to both an ion exchange and solvation reaction. The substitution of a hydrogen cation from the non-dissociated molecule of a carboxylic acid occurs according to the following reaction: Water molecules, which form weaker bonds with metal cations, are partially or completely displaced by hydrophobic carboxylic acid molecules. In the system OH The «hardness» of lanthanides as Pearson acids increases, and in other equivalent conditions, the extraction activity increases for carboxylic acids but decreases for onium compounds. It is possible to find a correlation between the charge density on anions, the polarizing  A shift in the equilibrium towards the complete dissolution of eudialyte in an acidic medium was achieved by adding sodium fluoride. Fluoride influences the formation of strong fluoride and sulfate-fluoride complexes with zirconium and the catalytic action on the destruction of the amorphous silica structure. An increase in the hardness of the inorganic anion-ligand leads to an increase in the proportion of metals bound to the charged complexes of the compound. Because the extraction by acid-containing extractants - carboxylic acids and phosphoric acid esters - occurs due to the participation of metal cations or neutral complexes, a decrease in their content leads to a decrease in the amount extracted. For the extraction from the hard base medium, such as sulfate or fluoride, the use of organic amines or quaternary ammonium salts as extractants is recommended. To extract using a «soft» base medium, oxygen-containing extractants such as TBP or cation-exchange surfactants should be used. The work was carried out as part of project N 19-19-00377″Technological basis for the extraction and selection of strategically important rare earth elements from products of apatite production", supported by the