Adding polyelectrolyte to modify engineering properties of cemented soil has been tested in some studies, but its effects are controversial and the modification mechanisms need to be further investigated. This study aimed to examine the modification effects of a macromolecular polyelectrolyte, i.e. polynaphthalene sulfonate (NS) for the macro- and micro-characteristics of cemented soil, and NS dose of 0.6–1.8% of cement mass was employed. The macro-characteristics involved compactibility, unconfined compressive strength (UCS) and volume deformation produced by chemical reaction (shortened as chemical deformation). The micro-characteristics involved compounds evolution, micro-morphology and surface chemical activity tested by X-ray diffraction (XRD), Fourier transform infrared spectroscopy (FT-IR), scanning electron microscopy-energy dispersive spectroscopy (SEM-EDS), total organic carbon (TOC) and X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS). This study found that 1.2% NS addition improved compactibility, UCS and chemical shrinkage of cemented soil, for that the adsorbed NS reduced aggregation and water combination of soil minerals and increased water consumption for cement hydration. However, an overdose NS reduced the improvements due to the thickened NS adsorption layer and redundantly adsorbed NS molecules on cement. This study concluded that a substantially preferential adsorption of NS on soil minerals compared to cement was the fundamental mechanism of improvement effects.Natural soils are sometimes unsuitable for constructing superjacent structures directly due to the undesirable engineering performances such as the poor strength and high volume deformation potential Engineering issues typically consist in the performance degradations of the strength and volume deformation of cemented soil under the unfavourable conditions. It is well known that the strength performance of cemented soil is highly degraded when applying this technique in regions of high initial water Environmental issues associated to cemented soil are the massive carbon footprint and energy consumption throughout applying and manufacturing cementitious materials. For example, the worldwide production of cement in 2012 alone has emitted 3.2 giga tonnes of CO In addition to the applications on plain soil, several studies tested the feasibility of polyelectrolytes on cemented soil. Jin et al. In view of the above, the present study aims to investigate modification effects and mechanisms of incorporating polyelectrolyte on cemented soil under different doses for actual uses. Based on the preliminary applications of polyelectrolytes on cemented soil, polynaphthalene sulfonate (NS), a commonly-used polyelectrolyte in concrete engineering, was employed in this study. To explore the dose effects from the perspectives of macro- and micro-characteristics, a range of NS doses were added to the cemented soil. The macro-characteristics were analyzed by performances of unconfined compressive strength (UCS), compactibility and chemical volume deformation, while the micro-characteristics and mechanisms were studied by tests of X-ray diffraction (XRD), Fourier transform infrared spectroscopy (FT-IR), scanning electron microscopy-energy dispersive spectroscopy (SEM-EDS), total organic carbon (TOC) and X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS). The soil was collected from a highway construction site, which was not far away from the Yangtze River in Nanjing, P.R. China, with a sampling depth of 2–3 m under the ground. Thereafter, the soil was oven-dried at 105 °C, then passed through a 2 mm sieve to investigate the geotechnical properties, and was ground to pass through a 75 μm sieve to investigate the mineralogy. Test results are summarized in Ordinary Portland cement 42.5 N and distilled water were used in this study. The cement has an initial and a final setting time of 195 min and 305 min, respectively, determined with ASTM C191. The oxides mass of the cement was also obtained by XRF and given in NS is designated HLC-NAF, provided by NANJING R&D HIGHTECH CO. NS molecule has a rigid main chain and its general molecular structure To keep consistent with a previous study of the authors The recommended NS doses by the manufacturer for preparing concrete are 0.6–1.0% of cement mass, while Plank et al. The maximum dry density (MDD) and optimum water content (OWC) were determined with ASTM D1557, of which the compaction energy is 2698 kJ·m It should be mentioned that the compaction test in this study involved two stages, the first stage aimed to determine the appropriate density and water content for sample preparation, and the second stage aimed to investigate the NS effects on the compactibility of cemented soil. Thus, the compaction test in the first stage was completed within 1 h after the mixing for CS samples and samples NS6, NS12 and NS18. The compaction test results of the first stage revealed that the respective OWC and MDD of samples NS6–NS18 were at ~34.8% and ~1.61 g·cm Prior to mixing, the soil was oven-dried at 105 °C and passed through a 2 mm sieve. Then the soil and cement were pre-mixed at the prescribed ratios in a mortar mixer for 10 min (300 rpm). Next, NS (if used) was pre-dissolved into water, and the liquid was then added into the mixer for another 10 min mixing to produce the homogeneous mixture. The mixture was compacted into a cubic mold of 70.7 mm by 3 layers. The sample preparation was completed within 1 h after the mixing. According to the compaction results of the first stage, the densities and water contents for preparing the CS samples were controlled to the corresponding OWC and MDD values; and those for preparing NS samples were controlled to the OWC and MDD values of CS10, which aimed to reduce the potential impacts on the mechanical performances due to the sample densities. Samples were cured in a chamber with 20 °C and relative humidity (RH) 95%, demolded after 24 h and then returned to the chamber. Notably, to provide convenience for the results comparison, this study employed the same adding timing of polyelectrolyte with previous studies involving cemented soil UCS test was conducted with ASTM D2166, at a displacement rate of 1 mm per minute. The UCS value was calculated using the average of triplicate samples. This study proposed a modified test method for volume deformation based on ASTM D4546 and ASTM C1608, which aimed to measure the volume deformation induced by the chemical reactions (referred to as chemical deformation). The test was carried out on a device developed by the authors with the schematic diagram given in Although the chemical shrinkage of cement pastes persists up to about 40 d In this study, a chemical deformation index ( Compounds types and amounts of crystallized and amorphous states in the selected samples were qualitatively characterized with XRD and FT-IR, respectively. In addition, SEM-EDS was employed to characterize the morphology of the compounds. To prepare the samples for these characterizations, a solvent exchange method was employed after Sun et al. XRD patterns were measured on a Rigaku SmartLab diffractometer using Cu(Kα) radiation (wavelength = 0.154 nm). Samples were step-scanned at a rate of 10°·min NS functions through its adsorption process. However, this process is hard to characterize with condense samples due to the randomness of sampling in micro-scale. Thus, an indirect adsorption test was designed, and is comprised with two stages. The first stage is an isothermal adsorption test performed with dilute liquids, in which NS was the adsorbate, and unhydrated powders of US, CS10 and cement were the adsorbents. Notably, the soil should be subjected to an additional grinding to pass through a 75 μm sieve The second stage corresponds to the residue characterization with X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS), to investigate physical and chemical activities on adsorbent surface. Samples were denoted with “adsorbent-NS concentration”, e.g. US-0.6%. Prior to XPS test, the residues were washed by deionized water, then dried under vacuum at 50 °C till constant mass, and ground to pass a 75 μm sieve. By XPS scanning, the binding energy (B The compaction curves of selected samples are presented in The UCS test results are shown in The real-time volume deformation and the chemical shrinkage indexes (  An overview of these figures suggests that the chemical reactions in NS samples were typically the same with those in CS10. Another distinction in NS samples compared to CS10 was the improved intensity of C SEM images of US, CS10 and NS12 under different magnifications after 7 d are given in In addition, random points (g1–g4) were collected on gels of two shapes in So far, the fundamental mechanism for the improvements of NS on macro- and micro-characteristics remains unclear. Additionally, physical and chemical activities on the surfaces of selected adsorbents were characterized by XPS, the results are summarized in This study found that the fundamental mechanism of the improvements of NS on macro- and micro-characteristics of cemented soils lies in that the soil minerals process substantially superior adsorption capacity of NS molecules compared to cement. To summarize the mechanisms in detail, a schematic diagram is drawn in As seen, in the plain cemented soil, massive water molecules are combined by soil minerals, producing thick hydrated films. Meanwhile, some cement particles are unhydrated due to the soil mineral covering. After adding NS, soil minerals are preferentially adsorbed by NS molecules, the water molecules are repelled to reduce the hydrated films, so that the cemented soil can be compacted to higher density. Meanwhile, large soil aggregates exfoliated to small particles due to the electrostatic repulsion and cement hydration are promoted indirectly due to the increasing availability of water molecules, which jointly improve the UCS values of cemented soil. Additionally, the chemical shrinkage is intensified by the promoted cement hydration, but it reduces gradually with an increasing NS dose since that the total amount of AFt formed after the sample hardening increases with the NS dose. By overdose NS, the NS improvement effect on the compactibility is reduced probably due to the thickened NS adsorption layer. Meanwhile, the reduced improvement on UCS values is due to the delayed hydration of the cement with NS adsorption. With this knowledge, the UCS growth of cemented soil should be highly limited when the NS dose is extremely high. This study systematically investigated macro- and micro-characteristics of cemented soil modified by polynaphthalene sulfonate (NS) with a range of doses, explicated modification mechanisms and verified the feasibility of adding NS to reduce the cement demand for soil stabilization. Considering the NS modification effects on all tested macro-characteristics, the recommended NS dose in this study were 0.9–1.8% of cement mass, which was higher than that for concrete preparation. The specific conclusions are drawn as follows. Compactibility of the cemented soil was improved with NS addition since the adsorbed NS on the soil minerals reduced the water combination and hydrated film of soil minerals. However, overdose NS reduced the improvement on compactibility, probably resulting from the thickened NS adsorption layer. With the same sample density, the improved UCS values of cemented soil with the NS addition was benefitted from the indirect promotion effect of NS on the formation of cement hydration products. Nevertheless, overdose NS reduced the improvement due to the redundantly adsorbed NS molecules on cement particles, which hindered cement hydration. Furthermore, the NS addition refined the micro-structure of cemented soil, which could also contribute to UCS improvement. Cemented soil generated chemical volume shrinkage due to the cement hydration. Since the NS addition promoted the cement hydration, the volume shrinkage was increased by low NS dose. As a function of NS dose, the shrinkage would be reduced remarkably due to the NS effect on delaying the AFt and AFm formation. The fundamental mechanisms for the improvement effects lied in that the soil in this study processed a substantially superior capacity of adsorbing NS molecules compared to cement minerals.  The authors declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this paper. This work was supported by the