Creep and the creep-fatigue interaction have shown to strongly influence the mechanical behaviour of ancient masonry and long-term heavy loads proved to cause a continuous damage. The problem of achieving a reliable life-time estimate of historic masonry toward the effects of persistent loading has been dealt with by a probabilistic approach. The results of pseudo-creep tests on ancient masonry of different ages and their interpretation through a probabilistic model are presented, aimed to the individuation of a random variable as a significant index of vulnerability, and to the solution of the classic problem of reliability in stochastic conditions.random variable vertical peak stress v.v. vertical stress constant vertical stress level maximum vertical strain maximum horizontal strain vertical and horizontal strain-rate critical strain-rate levels r.v. vertical stress value required to exceed probability density function cumulative distribution function r.v. strain-rate p.d.f. of c.d.f. of the above p.d.f. failure rate function of the above p.d.f. survive function of the above p.d.f. parameters of Weibull density (Eq. time reliability function probability not to exceed the strain-rate level c.d.f. of p.d.f. of the above p.d.f. failure rate function of the above p.d.f.  experimental fragility curve shape parameters variable The main part of the European territory is characterized by the presence of historic masonry structures often characterized by non-homogeneous load-bearing sections that, during their service life, can be subjected to decay due to aggressive environmental attacks, aging and damage due to long-term heavy loads. Together with other synergetic aspects, time-dependent behaviour has proved to be involved in the collapse of historical buildings occurred during the last twenty years including the recent failures of the Meldert Bell-tower and the Maagdentoren Tower at Zichem (Belgium, 2006). The conservation of the pre-existing heritage gains an increasing relevance toward the safeguard of the memory and the complex relationship that the architectural culture has to carry out with its past, in view of a responsible and sustainable future. Among the risk factors menacing the safety of ancient structures, in addition to external factors like the lack of maintenance, the load increase due to building modifications, soil settlements, mechanical shocks due to earthquakes, fires, etc., an intrinsic feature of masonry (as of any rock-like materials) has to be highlighted. This feature, basically related to the self-weight and denominated time-dependent behaviour or creep, had not been recognized as a structurally crucial aspect, probably because it develops in the long run. Although it was well known in mining engineering and rock and soil mechanics As well known, these aspects of the problem suffer of uncertainty and may be dealt with through probabilistic approaches and or fuzzy sets theory. The literature offers a good panorama of structural safety assessment approached throughout Monte Carlo simulation, genetic algorithms, fuzzy theory and so on Similar approaches are not applied to ancient masonry, since a lot of parameters are involved in its definition such that, at the moment, simulating its behaviour in a general form seems impossible. Most of the researches are addressed to model the mechanical behaviour of masonry Since 1989 the authors are involved in a research program in which some experimental tests to investigate the masonry behaviour over time has been successfully developed Exploiting the medieval and the XVI century masonry coming from the ruins of the collapsed Tower of Pavia and that coming from the XVI century crypt of the Cathedral of Monza, several experimental procedures have been adopted to understand the phenomenon, from creep to pseudo-creep tests at different time intervals, and various rheological models have been applied to describe the creep evolution and creep-induced damage The results obtained have put in evidence the necessity to consider a few uncertainties involved in the collapse of massive buildings, therefore a probabilistic approach has been proposed. In the literature some examples are presented dealing with ancient masonry from a probabilistic point of view By experimental evidence, the strain evolution connected with a given stress history of a viscous material like a historic masonry can be described through vertical and horizontal strain-rate connected with a well defined creep phase. Since the strain-rate is related to the residual life of the material, to model its evolution over stresses the Aim of the paper is to suggest an experimental procedure suitable to study in the laboratory creep behaviour, and in particular to catch critical secondary creep strain-rate and to propose a probabilistic approach for the estimate of the residual life of the material. Further development will be the application of the approach to the interpretation of data coming from long-term monitoring of historic buildings in view of their safeguard and failure prevention. After the collapse of the Civic Tower of Pavia (XI to XVI century), during the investigation for searching the causes of the collapse, many prisms of different dimensions were obtained from the large blocks coming from the ruins of the tower In addition to monotonic and cyclic tests ( Considering that long-term tests require constant thermo-hygrometric conditions and especially designed testing apparatus, a more rapid and therefore more convenient testing procedure was subsequently preferred. The so-called pseudo-creep tests were carried out applying the load by subsequent steps corresponding to a constant value (generally 0.25 or 0.3 Subsequently, the XVI century plain masonry ( Before carrying out pseudo-creep tests, the material was characterized by monotonic tests and non-destructive sonic tests ( A total of four prisms coming from the conglomerate forming the very thick internal part of the 2800 This behaviour is coherent with the crack pattern at failure: in the case of the inner leaf ( Considering the last load step for each specimen, the secondary creep rate before collapse has been calculated and then related to the duration of the last load step, which can be regarded as the residual life of the material. In By experimental evidence, the strain evolution connected with a given stress history of a viscous material like a historic masonry can be described through the vertical and horizontal strain-rate reached at a certain vertical stress level As reported in With the aim to investigate the residual life of material as a function of the strain-rate, the parameters For each Choosing the suitable p.d.f. modelling a given phenomenon is a delicate and important matter; it must be found according to the physical aspects of the phenomenon itself, and to the characteristics of the distribution function in its “tail”, where often no experimental data can be collected. This latter aspect can be investigated analyzing the behaviour of the failure rate function The function Considering the recorded experimental data, a conventional value of This family of distributions presents an hazard-rate function It is furthermore interesting to evaluate the probability that the system will reach, or exceed a given strain-rate level Reliability Computing Since the experimental fragility curves are composed by a discrete number of points ( To model the experimental fragility curves, a Weibull distribution has been chosen Since As a consequence of this, for different strain-rate levels The described procedure has been applied here to the life-time estimate of ancient masonry, modelling the results obtained from the pseudo-creep tests mentioned above. Some results of this research were presented in An important step is the identification of significant thresholds of critical strain. This choice can be made considering the slope of the strain vs. time diagram in the branch corresponding to the secondary creep phase during the last load step ( Here in the following the proposed probabilistic approach is used to investigate the probability of failure of the medieval inner leaf masonry and of the XVI century plain masonry of the Civic Tower of Pavia (  In this case, at the same probability level vertical strain corresponds to a higher value of This depends on the mechanical damage developed during the test due to the load increase: in fact, the exit from the elastic range implies the preponderance of the horizontal (indirect) strain on the vertical ones; the phenomenon can be denominated  A difference has to be highlighted in the case of the horizontal strain. The experimental values show a bimodal behaviour ( The discontinuity on the fragility curves corresponds to the neat change in the slope of the diagram relative to the horizontal strain ( In The time-dependent behaviour, together with other factors acting in a synergetic way, proved to be responsible of the collapse of some monumental buildings happened during the last twenty years. The problem has been faced through an experimental programme showing that laboratory pseudo-creep tests provide useful results for a deeper knowledge of the primary, secondary and tertiary creep phases. The applied probabilistic model seems to appropriately interpret the experimental results, allows an estimate of the exceedance of the critical thresholds in vertical and horizontal strain-rate that are related to the residual service life, and also captures the difference between masonry of different ages and characteristics. For the safety assessment of time-dependent historic masonry buildings, useful information aimed to the prevision of the residual life may be provided by in situ long-term monitoring campaigns recording the evolution of the main crack opening and/or the variations of masonry wall thickness combined with complementary information on the states of stress and on the quality of masonry recorded through single and double flat-jack tests and sonic tests. The results obtained through the proposed probabilistic approach indicate an interesting research direction toward the interpretation of data collected through the monitoring of monumental buildings, to prevent total or partial failure. The precocious recognition in situ of critical values of secondary creep strain-rate related to the residual service life will allow to design strengthening interventions finalized both to directly repair damage and to remove the vulnerability sources. Arch. Serena Sironi and Arch. Roberta Tassi are gratefully acknowledged for their assistance in the experimental work and data elaboration; Mr Marco Antico for his technical support in the laboratory; Mrs Cinzia Arcadi for her assistance in the editing activity. The research has been supported by COFIN 2002 MIUR funds.