Prediction of the maximum displacement on the sidewalls of the powerhouse is a crucial task in the caverns excavation that depends on the site characteristics including geological and geomechanical parameters. Limitations of the available methods have caused utilizing of new predictive methods. In this research, maximum horizontal displacement around the caverns has been investigated using artificial neural network (ANN), numerical and empirical models for different conditions. The effective parameters including RMR (rock mass rating), overburden depth, coefficient of lateral pressure, pillar width and vertical difference of crown level between two adjacent caverns (powerhouse and transformer) are considered as the input parameters to predict the maximum horizontal displacement. Accordingly, the numerical modeling was utilized to introduce a sufficient database to construct the ANN model. The obtained results from the ANN model were compared with the results of the available numerical and empirical models based on the measured data gathered from different case studies in Iran and other countries. To compare the performance of utilized models, determination coefficient (R2), variant account for (VAF), mean absolute error (Ea) and mean relative error (Er) indices between predicted and measured values were calculated. Comparison results showed that based on the geomechanical parameters, the constructed optimum neural network can reliably predict the maximum displacement around the caverns. Finally, the sensitivity analysis of ANN model results shows that overburden depth is recognized as the most effective parameter, whereas tensile strength is the least effective parameter on the maximum displacement around the power station caverns in this study.Excavation of underground caverns for variety of applications is dominating worldwide. Prediction of displacement around these structures is a key factor in the performance of the cavern both during and afterwards the excavation. There are various methods including empirical, theoretical and numerical models for prediction of displacement around the underground spaces in the literatures. Among them, numerical methods are widely used for displacements prediction. However, in such models there is no a straightforward way for displacements prediction. For example, the numerical models only used for specific case studies and so that; such particular developed model cannot be successfully utilized for other cases. Also, in the empirical models only some of the effective parameters are accounted for maximum displacement determination ( Considering the above descriptions and limitations of the available models, this paper mainly shows the application of artificial neural network (ANN) technique to predict the maximum displacement around the power station caverns based on the datasets of three rook types under different conditions. To validate the proposed ANN model, its simulation results are compared with the results of the numerical and empirical models on the basis of actual data gathered from different case studies. As the details of Artificial neural networks (ANNs) can be found in the numerous reliable literatures ( To differentiate between the various processing units, values called biases are set up into the transfer functions. Transfer functions, known as activation functions, are used to transform the weighted sum of all input signals to a neuron and determine the neuron output intensity ( For development of intelligence models such as neural network and fuzzy system, impressive numbers of dataset are required. Therefore, it can be said that data collection is one of the most important stages in the ANN modeling. As the measurement of displacement around the power station caverns is difficult in practice, the numerical modeling is utilized to introduce sufficient database in order to construct an optimum ANN model. In this paper, numbers of numerical analyses were executed to predict horizontal displacement around a powerhouse cavern. The 2D finite element program (Phase 2) has been used to simulate the underground power station caverns ( Surrounding rock masses are assumed to be homogeneous, quasi continuous and isotropic. Two minor and major principal stresses act in horizontal and vertical directions. Horse-shoe shape with two cross sections dimension of 33 Because of too lengthy caverns, plane strain model were applied in modeling. In this research, effective parameters including RMR, overburden depth of the powerhouse (H An expansion factor of 5 with “Box Boundary Type” and gradation factor 0.1 with “Graded Mesh Type” have been used in all phase 2 models. In general, expansion factor or boundary condition coefficient can be automatically defined by the users. External dimensions of the model were determined according to the influence zone of constructions. The influence zone is the area that affected by excavation process. In this analyses expansion factor of 5 is selected based on the trial and error approach. Accordingly, the external dimensions of model are 5 times of cavern width. These boundary condition include fixed X condition in left and right boundaries; and the fixed Y condition in upper and lower boundaries of the model. After establishing the model geometry, mesh can be manually or automatically proceed. Automatically mode is used when the surrounding rock masses of underground space have similar properties. As the surrounding rock mass is considered as a semi-continues, the automatically mode is used for mesh generation. In addition, a mesh gradation factor of 0.1 was used. In Phase 2 software, the mesh setup is different considering element sizes on the excavation boundary (discretization density) and within the model domain (mesh density). For this, a network can be divided into zones with different densities. In the adjacent areas where stresses and displacements are sensitive, the smaller elements are used. On the contrary, the larger elements are utilized in far regions from the underground space. This leads to acquire more accurate results. Therefore, the lower gradation factor of the model (0.1) is selected in order to make it less time consuming. When the mesh was generated, all nodes on the external boundary were given a fixed, zero displacement boundary condition. The geometry and boundary conditions of the powerhouse and transformer house are shown in Based on the numerical modeling, the possible effective parameters are considered as the input parameters to predict the maximum horizontal displacement around the power station caverns in neural network modeling. Optimum architecture of ANN model can be achieved by examination of the different neural networks types based on the trial and error method. For this purpose, root mean square error (RMSE) index is calculated for all models and accordingly; the model with minimum RMSE can be selected as the optimum ANN model. The optimum number of neurons in hidden layers is also acquired by suing the trial and error method based on the minimum RMSE. As it can be seen from The optimum ANN model should be tested and validated in order to practical applications. In the original database, about 70% of datasets were randomly chosen as a training data to construct the ANN model. The remaining 30% of datasets are equally considered as the testing and validating datasets for examination and validation of the optimum ANN model. In fact, testing and validating datasets were not utilized in the training process of the network construction. These processes validate the ANN application in a more versatile way. In this step, the results of the network are presented to demonstrate its performance. The correlation coefficient (R) index between the predicted and measured values of displacements is taken as the model performance. The prediction was based on the input datasets which discussed in the previous section. The optimum network results in term of correlation coefficient for training, validation and testing processes of the proposed ANN model are shown in For further evaluation of the proposed ANN model efficiency, its predicted displacements are compared with the numeric ones based on the performance evaluation statistical indices. Accordingly, four key performance indices including determination coefficient (R In order to compare the proposed ANN model results with the results of numeric model, the simulation data (215 datasets) is used. These datasets were not incorporated in development of the ANN model. The model performance indices were computed based on the simulation data and summarized in Rounding up the reviewed references by the authors, there are some numerical and empirical models to predict displacements around the power station caverns and underground excavations. These models are discussed briefly in the following. There are some numerical equations in literatures for prediction of displacements around the underground excavations. Based on the 3D numerical modeling,  Based on the conducted literature review, there are two empirical equations to predict the maximum horizontal and vertical displacements around the power station caverns. In this regard, In the current research, Eqs. In this section, the results of ANN, numerical and empirical methods, are compared with the results of some case studies in Iran and other countries. The characteristics of these case studies and their related maximum displacements are shown in Based on the measured data gathered from several case studies (given in Sensitivity analysis is a process in which the significance of each input parameter on the objective (output) parameter is determined in the modeling. The Cosine Amplitude Method (CAM) is one of the sensitivity analysis methods that used to obtain the express similarity relations between the related parameters ( Each of the elements, Thus, each of the data pairs can be thought of as a point in By applying Eq. In this research, a new artificial neural network model is proposed to determine the maximum displacement around the power station caverns. The obtained results are compared with the results of the available numerical and empirical models. To estimate the maximum displacement, parameters including RMR, overburden depth, coefficient of lateral pressure, pillar width and vertical difference of crown level between two adjacent caverns are considered as the models inputs variables. By examination of the various types of neural networks, a network with architecture 12–20–20–1 and LOGSIG transfer function was found as an optimum in order to maximum displacement prediction. Performance evaluation of the utilized models was conducted by using of the determination coefficient (R