Derjaguin and Dukhin (1961) developed a kinetic model for the bubble-particle interactions in flotation using the classical DLVO theory. According to the model, the energy barrier (E
                     1) to flotation should increase with the square of particle ζ-potential due to the increase in the repulsive electrical double-layer (EDL) forces in the thin liquid films (TLFs) of water confined between the two dissimilar surfaces. In the present work, surface force measurements have been conducted by monitoring the changes in local curvatures of the air bubbles approaching flat silica surfaces of varying contact angles, while controlling the bubble ζ-potentials in alkyltrimethylammonium chloride (CnTACl) solutions of varying chain lengths and concentrations. The results show that the kinetics of film thinning and contact angle formation increased with decreasing energy barriers. It has been found, however, that E
                     1 = 0 is not the sufficient condition for maximum kinetics, as the bubble-particle interaction continued to improve with further increases in the negative disjoining pressure in the TLFs. These findings can be attributed to the increase in the hydrodynamic forces in TLFs due to the increases in the attractive EDL and hydrophobic forces. The fundamental information obtained in the present work may be useful for developing novel flotation reagents and designing more efficient flotation machines. The first step in bubble-particle interaction is collision, followed by the thinning and rupture of wetting films. If a particle surface is hydrophobic, the film thins fast, ruptures quickly and forms a contact angle. If the surface is hydrophilic, the particle cannot penetrate the film and bears away from the bubble, failing to be collected. Thus, flotation separation depends critically on the stability of the wetting films involved. Recognizing its importance in flotation, the wetting film formed on a hydrophobic surface is often referred to as flotation film. At the time when Derjaguin and Dukhin was developing the flotation model, only the DLVO forces, The first measurement of the hydrophobic force was made in the thin liquid films (TLFs) of water confined between two curved mica surfaces using the surface force apparatus (SFA) ( In the present work, the surface forces present in the wetting films formed on silica were measured in the manner described above with the objective of studying the role of the EDL forces in bubble-particle interaction. The measurements were conducted in the presence of alkyltrimethylammonium chloride (C When an air bubble approaches a flat surface in water, a thin liquid film (TLF), also known as wetting (or flotation) film, is formed in between. The curvature changes associated with conforming to the flat geometry creates an excess (or capillary) pressure ( Thus, Integrating Eq. An objective of the present work is to measure the surface forces in wetting films to find ways to improve the bubble-particle attachment and contact angle formation in flotation. To this end, an air bubble is slowly brought to a surface within the distance range where surface forces can cause the bubble to deform. By monitoring the bubble deformation, one can determine the capillary pressure ( Integrating Eq. Substituting Eq. The first term on the right of Eq. Flotation is based on controlling the surface forces (or П) present in the wetting films of water formed on minerals. According to the extended DLVO theory ( The hydrophobic disjoining pressure (П A Direct-Q water purification system was used to obtain batches of deionized water with a resistance of 18.2 MΩ⋅cm. Silicon cantilever springs for direct force measurements were fabricated from sheets of silicon wafers purchased from University Wafer, Inc., Boston, MA, with single side polished. Each cantilever had a dimension of 15 × 3 × 0.05 mm. Hydrogen peroxide (H The cantilever springs were cleaned by immersing them in a mild piranha solution (H In the present work, the force apparatus for deformable surfaces (FADS) shown in The recorded optical fringes were analyzed to reconstruct the spatiotemporal film profiles, which were used as raw data that can be used to determine the parameters such as According to   The surface force measurements were conducted at three different approach speeds, Note in Note here that the Laplace forces (black) calculated on the basis of the changes in bubble curvature are in reasonable agreement with those (green) obtained from direct force measurement, which validated the method of using an air bubble effectively as a force sensor. Note also that the force curves obtained using this method were smoother and more reproducible. Furthermore, the new method was more sensitive as has already been discussed. A series of FADS measurement have been conducted on the wetting films of water formed on silica surfaces to study the role of EDL forces on bubble-surface interactions. In flotation, air bubbles are usually negatively charged, and so are the collector-coated mineral surfaces. Under these conditions, the bubble-particle interactions are usually driven by the hydrophobic force, while the EDL forces imposing kinetic energy barriers. In the present work, a series of surface force measurements have been conducted in the presence of 10  The results presented in    Also shown in  Another series of force measurement have been conducted with hydrophobic silica surfaces. Cleaned silicon cantilevers were immersed in a 10 Based on the data presented in Note here that the Π(  In the presence of 10 Thus, the cationic surfactant served dual roles: one of a hydrophobicity-enhancing agent to increase The force curves obtained in 10  The results of the surface force measurements conducted in the present work show that one can improve the kinetics of the bubble-surface interactions by control of the surface charge characteristics of air bubbles. To demonstrate this approach using a simpler method of studying the kinetics, a series of induction time measurements have been conducted. The measurements were conducted on silica surfaces of different contact angles in the presence and absence of 10 In flotation, air bubbles collide with mineral particles in water before selectively collecting hydrophobic particles on the surface, while leaving hydrophilic particles unattached. The separation process is based on exploiting the differences in the wettability of the particles involved. As shown in the foregoing section, the wetting films formed on hydrophobic surfaces are unstable and hence rupture to form contact angles, while those on hydrophilic surfaces are stable and do not rupture. It has been shown also that the stability is determined by the surface forces in the film. In general, both the van der Waals and EDL forces are repulsive, while the hydrophobic force is attractive, which led to the conclusion that bubble-particle attachment is driven by the hydrophobic force ( Even if a particle is hydrophobic, the wetting film surrounding it can become metastable and hence does not rupture if the EDL force is stronger and longer-ranged than the hydrophobic force. The film can rupture if the particle has enough kinetic energy (   Another way to increase the kinetics of film thinning will be to increase the kinetic energy of the particles, which may explain why high-intensity agitation should help improve flotation particularly for fine particle flotation. As is well known, fine particles follow the stream lines around bubbles, resulting in low collision efficiencies (  One of the most intriguing observations made in the present work was that the hydrodynamic force increased sharply with the increase in the negative disjoining pressure due to the hydrophobic or attractive EDL forces as shown in In general, hydrophobic forces are represented by double-exponential functions consisting of short- and long-range components. It has been shown also that short-range forces are stronger than the long-range forces, and that in wetting films the former prevails at The surface forces in the wetting films of water formed on silica surfaces have been measured by monitoring the changes in local curvatures of an air bubble interacting with a flat surface. The results obtained at different approach speeds show that the curvature changes become more significant at a slower approach speed, suggesting that the force measurement be conducted at a slower speed to achieve a gain in accuracy. The wetting films formed on hydrophilic silica are stable due to both the repulsive van der Waals and electrical double-layer (EDL) forces. The kinetics of film thinning can be improved substantially by reversing the bubble charge from negative to positive in the presence of a cationic surfactant (C  The authors declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this paper. Authors would like to acknowledge the financial support from