Alternatives to internal fixation of long-bone fracture comprise, depending on location, external fixation or joint replacement. Limitations comprise risk of infection and functional outcome quality, which vary according to technique. The present study examines these limitations, based on comparative or large-scale studies from which certain significant results emerge. Four main questions are dealt with: (1) the present role of locking plates; (2) conditions for intramedullary nailing in Gustilo grade IIIb open fracture; (3) the limitations of conversion from external fixation to intramedullary nailing in open lower leg fracture; (4) and the limitations of definitive anterograde femoral nailing in multiple trauma. Locking plate fixation has yet to prove clinical superiority in any of the anatomic sites for which good-quality comparative analyses are available. Infection risk in Gustilo grade IIIb open lower leg fracture is equivalent when treated by intramedullary nailing or external fixation, if wound care and debridement are effective, antibiotherapy is initiated rapidly and skin cover is restored within 7days. Conversion from primary external fixation to intramedullary nailing is possible if the external fixator was fitted less than 28days previously and skin cover was restored within 7days. The pulmonary and systemic impact of peripheral lesions or definitive anterograde intramedullary nailing of femoral fracture in multiple trauma calls for caution and what is known as “damage-control orthopedics” (DCO), a term covering the general consequences of both the initial trauma and its treatment. Femoral intramedullary nailing is thus contraindicated in case of hemorrhagic shock (blood pressure<90mmHg), hypothermia (<33°C), coagulation disorder (platelet count<90,000) or peripheral lesions such as multiple long-bone fractures, crushed limb or primary pulmonary contusion. In such cases, external fixation or retrograde nailing with a small-diameter nail and without reaming are preferable.Toward the end of the 19th century, internal fixation was described for fracture treatment, which had hitherto been exclusively non-operative – and immediately ran up against its prime limitation: infection. Since then, limitations have been constantly pushed back, with the introduction of asepsis rules, antibiotic prophylaxis and ancillaries facilitating implantation, so that internal fixation now rivals other methods of fracture fixation and also implants. The role of internal fixation in long-bone fractures is now established, and treatments are ever more ambitious. The recent increasing use of locking plates has opened up a new field of treatment that remains to be assessed. Gustilo grade IIIb open lower leg fracture is increasingly fixed by intramedullary nailing. External fixation is no longer seen as contraindicating conversion to internal fixation. Finally, the concepts of “early total care” (ECT) and “damage-control orthopedics” open the way to considering internal fixation for the various fractures involved in multiple trauma in certain cases. Such are the conditions for these 4 types of internal fixation for which we shall try to see just how far back limitations can be pushed without exposing the patient to a risk of complications or poor functional outcome. Fully restoring function after long-bone fracture involves well-positioned bone healing without surrounding soft-tissue lesion. Intramedullary nailing, screwed plates and external fixation may be indicated, according to skin status, fracture type, location and bone quality. Locking plates have become widely used in the last 15 or so years, and are now an integral part of the traumatologic armamentarium. They are alternatives to non-locking screwed plates and also to other types of internal fixation. Their primacy, based on real or supposed advantages, seems established, but their precise role remains to be determined in the light of clinical findings. There have been numerous reports of the biomechanical advantages of locking plates Fjalestad et al. Humeral hemiarthroplasty, intended for this type of fracture, and especially 4-part fracture, in elderly subjects, has largely given way to the locking plate. Solberg et al. Functional results in arthroplasty closely depend on tuberosity reduction and consolidation and rotator cuff degeneration, which is frequent in this population. Reverse shoulder arthroplasty was developed in order to circumvent these two issues, but there have been no studies with comparison against locking plates. McKee et al. Elbow replacement provided significantly better Mayo Elbow Performance Score (MEPS) than internal fixation up to the end of the 2-year follow-up ( Only level-4 observational studies have been reported for locking plates in this indication, with no comparative studies. McKee's results cannot easily be extrapolated to locking plates, which would now be used in such cases. McKee's follow-up stopped at 2 The proximal ulna should be considered apart: locking plates show proven benefit in fractures of osteoporotic bone, but internal fixation of a displaced olecranon fracture in over-70-year-olds should be considered only with caution. Gallucci demonstrated the benefit of functional treatment in a prospective study of 28 consecutive patients with displaced olecranon fracture aged over 70 In younger patients, tension bands are the gold-standard, except in comminutive olecranon fracture, metaphyseo-epiphyseal fracture and dislocation fracture of the elbow, where locking plates showed superiority in level-4 studies In 2012, Jeudy et al. There were no significant inter-group differences in radioulnar index ( On the other hand, locking plates provided better functional results at 6 Locking plates potentially broaden indications for plate fixation, thanks to better fixation quality in complex and osteoporotic fracture. However, they do not exclude failure (disassembly, non-union, etc.) when their very strict principles (use of visors and dynamometric screw-drivers) are not respected, and it is not proven that functional outcome is improved. The possibility of subcutaneous implantation holds out hope for better results, although it involves greater technical difficulty and radiation dose. In the absence of studies with sufficient level of evidence, recommendations cannot be drawn up for distal femur or proximal or distal tibia fracture. The Gustilo classification is the most widely used for open lower leg fracture. Although it fails to quantify trauma impact on the bone and muscle, it provides a faithful representation of trauma severity. Grade IIIb constitutes a prognostic turning point. Outside of extreme situations such as bone defect, elevated contamination, possible vascular involvement or comorbidities requiring rapid intervention of the traumatized leg, intramedullary nailing has come to play a significant role in the treatment of serious open lower leg fracture. The advantage of intramedullary nailing over external fixation lies in easier wound treatment, easier mobilization of the knee and ankle, and lower rates of non-union. The risk is of deep intramedullary infection, which is difficult to treat and shows unpredictable course. In serious lower leg fracture, fixation success depends on several factors: one is the quality of surgical wound care, which consists in resecting necrotic or soon-to-be-necrotic tissue, and may require several procedures. Wound care does not replace debridement, which is a distinct step involving opening the wound wide and releasing tense tissue, from the skin to the aponeuroses, to expose dead spaces for cleansing; secondly, antibiotic prophylaxis needs to be of good quality, and rapidly implemented: according to current SFAR (French Society of Anesthesiology and Intensive Care), SoFCOT (French Society of Orthopedic Surgery and Traumatology) and Orthorisq guidelines Skin cover should be performed as soon as possible when the edges of the skin defect are viable. Rapid conversion of open to closed fracture is fundamental. The “fix and flap” principle has proved its efficacy in this regard. Mathews et al. However, not all hospital centers are able to ensure this strategy, and in that case cover by means of an occlusive dressing with negative pressure during the first 7 Ktistakis et al. Certain studies have compared the 2 fixation techniques in grade IIIb fracture. Tornetta et al. Intramedullary nailing does not seem to be associated with higher infection rates than external fixation. In the absence of the above-mentioned factors of severity, intramedullary nailing in Gustilo grade IIIb open lower leg fracture does not seem to be associated with higher infection rates than external fixation on condition that the following principles are respected: wound care and debridement in the surgery room, repeated until a wound with viable edges is obtained; prophylactic antibiotherapy initiated as of admission; skin cover within 7 Intramedullary nailing is the standard treatment for fractures of the 2 lower leg bones. Temporary external fixation ahead of definitive intramedullary nailing is occasionally used in fractures with severe skin opening (Gustilo grade III) and/or vascular involvement. It remains to be seen what risk of deep infection is incurred by this sequence, and what factors may limit such risk. Bhandari et al. reviewed all publications on the subject between 1980 and 2003 Secondary intramedullary nailing after external fixation in tibial shaft fracture may be considered in the light of the high non-union rate (10–40%) associated with isolated external fixation The only prospective randomized study on the subject Bhandari et al. Reports in this controversy are contradictory. A 2-step procedure, with a free interval of a few days between ablation of the external fixator and nailing, has the theoretic advantage of allowing pin orifice healing, and some authors proceed to nailing only after the orifices have closed (after at least 9 Roussignol et al. The answer is “No”. Roussignol et al. The main risk factor for infection following secondary nailing is the degree of skin opening and time to coverage. Yokoyama et al. Roussignol et al. reported that Gustilo skin opening grade was the only significant factor for infection following nailing ( The advantage of converting from external fixation to intramedullary nailing should be explained to the patient in terms of quality of functional recovery and also consolidation and the associated risk of infection: conversion within 28 The limitations of intramedullary nailing after external fixation of lower leg fracture can presently be defined as: > skin coverage later than day 7. Secretion around external fixator pins is a relative limitation, and should by precaution indicate 2-step conversion with a 9-day interval. Finally, if conditions for conversion are optimal, it should still be born in mind that non-union and infection risks are slightly less than 10%. Early surgery for long-bone fracture in multiple trauma long seemed misconceived, as patients were thought to lack the physiological resources to support lengthy internal fixation procedures. In the 1980s, the concept of ECT emerged: definitive treatment of each fracture in multiple trauma. Applied to all patients regardless of severity, the concept showed its limitations: some patients, notably with significant pulmonary, abdominal or cranial trauma or elevated Injury Severity Score (ISS), did not survive this kind of treatment In the 1990s, the concept of DCO was therefore developed, with early rapid temporary stabilization of fracture sites followed by definitive treatment after the critical phase of systemic recovery. Early fixation was mainly but not exclusively external: some authors recommended “damage-control nailing” by small-diameter retrograde femoral nails DCO is indicated only for femoral shaft fracture associated with significant pulmonary, abdominal or cranial trauma. If there is no femoral fracture, other long-bone fractures do not incur general postoperative complications and can therefore benefit from primary definitive treatment, even in case of associated pulmonary, abdominal or cranial trauma. The aim of DCO is to enable the anesthesiologist to control and stabilize the patient's general health status as quickly as possible. The surgeon must then fix the femoral fracture site effectively but without incurring damage DCO using plates has been attempted, but the surgical community has not gone down this road Definitive anterograde intramedullary nailing is aggressive, involving reaming and impaction of a nail of suitable diameter, and may thus trigger an inflammatory response and multiple organ dysfunction syndrome (MODS) or acute respiratory distress syndrome (ARDS). However, we are not quite sure why intramedullary nailing is so damaging; studies are contradictory, and it is not clear whether the reaming, the intramedullary impaction or the associated bleeding should be incriminated. Pape et al. The Canadian Orthopaedic Trauma Society There are no randomized studies comparing external fixation versus definitive anterograde intramedullary nailing for DCO in unstable multiple trauma. Numerous biological markers (C-reactive protein [CRP], tumor necrosis factor α [TNF α], interleukin [IL 6-8-10-18], procalcitonin [PCT], etc.) have been assayed to study plasma levels in multiple trauma Only IL 6 reliably correlates with trauma severity and post-traumatic complications The risks associated with definitive femoral anterograde intramedullary nailing depend on baseline clinical status, progression in intensive care, and certain intraoperative parameters. The classical “trauma triad of death”, comprising varying degrees of hypovolemic shock, hypothermia and coagulopathy, somewhat underestimates severity, especially in case of pulmonary trauma. The triad needs supplementing with soft-tissue trauma parameters: the severity of soft-tissue trauma can have pulmonary consequences that are especially serious in case of initial thoracic trauma The initial clinical and paraclinical parameters to be taken into account are hemorrhagic shock: systolic blood pressure hypothermia coagulopathy: platelet count soft-tissue trauma: long-bone fracture(s) associated with femoral fracture, crushing trauma, pelvic fracture, pulmonary contusion with AIS (Abbreviated Injury Scale) score > If 3 of these 4 criteria obtain, DCO is indicated and anterograde femoral intramedullary nailing thus contraindicated. Two other parameters, considered negative, also counsel caution: mean pulmonary blood pressure (PBP) increase in PBP exceeding 6 Whatever the primary fixation technique, an interval must be left between the first procedure and the “consolidation procedure”. Pape et al. Pape et al. The pulmonary and visceral consequences of the peripheral component of multiple trauma and treatment by definitive anterograde femoral intramedullary nailing are increasingly well understood. DCO should provide sufficient stability to allow definitive treatment of the femoral fracture. This must imperatively include cautious manipulation of the fracture site by minimal external fixation or retrograde “damage-control nailing” with a small-diameter nail. First-line definitive anterograde femoral intramedullary nailing should be considered in stable multiple trauma. In unstable multiple trauma, on the other hand, definitive intramedullary nailing can only be considered after assessment based on clinical and biological criteria, requiring close team-work with the anesthesiologist. The authors declare that they have no competing interest.