In this paper, different methodologies to characterize the flotation rate distribution at laboratory batch scale are presented. Conventional model fitting is compared with a selectively chosen set of one-parameter models to describe the flotation rate distribution F(k). In addition, a numerical inversion of the Laplace Transform, which is applicable to first-order systems, is shown. A wide range of time-recovery curves and probability density functions (PDF) for F(k) are presented based on 85 flotation tests. The Single Rate Constant, Rectangular, Exponential, Rayleigh, Unilateral Raised Cosine and χ
                     2 models are applied to fit the time-recovery curves. The best model per test is chosen and compared to the model fitting obtained from the Gamma distribution, showing a good agreement between these two approaches. The one-parameter PDFs are compared with F(k) estimates obtained from a regularized Inverse Laplace Transform. In this approach, no assumptions on the F(k) shape are made. The flotation rate distributions estimated from the Laplace Inversion show similar shapes to those obtained from the Gamma and the optimal one-parameter approach. In addition, the F(k) estimates present positive skews in all the evaluated tests. The use of the Laplace Transform Inversion along with conventional model fitting is a powerful tool to validate the F(k) estimates at laboratory scale.The kinetics of flotation have been commonly described by the change in mineral concentration in a flotation machine as a function of time, similar to a chemical reaction. Flotation is based on the interaction between solid particles and gas bubbles to form buoyant particle-bubble aggregates. An abundance of bubbles has been typically assumed ( Eq. Within Eq.  Continuous or discrete distributions have been proposed to describe  The current paper demonstrates the selection of suitable one-parameter flotation rate distributions, and the resulting accuracy in describing time-recovery curves. The model fitting obtained by means of this optimal selection is compared with the model fitting obtained from the Gamma distribution (a two-parameter model). In addition, a numerical inversion of the Laplace Transform of (1 − Eighty-five batch flotation tests of a porphyry copper ore were conducted. The copper feed grade ranged from approximately 0.3% to 1.2% with a median of 0.53% as presented in the cumulative distribution function of Mass recoveries ranged from 8.1% to 29.8% with a median of 14.9%. The time-recovery curves were fitted from six one-parameter  The six one-parameter models shown in Eq. The modelled function The linear system of Eq. In Eq.  From the regression analysis, a comparison between the fitting obtained from the one and two-parameter models was carried out. The SSR, calculated from Eq.  Each flotation rate distribution detailed in From The results showed that, for the one-parameter models, no single model structures allowed for suitable A comparison of 6 one-parameter model structures to describe the flotation rate distribution The authors are grateful for the financial support from the Known flotation rate distributions were used to obtain time-recovery curves under the six PDFs shown in 