The adhesion between high consistency silicone rubbers (HCR) and metal via a primer entails a complex chemistry not completely understood. This series of papers aims at defining the important criteria that govern the bonding of various HCR grades on metal surfaces. In this first study, different primer formulations were tested, thanks to a 90° peel test, showing different effectiveness toward silicone/metal attachment. Their basic components are organotitanate catalysts and a vinyltrialkoxysilane, whereas some other reactants, e.g. 3-mercaptopropyltriethoxysilane, polydimethylsiloxane chains or tetraethoxysilane, are likely introduced to bring supplementary properties to the primer film or to enhance the co-vulcanization with the silicone elastomer. From these bases, a new primer formulation, containing a silicone resin as main component, was developed successfully. However, the question of the primer selectivity for a grade of silicone elastomer still remains an issue.High consistency silicone rubbers (HCRs) are widely used for their intrinsic resistance properties against UV, high temperature, solvents and in a lesser extent, ozone. These elastomers are typically silica-filled PDMS linear macromolecules chemically cross-linked via organic peroxides. In the industry, the silicone rubbers are bonded with metals for the manufacturing of technical parts such as dampers, seals, etc. Primer formulations for HCR are mainly quoted in the patent literature. Our group has recently written a review on the chemical adhesion of silicone elastomers on primed metal surfaces This series of papers aims at developing a primer formulation for the adhesion of high consistency silicone rubber on metals and also at bringing further understanding on the (physical) chemistries of the organosilane-based primer formulations. In this first paper, two typical primer formulations were studied to compare their chemistry with their adhesive properties on silicone elastomers of study. To do so, 90° peel tests were systematically performed. The information obtained then allowed the development of a new primer formulation containing a mixture of organosilanes and a silicone resin in an organic solvent. The second paper Two basic primer formulations, named CAP1 and CAP2 thereafter, and high damped and resilient high consistency silicone rubbers, named elastomer A and elastomer B thereafter, were kindly supplied by our industrial partner. Chromium (III) acetylacetonate (97%), titanium isopropoxide (≥97%), vinyltrimethoxysilane (98%), 3-aminopropyltrimethoxysilane (98%), propylamine (98%), methylcylohexane (99%), toluene (puriss. for GC, >99.7%), tetrahydrofuran (THF, ≥99.5%) and lithium aluminum hydride (LiAlH The solid content of the primer formulations was determined by gravimetry. The nature of the catalyst in formulation CAP1 was determined by elemental analyses, which were performed by the Service Central d’Analyse, Villeurbanne (France). Nitrogen content was determined through a combustion process followed by gas chromatography detection and titanium content was obtained through a mineralization process in acid medium followed by inductively coupled plasma atomic emission spectrometry (ICP-AES) detection. Thermogravimetry (TGA) analyses were carried out on a Q500 from TA Instrument. 25 Size exclusion chromatography (SEC) was carried out on a Malvern Viscotek GPC max equipped with two detectors (a Viscotek VE3580 differential refractometer detector and a 270 dual detector Malvern viscometer) and three Waters columns in series (300 The functionality and the type of silicone units (M, D, T and Q) present in the solvated primer formulations were determined by liquid state Solid state The curing kinetics of the silicone elastomers was determined by a Moving Die Rheometer (MDR). The lower part of a heated biconical oscillating chamber applies an oscillation strain of 0.5° at 1.7 The percentage of residue obtained by TGA at the end of the heating ramp corresponds a priori to the quantity of inorganic fillers (i.e. silica) in the elastomer. The content of silica in the elastomer can also be estimated from the volumetric mass density of the HCR ( Swelling measurements were performed by plunging a test sample (cylindrical disk of 6 This parameter encompasses both chemical bindings between PDMS chains and physical knots between silica and PDMS chains. The molar mass between cross-linking points corresponding only to the contribution of chemical bonds ( To characterize the adhesive strength of a primer formulation, a 90° peel test was performed on three test specimens composed of a metal, a primer film and a silicone elastomer. The procedure used to make these test specimens is composed of several steps which are further described. The aluminum plates were first degreased in an ultrasonic acetone bath (10 The aluminum plates were coated by dipping them in the formulation of primer (10 The coated aluminum plates were placed in the mold and the non-vulcanized silicone material was deposited over the metal. The mold was closed and placed under the press. The minimal cycle time of vulcanization was determined by a Moving Die Rheometer (see e.g. The 90° peel test was performed according to the norm ISO 813-1997. A moderate strain rate (50 The fracture profile obtained after mechanical test was analyzed and the percentage of rubber remaining on the surface of the metal was determined (see e.g. The adhesive strengths of two conventional primer formulations for silicone were first determined by a 90° peel test ( A different profile of peeling was also observed between the silicone elastomers A and B, which is directly correlated to the mechanical properties of the silicone elastomer. For the high damped silicone elastomer (A), the adhesion is solicited at about 200 The non-universal character of a primer formulation for a given silicone elastomer is obvious from these results. Many commercial primer formulations were tested with the silicone elastomer A and none of them gave as good results as with the formulation CAP1 ( The composition and the main mechanical properties of the silicone elastomers employed in this study are summarized in Silicone elastomer A shows a higher gap between The primers CAP1 and CAP2 are available in naphtha solvent and ethanol, respectively. The solid content for each formulation was obtained after evaporation of these solvents. 9.3% of solid residue was found for the formulation CAP1 against 21.2% for the formulation CAP2. The MSDS of the formulation CAP1 does not contain any information regarding the type of catalyst used. The titration of the nitrogen and titanium elements was performed on the solid residue of the formulation CAP1 for the detection of an amine or organotitanate-type catalyst, respectively. The nitrogen content was close to the limit of detection of the device, so we can estimate that there is no nitrogen compound in the formulation CAP1. The titanium content was less than 1 Deeper analyses were done by liquid From these basic analyses, it can be concluded that basic primer formulations for silicone adhesion contain at least an organotitanate catalyst and a vinyltrialkoxysilane (T Thanks to the information found in the literature The different vinyl silicone resins (MM Silicone resins are hyperbranched structures with quite low hydrodynamic volumes; SEC measurements thus only give “apparent” molar masses. The different normalized SEC traces for the silicone resins MM The chemical composition of the silicone resins was qualitatively estimated by The catalysts usually employed with silicone resins are two-fold and depend on the type of terminal group: (i) aminoalkylalkoxysilane, alkenylacetoxysilane or basic amino compounds catalyze the adhesion of organopolysiloxane resins having hydroxyl groups bonded to the silicon atoms; whereas (ii) titanium esters are preferred for organopolysiloxane resins having alkoxy groups bonded to the silicon atoms First of all, different catalysts were tested with the silicone resin MD The different MM The influence of each component contents in the primer formulation DAP was then systematically studied. The silicone resin MD The formulation containing only 20 The primer formulations containing a silicone resin (MD In this study, the chemical characterization of all components engaged in a silicone/metal adhesion was initially performed before testing the adhesion by a conventional 90° peel test. The high damped silicone elastomer (elastomer A) is composed of a methyl, phenyl, vinyl silicone gum; the phenyl functions increase the hardness of the cross-linked material. The resilient one (elastomer B) is only composed of a methyl, vinyl silicone gum. The hardness of elastomer B is nevertheless set high by ensuring a lowing molar mass between cross-linking points than the elastomer A (10,200 against 18,700 The composition of two conventional primer formulations was also qualitatively estimated. An organotitanate catalyst and an organic solvent were present in both formulations. Partially hydrolyzed and condensed vinyltrialkoxysilane liberate functional groups for the reaction with the silicone elastomer. The major difference between both primers is the introduction of a PDMS compound as film former in the formulation CAP1 and the introduction of 3-mercapto-propyltriethoxysilane in the formulation CAP2. A primer formulation was then developed, optimized and tested in adhesion. It is composed of a vinyl-functionalized silicone resin, vinyltrimethoxysilane and various catalysts of hydrolysis/condensation reactions. Organotitanate compounds were found the best catalysts for the silane-based primer formulations, thanks to their reactivity toward hydrolysis and condensation of the alkoxyl functions of the primer on the metal surface. MM The optimized primer formulation was found really efficient for the adhesion of the high damped HCR silicone on an aluminum surface and gave equivalent adhesive strengths and fracture profiles as CAP1 formulation. Still, it is not adapted to the adhesion of the resilient HCR. Moreover, the DAP primer formulation containing no vinyltrimethoxysilane gave as good adhesive strengths with the silicone elastomer A as the one containing 3