Experimental data show that the efficiency of an irradiation process, ε, of the flowing water is related to water flowrate. In this work, we introduce a new formula for water flowrate which parameters ε and dose distribution well related to the flowrate are derived, analytically. First, in terms of stream velocity, electron fluence is defined then, the accepted concepts of an electron beam irradiation processing are rewritten in flowrate dependence using the experimental data of ε versus flowrate and initial electron energy. The final formula predicts the depth-dose distributions respect to the flowrate. Also, we propose an analytical formula for D(t) and further for Fe and ε in terms of the flowrate with definition of C1 parameter as a correlation factor of velocity on the surface and in the bulk. Further, the simulation approach shows flowrate dependence of the depth-dose curve well.Electron beam irradiation of materials have been vastly subjected to the polymer curing In this work, a reasonable concept is presented to explain this subject theoretically. For that, an analytical view is applied to obtain a relation between the efficiency and the depth-dose curve of the flowing stream; first, the depth-dose relation was rewritten as a function of fluence and then, a new correlation between fluence and flowrate has been developed. Finally, the experimental data of ε are reproduced to examine the validity of the proposed relation that predicts the flowrate dependence of the depth-dose distribution. In a flowing stream, ε is related to the average value of the absorbed dose, If an electron with an initial energy of Another quantity that is used to calculate absorbed dose is particle fluence, Or in terms of the dissipation function and with our notation, it can be equivalently written as [ The integrations in According to definitions If E’ changes from 0 to E,  In this study, the experimental data have been adopted from the reported results of IPEN. This facility consists of a 1.5 MeV electron beam, with beam current in the range from 1 to 25 mA and absorbed dose is measured by calorimetric system. Flowrate (20–45 l/min), energy, and current of electron are changed in different tests in a manner that the maximum absorbed dose keeps constant at 5 kGy. It is assumed that the incident electrons have transmitted through a 40 According to Sampa et al.   The flowrate dependent efficiency of a system subjected to electron beam irradiation can be explained according to the velocity profile and its role influence of electrons. Here, we proposed an analytical formula for D(t) and further for F All authors declare no conflict of interest. The authors declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this paper. The authors would like to thank Ardakan University for financial support and the Department of Metallurgical Engineering, University of Nevada for general support.