Changes in N-distribution patterns in volcanic-ash of Chile after deforestation of a primary forest were measured. There is a clear tendency towards the depletion of N linked to high molecular weight fractions (humin, humic acid fractions) after the disturbance. These changes are illustrated schematically in relation to N input and output and to rhizosphere behavior after deforestation.
                  N-pool and its pattern distribution within soil organic macromolecules is postulated to be a good indicator of N-dynamics in soils, which could be applied to detect soil deterioration processes. As an experimental model, it is proposed to characterize organic-N as N-fulvic, N-humic, N-humin and light organic-N.Information on the size and the cycling of nitrogen pools in soil is important to develop good soil fertilization management to improve N-uptake by plants. This includes the assessment of chemical forms of N and its dynamic changes related to organic matter and type of microbial population, clay mineralogy, cultivation practices, etc. Chilean volcanic soils represent a good model to obtain an insight on N cycle in natural ecosystems and its changes after the intervention of man and application of large amounts of fertilizer, mainly P and N. The formation processes of volcanic soils in Chile have been mainly influenced both by the chemical composition of the parent volcanic ashes and the climate of southern hemisphere beyond a latitude of 35°S (Chillán), characterized by high annual rainfall (1500–3000 Reported total N in soils range in general from 0.02 to 0.4% with a mean value of 0.14 ( In Chilean volcanic soils it has been postulated that microbiological N-mineralization processes are limited by low C-availability, in spite of their high total-C content ( Agricultural use of these soils has led to a drastic decrease in total C content, but knowledge is scarce on how and when indigenous or added-N is associated with the different chemical forms of SOM ( Here we report the distribution and cycling of N within the organic matter matrix in volcanic ash-derived soil in Chile, being under different levels of intervention and agronomic management. Our approach is based on the characterization of organic-N as N-fulvic, N-humic, N-humin and light organic-N, whereas inorganic-N is measured as NH The following Chilean volcanic ash-derived soils were selected for this study: Andisols (trumaos): Osorno, Temuco and Puerto Octay. Placandepts (ñadis): Frutillar and Piedras Negras. Ultisols (rojo-arcillosos): Cudico and Collipulli. Soil samples were selected in duplicate from sites adjacent to each other and under the following management regime: undisturbed wild forest (F) natural prairie (P) cultivated and fertilized prairie (Pf) soil under agronomic rotation (C) untreated deforested soil (old road-cuts) (O). Soil samples correspond to a composite sample prepared by mixing five representative samples of each plot, taken at 0–30 Actual conditions, resulting from ancient soil utilization practices, do not allow for all the soil series sampled with all the management regimes included. For this reason, not all of the tables present all the corresponding mark-letter samples indicated earlier. Organic matter was extracted using a modified alkaline extraction method ( In each soil sample and isolated organic fraction, total C and N were determined by dry combustion using a Vario-El Analyzer. Inorganic N was analyzed as NO All analyses were made in duplicate, and the analytical error was <5%. Data were expressed on a dry weight basis (105 Soil residue, after extraction with 0.1N NaOH. Humic acid, after acidification of alkaline soil extracts and purification with HCl–HF and finally by dialysis ( Fulvic acid, after purification first by ion-exchange and then through dialysis tubing (cut-off 12,000 Soluble soil fraction, composed of low molecular weight chemical species removed from the dialysis tubing after successive washings, contain soil soluble-salts, amino acids, monosaccharides and polysaccharides. Fraction (d) was estimated by weight difference between the original dry weighed sample and the sum of the (a), (b) and (c) fractions.  Total N-contents in the whole soil, organic-N in (a)–(d) fractions, N-NO  There was a clear reduction of organic-C when soils were converted to agricultural uses ( The effect of different soil management upon the modification of the N-distribution between different chemical soil fractions is noted in The natural N input processes active in these soil systems proceeds by microbiological processes mainly through N Under natural conditions N-forms are permanently subjected to continuous changes, but equilibrated through biological and physico-chemical processes, all of them working interactively at the rhizosphere level ( In deforested volcanic soil under present agronomic land use, the indigeneous rhizosphere has been dramatically superceded by a different one, composed of root systems from different plant species ( The net values of each N-fraction clearly diminishes after human intervention, but the internal balance of the N associated with each fraction (humin, humic, fulvic, low molecular weight organic molecules and inorganic constituents) kept relatively the same ( There is a real need to accelerate research in N pool characterization, especially at sites where good historical information exists on the management and cultivation practices of deforested volcanic soils. More studies on N and C cycles, using N-balance as a good indicator of soil deterioration, appear to be one of the best strategies to achieve rational agricultural and sustainable uses of volcanic soils.