A macroscopic model is introduced for simulating the sedimentation–consolidation of solid particles in an incompressible fluid under the effect of gravity and in the presence of a slowly rotating arm assisting the removal of sediment on the bottom of clarifier–thickener units. The governing model is an initial–boundary value problem for the Navier–Stokes equations describing the flow of the mixture coupled with a nonlinear parabolic equation describing the volume fraction of solids. The rotating structure is accounted for by suitable drag laws on the momentum balance of the mixture and on the mass balance of the solid phase. An H(div)-conforming method for the coupled problem is proposed, a rigorous proof of convergence is provided, and the validity of the new model and the performance of the scheme are demonstrated numerically by several computational tests.We advance a phenomenological model of solid–fluid interaction in a continuously operated clarifier–thickener, which is an equipment widely used in the mining industry, wastewater treatment plants, and other applications. The new continuum–based model accounts for the effect of the rotating rake structure, the influence of the settling solid particles, and the three-dimensional incompressible flow of the mixture. A large variety of these devices are used in industry, but most clarifier–thickeners are circular tanks of  We consider the process of sedimentation and transport of a suspension consisting of a phase of finely divided solid particles dispersed in a viscous fluid. This mixture is contained in a clarifier tank with a moving rake. For the sedimentation–consolidation of the suspension we assume that the particles are relatively small with respect to the tank size and possess the same density. It is assumed that the mixture is composed of incompressible solid and liquid phases, that the mixture velocity is relatively small, and that the suspension is already flocculated before the process starts (see It is the purpose of this paper to advance a novel discretisation for the resulting initial–boundary value problem that is of second-order in space and time. The discretisation employs divergence-conforming Brezzi–Douglas–Marini (BDM) elements of order Early models for the clarifying process with and without swirl effects were reviewed in Here we also include appropriate drag terms, much as in Moreover, we emphasise that the fluid–structure interaction considered in We have organised the contents of this paper in the following manner. Section The viscosity  The set of governing equations is furnished with the following initial and boundary conditions: We shall use standard notation for function spaces. So, for instance, The weak formulation of problem For the space discretisation we consider a family of regular partitions, denoted For Let us introduce a partition of the interval For sake of the subsequent analysis, we assume Lipschitz continuity of the concentration-dependent viscosity We utilise the following mesh dependent broken norms:   Moreover, for Furthermore, based on the assumptions on In addition, if we let  Using the definition and characterisation of the kernel Let us denote by The following development follows the structure adopted in    Since we assume Now we decompose the errors as follows: In what follows we assume a simpler form for the drag term The following algebraic relation will be useful in the sequel: for any real numbers    It suffices to take    First, taking into account the regularity assumptions for    We choose as tests functions    Proceeding similarly as in the proof of    From    Owing to the inf–sup condition In this section we test the performance of the numerical method and produce some typical solutions in operating conditions. Tetrahedral meshes have been constructed using the freely available mesh manipulator GMSH  We show orders of convergence in the discrete norm  The typical operation conditions in the clarifier–thickener unit are characterised by about 1.2 revolutions per hour, a solid concentration behind the rake of 0.01 g/l, a feed flow rate of 10,000 gpm, a return sludge flow rate of 3000 gpm, an effluent flow rate in the overflow weir of approximately 7000 gpm, and a solid concentration at the inlet of 5 g/l (see  We start the simulation with a homogeneous initial concentration Having now a better understanding on the dimension and isolated effects of each mechanism in the coupled problem, we turn to the simulation of the sedimentation of flocculated suspensions in a more realistic geometry. We consider the domain sketched in We conduct a series of runs on the 3D geometry where the resulting tetrahedral mesh has 139  We have advanced a model for the process of clarification and thickener in circular units in the presence of a spinning rake structure. The model is intrinsically 3D, it incorporates a detailed flow-sedimentation coupling in the settling mixture and it considers a simplified, one-way coupling that only imposes the velocity of the rotating arm which affects both the transport of solid particles and the revolving flow near the bottom of the tank. This addition constitutes an important generalisation over existing models for sedimentation–consolidation processes reviewed in e.g. Several interesting extensions are left to be explored. Regarding modelling aspects, we mention that the present approach is likely to be more suitable for the application to clarifiers in wastewater treatment, since for that application the rake can be moved more easily through compacted sludge. In contrast, the sediments formed by the settling of mineral suspension exhibit major resistance to the motion of the rake, and the torque that needs to be applied (that is, the cost of energy) On the other hand, there are a number of improvements we can add in terms of our numerical method. For instance, to concentrate in the design of partitioned solvers and efficient preconditioners needed for costly 3D computations with long time horizons The authors declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this paper. This work has been carried out during a visit of the second author to the Mathematical Institute at the University of Oxford. We thank the fruitful discussions and useful suggestions by Colin P. Please, Matthew Shirley, and Clint Wong. We also acknowledge the partial support by