The sludge dewatering properties (settling, filtration and centrifugation) of metal precipitates generated during treatment of monometallic solutions (0.020 mol/L) have been evaluated in this research. The precipitation tests carried out on 15 different metals gave metal removal yields generally similar to those predicted by MINEQL+ software, with the exception that kinetic aspects should be considered during precipitation of metal sulphides and phosphates. Hydroxides precipitation at pH 10.0 was the most efficient technique for the removal of eight metallic ions (Al3+, Cd2+, Co2+, Fe2+, Fe3+, Mg2+, Mn2+, Ni2+), whereas phosphates precipitation (at pH 6.0 with an addition of 0.0133 mol PO4
                     3−/L) gave highest removal yields for Ba2+, Ca2+, Cr3+. Sulphides precipitation (at pH 7.0 and using, 0.020 mol S2−/L) has been found the most efficient technique only for Cu2+ and Sn2+ precipitation, whereas carbonates precipitation (at pH 8.0 and using 0.020 mol CO3
                     2−/L) gave better removal yield only for Pb2+. Results have also shown that metal phosphates have generally better dewatering characteristics (SVI, filtration capacity, SRF, sludge solids content) than metal carbonates, sulphides and hydroxides. In fact, considering only the sludge dewatering characteristics, phosphates precipitation appears the most appropriate technique for the precipitation of many metals (Al3+, Ba2+, Cd2+, Co2+, Cr3+, Fe2+, Fe3+, Ni2+ and Zn2+). Metal hydroxides formation constitutes the best option for Ca2+, Cu2+, Mg2+ and Sn2+ removal, whereas precipitation of metal carbonates is particularly interesting for treatment of Mn2+ and Pb2+ containing solutions.viscosity of the filtrate surface area slope of the plot ( weight of solids/unit volume of filtrate filtration capacity oxidoreduction potential pressure rotations per minute specific resistance to filtration sludge volume index time volume The risks associated with the presence of potentially toxic metals in the waters and soils resulting from human activities have been largely studied ( In the last decades, a lot of research works have been accomplished to develop efficient and cheap technologies for the treatment of metal-polluted effluents ( Among these technologies, precipitation is still the most widely used approach for metals removal from groundwater, surface water, leachates and industrial effluents ( Some others precipitating agents can be used to reach lower residual soluble metal concentrations ( Metal precipitation as sulphides (Eq. The carbonates, such as Na It is possible to remove metals from effluents through insoluble metal phosphate formation as described in Eq. The metal precipitation is usually carried out in a settling tank ( Different selective precipitating agents, like dithiocarbamate derivates (DTC, DDTC, DMTC), thiocarbonate salts (STC), and 2,4,6-trimercapto-1,3,5-triazine (TMT), have also been developed in the last years for the treatment of metal-polluted effluents ( Oxidation/reduction reactions can also be used for the precipitation of specific metal pollutants, like arsenic and chromium ( In the past, the choice of a precipitating technique for the treatment of metal-polluted effluents was principally based on the cost of the chemicals used. However, it is evident that the decision should also consider the quantities and the dewatering characteristics of metallic sludge produced. The aim of the present work was to develop basic technological knowledge on the dewatering (settling, filtration and centrifugation) properties of sludge produced by metals precipitation as metal hydroxides, sulphides, carbonates and phosphates. The performance of chemical equilibrium software (MINEQL+) was evaluated to predict residual soluble metal concentrations and generated solids in normal operational conditions used for treatment of metal-polluted effluents. Solubility domains were calculated using the chemical equilibrium modelling system MINEQL+ (version 4.5). This program may be used to compute equilibrium among dissolved, solid and adsorbed phases suitable for aqueous solutions based on the appropriate thermodynamic stability constants. In the present study, models were constrained to include only those solid phases that were found to govern solubility (example: oxides are not considered due to kinetic considerations). Ionic strength was considered “off” within the program. All calculations were performed at a constant temperature of 298 K with the number of iteration cycles constrained to 100. Solubility domains were generated for four systems: hydroxides (Fe Monometallic synthetic solutions having a concentration [M Metal precipitation tests were realized at ambient temperature (22 For each selected pH, a reaction time of 15 min was allowed for the system to reach equilibrium ( Metal precipitation tests were realized with the following four precipitating agents: Sodium hydroxide (mother solution at 2.5 mol/L); Sodium sulphide (Na Monopotassium phosphate (KH Sodium bicarbonate (NaHCO Hydroxide precipitation tests were done by adjusting the pH of the monometallic solutions (volume of 1.5 L) to 10.0 with the sodium hydroxide solution. However, for the Al During the other precipitation tests, precipitant agents were firstly added to monometallic solutions. A pH adjustment was done by adding sodium hydroxide to 6.0, 8.0 and 7.0 respectively for phosphate, carbonate and sulphide. To note that in the case of sulphides and carbonates, an adjustment of the pH in values close to 5.50 was made to avoid the emission of hydrogen sulphide and dioxide carbon gases ( After the agitation period, the suspensions were settled for 30 min in 2 L capacity cylinders and the resulting volumes of the settled sludge were measured to evaluate the sludge volume index (SVI) values. Volumes of 400 mL of the settled sludge were then sampled after the supernatants were removed by pumping. Specific resistance to filtration (SRF) and filtration capacity (FC) were used to characterize the dewaterability of the sludge resulting from metals precipitation with the different precipitating agents ( Where “ Where “ Whatman No. 2 (8.0 µm pore size) membranes having an effective area of 12.50 cm Volumes of 100 mL of the settled sludge samples were centrifuged at 3000 × The pH and ORP were determined before and after each experiment by using a pH-meter (Accumet Research AR25 Dual Channel pH/Ion meter, Fischer Scientific Ltd., Nepean, Canada) equipped with a double junction Cole-Parmer electrode with Ag/AgCl reference cell for pH (daily calibration between 2 and 10). Total solids were measured according to the APHA method 1603 ( In order to fix the working pH, which allows the precipitation of the metals in the desired forms (metal hydroxides, carbonates, sulfides sulphides and phosphates), computer simulations have been carried out using the MINEQL+ software. These predictions have concerned the 15 metals examined and, for each one, in the case of the four tested precipitating agents.  The analysis of the results while using of the chloride matrix ( For hydroxides precipitation, the residual metal soluble concentrations and removal yields predicted by the MINEQL+ software correspond very well with the experimental results, with the exception of Mg(OH) In the case of sulphides ( In the cases of Cd Carbonates were efficient to precipitate eight studied metals (removal yields Phosphates were also a good precipitating agent (removal yields The obtained sludge in the different tests is essentially constituted of hydrated metallic precipitates and interstitial salted water. However, the precipitating agent used for removing metallic ions from solutions has a significant influence on the solid/liquid separation of the resulting metallic sludge. Firstly, SVI value indicates the behaviour of the sludge during a 30 min gravity settling period. Very large ranges (from 3.6 to 1100 mL/g) have been determined in SVI values between the different metals and types of precipitates. By comparing the average SVI values for six metals (Cd Systems obtained after hydroxide precipitation differ by their ionic strength. For divalent metals, this strength value is 0.040 and 0.060 M respectively for chloride and sulphate matrix. Therefore counter-anions (Cl Some important filtration properties of the different metal precipitates are given in By comparing the average filtration capacity values for Cd In terms of SRF, a parallelism between this parameter and the filtration capacity has been observed. In fact, a sludge having high filtration capacity has practically no resistance to filtration or a very low SRF value. During hydroxides precipitation (in chloride matrix), it is also been noticed that seven of the studied metallic sludge (Al It has equally been noticed that among 15 studied metals, precipitation using sulphides and phosphates ( In terms of sludge total solids, it has been noticed that the highest solids values have been measured for the hydroxides of Ca Therefore, considering the different dewatering properties, it appears that phosphates are the best adapted agents for water elimination during vacuum filtration of many metal precipitates (Al Solids contents of the metallic precipitates separated by centrifugation are given in In similar way to filtration, very large ranges of solid contents (from 0.1 to 45.1% w/w) have been measured between the different metal and types of precipitates. As examples, 9 and 4% w/w solids were respectively measured for the Cd(OH) Sincere thanks are due to the National Sciences and Engineering Research Council of Canada, Canada Research Chairs and Agence Universitaire de la Francophonie for their financial help.