Cyanide leach solutions produced from gold/silver ores can be contaminated with zinc due to the gold/silver cementation in Merrill-Crowe process and/or the dissolution of zinc minerals present in the ore. Zinc levels in cyanide solutions should be controlled to avoid potential problems in leaching and downstream processes associated with the accumulation of zinc. In this study, the application of a novel method was demonstrated for the precipitation of zinc from synthetic/real cyanide solutions using Trimercapto-s-triazine (TMT), a non-toxic organic reagent. Experimental studies have shown that precipitation of zinc with TMT is a fast process occurring in a short period of time i.e., ≤15 min. Increasing the concentration of TMT (33–90 mM) and pH (10–12.5) was found to improve the precipitation of zinc, which was unaffected by increasing the temperature (20–60 °C). Response surface methodology was adopted for detailed investigation of the effect of [TMT]/[Zn] ratio (2.70–16.25), [CN−]/[Zn] ratio (3.00–8.00) and initial concentration of Zn (50–950 mg/L) on the precipitation of zinc. High recoveries (≤95.4%) were obtained under suitable conditions. Precipitation tests were also performed using synthetic multi-metal and real leach solutions. The complete recovery/dissolution of zinc from the precipitates was also demonstrated using different acids (HCl and H2SO4). The findings have shown that TMT can be effectively used as an environmentally friendly reagent for removal of zinc from cyanide leach solutions.Dissolution of gold from ores in cyanide solutions was first applied in 1887 ( Leach solutions can be also contaminated by zinc due to the application of Merrill-Crowe process (cementation with zinc powder) for recovery of gold/silver from pregnant leach solutions (PLSs) ( In this process, theoretical consumption of zinc powder is 1 mol Zn per 1 mol gold/silver (Eq. 8). However, in practice, 5 to 30-fold higher amount of zinc than the stoichiometric ratio is required for efficient recovery of precious metals (Au + Ag) with a typical zinc consumption of 1–10 g/g. Barren solutions after zinc cementation typically contain <0.03 mg/L Au and high levels of zinc (up to 474 mg/L) ( Zinc can built-up in the leaching/adsorption (CIL/CIP) circuit through recycling of effluent into the plant resulting in various technical problems in leaching and downstream processes. During CIL/CIP process, the presence of zinc cyanide complexes may interfere with the adsorption of gold onto activated carbon. Zinc can be precipitated using sulphide salts in the form of ZnS from alkaline cyanide solutions. This is commonly used for controlling zinc levels in cyanide leaching plants that use Merrill-Crowe process. Based on sulphide precipitation, Velardena process was developed for removal of zinc and regeneration of cyanide from high zinc containing alkaline cyanide solutions (Eq. 9). The treated solution can be directly recycled to the leach circuit without solid/liquid separation due to the limited dissolution of ZnS in cyanide solutions ( Utilisation of Trimercapto- In this study, the precipitation of zinc from synthetic/real cyanide solutions using Trimercapto- A trimercapto- Powder/granular form of sodium cyanide (≥99.0% NaCN) and zinc sulphate (≥99.5% ZnSO Zinc-cyanide solutions (10 mL) were added in 50-mL polypropylene (PP) Falcon tubes. Solution pHs were adjusted to the required level using 20% NaOH or 10% H Precipitation of zinc by TMT also frees (recovers) the cyanide bound with zinc. Analysis of free cyanide could not be performed due to that the interference of residual TMT in the solution with the analysis. Therefore, recovery of cyanide in precipitation tests was calculated using zinc-cyanide speciation data produced by MEDUSA software (2009). Precipitation tests were also carried out at different [CN]/[Metal Based on the fact that TMT precipitates in acidic conditions (<pH 4) in the form of (H The produced dry Zn-TMT precipitates were examined under a stereomicroscope (Leica MZ16) and a Zeiss EVO LS10 scanning electron microscope (KTU, Department of Metallurgical and Materials Eng.) coupled with an Energy Dispersive Spectrometry unit (EDS). A Fourier Transform Infrared (FT-IR) Spectrometer (Perkin Elmer Frontier) (KTU, Department of Chemistry) was also used to obtain FT-IR spectra of a precipitate sample in the wavelength range of 550–4000. Particle size distribution of the H Recovery of zinc from Zn-TMT precipitates in acid solutions was investigated using different acids. The type (HCl or H Central composite design (CCD), a type of RSM, was adopted in this study to evaluate the effect of [TMT]/[Zn] ratio (molar) (2.70–16.25), [CN The influence of reaction time, concentration of TMT, pH and temperature were studied using one-factor-at-a-time approach. Fig. 3 shows the influence of pH on the precipitation of zinc. Precipitation of zinc appeared to be positively influenced by the increase in pH. An improvement by 17.9% in zinc precipitation was obtained with raising the pH from 10 to 12.5 ( The effect of pH on zinc precipitation is linked essentially with the speciation and binding properties of TMT (C Zinc can be present as Zn(CN) The effect of temperature (20–60 °C) on precipitation performance of zinc was also tested ( Central Composite Design (CCD) was adopted to investigate the effect of [TMT]/[Zn] ratio (molar), [CN Precipitation results (   The effect of parameters on the precipitation of zinc can be visualised by three-dimensional (3D) response surface plots drawn by Increasing the [CN The influence of the initial concentration of zinc was observed to be negligible as statistically confirmed by the magnitude of regression coefficients in the model (Eq. 16) and ANOVA ( Synthetic solutions containing multi-metal and pregnant leach solutions are used to test the efficiency of the process. Precipitation tests were performed using synthetic multi-metal solutions containing Zn The efficiency of precipitation of zinc with TMT also tested at the same TMT concentration (63 mM) using real pregnant leach solutions (PLSs) derived from the cyanide leaching of a zinc-bearing silver ore ( Separate tests were also performed using synthetic multi-metal ( Fig. 12 shows the precipitation of metals from PLSs of a pyritic gold concentrate. Precipitation of zinc and silver was 98.7% and 88.6%, respectively, while no copper and gold precipitation was occurred. The addition of TMT (i.e., 63 mM) was kept constant in all synthetic multi-metal and real solutions while [TMT]/[Metal] and [CN]/[Metal] ratios were inherently varied depending on metal concentrations. The findings obtained in the tests using synthetic multi-metal ( The findings of precipitation tests from single-metal synthetic solutions ( Size distributions of H SEM-EDS analysis indicated that Zn-TMT precipitates contain around 52–53% Zn ( The recovery of zinc from Zn-TMT precipitates and concurrent regeneration of TMT is of practical importance. Therefore, extraction of zinc using different type of mineral acids (1–3 M HCl or H After the acid treatment, TMT is converted to solid H TMT consumption could be significantly reduced by the recovery of zinc from precipitates using acid solutions ( A novel method was developed for the precipitation of zinc from cyanide solutions using a non-toxic organosulphide reagent i.e., Trimercapto- Further detailed tests designed by statistical design of experiments (i.e., response surface methodology) carried out for investigation of the effect of [TMT]/[Zn] ratio (molar) (2.70–16.25), [CN The authors would like to acknowledge