Hierarchical (bimodal) porous copper (Cu) materials with micro- and nano-sized pores are desired for a wide variety of important applications. This study proposes an annealing-electrochemical dealloying approach for the creation of bulk bimodal porous Cu materials from an as-cast hypereutectic Al75Cu25 (at.%) precursor alloy, which consists of pre-eutectic CuAl2 and lamellar eutectic α-Al(Cu)-CuAl2. Annealing of the precursor alloy plays a critical role in the subsequent electrochemical dealloying for the creation of bimodal porous Cu. It decouples the lamellar eutectic structure and substantially increases the size of the α-Al(Cu) phase which determines the size of the subsequently produced micropores. In addition, it reduces the solubility of Cu in α-Al(Cu) and noticeably decreases the critical potential of the Al75Cu25 alloy thereby enabling more flexible electrochemical dealloying. A variety of bimodal porous Cu structures were produced using the proposed approach. The most homogeneous bimodal porous Cu structure with the average ligament width of 52nm was produced by electrochemical dealloying of the annealed Al75Cu25 alloy at the applied potential of -0.5V, which is above the critical potential of the α-Al(Cu) but below that of the CuAl2 phase. The influence of annealing on the microstructure and the subsequent electrochemical dealloying behaviours of the Al75Cu25 alloy was characterised and discussed in detail.Dealloying is a selective dissolution process which dissolves one or more active components from a binary or multicomponent alloy, leaving behind a material enriched in the nobler or less active alloy component(s). The resulting nanoporous bulk materials or nanoporous surfaces hold promise for applications including energy storage Unlike single-sized porous materials, a hierarchical (bimodal) porous structure can impart enhanced or novel properties to the porous materials. For example, large pores can favour increased mass transport while fine pores can improve activity due to their high specific surface area Hierarchical porous metals can be produced by different approaches This paper aims to produce bimodal porous Cu with distinctly different pore sizes and good mechanical integrity using a simple process free of toxic chemicals. To achieve this, we propose an annealing-dealloying approach and apply it to Al The rationales for the selection of the Al (i) The presence of 25 (ii) Another consideration is from the dealloying perspective. Al The introduction of annealing and the section of electrochemical dealloying over chemical dealloying are based on the following grounds. The uniform lamellar eutectic structure in the as-cast Al These considerations constitute the conceptual framework for the annealing-and-electrochemical-dealloying approach to be presented and discussed below. The selected precursor alloy Al Electrochemical experiments, including potentiodynamic polarization, cyclic voltammetry (CV) and potentiostatic polarization, were performed in a standard three-electrode cell using an electrochemical workstation (Parstat 2273, Princeton). The Ag/AgCl electrode (in a saturated KCl solution) was used as the reference electrode, along with a platinum plate as the counter electrode. Samples made from the as-annealed Al The phase constitution and microstructure in selected samples before and after electrochemical dealloying were characterized using scanning electron microscopy (SEM, JEOL 7001 equipped with energy dispersive X-ray spectroscopy (EDX) made by INCA, operated at 15  The electrochemical properties of the Al The as-annealed Al The microstructures resulted from dealloying at -0.1 The microstructure resulted from dealloying at -0.5    The as-solidified hypereutectic Al An unexpected advantage resulted from annealing the as-cast alloy is that annealing noticeably decreased the In summary, the critical roles of annealing the as-cast Al The results obtained from dealloying at -0.1 The applied potential of -0.1 The development of Reaction At the applied potential of -0.2 Although the potential applied (-0.5 (iii) The promoting effect arising from dealloying the Al atoms from the α-Al(Cu) phase. The dissolution of the Al atoms from the α-Al(Cu) phase offers numerous penetration pathways for the electrolyte to interact with the Al atoms in the neighbouring CuAl Compared to dealloying at -0.1 According to the discussion in With the formation of nanoporous structure during dealloying, the specific surface area (  An annealing The critical roles of annealing the as-cast Al The most homogeneous bimodal porous Cu with the average ligament width of 52 T. Song acknowledges the support of the China Scholarship Council (CSC) for a CSC PhD Scholarship and the support of RMIT University for a fee waiver scholarship. Constructive and in-depth comments and suggestions from the reviewers are acknowledged.