We carried out focusing on the experiments and simulations of a gravitational air classifier, whose classifying chamber is designed into four different dispersion structures. Through the experiments, the classification performance in the classifier chamber was acquired after that feed rate was determined. And then using the Fluent, a two-dimensional computational fluid dynamics was developed. The flow field characteristics and air classification performance were presented and evaluated. We investigated the three important influent factors, including the dispersion structures, the feed rate and the frequency of the fan. Finally, with the experiment and simulation being analyzed, the optimal dispersion structure has been obtained.China's energy-saving emission reduction policy is very arduous, and many industries cannot comply with this law. Companies, especially domestic ones in the cement industry, have begun to grow increasingly concerned about an air classifier, which is one of the alternative techniques ( Air classification is a technology that uses air as a carrying media to classify material depending on size and shape ( The classifying chamber is the most essential component of a gravitational air classifier. Based on the classification principle of particle in vertical air flow, four different dispersion structures of the classifying chamber have been designed. The ultimate goal of this paper is to point out the optimal dispersion structure and operational parameters through experimentation and simulation. The schematic of experimental set-up is shown in The air classifier's working principle is as follows: the powder particles pass through the discharger and enter the classifying chamber. The discharger is used for preventing air and material from flowing out. Meanwhile, the air enters the classifier from the bottom. In the classifying chamber, there is an impact between the particles and the air, and they are subsequently mixed. Finally, the coarse particles fall into the coarse particle collection, and the fine particles are taken into the settling chamber by following the airflow. The classifying chamber, depicted in The classifying chamber has the following dimensions: the feed size is 200 The feed material is quartz sand with a density of 2700 In fact, feed rate reflects the concentration of the feed material. This can influence the classification efficiency. The main variables are feed rate and the contact form between the air and the material (  The efficiency values calculated using the above formula is presented in The classification efficiency is higher at the feed rate between 10 The faster feed rate may increase particle concentration, which makes the effect of dispersing material poorer and particle packing problem worse. Particle packing creates the gravity of some fine particles higher than the drag force of them, which causes some of the fine particles to fall into the coarse particle collection. It should be noted that the feed rate has a critical value. In The material was evenly fed and the feed rate was 12  The results reveal each case has a maximum efficiency, and the corresponding frequency is relatively close, both within 42–44 In this experiment, the pressure loss was transmitted by YTKJ-DW. The negative pressure side was connected to the air outlet by a hose, and the positive pressure side contacted with the atmosphere. The pressure loss of different classifying chambers was received by the frequency of the fan being changed. The relationships are illustrated in  According to the work principle of the classifier, the dispersion structure of the classifying chamber determines the efficiency and the pressure loss. Hence, it needs to know the flow field characteristics of the four cases through simulation. Such characteristics will allow for energy saving and improvement in classification efficiency. The simulations were performed using the commercial software Fluent version 6.3.26. The simulations include the airflow velocity distribution, and the pressure distribution. Such factors influence the performance of the air classifier. As the structure is symmetric in the lower section, three-dimension models are simplified to two-dimension ones. In addition, the airflow field pressure in the classifying chamber is lower than that of atmosphere pressure. Therefore, there is little change about the pressure; hence the airflow is seen as incompressible fluid. For simulating turbulent gas-particle multiphase flow, currently, there are two approaches in Fluent: the Euler–Lagrangian approach and the Eluler–Eluler approach ( The boundary conditions are the key part of Fluent, which significantly impacts the proximity of the simulation to the real situation. The boundary conditions were the same for all of the simulated cases. In the condition of this simulation, the classification process was performed at normal temperature without heat exchange. As mentioned previously in Here, The dispersion structures not only disperse the material, but also gain the distribution of the inlet airflow. The pressure loss can be achieved by the difference between the pressure of the air inlet and the pressure of the air outlet. From This study mainly aims to choose the optimal classifying chamber. From the results of the experiments and simulations, it has been observed that the dispersion structure of case (b) is optimal. In the pursuit of reducing energy consumption, case (b) makes the classification efficiency reach its maximum. When the dispersion structure is composed of pipes and they are arranged in opposite direction, it may improve the fluid-flow characteristics. In addition, it can achieve double dispersing bulk material, and the airflow velocity becomes evenly spaced without adding to the pressure loss. Furthermore, the classification efficiency is affected by a variety of factors, including the feed rate and the frequency of the circulating fan. From the discussion and analysis, it may be sure that the classification efficiency should be improved by the classification of the classifier when the feed rate is 12 The authors wish to thank Xuzhou Zhongkai Mechanical and Electrical Equipment Manufacturing Company.