Froth plays an important role in the froth flotation separation of minerals. In froth and foam liquid drains away due to gravity until equilibrium is reached and at the same time is carried upwards by the moving gas phase. This paper aims at better understanding of the influence of the superficial gas velocity and frothers on the liquid drainage in foam and liquid recovery rate from the froth column. The obtained experimental data shows that the available standard drainage theory does not properly describe the influence of gas flow rate and Dowfroth 250 frother on the liquid recovery rate. The theory overpredicts the liquid recovery rate from the froth column. The improvement of the standard theory by inclusion of the contribution of the vertex geometry to the liquid drainage in foam does not resolve this problem. It appears that the liquid drainage process in the froth column is controlled by the interfacial properties of the adsorbed surfactants at the gas–liquid interface.Water is an important feed constituent in operation of the flotation process. The water recovery during flotation has been considered in the modelling and simulation of flotation, in particular in flotation kinetics. For example, Both theoretical and experimental studies of the behaviour of water drainage in the flotation froth were further intensively studied by The starting point of the modern description of foam and froth drainage is the so-called drainage equation (see for example The detailed description of the foam drainage equation is available in the literature, e.g. ( The liquid flow in foam and froth multiphase systems is governed by the equations of mass and momentum conservation. At present no general solution to these equations exist and various approximations have been developed. In the simplest one-dimensional case of a foam column, the equation of mass conservation gives Clearly, Eq. It is noted that the above drainage theory and equations are developed under the condition of dry foam limit, The radius, A laboratory flotation column (height 31 cm, ID 4 cm) made from Perspex was used as the experimental apparatus for foam lifetime measurement. A schematic diagram of the apparatus is shown in Experimental parameters varied were the superficial gas velocity, the surfactant concentration and the froth height in the column. At lower superficial gas velocities, there is only a small amount of foam formed and at higher velocities the froth–water interface becomes difficult to detect. Therefore, the superficial velocities investigated were of the order of about 1 cm/s which is similar to that which is encountered in plant practice. The air bubbles were generated by a sparger (Bibby Sterilin 120 mm Pyrex sintered disc with porosity number 3) mounted at the base of the column. Air from a compressor was metered using a rotameter. An air feed pressure of 100 kPa was selected for all the experiments. Superficial gas rates were varied from 0.5 to 2.0 cm/s. The froth that overflowed the column collected in the overflow launder and then drained back into the reservoir tank. A waiting period of approximately 5 min was allowed to ensure the system was at equilibrium before a sample of the drained froth was collected for a known period of time (20 s). The liquid was then measured and thus the liquid drainage rate was calculated. Altering the total liquid volume of the system controlled the level of the foam–liquid interface. The total liquid volume of the system was commonly 6 l, however this was sometimes increased to 8 l when required to attain an overflow at low superficial gas velocities. The foam essentially comprised bubbles with a very narrow size range (very close to monodisperse bubbles). Determination of the average bubble size was made using photography. Photographs were taken of the foam near the base of the column using a digital SLR camera (Olympus E-10, 4.0 Mega pixel CCD). This enabled determination of the average bubble size using a bubble sizing software program developed by the University of Newcastle. The number–mean bubble size was determined directly from the photograph, with the only correction being for optical magnification. Approximately 200 bubbles were counted for each photograph in order to determine the mean bubble radius. The thickness of the column was significantly larger than the bubble diameter, which is sufficient to avoid wall effects. Average liquid fraction values were determined by the differential pressure technique ( The influence of the gas flow rate and frother concentration on the bubble size in the foam is shown in The influence of the gas flow rate and frother concentration on the average volume liquid fraction in the foam is shown in Knowing the bubble size and liquid content in foam, the water recovery rate, Importantly, frothers and surfactants tend to accumulate and adsorb at the gas–liquid interface which leads to a resistance to flow in foam. The interfacial shear viscosity is a measure of this resistance ( A study was conducted on the influence of the gas flow rate and frothers on the liquid recovery rate in a two-phase gas–liquid foam column. The experiments were successfully carried out to obtain the required data for the model validation. These include the bubble size determined by the photography technique and image analysis, and the liquid content in foam determined by the differential pressure technique. The bubble size decreased with increasing surfactant concentration and increased with increasing superficial gas velocity. The average liquid content in the foam increased with both the superficial gas velocity and Dowfroth 250 frother concentration. The experimental data obtained are consistent with the results reported by other researchers. However, comparison of these data with prediction from the standard drainage equation shows differences. The theory overpredicts the liquid recovery rate from the foam column. Similarly, the extension of the standard theory by including the contribution of the vertex geometry to the liquid drainage in foam does not significantly improve the modelling. It is likely that the liquid drainage process in foam and froth is controlled by the interfacial properties of the gas–liquid interface produced by the adsorption of molecules of frothers and surfactants added into the liquid phase. The authors gratefully acknowledge the Australian Research Council for financial support. We thank Drs Stephen Neethling and Jan Cilliers from UMIST for useful discussions, and Dr Paul Stevenson from the Special Research Centre for Multiphase Processes at the University of Newcastle for useful comments.