Getting magnetite concentrate with extremely high Fe grade using reverse flotation method has become increasingly important due to the enhanced requirement of iron making industry. The coagulation in magnetite-concentrate flotation system may impose negative effect on flotation performance. This paper combined the DLVO calculation and microscope observation to study the coagulation behavior in the system. The result shows that the coagulation between fine magnetite and coarse silica particle is very likely to occur with energy barrier 1.5×10−18
                     J at pH 10.0, which is much smaller than 1.6×10−17
                     J and 3.3×10−17
                     J for fine magnetite and fine magnetite-coarse magnetite particles. The coating of fine magnetite particle on silica surface was observed under microscope. Mechanical scrubbing increases the concentrate Fe grade and recovery by 1.5% and 8.5% respectively. Magnetite concentrate of 67.9% Fe grade and 71.5% Fe recovery was finally obtained.The dependence of magnetic force, gravity and hydrodynamic force on particle size and the entrapment caused by magnetic flocculation severely limit the use of magnetic separation in ultra-fine iron-ore enrichment ( To systematically study the role of scrubbing play in magnetite-concentrate reverse-flotation system, this paper first measured the zeta-potential of magnetite and silica. According to the data obtained from zeta-potential test, this paper explained and predicted the interaction among particles in the system through DLVO theoretical calculation and the results were verified via microscope observation. Finally, this paper compared the physical dispersion (scrubbing) and chemical dispersion (hexametaphosphate sodium) in terms of improving flotation performance. DLVO theory was used to evaluate the total interaction energy between mineral particles in terms of electrostatic repulsion ( For two particles with radius  For two different types of particles with radius While for particles of the same type but with distinct diameters, particle-plane model is adopted, For particles of the same type also with same diameter, Since the energy barrier ( Being Magnetite concentrate is obtained from Chile. XRD analysis indicates that magnetite and silica are two main minerals. According to the size by size distribution test, the iron content of the raw material is 62.2%, and the material is very fine with only 4.1% over 74 The cationic collector, Lilaflo D817M, was a typical kind of amine collector. Details about the Lilaflo D81 Pure magnetite sample (99.1% Fe Flotation test was carried out in a 1L Denver flotation machine with rotating speed 1100 The zeta potential measurement was tested using ZetaPlus made by Brookhaven Instruments Corporation, USA. Particle need to be ground below 5 The magnetic concentrate was first conditioned into 25% w/w concentration by mixing with tap water in a 50 When conducting the scrubbing test, the raw material was first conditioned into 40% w/w concentration by adding tap water in the flotation cell. The slurry was then agitated in the flotation cell at higher rotating speed of 1400 Zeta-potential measurements of magnetite and silica were carried out as a function of pH values. According to Charges can develop on a hydroxylated surface through amphoteric dissociation of the surface hydroxide groups like M Large zeta-potential difference (>30 DLVO theory provides a robust explanation and prediction for the stability of fine particle system (   A more distinct situation can be observed from Coagulation between fine magnetite particles can improve the flotation performance due to the decrease of mechanical entrainment for the increased apparent particle size. However, the heterocoagulation between magnetite and silica is never expected to occur due to the decreased surface nature difference, which will lower the separation effectiveness.  Cationic reverse flotation was conducted to get concentrate with higher Fe grade. Zeta potential was tested to provide the data used for DLVO calculation. Dispersion method, like scrubbing, was used to improve the flotation performance. Combining the DLVO calculation and microscope observation, the heterocoagulation of fine magnetite particle and coarse silica particle is very likely to occur, which can impose negative effect on flotation performance. Using Lilaflo D817M 0.18