The effect of initial polydispersity of particle size (unimodal versus bimodal distribution) and binder characteristics on the growth kinetics and mechanism of wet granulation was studied. Wet granulation of pharmaceutical powders with initial bimodal particle size distribution (PSD) presented growth kinetics consisting of two stages: fast growth followed by slow growth. The fast stage is controlled by the amount of binder and high probability of coalescence due to the collisions of small and large particles. The second stage is characterized by slow agglomeration of powder mixtures with water content 13.6%v/w, and slow breakage of powder mixtures with water content of 9.9% and 11.7%v/w. The wet granulation of powders with initial unimodal PSD exhibited slow growth kinetics consisting of one stage, since similar particle sizes do not promote agglomeration. The experimental results were better described by a population balance equation using a coalescence kernel that favors growth rate by collision between small and large particles. In general, the probability of a successful collision increased with higher size difference between particles, smaller particle size, and higher binder content.Wet granulation in a high shear mixer is primarily a process for particle enlargement that is used in many industries such as pharmaceutical, mineral processing, agriculture, food, and detergent. The process of particle enlargement via a coalescence mechanism improves the flow properties of the particles, and decreases segregation of the ingredients, thus also improving uniformity of the mixture (  Recently, the importance of Ennis’ theory has inspired researchers (  Powders with bimodal particle size distribution (PSD) or a wide size distribution contain many small and large particles that favor coalescence between them by the layering mechanism or adhesion of fine particles to large particles as suggested by The main objective of this investigation is to study the effect of initial polydispersity of particle size (unimodal versus bimodal distribution) on growth kinetics and the mechanism of wet granulation. The effect of interactions between factors such as initial particle size and the amount and viscosity of binders were also studied. PSD was determined by means of image processing and analysis ( Pharmaceutical powders such as lactose anhydrous supplied by Sheffield Products and lactose monohydrate manufactured by A viscometer (Brookfield  Although this is a laboratory-scale high shear mixer, the down-scaling of the wet granulation process allows an acceptable-mixed process without significant spatial variation in PSD and, therefore, obtains reliable measurements. The spatial variation of PSD (or PSD uniformity) in a granulator is modeled by the term In order to obtain an acceptable mixing quality, the poor mixing zone in the granulator located near the wall and bottom of the vessel had to be reduced. This was achieved by reducing the space between the blades and the vessel wall, and by positioning the blades equidistantly in the vessel as shown in The granulator was tested to determine the spatial variation of PSD and, therefore, the experiment reproducibility. Four samples were taken from four different zones of the granulator (Fig. Approximately 90 The experiments to study wet granulation behavior using lactose anhydrous and monohydrate were carried out following the Split-Plot experimental design ( A normalized number distribution (NND) was used to show the change in PSD over time, as indicated in The initial bimodal PSD ( The opposite case is observed for initial mono-dispersed unimodal PSD (Fig. The strength of the liquid bridge formed between similar size particles is weaker than that between small and large particles due to high bending, stretching, and the gravitational force yielded by the particles with the highest weight. The increased strength of the liquid bridge between small and large particles and the lower kinetic energy of small particles allow the particles to remain in contact for enough time to permit the small particle to join the larger one by diffusion through binder layers. The preferential coalescence between small and large particles is supported by a layering mechanism or coalescence of coarse and fine particles (Fig. The nucleation mechanism for fine narrow PSD could occur over first stage of slow growth of wet granulation by penetration of liquid drops into the fine powder bed. These nuclei take time to consolidate and become surface wet to facilitate coalescence. These observations agree with the initial “induction phase” as described by The gradient of each line in  However, for fine powders with initial unimodal PSD at 9.9% and 11.7%  The initial fast growth for bimodal PSD is maintained by high liquid content added during the first 30 There is a minimum critical amount of liquid on the granule surface required to trigger the second stage of slow growth. This minimum amount of liquid is the least required to form a liquid layer on the granule surface to increase the probability of coalescence between particles. Above this critical minimum value, there is therefore a high probability of only one stage of fast growth. The end of the first stage of fast granule growth is related to the end of the addition of binder, and the beginning of slow granule growth or breakage without a significant change in particle size. These observations are consistent with results obtained by  Binder viscosity was modified by dissolving different amounts of Povidone in water. The initial fast granule growth rate agrees with results reported by The large granule size in the first stage, obtained by an increase in binder viscosity, is the result of increasing viscous forces, as indicated by A decrease in granule growth rate during the second stage is due to the increase in binder viscosity by dissolution of lactose in the binder (  The effect of interactions between particle size and amount and viscosity of binder on the growth rate during the first stage of wet granulation was analyzed. As indicated above, the particle coalescence that occurs during the process of wet granulation is favored by the collision of small and large particles, as demonstrated by the higher granule growth rate for powders with bimodal PSD than for powders with unimodal PSD.  Initial PSD shape, whether unimodal or bimodal, has a strong effect upon granule growth rate and the mechanism by which wet granulation occurs. A sequential mechanism consisting of two stages was observed during the wet granulation of powders with bimodal PSD, for three binder contents. The first stage of rapid granule growth is controlled by the amount of binder and by the high probability of coalescence resulting from the collision of small and large particles. The second stage exhibits slow agglomeration when binder content is 13.6% Wet granulation of pharmaceutical powders with initial unimodal PSD at 9.9% and 11.7% In general, the binder content, PSD shape, and interaction between particle size and binder content were the factors with the strongest effect upon granule growth rate and the mechanism of wet granulation, whereas binder viscosity and initial particle size affected granule growth rate moderately. Variation in the three factors is explained by the viscous Stokes’ We are grateful to Angel Zapata and Efren Gregory for their collaboration during the equipment setup. Thanks to the NSF-EPSCoR and INDUNIV for their financial support.