Flocs were produced by adding three cationic polymers (10% charge density, 3.0×105
                     g/mol molecular weight; 40% charge density, 1.1×105
                     g/mol molecular weight; and 100% charge density, 1.2×105
                     g/mol molecular weight) to 90nm diameter silica particles. The shear yield stresses of the consolidated sediment beds from settled and centrifuged flocs were determined via the vane technique. The polymer charge density plays an important role in influencing the shear yield stresses of sediment beds. The shear yield stresses of sediment beds from flocs induced by the 10% charged polymer were observed to increase with an increase in polymer dose, initial solid concentration and background electrolyte concentration at all volume fractions. In comparison, polymer dose has a marginal effect on the shear yield stresses of sediment beds from flocs induced by the 40% and 100% charged polymers. The shear yield stresses of sediments from flocs induced by the 40% charged polymer are independent of salt concentration whereas the addition of salt decreases the shear yield stresses of sediments from flocs induced by the 100% charged polymer. When flocculated at the optimum dose for each polymer (12mg/g silica for the 10% charged polymer at 0.03M NaCl, 12mg/g for 40% and 2mg/g for 100%), shear yield stress increases as polymer charge increases. The effects observed are related to the flocculation mechanism (bridging, patch attraction or charge neutralisation) and the magnitude of the adhesive force. Comparison of shear and compressive yield stresses show that the network is only slightly weaker in shear than in compression. This is different than many other systems (mainly salt and pH coagulation) which have shear yield stress much less than compressive yield stress. The existing models relating the power law exponent of the volume fraction dependence of the shear yield stress to the network fractal structure are not satisfactory to predict all the experimental behaviour.Solid–liquid separation plays an integral role in many industries, including for example, minerals processing, pharmaceuticals, pulp and paper, as well as the sewage treatment industry. Polymeric flocculants are commonly utilised to hasten the solid–liquid separation step and provide supernatant clarity. The process of polymer addition is known as flocculation and leads to the formation of loose aggregates referred to as flocs In many cases, for example in thickeners, aggregation processes are performed at relatively low solids contents. If these aggregates are allowed to settle, they will produce a sediment bed of a higher solids volume fraction. The density of the sediments will increase from the top of the sediment bed to the bottom The shear yield stress, It is well known that the strength of the particle network is exhibited in the macroscopic properties of the compressive yield stress, elastic modulus and shear yield stress. The strength of an attractive particle network depends on the strength of bonds between particles and the number of bonds that need to be broken. The number of bonds that need to be broken depends on the network structural factors and particle parameters such as size, shape and volume fraction The yielding behaviour of the particle network in shear is expected to be related to that under compression given that the fundamental basis of both types of deformations is the ability of the network to accommodate elastic strain up to the yield point. Recent analysis by Buscall Rheological properties such as the steady shear viscosity, the elastic modulus, the shear yield stress and the compressive yield stress have been found to increase dramatically (with power law behaviour) with increasing particle volume fraction ( Although these earlier studies identify some chemical and physical factors that affect the yield stress, there is very little information available in the literature, which systematically describes how polymer charge densities, under various aggregation conditions, including polymer dose, initial solid concentration, background electrolyte concentration, and shear intensity during aggregation influence the as-consolidated shear yield stress of the sediment beds from the directly settled flocs. A previous report Our initial investigation In further work on the same systems More recently our investigations In this study, a series of flocs were produced by adding the three cationic polymers with various charge densities used in the previous studies Details of the materials used in this study, the size and structure of the aggregates and the effect of polymer charge on flocculation mechanism have been described elsewhere Details of the mini-thickener fabricated for the production of aggregates have been presented elsewhere All flocculation experiments were conducted at 25 Shear yield stress measurements were performed in the Perspex cup containing the sediment from the mini-thickener. To allow for equilibrium consolidation under the influence of gravity the sediments were allowed to sit undisturbed for 96 After either gravity sedimentation or centrifugal consolidation, the clear supernatant was removed from above the sediment bed with a pipette. The shear yield stress was measured on the as-consolidated sediment without disturbance. For each condition investigated, one gravity sedimentation and 2 or 3 centrifugal consolidation runs were performed to produce the yield stress data points for each curve presented. In order to minimise the disturbance to the structure of the sediment that is created by the aggregation and consolidation, the vane method is used to measure the shear yield stress Compressive yield stress measurements were performed in the Perspex cup containing the sediment from the mini-thickener. The sediments were consolidated by either gravity or centrifugal acceleration as described in detail previously The optimum polymer doses in terms of the best supernatant clarity for the 10% charged polymer at 0.03 The effects of polymer dose on the shear yield stresses of the sediments from aggregates induced by the three charged polymers follow the same trend as for the compressive yield stresses in our previous work Green and Boger Most previous measurements of shear yield stress have been made on suspensions batched up to the final volume fraction as a flocculated suspension and then sheared or mixed before yield stress measurement or batched up to final volume fraction as a dispersed suspension and flocculated by mixing in some salts (for example). In either case the shear yield stress appears to be a material property that is unique to the suspension composition at each volume fraction. Our result for the 10% charged polymer indicates that the shear yield stress may depend not only on the composition of the suspension, but also the flocculation history of the suspension when the shear yield stress measurements are made on the as-consolidated sediment. Because the aggregate properties for the 10% charged polymer aggregates depend on the initial solids concentration during aggregation, two different strength networks are developed from the as-settled aggregates. Process water in most industrial applications typically contains electrolyte concentrations between that of household tap water (less than 0.01 Green and Boger The effect of shear intensity during aggregation on the shear yield stress of the silica sediments from flocs induced by the 10% charged polymer at the background salt concentration of 0.03 To help elucidate the above results the typical volume average ( The shear yield stress has been used as an indicator of the net inter-particle force under a wide variety of suspension conditions in recent years. It is directly related to the adhesive force between the particles that make up the network. The adhesive force is defined as the force required to separate surfaces from contact. A large adhesive force means that a large load must be applied to the particle network to cause the particles to break apart. The shear yield stress of the particle network also depends to some extent upon the structure of the particle network (number of bonds that need to be broken) and particle size (which is constant in this work). In our previous work It is useful to compare the volume fraction dependence and the order of magnitude of the shear and compressive yield stresses, since both give an indication of the network strength.  The results shown in Using scaling law relationships originally developed for polymeric gels, models have been developed relating the structural properties of the attractive particle network to the rheological behaviour Several authors have reported elastic modulus/yield stress–volume fraction data with power law exponents within the ranges predicted by the fractal model Other authors have developed models based on percolation theory The shear yield stresses of sediment beds from flocs induced by weakly charged polymers depend more strongly on the polymer dose than highly charged polymers over the range of polymer doses investigated. The shear yield stresses of sediments increase with increasing polymer charge when compared at each polymer’s optimum dose. This is consistent with the increase in adhesion measured previously The shear yield stresses of sediment beds from flocs induced by the 10% charged polymer increase with initial solid concentration at all volume fraction, while the shear yield stresses of sediment beds from flocs induced by either the 40% or 100% charged polymers are independent of the initial solid concentration at all volume fractions. An increase in background electrolyte concentration increases the shear yield stresses of sediment beds from flocs induced by the 10% charged polymer. This is attributed to the enhanced bridging force as the double layer extent is reduced. In contrast, the addition of background electrolyte decreases the shear yield stress of sediment beds from flocs induced by the 100% charged polymer at the doses used and this results from diminished patch attraction. More interestingly, the addition of background electrolyte has no effect on the shear yield stresses of sediment beds from flocs induced by the 40% charged polymer. An increase in shear intensity during aggregation has no effect on the shear yield stress of sediment beds from flocs induced by the three charged polymers under their own optimum dosage. The shear yield stress–volume fraction relationship fits a power law model which is consistent with many other previous investigations. The available models relating the network fractal structure to the power law exponent of the volume fraction dependence of the shear yield stress are not satisfactory to predict the experimental behaviour. Better models and computer simulations are needed to better predict the relationship between aggregate properties and the sediment behaviour. Comparison of shear and compressive yield stress shows that the as-consolidated sediments are only a bit weaker in shear than in compression. The much closer correspondence between the shear and compressive yield stresses in the polymer flocculated systems (relative to salt coagulated systems) is consistent with predictions that the compressive to shear yield stress ratio is related to the strain to failure. The polymer systems would be expected to have larger failure strains than the van der Waals aggregated systems. Thanks to Richard Buscall for the enlightening discussions. Ying Zhou thanks the Australian government for the award of an IPRS and the University of Newcastle, Australia, for the award of an UNRS Central scholarship. Thanks are also extended to SNF for the provision of the cationic polymers. The authors wish to acknowledge financial support from the Australian Research Council (in particular, Discovery Grant 0209669 and the Special Research Centre for Multiphase Processes).