Background context
                  Short-segment pedicle screw instrumentation constructs for the treatment of thoracolumbar fractures gained popularity in the 1980s. The load-sharing classification (LSC) is a straightforward way to describe the extent of bony comminution, amount of fracture displacement, and amount of correction of kyphotic deformity in a spinal fracture. There are no studies evaluating the relevance of fracture comminution/traumatic kyphosis on the long-term radiologic outcome of burst fractures treated by short-segment instrumentation with screw insertion in the fractured level.
               
                  Purpose
                  To evaluate the efficacy of the six-screw construct in the treatment of thoracolumbar junction burst fractures and the influence of the LSC score on the 2-year radiologic outcome.
               
                  Study design
                  Case series of consecutive patients of a single university hospital.
               
                  Patient sample
                  Consecutive patients from one university hospital with nonosteoporotic thoracolumbar burst fractures.
               
                  Outcome measures
                  Being a radiology-based study, the outcome measures are radiologic parameters (regional kyphosis [RK], local kyphosis, and thoracolumbar kyphosis [TLK]) that evaluate the degree and loss of correction.
               
                  Methods
                  Retrospective analysis of all consecutive patients with nonosteoporotic thoracolumbar burst fractures managed with a six-screw construct in a single university hospital, with more than 2 years' postoperative follow-up.
               
                  Results
                  Eighty-six patients met the inclusion criteria, and 72 (83.7%) with available data were ultimately included in the study. The sample included 53 men and 19 women, with a mean (standard deviation [SD]) age of 35.6 years (14.4 years) at the time of surgery. Mean LSC score was 6.3 (SD 1.6, range 3–9). Forty-four of 62 (70.9) fractures had a score greater than 6. Mean (SD) RK and TLK deteriorated significantly during the first 6 months of follow-up: 2.90° (4.54°) p=.005 and 2.78° (6.45°) p=.069, respectively. Surgical correction correlated significantly (r=0.521, p<.0001) with the time elapsed until surgery. Loss of surgical correction (postoperative to 6-month RK and TLK increase) correlated significantly with the LSC score (r=0.57, p=.004; r=0.51, p=.022, respectively). Further surgery because of correction loss was not required in any case.
               
                  Conclusions
                  The six-screw construct is effective for treating thoracolumbar junction burst fractures. The medium-to-long-term loss of correction is affected by the amount of bony comminution of the fracture, objectified through the LSC score. Short-segment fusion with instrumentation has been used for burst fractures for several decades, but there are concerns when significant comminution is present that can lead to loss of correction and construct failure. The authors report their experience using a six-screw technique. In this retrospective radiographic case series report, the group found that operating within 15 days of fracture allows for better correction and loss of correction after surgery and correlates with the degree of vertebral body comminution. The loss of correction, in this study, did not appear to impact outcomes as measured by reoperation. This is a case series report, so conclusions that can be drawn are limited by a lack of control group. Clinical and functional outcomes are also missing. These limitations notwithstanding, the findings suggest that if clinical and functional outcomes are indeed similar to techniques that provide direct anterior column support, the described technique might be a reasonable option.  In 1994, McCormack et al. One randomized controlled trial has shown that transpedicular grafting does not prevent failure of short fixation in the treatment of thoracolumbar burst fractures Recent in vitro biomechanical studies in an unstable burst fracture model have shown that the addition of two screws in the fractured vertebra (six-screw construct) increases the stiffness of short-segment pedicle instrumentation. Two recent randomized controlled trials We retrospectively analyzed all consecutive patients with a nonosteoporotic thoracolumbar (T11–L2) burst fracture, surgically managed with six-screw constructs in a single university hospital, and with more than 2 years of follow-up. Institutional review board approval from local ethics committee was obtained. The standard surgical technique, described previously Two independent investigators reviewed the patients' charts, following a preestablished protocol. Fractures were scored according to the LSC using preoperative X-rays and computed tomography scans. The time elapsed to surgery, surgical time, blood loss, screw length (% respect to vertebral body), and screw orientation (angle between screw and sagittal vertebral axis, positive being toward the superior end plate and negative toward the inferior one) were obtained from surgical reports and postoperative standing radiographs. Posttrauma deformity was evaluated measuring: Anterior body height (ABH) of the fractured vertebra, expressed as a percentage, obtained with the formula, ABH=A/([superior vertebra ABH+inferior vertebra ABH]/2)×100 Posterior body height (PBH) of the fractured vertebra, expressed as a percentage, obtained with the formula, PBH=B/([superior vertebra PBH+inferior vertebra PBH]/2)×100 Local kyphosis (LK): Cobb angle between the superior and inferior end plates of the fractured vertebra Regional kyphosis (RK): Cobb angle of the instrumented area measured from the superior end plate of the uppermost instrumented vertebra to the inferior end plate of the lowest instrumented vertebra Thoracolumbar junctional kyphosis (TLK): Cobb angle measured from the superior end plate of T10 to the inferior end plate of L2. Measurements were performed using preoperative, immediate postoperative, and 6-, 12-, and 24-month postoperative radiographs. To increase reliability, two independent investigators performed the measurements and final values corresponded to the mean of the two readings. The final database was depurated and outliers were identified and reviewed. Data analysis was performed using SPSS 14.0 (IBM Corp., Armonk, NY, USA). Eighty-six patients met the inclusion criteria, and 72 (83.7%) patients with available data were ultimately enrolled in the study. The study population included 53 men and 19 women, with a mean age of 35.6 years (standard deviation [SD] 14.4 years) at the time of surgery. The affected levels were T11 (n=3, 4.2%), T12 (n=18, 25.0%), L1 (n=40, 55.5%), and L2 (n=11, 15.3%) ( The mean time elapsed until surgery was 11.7 days (SD 7.6, range 1–36 days). Mean surgical time was 109.4 minutes (SD 42.6, range 45–300 minutes) and mean intraoperative blood loss was 483.7 mL (SD 299.1, range 150–1,500 mL) ( Postoperative radiographs showed proper positioning of pedicle screws in all patients. Sagittal screw orientation showed a mean of 0.97° (SD 6.41°, range −15.50° to 14°) at the fractured level, 5.85° (SD 5.58°; range −10° to 19.50°) at the vertebra above, and −2.98° (SD 6.58°; −19° to 11°) at the vertebra below. Surgery significantly improved the LK, RK, TLK, and ABH ( Surgical correction correlated significantly (r=0.521, p<.0001) with time elapsed until surgery, with earlier surgeries yielding better corrections. During the first 15 days after the fracture is produced, corrections in RK of 20° to 25° were achieved; after that moment on, no correction of more than 15° was obtained. Delay in surgery was slightly shorter in patients with isolated fractures (10.9 days) than in polytrauma patients (12.7 days). However, no significant differences were found in postoperative radiologic outcome. No correlation was found between surgical correction and LSC score. Loss of surgical correction (postoperative to 6-month RK and TLK increase) correlated significantly with the LSC score (r=0.57, p=.004; r=0.51, p=.022, respectively). Mean (SD) loss of correction in fractures with an LSC score of 6 or less was as follows: 6-month RK 0.50° (2.64°), 6-month TLK −0.56° (6.30°) and 24-month RK 1.08° (5.26°), 24-month TLK 0.65° (6.82°). In fractures with a score of 7 or more, mean (SD) correction loss was the following: 6-month RK 4.92° (4.90°), 6-month TLK 5.50° (5.39°) and 24-month RK 6.53° (5.88°), 24-month TLK 3.27° (9.64°) ( The results of our study corroborate the reported benefits of inserting pedicle screws in the fractured vertebra and the efficacy of the six-screw construct for the treatment of thoracolumbar burst fractures. In addition, it shows for the first time that time elapsed until surgery correlates with the surgical correction achieved. Furthermore, it provides evidence that the loss of surgical correction has to do with the LSC score of the fracture; that is, the grade of fracture comminution has an effect on postoperative loss of correction. The similarity of our results to previously published Parker et al. Attempts have been made to restore the vertebral body weight-bearing capacity using a posterior approach. The use of transpedicular bone graft does not restore mechanical properties and does not modify the failure rate of short-segment instrumentations As it has already been reported After 2 years of follow-up in our study, radiographs showed fracture healing, disc collapse, mild loss of surgical correction, fusion, and integrity of the pedicular instrumentation ( A randomized controlled trial Based on the findings of this study, we conclude that the six-screw construct, a short-segment instrumentation including pedicle screws at the fractured level, is effective for the treatment of nonosteoporotic thoracolumbar junction burst fractures, with indemnity of adjacent vertebral bodies. The final outcome depends on the degree of vertebral body comminution, as measured with the LSC score. No loss of correction is expected in fractures with an LSC score of 6 or less, and mild (5°), well-tolerated loss of correction is expected in highly comminuted ones (LSC ≥7). Direct anterior reconstruction associated with posterior instrumentation does not seem justified in most thoracolumbar junction burst fractures. Additionally, our study clearly shows that delay until surgery is detrimental for the patient's outcome. Our results should be added to evidence, endorsing the need for early treatment of spinal fractures. A limitation of our study is the fact that it is radiology-based and not clinically-based. Investigation to determine whether patients with LSC score of 6 or less are clinically better off than those with LSC score 7 or more was not a part of our aim. K2M, Inc., provided research grant support for this study.