Ultrafine-grained (UFG) Ti was prepared by equal channel angular pressing (ECAP) through 1 and 4 passes at room temperature. The ambient-temperature creep behavior and mechanism of UFG Ti were studied by nanoindentation creep tests at the loading strain rate of 0.005 and 0.1s−1. The effect of grain size on creep behavior and relevant creep parameters such as steady creep strain rate and creep stress exponent (n) was estimated for coarse-grained (CG) and UFG Ti. The results show that the creep resistance of UFG Ti is enhanced with respect to CG Ti. UFG Ti after 1 pass of ECAP exhibits the highest creep resistance. The creep resistance of UFG Ti decreases with increasing the number of ECAP passes. The creep stress exponents of UFG Ti are much higher than those of CG Ti while steady creep strain rates do not vary much with grain size. The creep stress exponents of CG and UFG Ti are dependent on the loading strain rate and increase with increasing the loading strain rate. The power-law creep with a stress exponent of 18.1–24.6 is consistent with dislocation process, especially for dislocation emission and annihilation at grain boundaries, which is a key mechanism in creep deformation of UFG Ti. Grain boundaries may play an important role in the creep behavior of UFG Ti.Titanium and its alloys with high strength and excellent corrosion resistance are widely applied in the fields of aerospace and transport. Ultrafine-grained Ti processed by equal channel angular pressing (ECAP) has been under intensive attention worldwide for past two decades due to its low weight, excellent mechanical properties, and good biocompatibility for potential engineering applications and biomedical implants. To date, a large amount of studies have been reported on the microstructure evolution, deformation behavior and fatigue failure mechanism of UFG Ti Ambient-creep was observed in coarse-grained (CG) titanium about the 1950s The grain size is expected to play an important role in creep behavior of UFG materials. However, the study on the creep behavior of UFG materials processed by ECAP was scarcely carried out. These reports concerning the creep behavior of ECAP materials were focused on pure aluminum and pure copper Recently, there has been intensive interest to investigate creep behavior and mechanism of micro/nano structural materials and thin films by nanoindentation creep test Ultrafine-grained Ti used in this work was prepared by ECAP following route C for 1 and 4 passes at room temperature, respectively. The more details of the processing method were reported elsewhere In order to acquire reliable nanoindentation data, the surface of the indentation specimens was metallographically ground with a series of progressively finer SiC sandpapers, and mechanically polished to mirror finishing. Nanoindentation tests were performed using the Nano indenter’ XP system (MTS, Inc.) at room temperature. The continuous stiffness measurement (CSM) system was used in this study, which provides a better control on the contact step of the indentation. Upon calibration on standard fused silicon, the tip of the Berkovich diamond indenter was estimated to have a radius of 50 The microstructures of CG and UFG Ti are shown in  Representative SEM indentation micrographs of CG and UFG Ti at the loading strain rate of 0.1 In order to investigate the creep behavior with nanoindentation tests, the data collected during the holding stage was used. The experimental data during the holding stage could be well fitted as the following equation For example, the experimental data and fitted creep displacement and time curve of CG Ti during the nanoindentation holding stage are shown in It can be observed from According to Mayo et al. In this work, the creep strain rate data was derived by differentiating the fitted creep Some researchers have demonstrated that the ambient-temperature creep behavior and dominant creep mechanism of the materials can be analyzed by the simple power-law relationship between the stress (  In this work, the steady creep strain rates for CG and UFG Ti come out to be (6.94–4.18)×10 There is the obvious increase in creep stress exponent with decreasing grain size (from CG to UFG) despite power-law creep is expected to be independent of the grain size. It indicates the microstructure has a key role in the creep behavior of Ti and the grain boundaries significantly affect the creep behavior and mechanism. For CG Ti with low dislocation density, the dislocation activation is mainly achieved by new dislocation nucleation and dislocation motion in the grain interiors. The creep strain rates are determined by the grain interiors. New dislocation nucleation and emission becomes the dominant mechanism during plastic deformation From the The ambient-temperature creep behavior and mechanism of UFG Ti were investigated by nanoindentation test. The results show that an obvious ambient-temperature creep deformation occurs in CG and UFG Ti. The steady creep strain rates do not vary significantly with grain size, while the creep stress exponent values are found to be exceptionally high for UFG Ti, which indicates that UFG Ti processed by ECAP has higher creep resistance than that of CG Ti. The creep behavior of UFG Ti slightly depends on the number of ECAP passes. The creep stress exponent The authors acknowledge the financial support from