The goals of monitoring, verification, and accounting (MVA) for carbon capture, utilization, and storage (CCUS) studies include improved understanding of injection and storage processes, evaluation of interactions among carbon dioxide (CO2), reservoir fluids, and formation solids, and assessment and minimization of environmental impacts (DOE and NETL, 2009). Site-specific selection of tools for a well-rounded MVA program may include technologies for atmospheric, near-surface, and subsurface monitoring.
                  An upcoming small-scale CCUS study in an active coalbed methane field in Buchanan County, Virginia, presents a unique application for several established, effective MVA methods. The study will involve injecting up to 20,000tonnes of CO2 into three injection wells over a one-year period in order to test the injection and storage potential of the coal seams and to assess the potential for enhanced coalbed methane (ECBM) recovery at offset production wells. The reservoir consists of approximately 15 to 20 coal seams, averaging 0.3m (1.0ft) in thickness and distributed over 300m (1000ft) of vertical section. This reservoir geometry creates an unusual target for CO2 injection and also a challenging one for many monitoring and imaging techniques. MVA for the Buchanan County test will include gas content measurements at offset wells, groundwater monitoring, injectate tracer analysis, well logging, surface deformation measurement, passive microseismic monitoring, and tomographic fracture imaging. Multiple monitoring wells will be drilled in order to facilitate the MVA efforts. Surface deformation measurement, microseismic monitoring, and tomographic fracture imaging are state-of-the art tools that have potential to define the subsurface CO2 plume beyond the borehole scale. The results of the MVA program for the Buchanan County injection demonstration can be used to improve design for potential future studies of CCUS in thin coals.Geologic storage of carbon dioxide (CO A robust monitoring, verification, and accounting (MVA) program is important for any CO The best practices document provides a summary of available MVA technologies, divided into atmospheric, near-surface, and subsurface options, and lists the pros and cons of each. As the manual emphasizes, it is important to select a subset of technologies well-suited to the unique characteristics of the site, reservoir properties, and the test objectives and to adjust the technologies and sampling schemes used, as appropriate over the lifecycle of the project. Common atmospheric methods include CO Near-surface methods include groundwater monitoring, which can also indicate leakage or proper containment, and surface deformation meters, such as GPS or tiltmeters, which can help define the CO Subsurface methods include borehole logging techniques and geophysical imaging techniques, such as seismic or electrical conductivity/resistivity surveys. Both logging and imaging techniques are often conducted in a time-lapse manner, pre- and post-injection, in an attempt to record changes in properties due to the presence of the CO This paper describes the selection of MVA technologies for an upcoming CCUS field demonstration in the Oakwood coalbed methane (CBM) field of southwest Virginia. The coal reservoir is a unique application for many MVA methods because of its geometry, which includes several thin, dispersed seams. The reservoir geometry became a guiding factor in the selection of effective technologies for the MVA program. Other important considerations were the unique reservoir properties of coal, including swelling of the matrix in the presence of CO Coal is an attractive reservoir rock for CO Coalbed methane fields are attractive settings for CCUS due to the favorable storage properties of coal and the potential for enhanced coalbed methane recovery (ECBM). Like CO Another advantage of the CBM field setting is that the existing infrastructure used for CBM production can be utilized for conducting CO The Oakwood coalbed methane field lies within the Cumberland Overthrust Block, a large tectonic feature within the Central Appalachian Basin. The southwest-northeast oriented block extends approximately 250 The coal reservoir in the Oakwood coalbed methane field includes 15 to 20 individual coal seams from the Pennsylvanian-aged Pocahontas and Lee formations, rarely exceeding 0.6 In January 2009, SECARB conducted a small CO The MVA program for this test was designed to monitor and collect data from atmospheric, surface, and subsurface levels. Atmospheric monitoring was conducted using infrared gas analyzers (IRGAs) to measure CO This MVA design produced several significant findings: 1) No leakage was detected by any available means, including IRGAs for atmospheric detection, soil CO Up to 20,000 Selection of the Buchanan County field site was based on several favorable site characteristics. A single, cooperative landowner maintains surface and mineral rights for all three injection wells, as well as rights to several offset wells. The field site is a sufficient distance from subsurface mining activity and is in sufficient proximity to the Russell County study for extrapolation of findings between the two locations. Although the Cumberland Overthrust Block was formed by complex tectonic activity, the field site location within the block is structurally quiet, with no significant documented faults near the injection wells, and no recorded sizeable seismicity or other geohazards. Folding is present at the injection site and throughout the south Oakwood field and is apparent in the structure model for the Pocahontas No. 3 seam shown in The Oakwood CBM field has been active since the early 1990s when the primary field operator, CNX Gas Company (CNX), began drilling wells on 0.32-km An MVA focus area was determined for the Buchanan County injection site, based on overlapping 730-m (2400-ft) proximities from the injection wells, as seen in Three monitoring wells will be drilled for additional gas content testing and formation logging, such as reservoir saturation and acoustic (sonic) logging. One of the wells will be cored for laboratory testing that will aid the geologic characterization and reservoir modeling efforts. The locations of these wells will depend on several factors, including access, predicted plume growth, optimal placement for specific tests, and potential future utilization of the wells (conversion for production). A summary of the general MVA design is depicted in The original MVA objectives for the Buchanan County test included the use of a time-lapse seismic imaging method, either vertical seismic profile (VSP) or crosswell surveys, in order to image the reservoir and injected CO Instead of time-lapse seismic imaging, a buried passive seismic array will be used to monitor the reservoir. The passive seismic data will be used for two purposes: to detect any microearthquakes that may occur during the treatment period and for Tomographic Fracture Imaging™ (TFI™), a proprietary technology of Global Geophysical Services, Inc. ( Measuring surface deformation at the Buchanan County field site during CO The unique characteristics of the Buchanan County CO The most informative and cost effective MVA program for the Buchanan County test may be one that combines technologies that collect data over large areal extents, such as passive microseismic or TFI monitoring and surface deformation measurement, with substantial data from monitoring and offset wells. These data sets complement and validate each other by defining the relationships between the spreading plumes of pressure, CO Financial assistance for this work was provided by the The following KML file contains the Google maps of the most important areas described in this article. Supplementary data associated with this article can be found in the online version, at