It has been an established fact that comminution processes, crushing and grinding, are most energy intensive processes which account for more than half of the total energy consumed in mineral industries. Various alternative pre-treatment methods have been tried by experts around the globe. Although these methods yielded positive results in terms of reduction in energy consumption in crushing and particularly, in grinding operations at laboratory scale, their industrial application still remains an unresolved issue and challenge. Present review paper describes each one of these methods along with outcome of earlier studies and issues that need to be addressed through further rigorous experimental investigation. It also suggests the direction in which future studies can be carried out to meet the primary objective of making comminution processes more energy efficient than today they are.Comminution essentially involves two processes-crushing and grinding. This terminology is also applicable to blasting and drilling As no process is without its limitations, so is the comminution. Through umpteen researches, it has been established that comminution is the most energy intensive process of concentrator. The audit of energy consumption by comminution in Australian copper and gold mines conducted by Ref. Among crushing and grinding, grinding is a more energy-consuming process than crushing Ref. To address the grave issue of unrestrained power consumption in comminution, rigorous investigations were undertaken by various experts globally to develop alternative and novel methods of comminution. These methods can be commonly termed as Pre-treatment methods in the sense that rocks are exposed to some sort of treatment before their full-scale mechanical comminution by extant technology. As observed by Ref. However, although these methods have been found to efficient at laboratory scale, these have not yet been converted to economically viable and commercially feasible technology which can be employed for large-scale operations. The subject of current review paper is, thus, to summarize work done in these areas of pre-treatment methods and suggest main focus areas for future investigations. Among several methods experimented globally, following are the methods which saw considerable efforts. These methods are listed below as: Thermal breakage. Microwave heating. High-voltage pulse breakage. Ultrasonic breakage. Thermal shock. Following sections deal with these methods in detail. Thermal breakage, commonly known as conventional heating, signifies heating rocks before comminuting them. The mechanism of heat transfer in rock is convection, conduction, and radiation. Heating of rocks induces inter-granular cracks in the rock matrix and facilitate easy grinding and generation of less fines. Numerous studies have proved that temperature plays a major role in altering properties of substances than other operating conditions like pressure, magnetic field, electric field, etc. In the review paper, Ref. Ref. The crusher result showed that HT ore produced 14% lesser +4 Ref. Ref. In yet another study, Ref. In spite of some promising results obtained from conventional heating in terms of reduction in mechanical properties of rocks, it has not proved to be successful in context of reduction in energy consumption, improved grindability, enhanced throughput, etc. The principal cause of above demerits is its mechanism of heating of rocks. The standard mechanisms of heat transfer through convection, conduction, and radiation are very slow on account of the fact that it requires long time for heat to defuse into the rock matrix. Due to slow heating, density of cracks generated inside matrix is low. Over and above, there is no selective heating of intended mineral particles. These serious limitations led researchers to the development of more effective method of heating. This method makes use of a radiowave namely Microwave. The basic mechanism of microwave heating is microwaves are in the form of energy to which electric and magnetic fields are associated. When this energy is absorbed by dielectric material, its atoms are polarized. Resultant dipoles align themselves according of alternating fields. These fields flip about several billion times in a second which expedite change in orientation of dipole. Due to the rapid change in orientation of dipoles, the resultant stored energy is dissipated in the form of heat within the volume of matrix. Majority of naturally occurring ores have different thermal properties. As a result of this, these ores undergo thermal expansion to varying degrees due to differential thermal stresses created within the lattice. Varying magnitude and extent of expansion among different minerals result in generation of cracks at their interfaces i.e. development of inter-granular and trans-granular fractures. Microwave heating is a non-contact heating method leading to volumetric and rapid heating of rocks and also selective heating of minerals as opposed to conventional heating. On account of expeditious and volumetric heating, the density of cracks generated is high leading to substantial improvement in grindability. Thermal properties of minerals in rocks play a vital role in the successful application of microwave heating method. Minerals can be classified into three categories-insulator, conductor, semi-conductor. According to Ref. As quoted by Ref. In a nutshell, ability of rock to microwave heating depends of its thermal diffusivity, common term for specific heat, thermal conductivity, and density all taken together. This is a measure of increase in temperature within matrix as a function of time of exposure of microwave heat and penetration depth form the surface. Study conducted by Ref. Ref. It encompasses volume, surface area, size, and shape of mineral particles, and texture and structure of rock matrix. These determine consistency and amount of power absorbed in matrix. Ref. Ref. The speed of heating and duration of exposure to microwave energy influences the generation of cracks and subsequent grindability. The test conducted by Ref. Ref. Technical aspects of this method deal with operating parameters of microwave heating equipment. These parameters include operating frequency i.e. 915 or 2450 Ref. Another parameter studied was type of cavity to be employed. As reported, for 10 Ref. Ref. Similarly, Ref. Study undertaken by Ref. Another investigation by Ref. High-voltage electric pulse disintegration method is one of the most pursued methods besides microwave heating. Generation of fractures in the rock matrix is accomplished by two mechanism namely electrostriction and electrical breakdown. Electrostriction is the property of an electrical insulator which, when subjected to electric field, undergoes deformation in some way. Electrical breakdown means there is occurrence of rapid reduction in the resistance to the flow of electrical current when the applied voltage across material exceeds breakdown voltage. Understanding of mechanism of rock breakage of rock by electrical pulses has logically led to the argument that effectiveness of this method is ascertained by differences in electrical properties of minerals. Greater is the difference, more effective is the method. The electrical properties of prime importance are permittivity and electrical conductivity. Ref. These factors can be classified into two categories viz. mineral-related and operation-related. Mineral-related parameters are mineral morphology, grain size of desired minerals, feed particle size, differences in electrical properties of minerals and gangue material, and shape and angularity of particles. Operation-related parameters are number of pulses, high-voltage power supply, high-voltage pulse generator, process area, discharge voltage, electrode gap, and frequency of discharge. The impact of dielectric strength on the efficacy of electrical disintegration of rock can be understood from the experiments conducted on coal and Banded Hematite Jasper (BHJ) iron ore samples by Ref. Feed particle size influences the effective transfer of electrical energy in the sense that coarser size particles provide a continuous bridge between electrodes. This considerably reduces travel distance for energy, leading to less loss of energy. In case of fine feed particle size, the discontinuity is created between electrodes. Sparks jump from one particle to another which results in long traveling distance and more loss of energy. Thus sizes of particles in feed highly influence the disintegration of minerals. It was found through experimental study that the rocks with high porosity are amenable to electrical disintegration. The reason quoted was that air has lower electrical breakdown strength than water and rock itself. Thus, it promotes easier electrical breakdown and formation of plasma channel. Rocks with higher quartz content were reported to have fine size products. The reason represented for this observation was its piezo-electric nature i.e. charges accumulation in response to mechanical stress or its brittle nature. Ref. Experiments by Ref. According of the theory of electromagnetism, the electric field intensity is more at sharp points than at relatively flatter surface. This theory gives the argument that sharpness and angularity particles in feed will be more responsive to this method than any other particle of different shapes. Ref. Ref. Ref. Similar studies were conducted Ref. Another challenge is the integration of process of electrical disintegration in comminution circuit, distribution of power in the circuit, particle size of the feed to be treated which is in accordance with ability of electrical disintegration system as well as comminution mill. Next issue to be addressed is to maintain cracks in ore and prevent them from closing while undergoing comminution at different stages. Final and most important challenge which has direct impact on the quality of final product is the effect of electrical treatment on the effectiveness of downstream processes. It shall be ensured that electrical treatment do not degrade surface chemistry or grade of ore and shall not reduce recovery of valuable minerals in these processes. Another method of pre-treatment of rock uses ultrasonic waves which have frequencies more than 20 The history of ultrasonic pre-treatment dates back to 1981 when it was first experimented at Energy and Minerals Research (EMR) Company at Exton, Pennsylvania. Their rotating roller ultrasonic device with the capacity of 10 In 1988, The US Department of Energy applied ultrasonic comminution to Illinois No. 6 coal in the Coal Preparation Division at Pittsburg Energy and Technology Centre (PETC). However, this project proved to be a complete fiasco with results following opposite trend. The study of effectiveness of ultrasonic comminution resulted in the energy consumption of 300–400 In 1993, Ref. A recent study by Ref. The success of ultrasonic comminution method is governed by the ability to tap the synergistic potential of vibrating and compressive stresses to weaken mechanical properties of targeted rock. The important operating parameter is gap i.e. space between rollers for roller mill used for grinding. Increase in gap results in increase in energy consumption as well as production of less fine products. Thermal shock is a phenomenon which results from considerable differences in temperature. When an object, at high temperature, is suddenly subjected to colder condition, a stress known as Tensile Thermal Stress is developed within the body of object resulting in generation of cracks. This takes place only when tensile thermal stress exceeds tensile strength of material of object. Similar phenomenon is observed in case of rocks. An abrupt change in temperature of rock induces fracture in it The generation of fracture in rock is attributed to the fact that ores/minerals constituting rock have different heat conductivities. Through prior studies, it is known that object undergoes expansion or contraction due to variation in temperature it is subjected to. Due to different heat conductivities, these constituents experience different amounts of expansion or contraction. This engenders uneven deformation of rock, eventually leading to fracturing. Ref. Ref. The earlier sections highlighted some of the results of the application of various pre-treatment methods. Careful analyses of these results show the development of a promising method to treat materials before subjecting them to conventional comminution process. Two methods, pre-treatment by microwave heating and electrical disintegration i.e. electrical comminution, have been shown to more effectively liberate valuable minerals from the gangue matrix at relatively finer size ranges than mechanical comminution process. An attempt has been made to prove efficacy of application of ultrasound as a pre-treatment method. However, availability of limited literature calls for more extensive investigation in this area. This section aims to compare efficacies of aforementioned pre-treatment methods with the help of data and results obtained from experimental investigation of researchers globally. This would enhance the understanding of the method and help in making reasonable decision regarding the adoption of method based on the mineralogical condition at hand. Earlier sections compared effectiveness of conventional comminution process with these aforementioned novel methods. Ref. The above findings prove that microwave heating not only improves the liberation and resulting comminution characteristics of microwave treated ore more than conventional heating, but also has the potential to reduce energy consumption which is otherwise spent in heating material for hours at higher temperatures with no conspicuous benefit realized in generation of fractures and subsequent liberation. Such method of conventional heating is even more uneconomic than the mechanical comminution process. Comparison of liberation results of microwave treated iron ore from investigation of Ref. The result of the floatability study conducted by Ref. Ref. As observed and reported by Ref. In light of above results it can be concluded that microwave pre-treatment method is more efficient method of liberation of valuable minerals and size reduction than electrical disintegration. The reason for this conclusion is that in microwave treatment method, material is heated and then subjected to mechanical comminution which results into better liberation and enhanced recovery of valuable minerals; whereas in electrical disintegration method, the rock is comminuted with the use of high voltage electrical pulses with the use of any mechanical means. Also former is less energy intensive than latter. In the grindability study conducted by Ref. The present review paper attempted to summarize developments and advancements made globally to develop novel methods of comminution. The primary goal of these methods was to improve liberation and grade of valuable minerals and at the same time bring down load of energy consumption on mining industry and/or mineral processing plants. Many promising results are reported by various researchers in these regards. They demonstrated the ability of these methods to realize principal goal behind the idea of development of pre-treatment methods. The common central point of these methods was to examine the efficiency of method in comparison to conventional i.e. mechanical comminution method to liberate and separate minerals. The investigation encompassed aspects from reduction in mechanical strength to recovery of metal in concentration processes. There is a lack of investigation proving effectiveness of these methods with regards to energy consumption. There needs a further probe to quantify overall energy consumption in these methods. The aforementioned results are obtained at the laboratory scale. The quantity of material that is used was in the range of few grams to few kilograms. In spite of promising results, there lack successful implementation of these novel methods at the industrial-scale operation. This also demands investigation to generate these results at the larger scale where large tonnages of material are required to be dealt with and handled. Another area of investigation which attracted focus is the concept of thermal shock. The results of the application of thermal shock presented indicate toward an alternative and more efficient method of pre-treatment. The means to induce thermal stresses in rock material used so far by some investigators is quenching with water. So far, effects thermal shocks are reported up to temperatures down to −25 Rocks are composed of varied sizes of mineral grains of dissimilar thermal and mechanical properties. On application of liquid nitrogen on the heated rock surface, sudden cooling would occur in different mineral grains lying in close contact. As mineral grains generally have different thermal conductivity and thermal expansion co-efficients, a differential volumetric contraction among adjacent mineral grains would occur, which could give rise to a potential thermo-mechanical stress leading to weakening of rock by generating inter-granular and trans-granular cracks. It may even cause localized spalling of mineral matters, which may be termed as ‘cryo-fragmentation’ or ‘cryo-cracking’ of rocks. Moreover, change in brittleness of mineral matters will also cause the rock to fail under lower stress. Thus, the possibility of rock grinding at cryogenic temperature with much reduced energy consumption could also be explored. Cryogenic grinding is already an established technology for crushing non-metallic such as polymer, rubber etc. However, economic viability or suitability of crushing of rocks with cryogenic treatment is yet to be established. Ref. One of the major concerns in cryogenic grinding is the time required for penetration of cold into the rock. Smaller the size of the rock particle, lesser will be the time requirement for cooling. In conventional method of grinding, cost increases very rapidly with reduction of the particle size. On the other hand, smaller size particles can be quickly made brittle at cryogenic temperature. Thus, cryogenic grinding might be an effective way of grinding the smaller particles. Changes in properties of mineral matters due to cryogenic treatment may even alter the liberation size of a particular ore type. Authors acknowledge the support provided by