This study aims to develop novel nanocollectors for potential application in cobalt [Co(II)] detection and removal from lithium ion batteries. The optical nanocollectors were fabricated through functional immobilization of 2-nitroso-1-naphthol, bis[N,N-bis(carboxymethyl) aminomethyl]fluorescein, and pyrogallol red chromophore probes into large, open, cage-pored, three-dimensional cubic mesostructures with micrometer-sized monolith particles. The monolithic nanocollectors are stable and easy to use, and they have sensitive detection capabilities for low Co(II) ion concentrations. The construction of these probes into highly ordered pore-based monoliths transform ion sensing and removal systems into smart, stable assemblies and portable laboratory assays. The experiments were conducted to determine the effects of feed solution pH, concentration, and competing ions on the selective detection and removal of Co(II) ions. Solution pH played an important role in the selective removal of Co(II) ions. The nanocollectors were able to detect Co(II) ions selectively despite high concentrations of interfering ions. The unique features of the nanocollectors allow the visual detection, removal, and extraction of ultratrace concentrations of Co(II) ions without preconcentration. The adsorbed Co(II) was eluted/extracted with stripping agents and the nanocollectors were simultaneously regenerated for subsequent removal operations after rinsing with water. The nanocollectors retained their functionality despite several chemical treatments during the removal–extraction–regeneration cycles. Therefore, large-scale pilot studies are recommended to confirm these promising results.The removal and recovery of rare metals via extraction techniques have gained increasing interest because of the growing importance of rare metals in industrial applications and environmental problem solutions. Cobalt [Co(II)] is a rare metal that has diverse commercial, industrial, and military applications. For example, Co(II) is an important metal in manufacturing lithium batteries A variety of quantification technologies for metal ions have been developed. For example, several methods for quantifying Co(II) ions have been proposed, namely, radiometry, atomic absorption, inductively coupled plasma with atomic emission spectroscopy (ICP-AES), inductively coupled plasma with optical emission spectrometry (ICP-AES), inductively coupled plasma-mass spectrometry, electrochemistry, and potentiometry The search for rare-metal quantification methods that could be applied in online analysis, have easy-to-use methodology, and provide relatively cost-effective analysis of complex solutions, is a challenging and important issue in environmental monitoring. Several processes for Co(II) recycling from used LIBs have been proposed, such as adsorption, solvent extraction, hydrometallurgy, and pyrometallurgy The novel quantification methods for Co(II) analysis in complex solutions without sophisticated instruments are a challenging and important issue for modern environmental science and technology. Among the several analytical techniques, the use of optical nanocollectors for measuring toxic trace elements allows the detection of pollutant species with large economic, political, and social effects In view of the environmental mitigation and natural resources, this study aims to detect and extract rare metals as pure compounds to manufacture lithium batteries. Three optical nanocollectors were prepared to remove Co(II) efficiently from LIBs. In the controlled designs of the nanocollectors, high-order mesoporous silica monoliths (HOMs) with uniformly sized 9 All materials and chemicals were of analytical grade and used without further purification. Tetramethylorthosilicate (TMOS), the triblock copolymers of poly(ethylene oxide-b-propylene oxide-b-ethylene oxide) Pluronic F108 [F108 (EO Cubic HOMs were synthesized via the direct templating method using the lyotropic liquid crystalline phase of F108 as template Nanocollector 1 ( Nanocollectors 2 and 3 ( Typically, the term monolith is used to describe a solid piece of material with a large particle size (i.e., ≫micrometric size), wherein each individual particle maintained at least its micrometric particles even though the materials were crushed into powder ( In a typical Co(II) ion-sensing experiment, the nanocollector materials (20 FESEM images were measured by a field-emission scanning electron microscopy (Hitachi S-4300). Before insertion into the chamber the powder substrates were fixed on a SEM stage using carbon tapes. The Pt films were deposited on substrates at room temperature by using an ion-sputter (Hitachi E-1030). The distance between the target and the substrate was 5.0 Small angle powder X-ray diffraction (XRD) patterns were measured by using a 18 N Thermogravimetric and differential thermal analyses (TG and DTA, respectively) were measured using a simultaneous DTA-TG Apparatus TG-60 (Shimadzu, Japan). High-resolution transmission electron microscopy (HRTEM) was performed using a JEOL JEM model 2100F microscope. HRTEM was conducted at an acceleration voltage of 200 Energy Dispersive X-ray micro-analyzers (EDX) were recorded by employing Horiba EDS-130S, which directly connected with Hitachi FE-SEM S-4300. Elemental mapping of all samples was carried out with the energy dispersive X-ray micro-analyzers with an acceleration voltage of 30 The absorbance spectrum of the nano-collectors material was measured by UV-Vis-NIR spectrophotometer (Shimadzu 3700). In selective removal, metal ions concentrations were determined by ICP-AES. The instrument was calibrated using four standard solutions containing 0, 0.5, 1.0 and 2.0 Mesocage cubic Im3m (HOM) mesostructures with uniform cavities and entrance pores were fabricated using the direct templating method for F108 (EO The XRD profiles ( The N The optical nanocollectors were designed using the grafting technique The adsorption capacities of loaded organic moieties of nanocollectors 1, 2, and 3 were investigated through thermogravimetry (TG) and differential thermal analysis (DTA) (data not shown). The TG curves of the nanocollectors indicate a decrease in mass at approximately 180–650 Solution pH plays an important role in the optical detection and removal of the nanocollectors to achieve the optical color signal and the selective removal of target metal ions in the presence of competing or coexisting ions. Therefore, the present nanocollectors were affected by pH during the monitoring of Co(II) ions. The Co(II) ion-sensing system with nanocollectors 1, 2, and 3 was determined over a wide pH range of 2.0–12.5 using different buffer solutions at each pH level. The effects of pH on the Co(II) ion detection of the three nanocollectors are shown in Using the batch adsorption method for the optical sensing/collection of metal ions, the contact time “signal response time” plays a key role in the development of color signals because of the binding of Co(II) ions with probes during the formation of the metal–probe [Co–probe] The solid cage materials immobilized by indicator dyes 1, 2, and 3 could be used as preconcentrators to yield high adsorption capacities and preconcentration efficiencies for simultaneous visual inspection and simple collection over a wide, adjustable range of Co(II) ion concentrations (0–2000 The nanocollectors fabricated in this study were estimated from the linear part of the calibration plot of the absorbance of the [Co–probe] The calibration plot ( For experimental Co(II) nanocollector 1, the effects of adding an equivalent amount of cations (2 Ion selectivity is a key consideration in monitoring, removing, and collecting Co(II) ion from LIBs. However, the leached solutions from LIBs usually contain several anionic components (HCO  The Co(II) ion adsorption isotherms of nanocollectors 1, 2, and 3 were measured under experimental conditions, as shown in The Co(II) ions were extracted from the nanocollector pore surfaces after adsorption via simple treatment tests, which facilitates the regeneration of the nanocollectors and elution of the Co(II) ions. Low monoprotic acid concentrations (≪0.03 The nanocollectors retained their functionality after the elution or extraction of Co(II), as observed from the XRD profiles and N The main competing cations presented in LIBs were Ni(II), Al(III), Cu(II), Fe(III), Mn(II), and Li(I) ( A series of batch contact time experiments was performed to define and evaluate the specific removal of Co(II) ion from LIBs. The Co(II) ion quantification levels were tested individually with optical nanocollectors using a real LIB composite mixture (1.75  A laboratory experiment was conducted for the controlled monitoring, collection, recovery, and extraction of Co(II) ions from LIBs using novel nanocollector constructed via a batch approach. HOMs with cage mesopore architectures were used as platform substrates to produce simple and cost-effective nanocollectors that selectively and sensitively extract Co(II) ions from LIBs. The nanocollectors were highly sensitive to pH and enabled the selective removal of Co(II) ions from multicompetitive cation and anion solutions under specific pH values. The nanocollector assays extracted ∼98% of the Co(II) ions adsorbed onto the pore surfaces using a simple chemical treatment for the decomplexation of Co(II) ions from the [Co–probe]