In order to obtain bioactivity on the surface of titanium alloy, the bioceramic coating on Ti–6Al–4V was designed and fabricated by laser cladding. The microstructure and bioactivity of laser-cladded bioceramic coating were investigated in vitro via soaking in a simulated body fluid (SBF). The results indicated that the laser-cladded bioceramic coating was metallurgically bonded to the substrate and contained such bioactive phases as hydroxyapatite (HA) and β-tricalcium phosphate (β-TCP). A bone-like apatite layer was spontaneously formed on the surface of laser-cladded coating merely soaked in SBF for 7 days. And the appearance of flake-like and cotton-like morphology, which is the characteristic morphology of apatite, offered an advantageous condition for osseo-connection. The formation ability of apatite was remarkably accelerated on the surface of laser-cladded bioceramic coating compared with the untreated titanium alloy substrate.The bioactive materials, such as hydroxyapatite (HA) and certain glass–ceramic, have been used as important bone substitutes in clinic because they could spontaneously bond to living bone. However, the inherent mechanical properties of brittleness, low tensile strength, and poor impact resistance limit their scope in many load-bearing applications In the past several decades, laser processes as surface treatment techniques are becoming more attractive in biomaterials engineering. HA thin films have been prepared by pulsed laser deposition technology since 1992 In the present study, the bioceramic coating was obtained on Ti–6Al–4V substrate by laser cladding using CO The titanium alloy (Ti–6Al–4V) was adopted as the substrate. Calcium carbonate (CaCO In vitro experiments were conducted in corrected SBF (c-SBF) with ion concentrations nearly equal to those that have almost similar compositions of inorganic ions to human blood plasma. The reagents and amount for preparation of each liter c-SBF were listed as follows: 8.035 The morphologies and the elemental distribution of specimens were analyzed by scanning electron microscope (SEM, JEOL JSM-6700F, Japan) and electron probe microanalysis (EPMA, EPMA-1600, Japan). The phase composition of the bioceramic coating was investigated by X-ray diffraction (XRD, RIGAKU D/max-2400, Japan) using Cu target Kα radiation with a step size of 0.02°. The SEM micrograph of the surface morphology of laser-cladded bioceramic coating is shown in As could be seen from the cross-section morphology of composite ( The laser-cladded bioceramic coating and the untreated substrate showed different apatite-forming abilities after they were soaked in SBF at diverse immersion period. The SEM micrographs of the precipitates deposited on the surface of laser-cladded coating soaking in SBF for 7 days are shown in As to the morphology of laser-cladded coating immersed in SBF for 14 days ( There is no doubt that the XRD patterns obviously reflected different characteristics for each specimen. The XRD patterns of the laser-cladded bioceramic coating un-soaked and soaked in SBF of 14 days are shown in The phases of un-soaked bioceramic coating treated by laser cladding are displayed in In conclusion, the calcium phosphate bioceramic coating on titanium alloy (Ti–6Al–4V) was designed and fabricated by laser cladding. The bioceramic coating was metallurgically bonded to the substrate. The synthesis of bioactive phases such as HA on the top layer of coating offered an advantageous condition for osseous germination. Furthermore, the bone-like apatite was spontaneously formed on the surface of laser-cladded coating merely soaked in SBF for 7 days. And the appearance of flake-like and cotton-like characteristic morphology offered an advantageous condition for osseo-connection. The formation ability of apatite was remarkably accelerated on laser-cladded bioceramic coating in SBF, while untreated substrate unformed the apatite after a long soaking period. Therefore, the laser-cladded bioceramic coating was of favorable bioactivity in vitro after soaking in SBF.