This study explored the use of fluorescently labeled pectin to obtain evidence for Ca2+ mediated pectin–pectin interactions in situ. Specifically, carrots were either blanched at low temperature (LTB) or blanched at high temperature (HTB) to activate or inactivate endogenous pectin methylesterase, respectively. Consequently, pectin in tissue particles of LTB and HTB carrots exhibited low degree of methylesterification (DM) and high DM, respectively. Pectin present in the LTB carrot serum exhibited a lower DM, was more branched, and showed a higher molar mass compared to HTB carrot serum pectin. Ca2+ mediated pectin–pectin interactions were influenced by serum pectin molecular structure, increased with increasing pH and Ca2+ concentration, and decreasing DM. Presence of more linear pectin in the serum created a competition, leading to less intense interactions between labeled pectin and pectin at tissue particle surfaces. Generally, the most intense Ca2+ mediated pectin–pectin interactions were observed for pectin of LTB carrot particles.To increase shelf life, ease transportation and provide a variety of products to consumers, the edible portions of fruits and vegetables are more and more processed into high quality particulated products such as juices, purées and soups. During processing, mechanical disintegration techniques (such as crushing, blending and high-pressure homogenization) are applied to obtain the fruit- and vegetable-derived particulated products. These types of products are commonly described as a combination of a liquid phase or serum containing salts, sugars, proteins, organic acids and pectic substances, and a dispersed phase consisting of all the plant insoluble solids, mainly cell wall material ( Pectin is a heterogeneous group of closely associated cell wall polysaccharides rich in galacturonic acid (GalA). Three pectic polysaccharides (homogalacturonan (HG), rhamnogalacturonan-I (RG-I) and rhamnogalacturonan-II (RG-II)) have been isolated from primary cell walls and structurally characterized ( To study pectin interactions, a selective extraction of pectic fractions from cell wall material is commonly performed followed by a physicochemical analysis of the fractionated cell walls and isolated polymers ( Fresh yellow carrots ( One part of each purée was separated into fractions with different particles sizes using the wet sieving technique. A sieve shaker (Retsch, Aartselaar, Belgium) equipped with a set of sieves with pores sizes of 40, 80, 125, 250, 500 and 1000 The remaining part of the purée was centrifuged (30 Cell wall material present in the particle fractions (obtained in Section Cell wall material in tissue particle fractions was isolated as AIR using the method described by The DM of pectin was determined using the FT-IR method described by The galacturonic acid (GalA) content of carrot serum pectin was determined based on the method described by The neutral sugar composition of the lyophilised serum samples was analyzed using high-performance anion-exchange chromatography (HPAEC) combined with pulsed amperometric detection (PAD). Approximately 5 The molar mass distribution of serum pectin was estimated using high-performance size-exclusion chromatography equipped with multi-angle laser light scattering (PN3621, Postnova analytics, Germany) and refractive index (RI) detection (Shodex RI-101, Showa Denko K.K., Kawazaki, Japan). Approximately 5 Presence of pectin at the surface of carrot tissue particles was established through immunolabeling as described by The production of covalently labeled citrus pectins with different DMs was achieved in three stages: (i) demethylesterification of pectin, (ii) oxidation of the hydroxyl groups of the pectin to aldehydes, and covalent linking of the aldehydes to a fluorescent probe (BODIPY FL hydrazide, (4,4-difluoro-5,7-dimethyl-4-bora-3a,4a-diaza-s-indacene-3-propionylhydrazide)). First, for the demethylesterification of pectin, plant PME was extracted from carrots ( Next, the samples were oxidized based on the procedure of In the last step, to covalently link the oxidized sample to a fluorescent label, approximately 50 HTB and LTB carrot tissue particles of a small particle fraction (80–125 Pectin-interactions in the reconstituted systems were visualized using an Olympus BX-51 (Olympus, Optical Co. Ltd., Tokyo, Japan) microscope equipped with Olympus XC 50 digital camera and epifluorescence illumination (X-Cite® Fluorescence Illumination, Series 120Q, EXFO Europe, Hants, UK). Approximately 20  As can be seen from Molar mass and concentration profiles obtained for serum pectins from LTB and HTB carrot purées are presented in  The results of immunolabeling of tissue particle (>500 Ca For LTB carrot samples, When the concentration of Ca When LTB carrot tissue particles were reconstituted in LTB carrot serum, less intense interactions were observed between the particles and labeled pectin of DMs 16% and 35% for the smaller clusters (indicated by the grey arrow). With labeled pectin of high DM (DM 66% and 95%), no fluorescence was observed at the particle surfaces. For the larger clusters, similar results were observed. In both cases (larger and smaller clusters), interaction between labeled pectin and pectin at the surface of particles was observed despite presence of soluble pectin in the serum (DM 34%) which was expected to be a competition factor for interaction with labeled pectin. This observation can be attributed to the fact that LTB serum pectin is strongly branched and exhibits generally a low molar mass, thus generating little competition for labeled pectin, despite its low DM and high degree of blockiness (84.6%). Although the fluorescence of the surfaces of particles was observed (more intense for larger particles than in the case of smaller particles reconstituted in serum), it was less intense than that for particles reconstituted in water. As the Ca In the case of HTB treated carrot samples, the results obtained for suspensions reconstituted with smaller carrot tissue particles (80–125 As the amount of Ca When HTB carrot tissue particles were reconstituted in HTB carrot serum, very low interactions with labeled pectin were observed without added Ca By increasing the Ca In general, it can be concluded that pectin in LTB carrot tissue particles exhibited more intense interactions with labeled pectin compared to pectin in HTB carrot tissue particles. Furthermore, it can be concluded that Ca The effect of pH on pectin-interactions was investigated at three pH conditions (pH 2, 3.5 and 7). The pH conditions were selected based on the fact that the pKa value of pectin varies between 3.38 and 4.10 ( Enhanced insight into Ca The authors acknowledge the financial support of Supplementary data associated with this article can be found, in the online version, at 