This paper series adopts particle modeling (PM) to simulation of dynamic fracture phenomena in homogeneous and heterogeneous materials, such as encountered in comminution processes in the mining industry. This first paper is concerned with the setup of a lattice-type particle model having the same functional form as the molecular dynamics (MD) model (i.e., the Lennard–Jones potential), yet on centimeter length scales. We formulate four conditions to determine four key parameters of the PM model (also of the Lennard–Jones type) from a given MD model. This leads to a number of properties and trends of resulting Young’s modulus in function of these four parameters. We also investigate the effect of volume, at fixed lattice spacing, on the resulting Young modulus. As an application, we use our model to revisit the dynamic fragmentation of a copper plate with a skew slit [J. Phys. Chem. Solids, 50(12) (1989) 1245].interaction force ( interaction potential energy ( parameter parameter stiffness Young’s modulus ( equilibrium position in atomic structure, e.g., 2.46 exponential parameter in atomic structure exponential parameter in atomic structure mass of each atom ( total quasi-particle number in total quasi-particle number in total quasi-particle number in length of material specimen (cm) width of material specimen (cm) height of material specimen (cm) Attaining a better understanding of the comminution of rocks, such as commonly taking place in the mining industry (e.g. In this paper series we adopt the so-called The two basic rules in the model set-up on larger-than-atomistic-scales are the conservation of mass and the conservation of equilibrium energy between the quasi-particle system and the atomistic material structure. Interaction between any two neighbors in PM involves a potential of the same type as the interatomic potential—here typically one of a Lennard–Jones type. Particle modeling can handle very complicated interactions in solid and fluid mechanics problems, also with complicated boundary and/or initial conditions; an example of the latter is the dynamic free surface generation in solids’ fracture. In fact, due to these advantages, particle modeling has recently found increasing use in mineral and mining research especially in the studies of tumbling mills Research of the existing literature in PM shows that the following questions still remain open: How does the choice of parameters in the interaction potential affect the resulting Young modulus and the effective strength of the material to be modeled? How does the choice of volume of the simulated material, at fixed lattice spacing of quasi-particles, affect the resulting Young modulus? How does the choice of parameters in the interaction potential affect fracture of a copper plate (an example problem in studies What are the combined effects of all three factors above? What would be a proper, or optimal, choice of In this paper we address the above issues, and use the same basic set-up of a copper plate with an initial slit (crack) undergoing dynamic fracture as that in the aforementioned works of Greenspan. We abandon Greenspan’s definition of particle interaction as small “relative to gravity” in his dynamic equations that actually result in a pseudo-dynamic solution. In so doing, we also modify the proper time increment in PM. In essence, we set up rules for the formulation of models of fracture of multi-phase materials, which are then implemented in practical comminution problems in Part II of this paper series. In molecular dynamics (MD), the motion of a system of atoms or molecules is governed by classical molecular potentials and Newtonian mechanics. In our study, following Ashby & Jones In particle modeling (PM), the interaction force is also considered only between nearest-neighbor (quasi-)particles and assumed to be of the same form as in MD: The four parameters Just as in MD, the dynamical equation of motion for each particle Note that if an equilateral triangular lattice structure is adopted in 2-D, the resulting Poisson ratio equals 1/4 (or 1/3) when a 3-D (respectively, plane) elasticity formulation is adopted For the sake of a comparison, we follow the example of Greenspan We now construct a 40 First, in the The coordinate of first row: for odd rows: for even rows: for odd sections: for even sections: Just as in molecular dynamics, there are two commonly used numerical schemes in particle modeling: “completely conservative method” and “leapfrog method.” The first scheme is exact but requires a very costly solution of a large algebraic problem, while the second one is approximate. Since in most problems, both in MD and in PM, one needs thousands of particles to adequately represent a simulated body, the completely conservative method is unwieldy and, therefore, commonly abandoned in favor of the leapfrog method The leapfrog formulas relating position, velocity and acceleration for particles To ensure that numerical errors do not grow rapidly in time, the time step has to satisfy a stability condition. In PM, the safe time step is obeyed by the same formulas as those in MD, wherein it is dictated by the root locus method For a stretching problem of a plate/beam, we take For an impact problem, we need to set a minimum distance limiting the spacing between any two nearest-neighbor particles, e.g., From Eq. There also exists another criterion for stability and convergence As we have seen from Eq. First, for the atomic structure (MD model), we have: interaction force [dynes]: Using the mesh system shown in Next, we shall mainly take these three pairs as our principal study cases: ( The larger the (  A comparison of these three pictures shows that, for smaller ( In some situations, when the size of the simulated material is fixed, within the satisfaction of engineering need, we often hope to get rapid result by an adoption of as big equilibrium spacing as possible. So the question is, what is the relationship between changing ( When For all the We now turn to this question: For a 3-D lattice structure, at a fixed Since all the cases of ( This paper series employs particle modeling (PM) approach for simulation of dynamic fracture phenomena in homogeneous and heterogeneous materials, such as encountered in comminution processes in the mining industry. This first paper is concerned with the setup of a particle model having the same functional form as the molecular dynamics (MD) model (i.e., the Lennard–Jones potential), yet on centimeter length scales. Basically, we have four conditions to determine four unknown variables, The larger the values of ( In the case of In the case of A uniform augmentation of volume We have also used our model to revisit the previously studied case of dynamic fragmentation of a copper plate with a skew slit, and we have modified the previous results of Greenspan in two ways. First, we corrected the “local interaction parameter” concept in his dynamic equations that render his theory a pseudo-dynamic model, so as to have the full dynamics. Secondly, we studied the influence of four parameters We have benefited from correspondence with Prof. D. Greenspan (University of Texas at Arlington). Discussions with the staff at COREM, Quebec City, have proved helpful in orienting this research. The work reported herein has been made possible through support of the Canada Research Chairs program and the funding from NSERC.