Phase Change Materials (PCM) allow storing thermal energy as latent heat when phase change occurs. In order to characterize these materials the phase change enthalpy and temperature should be perfectly known. Differential Scanning Calorimetry (DSC) is the most used technique to determine PCM's thermophysical properties. There are mainly two DSC operation modes: dynamic and step mode. A selection of the two most common PCM materials (paraffin and salts hydrates) was performed to conduct measures with the two DSC operation modes. The main objective of this paper is to determine the most appropriate operation mode for each type of PCM. A slow dynamic mode is recommended when analyzing salt hydrates with DSC. No significant differences between the two DSC modes were observed for paraffin.The highest percentage of energy consumed in buildings is due to heating and cooling systems. Several constructive systems In order to design and optimize the PCM thermal characteristics, a deep knowledge on them is needed In DSC operation, the peak is shifted toward higher temperatures as the mass or the heating rate increases Both operation modes present advantages and disadvantages. Recent research with PCM analysis shows that the dynamic mode is the most widely used The main objective of this paper is to determine the most appropriate way to proceed experimentally with DSC depending on the nature of PCM. To fulfill this objective, two different DSC operation modes (dynamic mode and step mode) were compared testing two common types of PCM: paraffin and salt hydrates. Furthermore, accuracy and repeatability are evaluated and discussed. Two different and widely used families of PCM with ambient phase change temperature were chosen: salt hydrates and paraffin. On one hand, two salt hydrates with their commercial identification: PCM*17T from PCM Energy P. Ltd. company and PlusICE S27 from PCM Products Limited company. Their melting points are 17 In order to study the accuracy and the repeatability, three different samples (Run 1, Run 2 and Run 3) of each material were analyzed and each sample was cycled three times (Run 1.1, Run 1.2, Run 1.3, etc.) with DSC. The equipment used to perform the DSC analysis was a DSC-822e commercialized by Mettler-Toledo. Since the sample mass is a key factor, as seen in Dynamic mode was set out as a common pattern taking into account the melting temperature ( For further comparisons between both methods, an appropriate temperature range was selected for each sample and used for both DSC modes. The criterion for this temperature range was set in the dynamic mode, being the temperature range ( When the DSC signal does not return to its zero, thermal equilibrium is not reached. Results which follow such tendency should be avoided as data is not representative. A typical step temperature plot of a heating and cooling ramp is shown in Evaluation of the rsesulting DSC curves was done with STARe v.11.00 software from Mettler-Toledo. Phase change enthalpy and temperature were obtained from the DSC heat flux signal response by integration. Specifically, for phase change temperature (both melting and solidification), the peak temperature has been considered as the representative temperature of a phase change material. Phase change enthalpy and melting temperature are the thermophysical properties measured by means of DSC. Phase change enthalpy measures for the three materials studied and for the two DSC modes considered are shown in In order to compare and to evaluate repeatability of both DSC modes (dynamic and step), standard deviations were calculated and presented in  Focusing on melting temperatures obtained by DSC in comparison with manufacturer values ( Subsequently, repeatability between samples is evaluated. Comparisons of the standard deviations when cycling three times the samples applying the same operation mode are performed. Results for the three PCM considered and the two DSC modes are shown in A common thermal behavior of salt hydrates is subcooling occurrence, also known as supercooling When evaluating step curves, the enthalpy is calculated by adding the values of the different steps According to these results, when characterizing salt hydrates and paraffin, a slow dynamic mode (0.5 Main differences when analyzing paraffin and salt hydrates PCM using DSC technique are the following: When looking at melting enthalpies, no significant differences are observed between step and dynamic mode with salt hydrates. Considerable differences are detected with paraffin thought. Repeatability is achieved in both DSC modes and for the two PCM families analyzed (organic and inorganic). When looking at melting temperatures, no significant differences were observed between dynamic and step modes, for the different materials analyzed. Accuracy is achieved for PCM*17T salt hydrate and RT27 paraffin in both DSC modes. Large uncertainty (around 25%) was detected for PlusICE S27 salt hydrate, probably because the manufacturer is reporting onset temperature of the phase change (the starting phase change temperature). When performing the step mode, it is difficult to reach the solidification process as Anmol Chemicals salt hydrate showed. This is because samples have to be under a cooling pretreatment, which produces difficulties during programming. Experiments are longer because samples cannot be analyzed immediately after each cycle. Leaving this fact aside, solidification enthalpy values obtained are similar regardless of the material analyzed and the mode used. Standard deviations and uncertainty of the solidification enthalpy results show a good match between step and slow dynamic mode. From the material point of view, organic materials do not show subcooling effect, whereas this effect should be taken into account especially when cycling salt hydrates. Moreover, both DSC modes are suitable when evaluating DSC response for paraffin. Nevertheless, a slow dynamic mode is the most appropriate to obtain proper results and even preferable to the step mode when analyzing salt hydrates with DSC. To sum up, the recommended DSC operation for both PCM families analyzed, organic and inorganic, is the slow dynamic mode (0.5 The work is partially funded by