The demand for high quality materials are increased in the applications of aerospace and automobile industries. The main requirement in the industrial products looking towards the lightweight aluminium (Al) matrix composites lead us to prepare the same with improvisation of physical, mechanical and tribological properties of the composites. In this view the present paper opens up towards the new approach of the utilization of hard ceramic (WC) and soft metallic (Co) blend particulates as reinforcements in Al7075 matrix to prepare the composite via liquid metallurgy route. Composites are prepared for 6 and 9 wt% addition of reinforcement. Samples are characterized by using SEM and EDAX analysis. Evaluation on mechanical properties of the samples over the base alloy exhibits a significant improvement in the tensile strength of the composite material.Composites are the materials having prevalent mechanical properties. For example, solidness, high load bearing limit, resistance to wear and more quality due to the addition of reinforcements. Erosion obstruction and low thermal coefficient of expansion are the properties which make them predominant than customary materials Metal matrix composites (MMCs) need lightweight parameters of high resistance. Managing the microstructure, mechanical properties, and expense of the product by optimizing the chemical composition, manufacturing system and heat treatment is the main challenge in the development and processing of advanced materials A synergism produces material properties that are inaccessible from the individual constituent materials; while the wide variety of matrix and reinforcement materials enables the product or structure designer to choose an ideal combination of engineered composite materials to form Aluminum alloys are suitable engineering material for the automotive, aerospace and mineral processing industries for various high-performance components and are used for these different applications due to their low weight, exceptional thermal conductivity characteristics The major problems in aviation and automotive industries are fuel consumption and weight decrease accordingly MMCs with better properties, for instance low thickness, high density and solidity with acceptable mechanical properties assumes a significant job in assembling businesses Aluminium 7075 alloy ingots is used as matrix material for the experimentation. Combined form of WC and Co mixture which is extracted from the ball milling process is taken as reinforcement. Stir casting methodology is adapted to synthesis the composite under variable parameters. Composites are prepared with the addition of 6 and 9 wt% of reinforcement. A batch of aluminium alloy is weighed according to the required volume specification and placed into the resistance furnace in graphite crucible. The composite prepared are subjected to further testing. The specimens are prepared as per the ASTM standards for microscopic observation and tensile test evaluation. Composite samples are sliced to the dimension of 5 mm × Ø10 mm and subjected to polishing process to prepare the samples as per metallographic procedure. Sliced samples are been polished using 200, 400, 600, 800 and 1000 mesh size grit emery paper to give a rough polishing. Later the samples are polished with velvet cloth to make the surface scratch free and fine finishing. During the velvet cloth polishing the samples is made to slide on alumina solution to enhance the polishing capabilities. The polished samples are observed under optical microscope to ensure no scratch surface is generated. Later the fine polished, scratch less samples are etched with Keller’s reagent and observed under scanning electron microscope. Solidified composite samples are taken for the tensile sample preparation using conventional lathe machine. Samples are prepared as per ASTM E8M standard. The dimensions used for the preparation of the samples are shown in Samples prepared as per metallographic procedure are subjected to microscopic observation using scanning electron microscope. It is found from the observations that the distribution of the reinforcements is uniform all over the matrix. To investigate the mechanical properties tensile test were carried out for the samples prepared as per ASTM E8M standards. Tensile results of base alloy, 6 wt% and 9 wt% reinforcement added composite were evaluated using computerised uni-axial testing machine and are presented in From the graphical representation it is observed that the strength of the base alloy increased with the increase in the weight percentage of the added reinforcement. The increase in tensile strength is mainly due to the thermal expansion between the matrix material and WC-Co cermet particle, which is an important mechanism for increase in the dislocation density due to dispersion of hard ceramic particle WC and Co particle during solidification. Further, increase in tensile strength in the composite material is mainly due to presence of hard ceramic WC and Co particles impart strength to the matrix material and reinforcements act as a barrier to the dislocation there by increasing the tensile strength of the composite. To study the effect of addition of tungsten carbide (WC) and Cobalt (Co) in Al7075 matrix, the samples were prepared with the addition of 6 and 9 wt% of the reinforcement to Al7075 matrix. The composites which are prepared are subjected to microstructure characterization using SEM and EDAX analysis which confirms the fair uniform distribution of the reinforcement particulates in the matrix. An improvement of 45.08% and 54.96% in ultimate tensile strength was achieved over Al7075 alloy after addition of 6 and 9 wt% of WC-Co particulates respectively.  The authors declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this paper.