Damping capacity of an Fe–17% Mn alloy has been studied with respect to several factors such as volume fraction of ε martensite, carbon content, and cold rolling. In the case of subzero cooling, the damping capacity of an Fe–17% Mn alloy increases with increasing ε martensite content. In case of thermal cycling, however, the damping capacity decreases with increasing ε martensite content, because the dislocations, which act as barriers to operation of damping sources, are introduced during the thermal cycling. The carbon contents above 0.06 wt.% deteriorate the damping capacity of the Fe–17% Mn alloy, which is ascribed to an interaction between damping sources and carbon atoms and to the decrease in volume fraction of ε martensite with the increase in carbon content. The damping capacity of the Fe–17% Mn alloy shows a maximum value around 10% reduction in thickness, and decreases with further deformation. The increase in damping capacity up to 10% deformation is attributed to an increase in ε martensite volume fraction with increasing deformation, and a decrease in damping capacity above the 10% deformation is ascribed to the stress-induced α′ martensite and dislocations formed during deformation, which act as barriers to operation of damping sources.Machine designers have long sought to decrease the level of noise and vibration arising from moving metallic parts in machines, vehicles and other applications. One solution has been to employ materials with a high damping capacity in the manufacture of such components in order to keep the noise and vibration to a minimum. Many kinds of materials with high damping properties, such as Mn–Cu alloys Recently, we have found that the Fe–Mn binary system exhibits a superior damping capacity Fe–17% Mn and Fe–17% Mn– Optical microstructural observation of the specimens were conducted after electro-polishing in a solution of perchloric acid (HClO Fe–17% Mn alloy was subzero-cooled at different temperatures between room temperature and −196 In previous studies γ/ε interphase boundaries. Stacking fault boundaries inside ε martensite plates. ε martensite variant boundaries. The damping capacity of the Fe–17% Mn alloy should be increased with increasing the volume fraction of ε martensite, because the number of the damping sources per unit volume becomes larger with increasing ε martensite content. Nevertheless the damping capacity of the Fe–17% Mn alloy decreases with increasing the volume fraction of ε martensite in the case of the thermal cycling treatment, as shown in  Fe–17% Mn alloy was cold rolled at room temperature, and the volume fractions of ε martensite are plotted as a function of the reduction of thickness in  In the case of the subzero cooling, the damping capacity of the Fe–17% Mn alloy increases with increasing ε martensite volume fraction, while in case of the thermal cycling treatment, the damping capacity decreases with increasing ε martensite content. The decrease in damping capacity with ε martensite volume fraction is ascribed to the dislocations introduced during thermal cycling, which act as barriers to operation of the damping sources, such as stacking fault boundaries in ε, ε martensite variant boundaries, and γ/ε interfaces. Carbon content above 0.06 wt.% deteriorates the damping capacity of the Fe–17% Mn alloy, which is caused by the decrease in ε martensite content with increasing carbon content and an interaction between carbon atoms and damping sources. The damping capacity of an Fe–17% Mn alloy reaches a maximum around 10% reduction in thickness, and decreases with further deformation. The increase in damping capacity up to 10% deformation is due to the increase in amount of ε martensite, while the decrease in damping capacity beyond the 10% is attributed to dislocations and α′ martensite formed during rolling, which hinder operation of the damping sources.