The feasibility of coupling anaerobic digestion and struvite precipitation in the same reactor was evaluated to enhance manure anaerobic digestion methane yields through ammonia inhibition mitigation. Five different magnesium sources were tested as a struvite (ammonia sequestration agent) precursor, i.e. MgCl2, Mg(OH)2, two industrial by-products rich in MgO but with different reactivity, and a stabilizing agent. The latter was formulated in advance with the low reactivity industrial by-product and phosphoric acid. The effect of each magnesium source on anaerobic digestion as well as its struvite precipitation capacity was evaluated through biomethane potential tests. Results indicated that all magnesium sources were able to reduce ammonia concentration to different extents. However, the stabilizing agent was the unique magnesium source that did not inhibit the anaerobic digestion process. The avoidance of adding a phosphate source directly into the digester medium and the high newberyite content were the advantages of the stabilizing agent over the other magnesium sources. Finally, a series of experiments indicated that if anaerobic digestion and struvite precipitation are combined in a single reactor, stabilizing agent addition should be carried out through several small additions rather than few large additions.The capacity to mineralise organic matter, reduce greenhouse gases emissions, produce an effluent with good fertilising qualities and, overall, energy recovery through methane production have made anaerobic digestion (AD) a widely used technology to treat animal manure Many research efforts have been made to mitigate ammonia nitrogen inhibition in AD. Among them, the addition of material with ion exchange capacity (e.g. bentonite, glauconite, phosphorite and zeolites) or inorganic absorbent materials (e.g. clay, manganese oxides and zeolites) have shown good results The main goal of this study was to compare the performance of five different magnesium sources (i.e. MgCl The major and minor components of the magnesium sources and the loss of ignition (LOI) were determined by X-ray fluorescence (XRF) using a Philips PW2400 X-ray sequential spectrophotometer. X-ray diffraction patterns were performed in a Bragg-Brentano Siemens D-500 powder diffractometer with CuKα radiation to obtain information about the crystalline phases. Scanning electronic micrographs were obtained with a SEM Quanta 200 FEI analyser equipped with an energy dispersive spectrometer analyser. The reactivity of the MgO samples was determined by the citric acid method, which measures the time needed by 2.0 Total solids (TS) and volatile solids (VS) were determined following the guidelines given by the standard methods 2540G Pig manure and digested pig manure, used as inoculum, were collected from a centralized mesophilic anaerobic digestion plant, which treats around 100,000 tons of pig manure per year. After collection, both samples were stored at 4 Analytical grade MgCl BMP tests were carried out following the stages defined by Angelidaki et al. Eleven different Mg doses were tested, i.e. MgCl Struvite precipitation batch experiments were performed in a Jar-Test device (Flocculator 2000, Kemira) at 37 The utilisation of analytical grade Mg sources, MgCl The use of industrial by-products (HG-MgO and LG-MgO) as magnesium sources also led to a lower manure methane yield ( The SA additions presented a completely different trend than the other magnesium sources since no severe inhibition phenomena were recorded. Low and medium SA doses (SA(1) and SA(2)) showed the same methane potential as control, while the high SA dose (SA(3)) presented a slight reduction of manure methane potential (from 148 to 127 To better comprehend the effect of SA addition on pig manure, the evolution of pH, TAN, IC, TP and Mg As shown in The increase of TP and Mg The present study evaluated the feasibility of combining anaerobic digestion and struvite precipitation in the same reactor through five different magnesium sources. The addition of Mg(OH) The authors would like to thank ACC1Ó and FEDER (VALTEC09-1-0016), as part of the framework “Programa Operatiu de Catalunya”, the