This study investigated the products of kaolinite thermal activation and the process of the alkaline reaction, using XRD, FTIR, 27Al MAS NMR, SEM, TEM and XPS methods; moreover, the effect of Er(NO3)3 addition on this process was analyzed. The results demonstrated that the addition of Er(NO3)3 enhanced the destruction of the microstructure in the thermal activation process of kaolinite, increased the disorder degree, and promoted the transformation of the thermal activation product from AlVI to AlV. With the progress of the alkali reaction and increase in the alkali concentration, the zeolite A phase was gradually transformed into a sodalite phase by dealumination. In this process, extra-framework aluminium derived from dealumination was enriched on the surface of the alkali reaction products. The addition of Er(NO3)3 accelerated the formation of zeolite and the transformation of the zeolite phase into the sodalite phase.Kaolinite is a clay mineral with a 1:1 type layered-structure; its molecular formula is Al A number of studies on the synthesis of zeolite porous materials using metakaolin as raw materials have been published [ Rare earth elements (REE) are commonly used as a catalyst for chemical reactions due to its characteristics such as high oxidizability, tendency to lose or gain electrons and reducing the reaction activation energy [ The kaolinite raw materials used in this study was obtained from Kaolin Co., LTD, Suzhou, China. The chemical compositions of kaolinite are presented in The DX-2700 X-ray diffractometer used for the mineral characterization of the calcined products of kaolinite and the alkaline reaction product of metakaolin had a Cu anode X-ray tube and 35 kV and 25 mA standard operating conditions. The scanning mode was step scan with a stride width of 0.02° and a scanned area of 5–80°; the data were collected once every 0.5 s. The ALPHA Fourier transform infrared spectrometer was used to characterize the structural transformation of the sample; the spectral range was 4000–400 cm Scanning electron microscopy (SEM) was performed on a MLA 650F instrument to study the morphology of the sample. LEM2100-F transmission electron microscopy (TEM) was used to characterize the microstructure of the thermal decomposition products of kaolinite.  X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS) was performed using Al Ka (hν = 1486.6 eV, power = 100 W) radiation and a Thermo Escalab EXI with a constant analyzer pass energy (Ep = 20 eV). The pressure in the analysis chamber was maintained below 1 × 10 Metakaolin was obtained by calcining homogeneous mixtures of Er(NO The XRD patterns of kaolinite and the kaolinite calcinated at 750 °C for 2 h with (MK-Er-750) or without Er (MK-750) are shown in The FTIR spectra of kaolinite prior to and after calcination are shown in The  The TEM and HRTEM micrographs of MK-500 and MK-Er-500 were shown in The XRD spectra and SEM image of the alkaline reaction products of the reaction of MK-750 and MK-Er-750 with the 5 mol/L NaOH solutions at 65 °C are shown in The XRD spectra and SEM image of the alkaline reaction products of the reaction of MK-750 and MK-Er-750 with the 8 mol/L NaOH solutions at 65 °C are shown in For the sample mixed with Er(NO The phase composition and morphology of the alkali reaction products obtained with the different alkali concentrations and reaction times were analyzed, and the results were compared with those of the sample mixed with Er(NO The FTIR spectra of the alkaline reaction products of the reaction of MK-750 and MK-Er-750 with 5 mol/L NaOH solutions at 65 °C are shown in The FTIR spectra of the alkaline reaction products of the reaction of MK-750 and MK-Er-750 with the 8 mol/L NaOH solutions at 65 °C are shown in The The XPS spectra and data of the alkaline reaction products of the reaction of MK-750 and MK-Er-750 with 5 mol/L NaOH solutions at 65 °C for 8 h are shown in XRD, FTIR, During the heat treatment of kaolinite, the layer structure of kaolinite was evidently destroyed and changed from a highly ordered crystal state to a disordered amorphous state. The addition of Er(NO The spherical zeolite precursor phase was first formed in the early stage of the metakaolin alkali reaction. As the reaction progressed, the precursor gradually transformed into a cubic zeolite A phase. The mesostable zeolite A phase eventually transformed into a flower-cluster-like sodalite phase. Increasing the concentration of alkali under an identical condition of alkali reaction can accelerate the formation of the zeolite and sodalite phases in the alkali reaction products and reduce the size of zeolite in the products. The addition of Er(NO Dealumination reaction occurs in the alkali reaction of metakaolin; this results in the presence of extra-framework aluminium in the alkali reaction products. In this process, the extra-framework aluminium is enriched on the surface of the alkali reaction products. The addition of Er(NO The authors gratefully acknowledge the financial support from the