Different wastes are generated by the steel industry, among them the shredder residue (SR). The main source of chlorine in SR is the polyvinyl chloride (PVC), which makes the use of this residue in a thermochemical process a great challenge. In this context, the addition of CaO in the pyrolysis process can decrease the release of acid gases, especially HCl. The objective of this work was to evaluate the role of CaO and its influence on Chlorine during the thermochemical conversion of SR. A fixed-bed pyrolysis reactor was used and the following variables were evaluated using a 2k factorial design: temperature, heating rate, inert gas flow (N2) and CaO/SR ratio. The chlorine retention in char was higher in the experiments conducted in the presence of CaO. A decrease of the metals retention in char was verified in the experiments conducted with CaO for the following metals: Co, Cu, Cr, Fe, Ni and Zn. Through the removal of chlorine, it would be possible to conduct the pyrolysis process at higher temperatures, increasing its energy efficiency (EE). Therefore, the necessity to remove chlorine from SR before the pyrolysis process is evidenced, since from this the use of CaO would contribute to the EE increase and the metals retention in char, and consequently with the global desirability increase.Proper management of urban and industrial solid waste is one of the major challenges faced by society. In this context, the steel production, if not controlled, can cause significant environmental impacts, since different wastes are generated, including the shredder residue (SR). The SR is generated in the ferrous scrap preparation, which is used in the feeding of electric arc furnaces for the production of different types of steel. The pyrolysis process is among the possible routes for the treatment of SR. Pyrolysis is a thermochemical process conducted at moderate temperatures and in the absence of oxygen, in which the volatile organic matter is decomposed into three fractions (solid, liquid and gas). The pyrolysis process is an attractive option because it reduces corrosion and emissions of sulfur, chlorine, and Polychlorinated Dioxins and Furans (PCDD/F). Meanwhile, pyrolysis lowers the rate of thermal NO Studies on the pyrolysis of automobile shredder residues (ASR) have been reported in the literature ( The SR has all the characteristics of a complex waste, which makes its treatment and reuse difficult processes. Although SR is generated in large quantities, and is available to provide a safe feed in a process ( In general, the main source of chlorine in the SR is the polyvinyl chloride (PVC). The chlorine elimination is considered a major concern in the development of polymer heat treatment processes. Pyrolysis is mentioned as a possibility of dehalogenation. It is divided into three groups: pyrolysis in stages, catalytic pyrolysis and co-pyrolysis with adsorbents. During the pyrolysis in stages, a step at a low temperature is conducted in order to remove chlorine from the original samples as HCl; afterwards the pyrolysis is conducted in a conventional manner ( Therefore, the calcium oxide (CaO) presence in the SR pyrolysis process can reduce the acid gases release (especially HCl). In addition, CaO has been used in pyrolysis processes for the The objective of this study was to evaluate the role of CaO and its influence on chlorine during the thermochemical conversion of shredder residue under different operating parameters (temperature, heating rate, inert gas flow, CaO addition) using a factorial design. SR samples used during the development of this work come from the Brazilian steel industry. These samples were generated in a shredder equipment, which has the capacity to process approximately 45,000 tons of scrap/month. An equipment image is available in the supplementary material (S1). Residues generated in the shredding process (> 100 mm) were sampled at the beginning and at the end of the process. Afterwards, they were placed in bags with a capacity of 600 kg max. After the quartering procedure, the samples were comminuted in a knife mill. A detailed characterization of the SR samples was reported by The reactor used for pyrolysis experiments is a tubular reactor (Sanchis, Brazil), which operates in a batch system. A 2 The statistical significance of the factors was evaluated using the analysis of variance (ANOVA) with the assistance of Statistica 12 software. Significance was tested with a 95% confidence interval. The result was evaluated as a function of the p-value obtained. P-values lower than 0.05 indicate the statistical significance of the factor. Only significant variables were used in the discussion of the results. The residue analysis was obtained by fitting a linear regression model. The linear equations generated from the multiple regression procedures for each response variable (dependent variables) are shown together with the graphs in the results section. These equations are valid throughout the investigated range of the independent variables, according to The thermal analysis of SR samples and the main polymers (polystyrene, high-density polyethylene, low-density polyethylene, polypropylene, polyamide 6, polyamide 6.6 and polyamide 6.12) present in SR, as well as a sample of wood that was segregated from SR were performed with samples of less than 0.9 mm diameter and an initial mass of approximately 10 mg. The experiments were conducted in a STA 449 F3 Jupiter® thermogravimetric balance (Netzsch) under inert atmosphere (50 ml.min The chlorine analysis in the SR, as well as in the char produced from the SR pyrolysis, was performed from the deionized water (5 mL) fraction resulting from the combustion conducted to determine the calorific value of the samples, according to ASTM D4208-02e1 (adapted) standard. Therefore, the 5 mL of deionized water resulting from each combustion was subsequently used for the determination of chlorides by using the Mohr titration method. The SR and char chlorine content (% wt.) was determined according to Eq. The chlorine retention in char was obtained according to Eq. A: chlorine concentration in char (mg/kg) B: char mass produced in the pyrolysis experiment (kg) C: CaO mass fed in the pyrolysis experiment (kg) D: chlorine concentration in SR (13,300 ± 130 mg/kg) E: SR mass used in the pyrolysis experiment (kg) The analyses of metal content in SR and char were conducted using the coupled plasma optical emission spectrometry technique (ICP-OES). The acid digestion preparation procedure was necessary. The concentration of metals in different samples were obtained from calibration curves with known concentrations of metallic elements (Aluminum, Lead, Cobalt, Copper, Chromium, Iron, Manganese, Nickel and Zinc). The retention of metals in char throughout the SR pyrolysis experiments was performed according to Eq. in which, metal concentration in char (mg/kg) char mass produced in the pyrolysis experiment (kg) CaO mass fed in the pyrolysis experiment (kg) metal concentration in SR (mg/kg). SR mass used in the pyrolysis experiment (kg) The energy efficiency (EE) of the SR pyrolysis process was defined by the ratio between the chemical energy present in the products (char and condensable volatiles) and the chemical energy present in the SR ( For determination of the char mass and its higher heating value, was considered the total mass of solids at the end of each experiment. m HHV m HHV m HHV m HHV  According to The SR derivative mass loss at the heating rates of 5 and 35 °C.min The first phase must be associated with the thermal degradation of hemicellulose and cellulose present in the wood contained in the SR. The shoulder formation in the DTG curve at higher temperatures indicates the degradation of the polystyrene contained in the SR and the final phase of thermal degradation is associated with the degradation of other polymers present in the SR. The chlorine retention in char was determined from Eq. Based on the identification and quantification of the materials present in SR, it was possible to identify the PVC (0.41% wt.). The PVC presents a high amount of chlorine in its composition (56.8%wt. according to  The chlorine retention in experiments conducted in the absence of CaO may be associated with HCl adsorption (formed from PVC degradation) in char. For the experiments conducted in the presence of CaO, the HCl can react according to Eq. According to  According to The reduction of chlorine retention in char with the temperature increase observed for the experiments conducted in the presence of CaO may be associated with the reaction 7. The chlorine may be volatilized as a gas-phase metal chloride. According to the dispersive energy spectroscopy analysis (S4), silicon is present in char. In the X-ray diffraction analysis (S5) it was possible to identify the presence of calcium silicate (CaSi  The retention of metals in char was evaluated for the following metals present in the SR: Aluminum (Al), Lead (Pb), Cobalt (Co), Copper (Cu), Chromium (Cr), Iron (Fe), Manganese (Mn), Nickel (Ni) and Zinc (Zn). The statistical analysis of the results obtained from the experimental design for all metals (except for lead) indicates that with a 95% confidence level, the CaO/SR ratio exerts a significant effect (p-value <0.05) on the retention of metals in char.  From   The mechanism proposed by  The authors reported the standard Gibbs energy ( According to the statistical analysis of the results, the variables CaO/SR ratio and temperature had a significant effect (p-value <0.05) on lead retention in char. For both temperatures, there was a significant reduction of Pb retention in char in the presence of CaO. This behavior indicates that Pb volatilization was influenced more significantly by the presence of CaO. According to The energy efficiency (EE) of the SR pyrolysis process was obtained according to Eq. The EE of the SR pyrolysis process reached mean values between 60 and 65%, hence approximately 60% of the SR energy content was recovered in the condensable volatile and char streams. Considering that the EE does not consider the energy present in the non-condensable gas stream, the EE of the SR pyrolysis process was appreciable. For comparison purposes, As can be seen in The factorial design used during the development of this work was also conducted in order to determine optimal experimental conditions. The SR pyrolysis process optimization by the desirability function was performed through Statistica 12 Software. This procedure consisted optimize the levels of the main factors in order to achieve the desired values for the response variables. Desirable conditions are shown in The values predicted by the desirability function ( The chlorine retention in the char was higher in the experiments conducted in the presence of CaO. The reduction of chlorine retention in char by increasing the temperature for the experiments conducted in the presence of CaO was attributed to the volatilization of metal chlorides. The retention of metals in char was influenced by the presence of CaO. A decrease in the retention of some metals (Co, Cu, Cr, Fe, Ni and Zn) in char in the presence of CaO, as well as an increase in Al and Mn retention was verified. The reduction of metals retention was attributed to the formation of CaCl The thermochemical conversion process, through pyrolysis, presented a high potential for the reuse of SR. Nevertheless, the removal of chlorine would lead to the pyrolysis process at higher temperatures, increasing the energy efficiency of the process. Therefore, the necessity of removing the chlorine from the SR before the pyrolysis process, since the use of CaO would contribute to the increase of the EE and the retention of metals in the char. Consequently, the global desirability would also increase. Due to the need to remove the chlorine present in the SR before the thermochemical conversion processes, which was highlighted throughout this manuscript, studies involving the removal of PVC contained in the SR (as a pretreatment) are necessary. In addition, the use of other adsorbents, with the objective of finding a suitable experimental condition for the capture of CO The authors would like to acknowledge the National Council for Scientific and Technological Development (CNPq) for providing the scholarship, the Coordination for the Improvement of Higher Education Personnel (CAPES) and are grateful to Gerdau Riograndense (Rio Grande do Sul State- Brazil) for providing the SR samples. Supplementary material related to this article can be found, in the online version, at doi: The following is Supplementary data to this article: