Copper coatings on the inside surface of aluminum 6061 tubes (surface exposed to helium-3 gas) were applied to mitigate the implanted tritium retention and permeation problem. The aluminum tubes through which Helium-3 gas flows continuously are used to capture the tritium generated when “spallation neutrons” are created during collision of the accelerated protons with a tungsten target A main concern during the production of tritium by this method is the loss of a significant portion of tritium into the aluminum tube wall by permeation and retention. More importantly, the risk of polluting the surrounding cooling water mandates the minimization of retention and permeation of tritium. To address this problem, copper coating has been used on the Al-6061 substrates to mitigate the retention and permeation of tritium A novel technique, based on plasma assisted physical vapor deposition (PVD), was utilized to deposit elemental copper on aluminum 6061 substrates at temperatures ranging from 150–200°C. The details of the deposition method are presented elsewhere An issue which cannot be neglected during the application of vacuum-deposited coatings is the state of stress within the coating. The total stress is composed of a thermal stress and an intrinsic stress. The thermal stresses are due to the mismatch in the coefficients of thermal expansion (CTE) of the coating and the substrate. The intrinsic stresses are due to the accumulating effect of crystallographic flaws that are built into the coating during deposition Although residual stresses in thin films have been studied by other researchers through models or experiments, there has been a lack of information in terms of irradiated thin films, which are produced by plasma thermal evaporation The copper deposition was performed by utilizing a dc plasma assisted evaporation system. The substrate temperatures were maintained at 150, 175 and 200°C. Sample sets were selected based on the operating temperature ranges of the system (150–200°C). Sample sets were identified as follows. Samples of sets A, B and D correspond to substrate temperatures of 175, 150 and 200°C, respectively. These temperature ranges were based on a close correlation between bond strength of the coating-substrate interface and the substrate temperature during coating operation Residual stresses were measured using conventional laboratory X-ray diffraction at Los Alamos National Laboratory. A Huber Residual Stress/Texture goniometer (Model #4030) using Copper (Kα) produced by an 18 kW Scintag rotating anode was employed for recording diffraction data. X-ray measurement parameters used for diffraction are in  In this study we evaluate the pre and post irradiation residual stresses of copper coatings from existing research available in the literature. The origins of stresses in coatings have been given as thermal, epitaxial, intrinsic, subsequent treatments after processing, etc.  Nevertheless, assuming the deposition temperature of 1083°C as the solidification temperature, the thermal stresses are tabulated for ΔT (T  The post irradiation residual stresses are consistent with previous work, which also observed a decrease in the residual stress of the coatings with an attendant increase in the residual tensile component A novel technique, based on plasma assisted physical vapor deposition, was utilized for coating of pure copper on aluminum 6061 substrates. These coated specimens were then deuterium irradiated. Finally, residual stress measurements were determined for both pre-irradiated and post-irradiated samples using x-ray diffraction. The pre-irradiation samples for each set repeatedly revealed compressive residual stresses. Significant decrease in compressive stresses was experienced after the irradiation for each set of coatings. It is clear that further, detailed, systematic studies are required to examine the irradiation effect on the residual stresses for the copper coatings and developing an understanding of all the possible mechanisms that contribute to the observed stress relaxation. This work was supported by the APT Program Office, Los Alamos National Laboratory, under U.S. DOE Grant DEFG0497AL77993. The authors wish to acknowledge Drs. Kristin Kurz and Rion Causey of Sandia National Laboratories, Livermore, for their help in the ion-implantation work.