Background
                  The purpose of this study was to evaluate the various factors, which could contribute towards redisplacement of distal radius fractures, including comminution of the dorsal cortex of the distal radius, treated in our department.
               
                  Methods
                  In this retrospective study, we evaluated the risk of redisplacement of distal radius fractures in our department and also looked at the probable factors predisposing to this risk. A total of 134 fractures (129 children) were included in the study after exclusions. The variables that were assessed as possible causes of redisplacement were age, gender, fracture pattern (apex), degree of initial displacement, presence/absence of comminution, presence/absence of ulnar fracture, grade of surgeon, quality of initial reduction and Cast index.
               
                  Results
                  After excluding the fractures without a known outcome, 124 fractures (120 children) were available for analysis. The average age of children was 10.6 years (range 2–16 years) with more boys (89) than girls (31). Redisplacement after an initial reduction occurred in 30 children (24%). Six of these children (4.8% of the entire study group) required further intervention. The factors associated with an increased risk of redisplacement were complete initial displacement of fracture (p
                     =0.02), dorsal bayonet fracture pattern (p
                     =0.007), presence of comminution (p
                     =0.001) and the quality of the initial reduction (p
                     =0.002). Forward stepwise logistic regression analysis revealed comminution at the fracture site to be the most significant factor associated with redisplacement, increasing the odds of redisplacement by 5.82 (95% confidence interval (CI): 2.08–16.22, p
                     =0.001). There seemed to be a trend towards a reduced risk of redisplacement when K-wiring was done in the presence of comminution (p
                     =0.12).
               
                  Conclusion
                  The presence of dorsal cortical comminution at the fracture site on initial radiographs should alert the treating surgeon to a significantly higher risk of redisplacement and supplemental K-wiring should be considered in this situation.Approximately one-third of all fractures in children occur at the wrist The causes of redisplacement in these fractures still remain a matter of debate and some that have been implicated include the initial complete displacement at the fracture site, The purpose of this study was to evaluate the various factors, which could contribute towards redisplacement of distal radius fractures, including comminution of the dorsal cortex of the distal radius, treated in our department. The study was conducted in the department of paediatric orthopaedic and trauma surgery at Sheffield Children's Hospital, UK. Approval was sought and obtained from the clinical effectiveness department and the study was conducted in a retrospective manner. Children treated in the department for displaced distal radius fractures from February to November 2007 were included in the study and were identified from the database maintained in the operation theatre. We included fractures involving the distal 1/3rd radius and excluded those that were open, pathological, Salter and Harris types III/IV, refractures in a previously healed fracture and those that occurred after physeal closure. A total of 129 children (134 fractures) were identified from the database and their hospital notes and radiographs were reviewed using a standard proforma. Immediate post-reduction radiographs were reviewed to assess the quality of reduction, along with subsequent follow-up radiographs to look for any redisplacement. For isolated distal radius fractures, the reduction was considered acceptable if there was ≤10° of angulation in the lateral radiograph, no angulation on the posteroanterior (PA) radiograph and ≥50% contact between the fracture fragments. For distal radius fractures associated with an ulnar fracture, the reduction was considered acceptable if there was ≤10° angulation in either bone on the lateral radiograph, no angulation in either bone on the PA radiograph and ≥50% apposition of both the bones on lateral/PA radiograph. Redisplacement was considered to have occurred if any of these was seen at follow-up:  For isolated distal radius fractures: >10° of angulation on the lateral radiograph Any angulation on the PA radiograph <50% apposition on the PA/lateral radiograph For combined distal radius and distal ulna fractures: >10° of angulation of either bone on the lateral radiograph Any angulation of either bone on the PA radiograph <50% apposition of either bone on the lateral/PA radiograph Ten fractures were excluded from the study due to lack of accurate information regarding redisplacement, therefore leaving 120 children (124 fractures) for analysis. The variables that were assessed as possible causes of redisplacement were age, gender, fracture pattern (apex), degree of initial displacement, presence/absence of comminution, presence/absence of ulnar fracture, grade of surgeon, quality of initial reduction and Cast index. Comminution of the dorsal aspect of the distal radial fragment was noted in any view. Statistical analysis was done using SPSS v14 software (Chicago, IL, USA). The relationship of individual factors to redisplacement was assessed using chi-square test. Fisher's exact test was used where the expected frequencies in any of the cells of the contingency table were <5. A A total of 129 children were identified with 134 fractures. After excluding those with unknown outcome, 120 children (124 fractures) were available for analysis. There were 89 boys and 31 girls. The average age was 10.6 years (range 2–16 years). The various types of fractures included greenstick (42), physeal (35), buckle (12), complete (17), dorsal bayonet (17) and unknown (one). A total of 95 fractures were partially displaced and 29 were completely displaced. The apex of the fracture was volar in 104 fractures and dorsal in 20 fractures. A total of 84 fractures had an associated ulnar fracture and 40 did not. The most common fracture patterns in the ulna were the greenstick type and ulnar styloid avulsion. The majority of children (107) underwent surgery within 24 As many as 28 children had comminution of the cortex on the initial radiographs. A total of 27 had comminution of the dorsal cortex and one had comminution of both dorsal and volar cortices. Seventeen of these children underwent wiring as the initial treatment and 11 were managed with manipulation and casting. The rate of redisplacement was 63.6% (7/11) in the manipulation group and 29.4% (5/17) in the wiring group. Interestingly, four out these five redisplacements in the wiring group occurred with the Kapandji technique and only one in the crossed wiring technique. The difference did not achieve statistical significance ( Four out of 14 children, who underwent K-wiring by the Kapandji technique, redisplaced. On the other hand, only 1 out of 12 children, who underwent crossed K-wiring, redisplaced. This difference in the frequency of redisplacement was not found to be statistically significant ( The association of various factors with redisplacement was assessed individually using the chi-square test and Fisher's exact test. The individual factors associated significantly with redisplacement were complete initial displacement of fracture ( The rate of redisplacement of distal radius fractures in our study was 24%, according to the criteria used, and this is comparable to the rates reported in the literature. The significant predictors of redisplacement that we found in our study were the degree of initial displacement, dorsal comminution, quality of reduction of fracture and the experience of treating surgeon. However, the single most significant predictor of redisplacement in our study was comminution of the dorsal cortex of the distal radial fragment in all but one case (volar and dorsal). This was interesting because, upon reviewing the literature, we found that this particular factor has not been assessed as a predictor of redisplacement in the paediatric population. Its significance is well documented in the adult population. The degree of initial displacement and the quality of initial reduction were also found to be significant predictors of redisplacement of these fractures in our study. This has been reported by various authors in the past. Mani et al. The experience of the operating surgeon did seem to affect the risk of redisplacement in our study. Most children (78 children) were treated by the paediatric orthopaedic fellows and we found that the odds of redisplacement seemed to reduce when the child was treated by the senior paediatric orthopaedic fellow rather than a trainee registrar. Haddad and Williams The Cast index was not found to have a significant effect on the risk of redisplacement in our study. This index is based on the geometry of the cast at the level of fracture site with an aim to achieve an elliptical shape to the cast at the fracture site. Chess et al. The role of an associated ulnar fracture remains controversial. Our results were similar to those of Proctor et al. Closed manipulation and casting is still the most common method of treatment of displaced fractures of distal radius. There are limitations to this study of which we are aware. This is a retrospective study, which relied upon the information available from the hospital notes. We have mainly considered the probable factors predisposing to redisplacement but have not assessed the long-term outcome in children whose fractures redisplaced. Out of 30 fractures, which redisplaced, only six were subjected to repeat intervention. The rest were managed conservatively accepting the deformity and anticipating remodelling with time. The long-term outcome of these children is not known. There would be a higher rate of K-wiring if our recommendations are followed. This raises the issue of potential complications of ‘K’-wiring, that is, neurovascular complications, wire migration, pin-tract infection and deep infection. Pleasingly, there was no such complication in any of the children in whom we undertook K-wiring, but we accept that the numbers are not enough to comment on the safety of this technique. However, other authors have shown wiring to be a safe and reliable method of treating distal radial fractures with a low risk of complications. Further research should try to establish the best method of treatment of distal radius fractures with dorsal comminution in the paediatric population. This could be achieved by conducting a randomised controlled trial to compare casting with K-wiring in the management of this unstable fracture pattern. The K-wiring method (Kapandji vs. crossed wiring) most effective in preventing redisplacement in the presence of comminution also needs to be established. In conclusion, the presence of comminution of the dorsal cortex of the distal radial fragment on initial radiographs should alert the treating surgeon to a significantly higher risk of redisplacement, and supplemental K-wiring should be considered for this unstable fracture pattern. There are no conflicts of interest with any of the authors involved in the study to the best of our knowledge.