Acid orange 7 has been degraded in the presence of NaCl by coupling electrochemical treatment with purely photocatalytic degradation. First, electrochemical reduction broke the azo bond and the obtained fragments were then subjected to photocatalytic degradation. The coupling of the two processes accelerated the mineralization process. Electrochemical treatment was carried out at a moderate potential of −1V vs Ag/AgCl and it was much faster in the presence of NaCl than in Na2SO4. The effects of salt and substrate concentrations were also studied. The degradation route was monitored by LC-MS and ion chromatography analysis. The transformation products at initial stages were 4-aminobenzene sulfonic acid and 1,4-naphthoquinone while at the end the nitrogen of the azo bond was fully mineralized to inorganic ions.Photocatalytic degradation of organic dyes using semiconductor photocatalysts has attracted intensive scientific research, registering several thousands of publications during the last years However, the use of dyes for evaluating photocatalytic degradation has been frequently questioned Photocatalytic degradation involves activation of a semiconductor photocatalyst by absorption of light and generation of active oxidants, capable of carrying out photocatalytic degradation. This procedure has been extensively studied in the past and it is reported in many works Photoelectrocatalytic and, more generally, electrochemical treatment of organic pollutants can only be carried out in the presence of an electrolyte. It is then attractive to use a natural and abundant material for this purpose. Indeed, the focus of the present work is placed on NaCl, which makes the added electrolyte in most of the presently discussed experiments. It is then necessary to briefly introduce the role of Cl which is hydrolyzed to give hypochlorous acid, HClO, the latter being in equilibrium with ClO It is accepted By taking into account all the above knowledge, in the present work we have studied the degradation pathway of AO7 by following a combined electrochemical, photoelectrochemical and photocatalytic route in an effort to develop an efficient and reliable system for the degradation of this present dye and other similar water pollutants. Unless otherwise indicated, reagents were obtained from Aldrich and were used as received. Commercial nanocrystalline titania Degussa P25 was used as photocatalyst and Millipore water was used in all experiments. SnO In this work, we used a photoelectrochemical cell made of Plexiglas, which could function, if necessary, in a 3-electrode configuration. The photoanode was made of an FTO glass on which a nanoparticulate titania film was deposited, as explained in the following subsection. The active area of the electrode was 2.5 The following procedures were undertaken in order to deposit photocatalyst on the photoanode (working) electrode Linear voltametry curves were traced with an Autolab potentiostat PGSTAT128N and the same was used for applying bias. The extent of AO7 decolorization was assessed measuring sample absorbance at 485 The evolution of SO Samples collected at different treatment times during the experiments were directly analyzed by liquid chromatography time of flight mass spectrometry (LC–TOF–MS). The LC system consisted of an Ultra-High Performance LC pump (Dionex Ultimate 3000, Thermo) incorporating a column thermostat and an autosampler interfaced to a Focus microTOF II-time of flight mass spectrometer (Brüker Daltonics, Germany). The MS part was operated using microTOF control (version 2.0) software. The scan range applied in the full-scan mode was As already stated in the introduction, photocatalytic degradation rates suffer from recombination of the charge carriers (e Electrochemical fragmentation was then followed by pure photocatalytic degradation. All electrodes were disconnected and removed except TiO The experiments of the previous sub-section were carried out in the presence of NaCl. This salt plays an important role in the process. This is verified by the data of Variation of the applied negative potential did affect decolorization rate within a range of 0 to −1.5 NaCl concentration was varied in the range 0.1–1 All the above data point to the same direction. Photocatalytic degradation of AO7 can be accelerated by first treating solution of the dye in the presence of NaCl by electrochemical reduction and then by photocatalysis. Electrochemical reduction can be fast at moderate voltages of about −1.0 The evolution of inorganic ions in solution as a function of treatment stages (times) is shown in The screening of the treated samples using (−) ESI mode by LC-TOF-MS allowed to tentatively identify the formation of seven transformation products (TPs). The structure identification relied on proposing elemental compositions for the ion masses obtained by accurate mass measurements. The exact masses of pseudo-molecular ions and the proposed elemental formulas, together with calculated mass errors given by the instrument software are summarize in The identified TPs were completely degraded at the end of the process, as assessed by their evolution profiles shown in Photocatalytic degradation of AO7 can be accelerated if the dye is first electrochemically reduced and then photocatalytically degraded. During the first stage of electrochemical treatment the cleavage of the azo-bond is assured, apparently facilitating further degradation. The whole process is carried out in the presence of NaCl, which plays a crucial role, in particular during electrochemical reduction. Its role cannot be substituted by other salts, for example Na This research has been co-financed by the