The harvesting of wood species intended for energy production is one of the critical steps for the establishment of an economically viable supply chain. The review examines the state of the art of the main systems for collecting the short rotation coppice (SRC) by referring to poplar (Populus spp.), one of the main energy species for southern Europe. Starting from the early experiences of willow (Salix spp.) in Sweden, over time two approaches have established: the cut-and-chip and the harvest-and-storage system. In the work, the pros and cons of the two systems are analyzed and their efficiency compared, giving also some indication about the next evolution of the machines. Emerging systems showing an interesting future potential as bales production or the development of small-scale tractor-powered harvesters are also described. Finally, some economic considerations on differences between harvesting cost for the cut-and-chip and harvest-and-storage system are reported.The main objectives of EU policies on energy savings and reduction of greenhouse gas emissions are based on renewable forms of energy from agriculture. The use of dedicated crops for energy purposes has been recognized to provide some environmental, economic and social benefits like low input requirement, reduced environmental impact, positive role on soil health, re-utilization of marginal lands, improvement of GHG balance, opening of additional opportunities for farmers revenues ( The harvesting is the connecting point among the crop management and the supply system leading to the industrial transformation. Its key role is to assure the removal of the raw material safeguarding, simultaneously, the sustainable production of a feedstock complying the technical specification required for an efficient handling during the following stage of storage, transportation and energy conversion. The manuscript analyzes the specific issue of mechanized harvesting of short rotation coppices (SRC). To our knowledge reviews on this topic are lacking. Using keywords like “SRF harvesting”, “SRC harvesting” or “Poplar harvesting” on a citation database ( As summarized by The most widespread cropping system is based on high density plantations harvested every 1–5 years and include ( Very short rotation system: the plant density exceeds 10,000 plants Short rotation system: 6–7,000 plants Medium rotation system: the harvesting is delayed until the 5 The attractiveness for the farmer resides in the highest surface yield and the short return time with acceptable economic results. Moreover, the SRC can be grown on surplus agricultural land, but also on abandoned and/or contaminated soils ( Considering its diffusion and importance as dedicated tree crop for the energy aims, poplar can be assumed as a “model specie”. In this paper, the state-of-the-art of the mechanized harvesting of SRF poplar species will be synthesized and discussed. Before discussing the data, for the sake of clarity a premise is highly desirable. Reader should be aware that the units of measure of machine performance can vary among authors, making the comparison a tricky task. In general, the machine performance can be evaluated following two different conceptual approaches. Machine rates can be expressed as productive (pmh) or scheduled (smh) machine hour. This one is the time during which equipment is scheduled to do productive work and the productive time is that part of scheduled time during which a machine actually operates. Generally, both the times are related to the worked area (ha smh The measuring of working time can follow the methodology adopted by CIOSTA (Comité International d'Organisation Scientificue du Travail en Agricolture) or the Italian Society of Agricultural Engineering (AIIA) ( Since the aim of present work is not the comparison of the systems of time measurement, the values of working time will be reported as in the original papers where the reference to each approach may be ascertained. The high plant density and the relatively rapid growth allow to associate the poplar for SRC to an industrial crop rather than a conventional forest production. Consequently the integral mechanization assumes a central role for the development cropping system. The harvesting is one of the items with the greatest impact on economic balance, energy consumption and derived emissions of the dedicated woody energy crops ( The choice of the harvest system includes several variables (soil condition, length of harvest window, availability of auxiliary implements, type of storage facilities) that affect the final quality of the feedstock but also the cost-effectiveness of the supply chain. Both the harvesting systems present some The harvesting of SRC in a single-pass is preferentially performed with large-size modified foragers equipped with specific headers for woody biomass ( During time, the weight of the machines used for the harvesting as well as their performance increased. The mass of a forage harvester ranges from 11 to 14 t and the addition of a header units leads the value at 15 The main component characterizing the SRC harvester is the cutting head. The most important versions developed till now are Claas HS1, HS2 and GB-1, Kemper and Krone headers and GBE1 and GBE2 ( In the last years there has been a growing interest in extending the rotation age until a five-year cycle (Medium Rotation Coppice). This is due to an actual advantage of the MRC in term of yield maximization (high biomass at low plant density), great improvement of the product quality (reduced bark/fiber ratio), less dependence on adverse seasons ( Recently, In the Italian regions the unfavorable climatic conditions during winters may render the fields unworkable. So, the harvesting period should be extended, hampering an efficient use of the machines. The wood chip storage may lead to high energy losses owing to the dry matter degradation triggered by the fermentation phenomena occurring in a feedstock having high moisture content ( The storage of whole stems involves costless natural dehydration process that allow a reduction of the final moisture content at values lower than 30%. The product is stored in the field, avoiding the need of an additional storage space and the trafficability of the fields is improved because the felling is carried out in winter with a relatively light feller whereas the chipping may be delayed when the soil is sufficiently dry to consent the entry with a heavier chipper. On the other side, the harvest-and-storage system requires a more complex harvesting chain because it implies secondary handling and chipping operations. As previously mentioned, in the two-pass system the phases of cut and chipping are physically and temporarily separated ( Up to now few prototypes have been built, often intended for willow but suitable for poplar too ( Recently, two interesting innovations have given a new impetus to the harvest-and-storage system. A second innovative two phases system for SRC harvesting has been described ( Starting from the experience on two-year old poplar plantation, the same harvesting scheme (coupling of a cut-windrower with a self-propelled chipper equipped with a pick up head, In the harvest-and-storage system the choice of the harvesting system does not complete the supply chain since a secondary chipping operation is required. The choice of the chipper concerns the use of static or mobile machine as well as the form of cutting device: disc, drum or cone-screw. The first two are those more largely used and according to An interesting new system for the harvesting of willow and poplar SRC has been recently proposed by In a single passage the machine cuts and compacts the biomass into a dense round bale that can be finally handled as a common bale deriving from forage cultivation. The machine cuts plant diameters ranging from 7.5 to 15.0 Based on the data of In a perspective of medium-period, the efforts will be also directed towards the development of small-scale tractor-powered harvesters. These machines are mounted in front or at the back of the tractor and have a mass of 1000–4000 The analysis of the economic convenience of cut-and-chip or the harvest-and-storage system should not be narrowed to the mere calculation of the harvesting cost, but it would include some other factors like the type of cultivation (Short or Medium Rotation Coppice, wood specie, variety), the cultivation area interested at the fuel supply and the downstream processes such as transportation of the product and the harvesting machine, logistic, conditioning and plant removal at the end of the cycle. The cultivated surfaces and the production level as well as the machine power are variables influencing the choice of the harvesting system. For the cut-and-chip system, The analysis of the harvesting costs for the harvest-and-storage system is a little bit more complex. As remarked by various authors ( Owing to the greater complexity of the harvesting chain, another inference shared by various authors concern the higher cost esteemed for the harvest-and-storage system compared with the cut-and-chip system. Recently Such differences among the cut-and-chip and the harvest-and-storage systems were also observed previously by The harvesting of poplar for SRC has been afforded till now employing modified self-propelled forage harvester (cut-and-chip system) or new prototypes having a different conceptual approach (harvest-and-storage system) described in the present paper. The choice of the one or the other leads to a completely different biomass handling, extent of cost and quality degree of the feedstock. The phase of the harvesting is a challenging task requiring a careful evaluation of several factors. These comprised technical (specie, age of the trees, layout of the plantation, soil type, slope, environmental conditions), logistic (feedstock handling, network of biomass supply, distance from the collecting point) and economic (machine transportation, additional operation, machine ownership) aspects. All of these must be analyzed and appraised within the productive context where the farm will operate. The available findings highlight the higher working capacity and economic convenience of the cut-and-chip respect to the harvest-and storage system. The first one may be easily integrate in a farm rotation without a deep modification of the traditional cropping system. However, several authors agree on the great potential that the double-pass harvesting might have in the next future. The main criticisms concern the lower performances and the need of additional operations besides the harvesting that cause a higher cost. Nevertheless, the harvest-and-storage system presents some advantages because it allows obtaining a high-grade feedstock, a suitable scheduling of the biomass collection due to its flexibility and a greater care to the soil management. Its use is recommended when field conditions or logistic arrangements do not allow the use of an integrated cut-and-chip harvester. Beside these two main systems, other mechanical solutions like small-scale tractor-powered harvesters or biobaler were proposed with the intent of making the biomass harvesting more effective and competitive. The key point is the lowering of the investment cost and the higher mobility of such implements that could allow their adoption also at small-holding level. In the last two decades the sector of engineering for the harvesting of SRC (particularly the poplar) has known a remarkable development leading to a noticeable improvement. Probably such advancement is not enough yet and requires further efforts in stepping up the performance of the machines. This in turn, could affect the future profitability (with or without government incentives) of the SRC and the extent of their widespread. This work was supported by the Italian Ministry of Agriculture in the framework of SUSCACE Project (Scientific Support to Agricultural Conversion towards Energy Crops).