The study proposed a parabolic hydrocyclone to solve the problem of excessive fine particles in the underflow, namely, fine clipping underflow during classification of red muds. Experimental studies on separation performance differences, particularly the yield, product concentration, particle size, and stage efficiency, between hydrocyclones with parabolic and straight cones were carried out, and the influence of the apex diameter on the separation performance of the parabolic hydrocyclone was studied. Based on this result, a regression model for the content of −5 µm particles in the underflow was established, and the accuracy of the regression model was validated. The experimental results show that the content of the −5 µm particles in the underflow of the hydrocyclone with a parabolic cone was reduced by 9.7% as compared to that of the hydrocyclone with the straight cone, thereby indicating that the parabolic cone effectively decreased the number of fine particles in the underflow. According to the regression model, the optimal operating conditions of the parabolic hydrocyclone exhibited a solid concentration of 29%, an apex diameter of Φ5 mm, and a feeding pressure of 0.08 MPa. Under these conditions, the underflow of the hydrocyclone with a parabolic cone presented a 17.1% content of −5 µm particle, which was 15.2% lower than that in the underflow of the hydrocyclone with a straight cone.Red muds are the solid wastes generated during the production of aluminum oxide. They contain complicated components and have a wide particle range, and are thus difficult to be directly utilized. However, there are many valuable elements such as iron, silicon, aluminum, calcium, and titanium inside, thereby qualifying the red muds as a precious secondary resource ( The fine clipping underflow is a common issue in the practical production of hydrocyclones ( Previous studies have performed certain improvement efforts on the fine clipping underflow. Based on previous research findings, the present study discovered that it is advantageous to solve the problem of fine particles in the underflow by changing the curvature of the conical section. Therefore, a parabolic hydrocyclone was designed and applied to replace the traditional hydrocyclone for the classification of red mud to improve the product quality. The design of the parabolic hydrocyclone was based on principle that only permits changes in the curvature of the conic section while other the structural parameters remain unchanged. The central point of the bottom of the conic section was treated as the origin and a coordinate system was set up based on the directions from the origin to the wall surface and the overflow tube, respectively, of which a generatrix equation of Compared to the straight conical form, the parabolic hydrocyclone generated a smoother curvature inner wall from the cylindrical section to the apex, which benefited the stability of the flow field. Because when fluid flow towards the apex, its velocity along the wall surface decreases, which minimizes direct fine particles flow into the underflow. At the same time, the variation in the wall surface form resulted in an increase in the lower space of the conic section, thereby providing sufficient space for particle separation. Therefore, the mixture of coarse and fine particles induced by particle accumulation near the apex may be avoided effectively. However, current research on the parabolic hydrocyclone was relatively rare, with most related research presenting numerical simulations and theoretical studies that lack specific experimental verification. Therefore, the present study performed experimental studies on the classification of red mud using the parabolic hydrocyclone, and compared its performance to a hydrocyclone with a straight cone to explore their separation performances. Moreover, the influence of the apex diameter on the separation performance of the hydrocyclone was studied. The present study conducted experiments using red mud produced by an aluminum oxide factory (China Aluminum Corporation Shandong Enterprise, Shandong, China), with the particle size distribution presented in An experimental system was designed to test the classification performance of the parabolic hydrocyclone,.and the system primarily consisted of a hydrocyclone, an agitator, a slurry pump, a pipeline, a valve, a pressure gage, a flow gauge, and a frequency converter. For convenience of experiment sampling observation, a closed loop was applied to the system. In the hydrocyclone separation process, the material entered the hydrocyclone at a certain speed and under a certain pressure along the tangential direction of the feeding inlet, and obeyed the outer swirl along the inner wall of the hydrocyclone. The particles were subjected to a small resistance as they moved downwards and passed the conic section of the traditional straight cone. The rapid downward fluid speed generated an increase in the amount of the fluid entering the underflow. At the same time, partial fine particles directly entered the underflow without being fully separated, thereby resulting in the presence of fine particles in the underflow, which reduced the quality of the products. The inner wall surface of the conic section in the parabolic hydrocyclone exhibited a cubic parabolic form, as shown in Hydrocyclone structures with Φ50 mm parabolic and straight cones were presented in To compare the difference in the separation performance between the hydrocyclones with parabolic and straight cones and evaluate the influence of the apex diameter on the separation performance of the hydrocyclone, the present study had a solid concentration of 21%, a feeding pressure of 0.14 MPa. Likewise, five different apex diameter were respectively selected for the experiments (Φ5 mm, Φ6 mm, Φ7 mm, Φ8 mm, and Φ9 mm). The impact of the apex diameter on the classification performance was primarily realized by changing the allocation of the flow quantity inside the hydrocyclone. The influence of the apex diameter on the liquid yield was measured and presented in  The apex diameter exhibits a relatively large impact on the underflow concentration. Enlargement of the apex diameter generates an underflow concentration decrease from 55.6% to 35.2% in a parabolic hydrocyclone and from 57.2% to 33.8% in a straight conic hydrocyclone. Because an increase in the apex diameter results in an increase in the underflow quantity and water content. And, when the apex diameter is larger than Φ6 mm, the former is slightly higher, a 4.9% improvement in the underflow concentration generates in the parabolic hydrocyclone with Φ8 mm apex diameter. An increase in the quantity of the underflow results in a large amount of particle discharge from the underflow, thereby resulting in an increase in the solid yield, which refers to the solid recovery rate of underflow relative to the feed.  The parabolic hydrocyclone reduces the quantity of fine particles in the underflow as compared to the hydrocyclone with the straight cone, which indicates its significant reduction to the fine clipping underflow. Based on It must be stressed that the −5 μm particles content in underflow of the parabolic hydrocyclone is always lower. For example, a 9.7% content decrease exhibits when the apex diameter is Φ9 mm. It can also be found that the recovery rate for −5 μm particles in overflow of the parabolic hydrocyclone is obviously higher. Also, a 7% content increase exhibits when the apex diameter is Φ9 mm. Orthogonal experiments have been designed to establish a scientific regression model to evaluate the influence of various factors and parameters on the separation performance of the hydrocyclone. To explore the influence of the solid concentration, the apex diameter, and the feed pressure on the content of −5 μm particles in the underflow of the hydrocyclone, three-factor, three-level orthogonal tests have been designed (apex diameter: Φ5 mm, Φ7 mm, and Φ9 mm; solid concentration: 13%, 21%, and 29%; feed pressure: 0.08 MPa, 0.12 MPa, and 0.16 MPa). The statistical analysis software IBM SPSS has been adopted to the analyze multivariate linear regression equation on the experimental data, thereby ensuring the scientificity of the regression equation. The experimental data for establishing the regression equation is listed in To validate its accuracy, the regression equation has been examined within the range of the experimental variables. By comparing the measured data of the −5 μm underflow particle content and the predicted data obtained by the regression equation (presented in An analysis of regression Eqs. The experimental data in To solve the problem of fine particles in the underflow of the hydrocyclone, a parabolic hydrocyclone was proposed, and experimental studies and a regressive model analysis on the classification of red mud based on the hydrocyclone were performed in this paper. Accordingly, the following conclusions are made. Compared to the hydrocyclone with a straight cone, the yield of the underflow in the parabolic hydrocyclone can be reduced by 15.1%, the separation particle size can be increased by 24.8%, and the content of the −5 μm particles in the underflow may be reduced by 9.7%. Overall, the parabolic hydrocyclone effectively reduces the fine fraction content in the underflow. A decrease in the apex diameter can make the yield decrease from 0.178 to 0.053 in the parabolic hydrocyclone, the separation particle size d Regression models for the −5 μm underflow particle contents of the two types of hydrocyclones have been established using orthogonal experiments and validated by the single-factor experimental results. Based on the regression models, the apex diameter exhibits the greatest impact on the fine particles in the underflow, and the combined action of the apex diameter and the feed pressure exhibits the most significant effect on the reduction of fine particles in the underflow. The optimal working conditions for the parabolic hydrocyclone are: a solid concentration of 29%, an apex diameter of Φ5 mm, and a feed pressure of 0.08 MPa. Under these conditions, the content of the −5 μm particles in the underflow can reach the minimum value of 17.1%. This work was supported by the The authors have declared no conflict of interest.