Controlling the initial release rate of alumina and silica from source materials is known to have a significant effect on the nanostructure of geopolymer gel and its final mechanical properties. However, most of the studies regarding the solubility of source materials take an equilibrium approach, and there is a gap in understanding of the release rates at far-from-equilibrium conditions. In the present study, the initial dissolution rate of some geopolymer precursors is characterised. The liquid to solid ratios are designed to be sufficiently high to minimise precipitation of hydration products, and the effects of solution alkalinity and milling on dissolution rates are investigated. While fly ash and blast furnace slag particles seem to release Si and Al at approximately similar rates, metakaolin shows a distinctively higher release of Si from the very early time of dissolution. Increasing solution alkalinity increases the dissolution of source materials up to some point, and the greatest effect is observed on fly ash particles. The most interesting result of milling is observed on fly ash particles where the release rate of silica has become higher than alumina, while contrasting behaviour is observed in the non-milled fly ash system. The opposite behaviour is observed in the slag system where milling rapidly increases the release rate of Al while the release rate of Si is increased slowly.Geopolymers are low calcium binding materials that can convert aluminosilicate wastes such as fly ash, slag and metakaolin into strong cementitious binders. These alkali-activated binders are acid-, heat- and fire- resistant ( During geopolymer formation, dissolution, hydrolysis and condensation reactions take place. Depending on the concentration of Si in the system, condensation reactions can occur between aluminate and silicate species, or between silicate species themselves. While the dissolution of various compounds from aluminosilicates causes a gradual increase in Al and Si concentration in solution, this will stabilise when the Al and Si concentrations reach equilibrium with respect to the solid/gel phases present ( Many researchers have published investigations on the dissolution of aluminosilicate compounds, and possible leaching of elements from various sources ( In this paper, the dissolution rate of some geopolymer precursor materials is examined using a kinetic approach. The liquid to solid ratios were designed to be sufficiently high to minimise precipitation of hydration products. The dissolution behaviour of some geopolymer source materials is characterised, and the effects of pH and particle size distribution on dissolution behaviour are presented. These results have implications for the selection of geopolymer precursor materials and the mix design of geopolymer binders, and explain some of the behaviour of geopolymers in the literature. Fly ash (FA) can be used as a secondary raw material in many products such as concrete, and the main reason for the wide use of this material is its commercial availability throughout most of the world. Its utilisation in solid products provides an effective means of disposal of what is otherwise often a hazardous waste ( The most important selection criterion for a solid silica source in the synthesis of geopolymers is the dissolution rate, which must be fast so that the solution will rapidly become rich in Si. Therefore, both the structure and surface area of the solids are important. Two silica sources that have been used to some extent as additives in the concrete industry to enhance the properties of mortars and concretes, and have good potential in making high-quality geopolymeric materials, are rice hull ash (RHA) and geothermal silica (GTS) ( The fly ash used in this research was sourced from Gladstone Power Station Queensland, Australia. Metakaolin, with the brand name of Metastar 402, was sourced from Imerys Minerals, UK. Granulated blast furnace slag was obtained from Independent Cement, Australia. Geothermal silica was obtained from the Cerro Prieto geothermal power station, Mexico. Rice hull ash was provided by Sunrice, Griffith, NSW, Australia. The results of X-Ray Fluorescence (XRF) analysis of all of the precursor materials are presented in The GTS is milled to reduce the particle size (BET surface area approximately 30 A laboratory ring mill was used for milling material for different time intervals. A Malvern Mastersizer 2000 laser-diffraction particle-size analyser was used for measuring the particle size distribution of materials before and after milling. A Perkin-Elmer 3000 Inductively Coupled Plasma-Optical Emission Spectrometer (ICP-OES) was used for elemental analysis of dissolved materials. Sodium hydroxide solutions were made at concentrations of 0.05, 0.1, 0.2 and 0.3  The average particle size of purified GTS without milling is 21 For FA, the average particle size decreases from the initial 12 Recently, the effect of particle size classification of fly ash and its milling on the strengths of geopolymers has been studied, and it was reported that although classification gives fine spherical particles with more glass content, milling of ash particles (vibratory or attrition) gives better strength results due to more fracture damage caused in ash particles by mechanical activation ( A totally adverse effect of increased milling time is only observed for MK, which has a very fine initial average particle size of 6 The effect of milling time on the size distribution of GBFS is very desirable for enhancing its reactivity. The glass structure of fine ground slag is similar to fly ash, but because its particles are not spherical, they are easy to agglomerate after mixing with water. Therefore, the effect of milling on the water demand of GBFS particles in a concrete mix is not as significant as its effect on fly ash. Although it seems that the size distribution gets wider with increasing milling time, it gets wider towards smaller particles, becomes more distinctly bimodal, and the average particle size decreases from 16 There is an obvious difference between the results of milling of FA and GBFS particles compared to MK and GTS particles. FA and GBFS particles are very brittle glasses, and even very short milling times result in smaller particle sizes. However GTS and MK particles are relatively softer and milling does not have the same significant effect on their particle size distribution, as the particles have more tendency to aggregate with milling. These results are important not only for the design of grinding processes in preparation of cementitious precursors, but also as a reference point for characterising the dissolution of the precursors, which is important in designing cementitious binders, including alkali-activated systems.  Increasing pH using sodium hydroxide solutions generally increases the dissolution rate of silica. It is known that in sodium silicate solutions with lower sodium hydroxide concentrations and high silicate concentrations, larger polymeric species dominate while the smaller species dominate at lower silicate concentrations (  The alkalinity and the types of alkali and alkaline earth cations present are critical when analysing the dissolution behaviour of geopolymer precursor materials. Dissolution of silica from GBFS particles obviously increases upon increasing the alkali concentration in MK has the highest extent of dissolution among aluminosilicate materials studied here, and the effect of alkali concentration is also the greatest for this system. Increasing the NaOH concentration from 0.05 to 0.2 The Si concentration leached from GTS and RHA increases upon increasing the alkalinity of the system, while the maximum concentration reached for GTS increases when increasing alkalinity from 0.05 to 0.2 The effect of milling time on the dissolution rates of the precursor materials was studied using 0.1  For GBFS, milling has increased the dissolution rate of this material, which correlates well with the known increases in reactivity of finely-milled slags blended with Portland systems ( For MK, as the particle size analysis showed, aggregation of particles occurs with milling, and milling increases the mid-range particle size population in this clayey material. The average dissolution rates also show decreasing dissolution after milling MK particles, and the biggest influence is after 5 For GTS, milling has only a small effect on its dissolution rate, and as this material also does aggregate, the effect is to slightly decrease the dissolution rate. For RHA, although milling caused the smallest changes in its particle size distribution of all the materials studied, it does have some effect on dissolution rate. While the dissolution rate of GTS is much higher than for RHA in non-milled samples, the RHA dissolution rate becomes very close to the dissolution rate of GTS after 2 It is known that the time of release of Al and Si species in solution plays a critical role in the nanostructural evolution of geopolymers and therefore in their final properties. Understanding the initial dissolution behaviour of source materials under different conditions can aid substantially the selection of geopolymer precursors and the custom design of geopolymer binders for specific applications. The effects of solution alkalinity and particle size distribution on dissolution rate have been investigated by considering the initial dissolution rate. The dissolution rates of the silicate sources (GTS and RHA) are much higher than the aluminosilicates (FA, GBFS and MK), and MK has the highest dissolution rate among all aluminosilicates studied here. Also, MK shows a distinctively higher release of Si from the very early hours of dissolution while release rate of Si and Al species is almost similar in FA and GBFS systems. Increasing solution alkalinity increases the dissolution of aluminosilicates up to some point. The biggest effect was observed in FA where increasing the alkalinity significantly increases the dissolution of FA particles, and especially dissolution of Si species increases more rapidly. The greatest effect of milling on a number of submicron particles is observed in GBFS system. In GTS, 1 These observations on dissolution rate have a significant impact on the selection of precursors used in alkali activated systems. On the one hand, it is important to use highly reactive precursors, but on the other hand, it is necessary to manage the right rate of release of the various species forming the phase assemblage in cementitious binders. An imbalance between the dissolution rate and the reaction rate of a particular species may form undesirable phases, which will lead to poor matrix integrity and durability problems. For this reason it is essential that dissolution rates of cementitious precursors in alkali activation are quantified and modelled, especially for different extents of grinding. Such a kinetic approach is novel in cementitious systems, as equilibrium modelling is normally used to predict phase assemblage. The results in this paper provide the basis for a future kinetic modelling study, even when the kinetics are approximated by a step-wise equilibrium approach. This work was funded in part by the