Cutting operations in the natural stone industry are very laborious and the accurate assessment of cutting performance helps in the selection of equipment and machinery during quarry and plant planning stages. Natural stone quarry operators need to predict the wear amount of diamond beads on wire and energy consumption of mono-wire stone cutting machines for estimation of the facility costs before the block or slab production. The unit wear (UW) and the unit energy (UE) values in the sawing of natural stone samples with mono-wire block cutting machine which can be used for slab cutting or squaring operations in the natural stone industry are two quantitative parameters to be used for the accurate assessment of cutting performance. In the current study, Artificial Neural Network (ANN) and Regression Models were investigated for predicting of UW and UE as mono-wire cutting machine parameters. The uniaxial compressive strength (UCS), cutting speed (CS) and peripheral speed (PS) of diamond wire parameters were selected as inputs, while UW and UE were considered as outputs of the prediction models. Prediction performances of the regression and the ANN based models were evaluated by correlation coefficient, root mean square error and cross correlations between the measured and the predicted values of UW and UE. The prediction performance evaluations of the models revealed that the best prediction performances were obtained from the ANN models, while performance indicators of the regression based relations followed those of the ANN models. Although the ANN is a powerful learning tool for prediction purposes, the requirements of a software to use of the developed ANN models may be evaluated as a practical limitation for practitioners. Therefore, the prediction charts for both UE and UW were produced to improve the practical value of the ANN models which consider PS, CS and UCS as inputs. It is concluded that the ANN based models can be used for prediction of reliable UE and UW parameters of mono-wire cutting operations.Diamond wire cutting machines are widely used in marble, granite and hard rock quarries from production of blocks to the final product stages in natural stone industry. The method has shown continuously improved depending on user requirements. In fact, the widespread utilization of diamond wire cutting machines in quarries has ushered in a new era in natural stone mining. It is still expanding in the natural stone quarrying operations such as squaring and shaping of rock blocks. The diamond wire cutting machines are also used in concrete cutting in the construction industry and disassembling of large structures (i.e. buildings, railway bridges and dams), cutting of ceramics, metals, silicon circuit boards, sapphire, foam, wood etc. ( While the mono-wire block cutting device is one of the machines used in squaring stage of blocks taken from marble and limestone quarries, operations such as sizing of natural stone blocks and slab-sawing from the blocks were also employed by these machines. The major parameters affecting the economic performance of mono-wire block cutting are the consumed energy and the wear of diamond beads during cutting. Wear is important as it decreases cutting efficiency and reduces wire life. The physical and mechanical properties of natural stones have importance on performance and efficiency of rock cutting by diamond wire cutting method. In addition, cutting parameters related to cutting machine such as wire rotation speed and cutting speed affect the efficiency of the cutting process ( Some studies about performance evaluations of cutting machines used in natural stone quarries or plants are available in the literature. These studies were generally focused on predicting some of the effective parameters on circular saw cutting machines by using modeling techniques such as regression methods, ANNs, etc. ( In addition to regression based statistical models, soft computing techniques such as fuzzy inference systems (FIS) and ANNs have been popular tools in rock mechanics (  This study aims to predict the unit wear and unit energy values which are both cutting performance parameters in mono-wire cutting machines by using cutting parameters (peripheral speed of diamond wire and cutting speed of wire) and some physico-mechanical properties of rocks. To achieve this goal, a computer-controlled, fully automatic cutting machine developed in the Mining Engineering Department of Hacettepe University was used. Some cutting experiments were then performed by mono-wire block cutting machine on eight different marble and limestone samples selected from eight different quarries located in three cities (Afyon, Burdur and Mugla) in Turkey ( In this study, blocks collected from Afyon, Burdur and Mugla locations were used in experimental studies for establishment of the database. The material properties of the stones and experimental studies on cutting performance employed on the rock samples were described as follows: Six marble and two limestone samples were used for cutting experiments. In the tests, rock blocks having 1 m × 1 m × 1 m dimensions were cut under different cutting conditions by a diamond wire with 11 mm in diameter. Some physico-mechanical and textural properties of the samples used in the study were determined in accordance with the suggested methods adopted by the Cutting experiments were conducted on natural stone samples by using a computer-controlled, fully automatic mono-wire cutting machine developed in the Mining Engineering Department of Hacettepe University. Mono-wire block cutting machines, which are also known as stationary diamond wire saws, can be used for squaring natural stone blocks and slab-cutting processes on the blocks and for decorative profiles for monumental and ornamental uses. Manufacturing products of the desired quality at the possible lowest cost is the main purpose in the cutting facilities. Cutting operations were performed using a diamond wire with mono-wire block cutting machines. The use of this equipment in the mono-wire cutting process ensures a low amount of wear on diamond beads and a longer wire life while helping to perform cuts at high cutting speeds, thus reducing the cutting costs. The cutting performance of mono-wire cutting process is sensitive to many variables. Therefore, investigations on understanding of the cutting systems of these kind of machines are useful studies for increasing efficiency and reducing production costs in natural stone processing facilities. For this reason, the machine used in this study was equipped with various sensors and measuring devices such as load cells, vibration meters, water flow meter, etc. Special load cells were used for measurement of reaction forces generated during the cutting process, while vibrations (in Hz) on the wire during cutting in both x- and y-directions were measured by the aid of two vibration meters. A water flow meter was also placed to measure and control of the amount of water used in the cutting processes. An image of the fully automated computer-controlled mono-wire block cutting machine is shown in The mechanical unit comprised of eight motors and a gearbox that provided movement to the wire. A wagon and bridge system and screw shafts provide the up-down motion system for the pulleys. The hydraulic unit consists of a hydraulic motor providing power and a cutting deck to move around the wire axis. A tensioning system applies tension on the wire. The electrical and electronic units include load cells, vibration gauges, a flow meter, bridge termination switches (to terminate the movements of the wagon and bridge) and a control panel. The automation unit comprised of a computer for automatic control of the mono-wire cutting machine ( While the followed experimental programs were given in detail by Cutting experiments were performed with a mono-wire block cutting machine on eight different marble and limestone samples at five different peripheral speeds and six different cutting speeds. The operating parameters shown in The unit wear and the unit energy values were measured for evaluation of the performance of the cutting experiments. The reduction in bead diameter per unit cutting area is defined as the unit wear value (μm/m The amount of required energy to cut the unit area of stone (kWh/m The unit wear and unit energy values obtained from cutting experiments were correlated statistically with measured nine rock properties (Unit Volume Weight; Apparent Porosity; Shore Hardness; Uniaxial Compressive Strength; Impact Strength, Flexural Strength and Bohme Abrasion Resistance, Cutting Speed and Peripheral Speed) as shown in The r-squared, adjusted R-squared ( Mallows' In this study, In the study, the parameter selection stage for ANN and regression analyses was performed by taking into consideration some specific requirements. The main point was to predict the unit wear and unit energy values by using the minimum number of parameters. Operational parameters related to mono-wire cutting machines (cutting speed and peripheral speed values) were used in all of the models. The highest possible r and the lowest possible Mallows' It is accepted that regression-based equations are very easy to use prediction tools. Therefore, as a first stage of investigation for prediction models, simple and multiple regression analyses were performed for prediction of unit energy (UE) and unit wear (UW). These analyses were given as follows. As discussed above, while unit energy (UE) and unit wear (UW) were considered as outputs of the models, uniaxial compressive strength (UCS), cutting speed (CS) and peripheral speed (PS) were selected as inputs of the models considering their well combined correlations with the outputs (see As seen from the simple regressions given above, the sufficient prediction of unit energy and unit wear is not possible when unique input is considered. However, the combination of three inputs namely uniaxial compressive strength, cutting speed and peripheral speed may give better results due to the correlations listed in As it is well known, linear relation is assumed between dependent and independent variables for multi-linear regression analyses. This is the main limitation of the multi-linear regressions for consideration as a prediction tool. To overcome this difficulty, a combined parameter (CP) was generated using three inputs considering their positive (UCS) and negative (CS and PS) relations with outputs as follows. The equations with better correlations than the multi-linear ones were obtained when the combined parameter (CP The cross correlation graphs between predicted and measured values of both unit energy and unit wear for CP1 and CP2 based equations were given in Eq. (6) and Eq. (8) and illustrated in Soft computing techniques have been widely used particularly as a predicting tool in in recent studies about rock mechanics and other engineering disciplines. Some soft computing techniques such as artificial neural network (ANN), fuzzy inference system (FIS) and adaptive neuro-fuzzy inference system (ANFIS) have been preferred as a prediction tool in engineering applications due to their high prediction capacities on non-linear and complex problems. Much literature is available on the use of soft computing techniques in engineering applications in recent decades ( As mentioned in the introduction section, the intention of this study is the prediction of cutting parameters such as unit energy (UE) and unit wear (UW). ANNs are simplified mathematical models inspired by the biological structure and functioning of the human brain. ANN models consist of elementary processing units called neurons. The neurons are interconnected in a predefined topology called layers. Usually the neurons operate in parallel layers. A typical network topology consists of an input layer, one or more hidden layers and an output layer ( The simplest ANN architecture includes one hidden layer in addition to input and output layers. The number of hidden layers can be increased depending on the complexity of the problem. However, the simple ANN architecture with sufficient prediction capacity should be preferred to avoid overlearning of the model ( The learning rate is the other input parameter of the ANN algorithm. It controls the speed of the training stage of the ANN model. The required time may be too high when the volume of training inputs increases particularly. Although the learning rate can be used as a constant between 0 and 1, some dynamic functions of the learning rate were investigated in the literature. The higher values of learning rates may cause oscillation in the training phase to reach the solution or stop learning of the ANN system. On the other hand the lower learning rates may cause a slowdown in the speed of the ANN system in reaching a solution ( Where Considering the non-complex structure of the problem analyzed in this study, ANN architecture with one hidden layer was used. The linguistic recommendations given in The computer code namely ANNES developed by Dr. H. Sonmez was used. ANNES was also used by Totally 70% of all data (168) were randomly selected to create the training data set and the rest of them (30%) were used as the testing data. Training and testing data sets were linearly normalized between 0 and 1 considering maximum and minimum values as 0.9 and 0.1 respectively, then the training phase of ANNES was started for two ANN models of UE and UW separately. The graphs representing the number of training cycles (epoch) versus root mean square error (RMSE) for both training and testing data sets were given in As it can be followed from The prediction capacity for both UE and UW of the ANN models were better than regression based models with the correlation coefficients greater than 0.8 ( Although soft computing techniques are powerful tools used in engineering practice, the use of their results may include some difficulties due to their black-box calculation features, particularly for ANN models. To overcome this difficulty, some prediction charts can be generated for practical purposes as performed by Artificial Neural Network and Regression Models were used to predict the performance parameters namely unit wear values on diamond wire and unit energy values in mono wire sawing of marble and limestone samples in the current study. Performances of these produced models were measured, compared, and evaluated in prediction of unit wear and unit energy values, which are two of the performance parameters in diamond wire cutting operations. The main point of this study was to predict the unit wear and unit energy values by using the minimum number of input parameters. So, a series of simple regression models were constructed according to r and the Mallows Following to regression assessments, the ANN analyses were carried out for investigation of possible increase in the prediction capacity. In these analyses, three input parameters namely UCS, CS and PS were used as inputs and UW, UE were used as outputs. The results of multi regression and the ANN analyses were compared and their performances were tested against to each other. The prediction performances of the regression based models and the ANN were evaluated by correlation coefficient and root mean square error (RMSE). The prediction performances were listed in To improve the practical value of the ANN model, prediction charts were developed considering possible ranges of inputs, particularly for the novice users. It was concluded that, both ANN based prediction charts and regression based relation with combined parameter-2 (CP2) can be used for predicting mono-wire block cutting performance parameters such as UE and UW for limestone and marble samples. Cutting operations in the natural stone industry are very laborious and accurate estimation of cutting performance helps for in equipment and machine selection of the plant planning stage. Consequently, it is vital to use regression analysis, soft computing techniques, etc. to predict the wear amount of diamond beads on wire and energy consumption of cutting machines before the block or slab production stage. The authors would like to thank Dr. A. Basu and the editor of the Journal of Engineering Geology, Dr. Janusz Wasowski for their constructive comments in the preparation of the final manuscript.