The oxidation of ferrous iron by Acidithiobacillus ferrooxidans in the pH range 2.5–7.0 was characterized. In order to measure the rate of bacterial oxidation of ferrous iron with A. ferrooxidans in this high pH range, a novel experimental methodology was developed. The results showed that the inhibition of ferrous iron oxidation activity by A. ferrooxidans observed at pH values above 3.0 is partially linked to the formation of ferric iron precipitates, which apparently hinder transport processes on the cell surface. By carefully controlling the amount of iron precipitates formed during the oxidation of ferrous iron in this pH range, enhanced bacterial activity was obtained.The main mechanism of bacterial catalysis in the dissolution of sulfide minerals is based on the bacterial oxidation of ferrous iron, with oxygen as electron acceptor, according to the reaction: It is known that ferrous iron oxidation by In the present work, the bacterial oxidation of ferrous iron in the pH range 2.5–7.0 was investigated. A novel experimental methodology was developed to evaluate bacterial activity over this pH range. This approach permitted the separate evaluation of the inhibiting effects of both proton concentration depletion and ferric iron precipitation (linked to pH increase) on bacterial ferrous iron oxidation. A pure strain of The inoculum to be used in each experimental run was prepared from 80 mL of culture sample, which was filtered through a 0.22-μm Millipore® membrane. The bacterial pellet was washed four times: twice with 20 mL of pH 1.6 sulfuric acid solution for iron removal and twice with distilled water to remove residual acid. It was then resuspended in 10 mL of pH 6.0 distilled water or iron-free basal medium. The cell population in this inoculum, determined by direct counting using a Petroff–Hausser chamber, was typically in the range of 8–10×10 The abundant precipitate formation and rapid variations in pH that are associated with the oxidation of ferrous iron at pH>2.3 preclude accurate measurements of the bacterial oxidation process by direct measurement of variations of ferrous iron concentrations in solution. Consequently, a novel method was developed to determine the rate of ferrous iron oxidation from the data of the evolution of Eh and pH during the oxidation process. The scheme of the experimental set-up is shown in The test solution was prepared in situ according to the following procedure: 25 mL of iron-free basal medium was initially added to the cell and deoxygenated by the continuous bubbling of high-purity nitrogen. Next, 1 M NaOH solution was added dropwise until a pH slightly over 7.0 was obtained. Whilst still under nitrogen bubbling, a predetermined amount of ferrous sulfate was added to reach the initial desired ferrous iron concentration (1 g/L). This procedure enabled the solubilization of ferrous iron to occur at high pH completely preventing its spontaneous oxidation. If required, some additional NaOH was added to readjust the solution to pH=7.0. Finally, bacteria, resuspended in about 1 mL of distilled water, were added to give an initial bacterial concentration of 2×10 In every experiment, a continuous pH decrease and Eh increase was observed, which was triggered by the oxidation of ferrous iron, either by a chemical or microbiologically mediated mechanism. A typical trend is shown in The oxidation of ferrous iron can be expressed by the reaction described in If the rate of ferrous iron oxidation is defined as: A preliminary calibration procedure was developed to obtain explicit data of [H This equation proved to be valid in the pH range 1.4–2.0 and total iron concentration range 0.1–1 g/L. From calibration of the pH electrode, the following expression, which relates the potential signal (Δ The concentrations of ferric iron and ferrous iron were calculated from values of [Fe Ferrous iron oxidation rate and ferric iron precipitation rate were evaluated, according to The total ferric iron precipitated at each time was calculated using the following equation: Finally, the total iron concentration to be used in the next time step was evaluated using the expression: The validity of the proposed calculation methodology was assessed by comparing at the end of each experiment the final iron concentration calculated according to Results of the calculated rates of ferrous iron oxidation for the experiment with 1 g/L initial ferrous iron concentration are shown in Results in Results in The above results show that it is possible to determine the net rate of bacterial oxidation of ferrous iron after discounting, at each pH, the component attributable to abiotic ferrous iron oxidation. Results of bacterial oxidation of ferrous iron obtained with this procedure are shown in Data in The possible involvement of the formation of ferric iron precipitates on the peculiar pH dependence of bacterial activity, indicated by the curvature of the line graphs in In this expression, [Fe Results of the calculation of [Fe Values of Values of Results of the above mechanistic analysis show that the decrease in bacterial activity normally observed at pH values above 2.5 is, in fact, partially related to the formation of a layer of ferric iron precipitates on the bacteria, which hinders proton diffusion. Previous measurements of bacterial oxidation activity in this pH range with conventional methodologies have mostly been conducted using much greater ferrous iron concentrations (1–9 g/L; Maximum rates of bacterial iron oxidation can be obtained when the formation of ferric iron precipitates is completely avoided. In this hypothetical situation, the rate of bacterial oxidation of ferrous iron will be solely controlled by the chemiosmotic mechanism. The present methodology has laid a conceptual base, which will facilitate the evaluation of the intrinsic chemiosmotic kinetics of A novel methodology to determine the rate of ferrous iron oxidation with At pH over 5.0, chemical oxidation predominates over bacterial oxidation of ferrous iron, and it is not possible to evaluate bacterial oxidation activity. Bacterial oxidation of ferrous iron becomes relevant, and predominates over chemical oxidation, at pH below 5.0. The inhibition of bacterial oxidation activity observed at pH over 2.5 is partially linked to the formation of a layer of ferric oxide precipitates on bacteria, which hinders the diffusion of protons. It is possible to obtain noticeable improvements in the specific bacterial oxidation activity in the pH range 2.5–5.0 if a very low ferrous iron concentration is used in the experiment. Ferrous iron concentration (mg/L) Ferric iron concentration (mg/L) Ferric iron precipitates formed (mg) Specific amount of ferric iron precipitated per bacteria (mg/cell) Total iron concentration (mg/L) Proton concentration (mg/L) adjustment parameter in adjustment parameter in Michaelis–Menten constant (mg/L) Ferric iron inhibition constant (no units) Bacterial concentration in solution (cell/mL) Ferric to ferrous concentration ratio (no units) Maximum specific ferrous iron oxidation rate non affected by ferric precipitates (mg/h cell) pseudo-values of Ferrous iron oxidation rate (mg/h) Specific ferrous iron oxidation rate (mg/h cell) Maximum specific ferrous iron oxidation rate (mg/h cell) Maximum specific ferrous iron oxidation rate calculated using Ferric iron precipitation rate (mg/h) Total volume (0.025 L) Bacterial growth yield on ferrous iron oxidation (cell/mg Fe) Potential difference at the pH electrode (V vs. Ag/AgCl) Ferric iron precipitates thickness at bacterial surface (m) This work was conducted with the support of Fundación Andes/Fundación Antorcha grant C-13398/6. We thank CONICYT for financial support to one of us (G.M.). We are also grateful to Héctor Jordan for the helpful discussion.