Nanostructured Al/B4C composites with an average grain size of 151nm were successfully fabricated in the form of sheets, by using accumulative roll bonding (ARB) process. Furthermore, monolithic Al (without B4C particles) also was processed by the same method for comparison. The microstructure of the composites, evaluated by optical and scanning electron microscopy, revealed the properly distributed B4C particles in the Al matrix. The grain size of the Al matrix, after the final ARB cycle, is studied using Williamson–Hall analysis of X-ray diffraction (XRD) pattern of the deformed sample. Mechanical properties of the specimens were investigated by tensile and hardness tests. The tensile strength and microhardness of the processed samples increased with increasing the number of ARB cycle. Whereas, the elongation dropped abruptly at the first cycle; afterwards, it remained nearly constant in the monolithic samples and increased slightly in the composites.Aluminum metal matrix composites (Al MMCs) are being considered as a group of new advanced materials due to lightweight, high strength, high specific modulus, low coefficient of thermal expansion and good wear resistance. A combination of these properties is not available in a conventional material Suggested applications for Al/B Strips of 1100-aluminum alloy with the length of 200 In the first step, the strips were degreased in acetone and scratch brushed with a 90 The microstructural characterization of the specimens was carried out by optical and scanning electron microscopy. Nikon optical microscope (OM) was used to observe the dispersion of the B XL-30 scanning electron microscope (SEM) was used to investigate porosities in the interface of the B Since the severe plastic deformation processes such as ARB process refine the grain size of materials into nanoscale, the transmission electron microscopy and X-ray diffraction (XRD) are used as basic methods for grain size evaluation of the processed materials by these processes Tensile test specimens were cut by an electric discharge machine from the rolled sheets according to the 1/5 scale of the JIS-no. 5 specimen, oriented along the rolling direction. The gauge length and width of the tensile test specimens were 10 and 5 Vickers microhardness (HV) tests, using a load of 15 The OM image of the 9.9  The engineering stress–strain curves of the Al/B The specific strength of as received aluminum, composite and monolithic specimens was measured about 4.4 The elongation obtained from the tensile tests of the composite and monolithic sheets are presented in The Vickers microhardness of the monolithic Al and Al/B In this study, Al/B It was proved that by using ARB process a homogenous distribution of the B The XRD analysis showed the nanostructured Al/B The tensile strength of the composite in the final ARB cycle reached a maximum value of 362 The ductility (elongation) of the composite samples was lower than that of the monolithic sample. The microhardness of both the materials increased as a result of the ARB process; however, the microhardness of the composite samples was about 1.13 times higher than that of the monolithic Al. The author would like to thank Shiraz University of Technology and Shiraz University (Department of Materials Science and Engineering) due to the support for this study. Also, Mr. Adileh is acknowledged for his nice help and using his rolling machine.