Three commercial anion exchange resins, strongly basic of type 1 (Amberlite IRA-900) and type 2 (Amberlite IRA-910) and weakly basic (Amberlyst A-21) were evaluated for the removal of anionic acid dyes, C.I. Acid Orange 7 and C.I. Acid Orange 10 from aqueous solutions. The pseudo-second order kinetic model was applied to predict the rate constant of adsorption and the equilibrium capacity as a function of initial dye concentration. Modeling of kinetic results showed that the sorption process of the dye adsorption on the anion exchangers is in the good agreement with pseudo second-order model in the entire investigated concentration domain. Also kinetic measurement showed that the process was uniform and rapid. However, C.I. Acid Orange 10 demonstrated faster binding with the anion exchangers than C.I. Acid Orange 7. On the basis of the Langmuir isotherm model analysis, the maximum adsorption capacity of anion exchangers and affinity of the dyes for resins were determined. For each acid dyes, the maximum adsorption capacity of Amberlite IRA-900 was higher than the maximum adsorption capacity of remaining anion exchangers. The dyes sorption did not change in whole pH range of 2–12 in accordance with a presupposed ion-exchange mechanism of the adsorption on strongly basic anion exchangers. On the other hand, the sorption of the dyes on the weakly basic anion exchanger also did not change with changing pH suggesting physical adsorption in the polymer network and hydrogen bonding as the predominant mechanism of the dyes on this ion exchange resin.Ion exchange is used in many chemical processes, including simple or chromatographic separations and catalysis, and is well-established in analytical chemistry. Ion exchange processes are employed as well in hydrometallurgy and metal recoveries, in the manufacture of sugar, in pharmacy and medicine as well as in biochemistry and biotechnology, and in agriculture and food processing. The best known are the ion exchange phenomena in soils and the ion exchange processes used for the treatment of water Contamination of surface water and groundwater with aromatic compounds is one of the most serious environmental problems human being faces today. Dyes constitute one of these problematic groups of chemical pollutants Especially macroporous anion exchangers with a typical average pore diameter of about 150 Thus, the objective of the present work is to investigate the adsorption potential of the styrenic anion exchanger of macroporous structure with different functional groups (Amberlite IRA-900, Amberlite IRA-910, Amberlyst A-21) for removing acid dyes with a different number of aromatic rings and sulfonic groups (C.I. Acid Orange 7, C.I. Acid Orange 10) from aqueous solutions. To understand adsorption properties, the adsorption kinetics and isotherms of the selected acid dyes onto three ion exchange resins were measured. The results of equilibrium investigations naturally lead to enquiring why one dye should be preferred by a given exchanger to the other. Furthermore, predicting such affinity or selectivity behavior, even quantitatively, still remains one of the most challenging aspects yet to be fully understood. Whereas understanding of the kinetics of ion exchange reactions derives important parameters such as rate constants being of value in the process design. The acid dyes, C.I. Acid Orange 7 and C.I. Acid Orange 10 were purchased from Sigma–Aldrich (Munich, Germany) with a purity of ∼85% and ∼80%, respectively. The structures of the dyes and their properties are presented in All anion exchange resins listed in Adsorption studies were conducted using the batch method. In each of the experiments, a fixed mass of anion exchanger of 0.2 Additional information:    The amount of the dye adsorbed at time The sorption capacity, The pseudo second-order kinetic model was developed by Ho and McKay The linear form of the equation that describes the adsorption kinetics corresponding to the pseudo second-order model is as follows The initial sorption rate is The Langmuir adsorption model is the most frequently used to describe the adsorption process of dye compounds from water The Langmuir equation may be written as The adsorption data for the uptake of C.I. Acid Orange 7 and C.I. Acid Orange 10 on the styrenic anion exchangers with different basicity versus contact time at different initial dye concentrations ranging from 50 to 500 As can be seen in Taking into account the difference in the amounts of sulfonic groups of dyes and kind of functional groups of anion exchangers, the obtained results can be concluded in the following way: The ionic charge of the dyes appeared to have some effect on kinetics of their adsorption on the anion exchange resins at the initial dye concentration above 200 Kinetics of adsorption describing the solute uptake rate is one of the most important characteristics defining the efficiency of adsorption The data for the acid dyes adsorption on all three anion exchangers showed a good compliance with the pseudo-second order equation. The plots of The values of the initial sorption rate, The equilibrium adsorption isotherms for C.I. Acid Orange 7 and C.I. Acid Orange 10 adsorption on three anion exchangers with different basicity are presented in As can be seen, the adsorption isotherms are characterized by a very favorable shape, i.e. the initial slope of the curve is steep indicating important characteristics of the anion exchangers for the dyes molecules According to the estimated Langmuir model parameters ( Not only the molecular size of the dye but also the basicity of the functional groups of anion exchangers was found to have a significant influence on affinity of the acid dyes for anionic resins. For both acid dyes, the results suggest that the strongly basic anion exchanger Amberlite IRA-900 of type 1 demonstrated greater maximum adsorption capacity than the strongly basic anion exchanger Amberlite IRA-910 of type 2 and much greater than the weakly basic anion exchanger Amberlyst A-21. The last one being a weakly basic anion exchanger exhibits the lowest basicity. Also the dimethyloamine functionality of Amberlite IRA-910 in comparison with trimethyloamine functionality of Amberlite IRA-900 is lower. Thus, it can be concluded that there is a distinct correlation between the basicity of anion exchanger and its efficiency. The more basic anion exchanger is, the more its maximum adsorption capacity for acid dyes is. In addition, taking into account the obtained maximum adsorption capacity of anion exchange resins (  For complete description of adsorption properties of anion exchangers, their comparison with the properties of other adsorbents used for acid dyes removal is needed. The obtained results show that the strongly basic anion exchanger Amberlite IRA-900 and Amberlite IRA-910 have much larger adsorption capacities than most proposed adsorbents. But also Amberlyst A-21 with the adsorption capacity ∼235 and 139 The first major challenge for the adsorption field is to select the most promising types of adsorbent from an extremely large pool of readily available materials. The next real challenge is to identify the adsorption mechanism The dependencies of the dye uptake with initial pH are given in The solution chemistry of the acid dyes can be described by the following equilibria: C.I. Acid Orange 7 (contains one sulfonic group and one phenolic group) pK pK C.I. Acid Orange 10 (contains two sulfonic groups and one phenolic group): pK pK Taking into account the values of the protonation constants pK Thus, although dyes are considered to be organic compounds, acid dyes with the sulfonic groups ionize in solution to form negative ions. Anion exchangers, on the other hand, possess positively charged quaternary ammonium (Amberlite IRA-900, Amberlite IRA-910) or tertiary amine groups (Ambelyst A-21). Thus, the ion exchange through electrostatic attraction may occur between the functional groups of the anion exchanger and the anions of dye molecule. Obviously, the conventional exchange mechanism of ions should be considered in the first place and indicated as the main one for adsorption of the acid dyes on the both strongly basic anion exchangers of type 1 and type 2. But to explain the behavior of the acid dyes adsorption on weakly basic anion exchangers not only the conventional exchange of ions mechanism should be applied. Amberlyst A-21 of the tertiary amine groups functions only at low pH (<8) when the hydrogen ion concentration is sufficiently high to protonate the resin ( It could be concluded that electrostatic attraction is the predominant mechanism of the acid dyes adsorption on the strongly ion exchange resins (Amberlite IRA-900 and Amberlite IRA-958). However, pure physical adsorption may also occur. Whereas non-electrostatic interactions is a more important adsorption mechanism of the acid dyes on weakly basic anion exchanger (Amberlyst A-21). Although he ion exchange could be also significant mechanism in the acid dyes removal on the weakly basic anion exchange resin at pH In this study, three commercial anion exchangers, namely strongly basic Amberlite IRA-900 of type 1 and Amberlite IRA-910 of type 2 and weakly basic Amberlyst A-21 have been proved to successfully remove anionic acid dyes from aqueous solutions. Study on the effect of the basicity of macroporous anion exchangers with the styrene–divinylbenzene skeleton and number and positions of sulfonic groups of the acid dyes on the adsorption rate of process and adsorption capacity of the anion exchange resins allowed to notice some interesting dependences. Firstly, the dye molecule with a larger number of sulfonic groups (C.I. Acid Orange 10) demonstrates faster binding with every anion exchanger regardless of its basicity than the dye with a smaller number of sulfonic groups (C.I. Acid Orange 7). However, its affinity for the anion exchanger is surprisingly weaker in comparison with the latter. Secondly, it was found that although the basicity of the anion exchanger does not affect an influence on the rate of the acid dyes adsorption, its effect on the adsorption capacity obtained by the anionic resins during this process is significant. Taking into account the values of adsorption capacities of the anion exchangers for the dyes, the applicability of the anionic resins allowing for their basicity can be presented in the following series: strongly basic anion exchanger of type 1 (Amberlite IRA-900) The pseudo-second order kinetics and the Langmuir isotherm models were applied for better understanding of the dye adsorption process on the anion exchangers and the obtained high values of the regression coefficients confirm their good fit to the experimental data. The large values of the pseudo-second order rate constants indicate that the acid dyes adsorption on the anion exchangers is really fast. Whereas very high maximum adsorption capacity of the anion exchangers obtained on the basis of the Langmuir analysis shows high potential of these anion exchange resins for removal of the acid dyes from water. The results of pH effect on the dyes adsorption suggest that more than one interaction is involved in the dye adsorption mechanism on the anion exchangers. Ion exchange (electrostatic attractions) is proposed as the main one for adsorption of the acid dyes on strongly basic anion exchangers. But also non-electrostatic interactions like van der Waals force and hydrogen bonding are considered as possible ones and these interactions play an extensive role in the case acid dyes adsorption on weakly basic anion exchangers.