A membrane adsorption–extraction process to recover di-(2-ethylhexyl) phosphate (D2EHPA) from the raffinate is developed, i.e. a hollow fiber membrane extraction module, in which raffinate flows in the tube side and n-heptane used as the “extractant” flows in the shell side. The emulsion with D2EHPA, n-heptane and Triton X-114 was used as the simulated raffinate, and it was proved that both the affinity of membrane for oil droplets and the extraction of D2EHPA by n-heptane contribute to the method. Via recycling the feed, the final recovery efficiency of D2EHPA could be as high as 90%. The effects of two main operating conditions, tube side velocity and shell side velocity, were investigated. The tube side velocity was found to be an essential operation factor, while the shell side velocity had a slight influence.Extraction is an important process that is widely applied in petroleum industry, pharmaceutics, hydrometallurgy and nuclear industry Some operations concern the extractant recovery, and most of them are physical processes, such as adsorption, gravity settler, air-induced flotation, fibrous beds, lamellar coalescer and so on. Active carbon Hein Some new kinds of phase separation are related with membrane technology, e.g., membrane filtration The aim of this paper is to develop a membrane adsorption–extraction process, where the raffinate phase is contacted with another “extractant”, diluent, via hydrophobic membrane. The extraction behavior of extractant residual in the raffinate with diluent, adsorption capacity of membrane and the effects of flow rates in both tube and shell side have been studied. Di-(2-ethylhexyl) phosphate (D2EHPA) was chosen as the extractant to be recovered and The emulsion was prepared as follows: an appropriate amount of the D2EHPA, D2EHPA and The solutions of D2EHPA in The emulsion flowed in tube side and shell side was filled up with air. The transmembrane pressure difference (Δ  The hollow fiber membrane module is made of polyvinylidene fluoride, which is highly hydrophobic The removal efficiency of D2EHPA ( As shown in In this experiment, both emulsion (0.4 The total phosphorous in the emulsion phase was measured using Ammonium Molybdate Spectrophotometric Method (GB 11893-89, China) and an ultraviolet spectrometer (HP8453, Agilent, USA) was used. The concentrations of D2EHPA can be calculated on the basis of material balance of phosphorous. The partition coefficient of D2EHPA between By regression the data in  The experiment for an emulsion without In the experiment, the emulsion flowed in the tube side and The length of membrane module strongly confines the final removal efficiency of D2EHPA. In order to simulate the best removal efficiency of D2EHPA for this process, the emulsion was recycled from the module export to the feed container.  Thermodynamic equilibrium limits the removal of D2EHPA. In the experiment, 0.4 In order to gain a better understanding of the process, the effect of flow rates for both phases on the removal performance of D2EHPA were investigated. As shown in As it is pointed out, the process can be considered as the combinative function of membrane adsorption and extraction. As the membrane absorption of extractant occurred on the inner wall of fibers, and depends on the flow rate in the tube side, but not the flow rate in the shell side. For the membrane extraction process, although there is accumulation of extractant on the inner wall of fibers from the membrane adsorption, the superimpose models of mass transfer resistance for membrane extraction can be used as the reference. For a hydrophobic membrane with the organic phase on the shell side, the mass transfer driving force based on the aqueous phase concentration, and no chemical reaction, the resistance-in-series equation for membrane extraction process is Both the affinity of membrane for oil and the extraction effect of diluent contribute to the method. The membrane adsorption–extraction process has been shown to be an effective, relatively simple way to recover extractant from raffinate phase and break oil-in-water emulsion. A good removal efficiency of D2EHPA was achieved via recycling the feed and that the tube side velocity has a strong effect on the process while the shell side velocity is an unimportant factor.