Introduction
                  Anaemia in patients with trochanteric fracture is associated with increased morbidity and mortality and it is an independent risk factor for functional mobility of patients. Several authors have reported the blood loss following operative treatment comparing different fixation systems but few authors have evaluated many associated variables that could influence the perioperative blood loss.
               
                  Purpose
                  To evaluate the blood loss in patients that had their trochanteric fracture stabilized with dynamic hip screw (DHS) or Gamma nail. Multivariate analysis of different variables that can influence blood loss was carried out (type of fracture, antiaggregant or anticoagulant therapy, time to surgery). The hypothesis was that there is no difference in terms of blood loss in patients with trochanteric fracture treated with DHS or Gamma nail considering all these variables.
               
                  Materials & Methods
                  Perioperative blood loss was evaluated in 417 consecutive patients treated for trochanteric fracture with DHS or Gamma nail between January 2010 and March 2013. The perioperative blood loss was calculated using the Lisander formula modified by Foss-Kehlet based on pre- and post-operative haemoglobin values and transfusion rates. Univariate and multivariate analysis were performed integrating the following variables: type of fracture (A1 vs A2), antiaggregant/anticoagulant therapy vs no therapy, time to surgery (<24 vs >24 hours from trauma), type of implant (DHS vs Gamma nail).
               
                  Results
                  A significant blood loss (p <0.05) was observed between A1 and A2 fracture types (1247ml vs 1796.7ml), antiaggregant/anticoagulant therapy and no therapy (1592.7ml vs 1470.2ml), time-to-surgery <24 and >24 hours from trauma (1584.4ml vs 1323.9ml), DHS and Gamma nail (894.7ml vs 1720.6ml). At multivariate analysis, in the A1 fracture groups the DHS showed a significant lower blood loss compared to Gamma nail (p < 0.05).
               
                  Conclusions
                  According to the perioperative blood loss, DHS should be used in A1 fractures while Gamma nail can be taking in account for the unstable A2 fractures.The morbidity rate in the elderly following hip fractures is high and the percentage of mortality ranges between 15% and 25% within the first 6 months Anemia is a strong negative prognostic factor in patients with hip fracture and it is associated with increased postoperative mortality, poor physical performance, increased length of hospitalization, poor functional recovery, readmission rates, and death Early fixation is the widely accepted treatment for trochanteric fractures and different implants are described according to the personality of the fracture and the surgeon’s choice. Several authors have reported the degree of blood loss following operative treatment comparing different fixation systems Aim of this study is to evaluate the incidence of blood loss in patients undergoing fixation of trochanteric fractures with dynamic hip screw (DHS) (Dynamic Hip Screw, Zimmer, Warsaw, Indiana, USA) or Gamma nail (StrykerTrauma A retrospective study was conducted between January 2010 and March 2013. Overall, 512 consecutive patients underwent to surgical reduction and fixation of trochanteric fracture at the Division of Orthopaedic and Traumatology of University of Insubria, Hospital di Circolo, Varese – Italy. Institutional board review approval was obtained. Inclusion criteria were: age >65 years old AO 31-A1, A2 fractures no previous ipsilateral proximal femoral fracture or surgery Exclusion criteria were: AO 31 A-3 fracture pathological fractures gastrointestinal diseases neoplastic diseases hematologic disorder (clotting disorders, thrombocytopenia, etc.) An independent observer (MR) blinded to the surgical treatment classified the fractures on the preoperative X-rays according to the AO classification. A second independent observer (DB) blinded to the surgical treatment recorded the following data from the hospital records: preoperative haemoglobin value and on the third-fourth postoperative days, anticoagulant or/and antiaggregant therapy, day of hospitalization, day of surgery, red blood cell transfusions, weight, height, sex and age. The total amount of blood loss was calculated based on the haemoglobin level and the estimated blood volume. The latter was determined according to gender, body mass and height and assuming that blood volume (BV) on the third or fourth day after surgery was the same as that before surgery. The formulae used were as follows The calculated loss of haemoglobin in the peri-operative period was based on the assumptions that the blood volume would be the same on admission and on the third postoperative day, and that all the red blood cell transfusions contained the same number of cells. The formulae used was as follows In order to assess the potential impact of dehydration on admission on the entire model and the results, the total peri-operative blood loss was also calculated from the level of haemoglobin on admission, corrected by a factor of 0.9, in order to simulate 10% dehydration in all patients. The calculated blood loss was estimated using the following formula The data were evaluated with an univariate analysis comparing the following variables: Type of fracture (AO 31 A-1 Antiaggregant/Anticoagulant therapy (AAT/OAT) Time to surgery (<24 hours Type of implant (DHS Multivariate analysis was used to compare the two implants in the two patient groups with equal risk factors for blood loss. Univariate and multivariate analysis were performed using a chi-square test (χ Out of the 512 consecutive patients, 95 patients were excluded because of different fracture pattern (19 AO 31-A3), fixation with other systems (35), pathological fractures (16), patients with neoplastic or hematologic disorders (25). The study included 417 patients for the final analysis, 307 females (73.6%), 110 males (26.4%). The mean age was 82.2 years (range, 65–101 years). 208 patients sustained an A-1 fracture (49.8%), 209 patients an A-2 (50.2%). 317 patients were treated with Gamma nail (76.1%), 100 patients with DHS (23.9%). 116 Gamma nails (27.8%) were used in A-1 fractures and 201 (48.2%) in A-2 fractures; 92 DHS (22%) were used in A-1 fractures and 8 in A-2 fractures (2%) ( A significant blood loss ( Proximal femoral fractures continue to be of great interest to clinicians We recorded a significant difference in blood loss at the univariate analysis for all variables considered. In our study the A2 fractures showed a significant higher blood loss compared to the A1. Torres et al. Lower blood loss was observed in DHS group compared to Gamma nail group. The higher blood loss in Gamma nail group may be explained by several factors: nail insertion may damage the gluteus medius and the pertrochanteric arterial circuit; greater trochanter drilling and femoral reaming may lead to an increased bone bleeding; if the trochanter is fractured, the bone fragments can be displaced during nail insertion delaying hematoma formation. Moreover, the distal locking may damage femoral perforating arteries with an increase blood loss Many comparative studies were conducted to compare the Gamma nail with plating with controversial results in terms of blood loss. Many of these studies have not revealed any difference between the two implants In a prospective randomized study, Adams et al. The main limit of these studies was that the authors recorded the total blood loss during these procedures from the intra-operative bleeding plus the post-operative drainage. These values determine the external blood loss, but in orthopaedic surgery there can be hidden blood loss. This loss would include red cells lost in haematoma, by haemolysis and residual blood in the joint A limitation of most of previous studies was to compare different fixation devices without considering associated bleeding risk factors. A multivariate analysis integrating type of fracture, antiaggregant or anticoagulant therapy, time to surgery was used to identify variables that could influence blood loss when DHS and Gamma nail were compared. In all the A1 fracture correlations with exception of “A1, no therapy and >24-to-surgery group,” we observed a significant lower blood loss in DHS group compared to Gamma group. A patient with simple fracture, no AAT/AOT and treated >24 hours from trauma has a blood loss risk independent by the fixation device used. However, due to an increased rate of morbidity and mortality, it is desirable to treat a trochanteric fracture within 24–72 hours from trauma Strengths of our study are the high number of cases, the multivariate analysis, an independent observer blinded to the surgical treatment classified the fractures on the preoperative X-rays and a second independent observer blinded to the surgical treatment recorded the clinical. Limitations include the retrospective nature of the study and the low number of A2 fractures treated with DHS. In this study, the multivariate analysis integrating type of fracture, antiaggregant or anticoagulant therapy and time to surgery showed that the DHS significantly reduces perioperative blood loss in trochanteric fractures compared to the Gamma nail. According to the perioperative blood loss, DHS should be used in A1 fractures while Gamma nail can be used for the unstable A2 fractures. The authors declare no conflict of interest in regards to the content of this study.