The mechanochemical processing of bauxite with lime has been investigated. The milling of bauxite and lime mixtures in an attritor mill resulted in the formation of an iron rich hydrogarnet phase in bauxite/lime slurries containing greater than 9% CaO. Up to 90% of the quartz contained in the bauxite was found to have been removed by the hydrogarnet reaction. The hydrogarnet compound was stable during the high temperature alumina extraction step, resulting in a 30% drop in caustic soda consumption. Alumina extraction was not influenced by the mechanochemical processing.The Bayer process accounts for over 90% of the world's commercial production of alumina. The process involves digestion of bauxite in a caustic soda solution at temperatures ranging from 100 to 250 °C, depending on the form of alumina in the bauxite, e.g. gibbsitic, boehmitic or diasporic. The digestion of bauxite not only dissolves the majority of the alumina in the bauxite but also dissolves silica. There are two main forms of silica which occur in bauxite: (i) reactive silica, mainly as kaolinite (Al Each tonne of silica that dissolves from bauxite during digestion consumes approximately 1.2 tonnes of soda in forming DSP. It is generally considered uneconomic to treat bauxites containing greater than about 5% reactive silica by the conventional Bayer process because of excessive soda losses ( The addition of lime during pre-desilication or digestion can minimise soda losses by forming hydrogarnet (calcium–aluminium–hydrosilicate) or low-soda calcium–cancrinite in which Ca The production of high iron and silica hydrogarnets has been proposed as a means of reducing both caustic soda and alumina losses ( It is well known that the reactivity of minerals can be improved by ultrafine grinding – a process known as `mechanical activation' ( This paper reports the results of an initial study of the mechanochemical processing of bauxite/lime slurries. It is shown that for sufficiently high lime to bauxite ratios mechanical milling results in the removal of silica from bauxite via the formation of an iron substituted hydrogarnet phase. The hydrogarnet phase is found to be stable under the Bayer digestion conditions, resulting in reduced soda consumption. The materials used in this study were a high silica bauxite and reagent grade CaO. The composition of the bauxite is given in Four different ratios of bauxite and CaO were milled corresponding to the CaO compositions shown in Following milling, the slurry was recovered by adding additional water to the mill and slowly milling for a further 2–5 min. The balls and slurry were tipped into a sieve and the mill and balls were further washed with distilled water. The slurry was then filtered to recover the milled bauxite residue. After drying the samples were examined using X-ray diffraction (XRD) to determine qualitatively the various fractions present, and X-ray fluorescence (XRF) to provide a standard chemical analysis which was used to calculate the weight percent of metal oxides in the bauxite. The amount of unreacted quartz in the milled bauxite was measured by a standard quartz analysis method involving acid digestion. The milled bauxite samples were digested at 250 °C for 10 min using the Bayer digestion liquor. After digestion the bombs were quickly cooled and the liquor and red mud separated by centrifuging. Caustic soda and alumina levels in the liquor were measured thermometrically using a Technicon Auto-analyser. Liquor impurities were measured by XRF. The solids (red mud) underwent a double ammonia wash, using 10% w/w ammonia solution, before being analysed by XRF to measure the amount of metal oxides in the mud, and XRD to identify the various compounds present. X-ray diffraction patterns of unmilled bauxite and milled samples QA2 and QA3, corresponding to lime contents of 5.9% and 9.1% CaO, respectively, are shown in Examination of the diffraction pattern of sample QA3 after milling revealed a set of new peaks, which were indexed to the iron substituted hydrogarnet phase, Ca Measurements of the effect of CaO concentration on the amount of quartz remaining in the milled samples is shown in The effect of CaO concentration on soda consumption during digestion is shown in It was also found that the milling had no significant effect on the extraction of alumina. Alumina extraction levels of 92.1–96.6% were obtained in the milled samples as compared to 95.6% in the unmilled bauxite. The present measurements show that the mechanochemical treatment of bauxite with lime has the potential to convert the silica components in bauxite into a non-reactive form, prior to the introduction of caustic soda solution for digestion. Theoretically if all the silica were converted to hydrogarnet this would eliminate soda consumption during bauxite digestion. Increasing the degree of iron substitution in the hydrogarnet compound formed during milling would reduce alumina losses associated with lime addition in the Bayer process. Further research work is required to optimise the process. Another possible benefit of the mechanochemical treatment is the destruction of organic contaminants ( The mechanochemical treatment of a bauxite/water slurry with lime resulted in the formation of an iron substituted hydrogarnet for CaO concentrations exceeding 9 wt%. Analysis of the quartz content of the milled bauxite revealed a decrease of up to 90% due to the quartz silica reacting with lime. Digestion tests showed that the iron substituted hydrogarnet was stable under the conditions of digestion and resulted in a decrease in soda consumption. Alumina extraction was not affected by the milling process. The present study shows that the mechanochemical treatment of bauxite with lime has the potential to convert the total silica content in bauxite into a non-reactive form which theoretically would eliminate present soda consumption problems. Further work is required to fully understand the reaction chemistry and optimise milling and other process variables. The authors would like to thank the management of Queensland Alumina Ltd. for their permission to publish this paper. The assistance of Darwin Del Aguila in carrying out the bauxite digestion tests is gratefully acknowledged.