This work describes a laboratory study concerning the adsorption of isopropylxanthate ions onto modified zeolites particles. The separation of the loaded carrier and their removal, from aqueous solutions, was conducted by flocculation followed by dissolved air flotation, DAF. The zeolite employed was a natural sample (approximately 48% clinoptilolite and 30% mordenite) which was previously treated with sodium ions (activation) and modified with copper ions (Cu–Z) before the xanthate ions uptake. Adsorption capacities (q
                     m) for Cu–Z were 0.34 meq g−1 for the powdered form, and 1.12 meq g−1 for the floc form. The adsorption capacity for the floc form appears to involve an enhanced electrostatic adsorption due to the positive sites on the floc surface. In all cases, the isopropylxanthate concentration in the treated water was found to be negligible (<0.04 mg L− 1). The flotation technique showed to be a fast process, requires a low recycle ratio (20%) in air saturated water, and the treated water ended up with a very low residual turbidity (6.8 NTU). It is believed that this adsorption–flotation technique, here named adsorptive particulate flotation, using activated and modified natural zeolite has a high potential as an alternative for pollutants removal (copper and isopropylxanthate ions) from waste mining effluents.Xanthates are commonly used as collector agents in froth flotation of sulfide minerals (more than two billion tones of ore per year). Residual concentrations of these organic flotation collectors are commonly encountered in aqueous effluents and they are toxic to aquatic life ( Other studies report removal of flotation collectors using biological processes ( Zeolites appear to have good potential as adsorbents of several ions and a number of articles may be found in the literature. Several researchers have reported the potential use of modified zeolites in environmental applications to remove several ions from wastewater by adsorption process ( Zeolites can be modified by the introduction of functional groups in order to improve their activity and selectivity for uptake of ions ( The adsorptive particulate flotation (APF) ( The advantages of the APF technique when compared to other methods, such as adsorption in fixed bed processes, are that in most cases bed pores (voids) become readily blocked up by the filtered water containing small particles leading to undesirable high pressure in the filters ( The aim of this work is to study the removal of isopropylxanthate ions from aqueous solutions by adsorption onto pre-treated and modified natural zeolite, either in the floc or powdered form, and also to evaluate the separation by adsorptive particulate flotation technique (APF) using microbubbles in the flotation stage (dissolved air flotation-DAF). A natural zeolite sample from Chile was used as adsorbent material. Technical properties of the natural zeolite sample are summarized in Synthetic isopropylxanthate solutions were prepared using the sodium salt. Analytical purity sodium chloride (NaCl) was used to pre-treat the material (Na-rich zeolite). Analytical purity copper nitrate (Cu (NO Aqueous solutions of the flocculant polyacrylamides Mafloc 2880 (anionic/SNF Floerger Solutions containing isopropylxanthate ions were analyzed by measurement of their absorbance values at 301 nm ( Copper ion concentration was determined by atomic absorption spectroscopy ( Activation of the zeolite was done by contacting the powdered material with an aqueous solution of sodium chloride. A known quantity of the adsorbent (5 g) was contacted with 0.05 L of 1 M NaCl solution for 24 h at room temperature and the suspension was agitated at 50 rpm in glass flasks using a Wagner™ shaker. Then, the suspension was filtered and the material was washed with 0.3 L deionised water. The resulting material was dried at 100 °C for 24 h and used in the modification stage. The modification of the activated adsorbent was achieved by contacting the activated zeolite sample (Na–Z) with an aqueous solution of copper nitrate. Thus, 5 g was contacted with 0.05 L of Cu(NO Flocculation trials of the modified zeolite particles to select the best polymer from the list described before, were conducted in a Jar Test Turbidity was measured with a HACH nephelometer model 2100 within the experimental error less than 0.8 NTU. Adsorption studies using modified zeolite (Cu–Z) (powdered form) were conducted in glass flasks, in a Wagner mixer. Different mass quantities of the adsorbent were mixed with 0.1 L of 60 mg L The isopropylxanthate ions uptake ( The isopropylxanthate ions uptake was calculated from the experimental data and Langmuir and Freundlich isotherms were employed to fit the equilibrium data obtained. The Langmuir isotherm assumes that the adsorption occurs in surface sites where the energy is equal in each site. Langmuir equation is given by Eq. Freundlich isotherm is usually applied to adsorption processes in monolayer, multilayer and adsorption onto heterogeneous surfaces ( Langmuir and Freundlich data fitting was done by regression linear of the Eqs. Plotting Plotting log  Adsorption studies using flocs of Cu–Z were performed by contacting 1 g of powdered Cu–Z with 0.05 L of deionised water and an optimum flocculant dosage. This system was stirred for 1 min at 70 rpm and 4 min at 30 rpm. Then, 0.05 L solution containing isopropylxanthate ions was added to the flocs suspensions at pH 8.0 and stirred for 2 h. Later, the suspensions were filtered and the solutions were analyzed for pH, temperature and ions concentration.  Adsorption–flotation studies were conducted in a batch scale dissolved air flotation (DAF) unit consisting of a pressure vessel of 2 L for water saturation and a flotation cell of 1.5 L capacity which was connected by a release needle valve for depressurization and microbubbles formation (see  Previous studies showed that the natural zeolite (NZ) has moderate to high adsorption capacity for copper ions as 0.62 meq g Elution studies of the copper ions from surface modified zeolite (Cu–Z) were negligible and the filtered aqueous solutions showed in all cases very low concentration of copper ions (0.06 mg L Flocculation studies showed that the Nalco 8589 cationic flocculant was the most suitable providing a very low supernatant turbidity (8.2 NTU) at an optimal concentration of 0.25 mg g Results showed that natural zeolite does not present significant adsorption capacity for the isopropylxanthate ion as 0.01 meq g Kinetic data (  The adsorption isotherm using Cu–Z floc is shown in  An important observation in this work was the color modification of the zeolite after the adsorption of the xanthate ions, confirming the formation of a yellow copper xanthate salt.  Best results were attained for an adsorbent/xanthate ratio of 7.2% (g mg A technique was developed for the isopropylxanthate ions adsorption onto modified zeolite, pre-treated with sodium ions and then modified with copper ions. This adsorption stage was followed by separation of the loaded carrier by dissolved air flotation (DAF) showed excellent results of removal of the xanthate toxic ions. There was found an extra adsorption capacity when the adsorbent was in the form of flocs using cationic polyacrylamide reaching a The authors thank all institutions supporting research in Brazil (FAPERGS, CAPES, CNPq and UFRGS) and Minera Formas™ (Chile) for the zeolite samples.