Studies have shown that using organic coated bubbles (“oily” bubbles) could increase bitumen recovery rate in flotation. One way to coat bubbles is that used in the air-assisted solvent extraction process where solvent foam is formed and injected through a capillary to release solvent coated bubbles in a controlled manner into the aqueous system. To investigate adapting this approach, the foaming properties of some organics (Hexane, Heptane, Hexadecane, Petroleum Ether, Toluene, Benzene and Kerosene and their binary mixtures) of potential interest in oily bubble bitumen flotation were investigated. Silicone oil was found to be a good foaming agent in some cases. Bubble stability and film thickness experiments were carried out to help select candidate organics. Surface tension and dynamic viscosity measurements were conducted to examine the mechanism of foaming. Attachment studies showed that droplets of the selected organics readily attached to a bitumen surface compared to air bubbles. From a combination of criteria, 25:75 Hexadecane/Heptane appears to be a promising candidate.Significant oil sand (tar sand) deposits are located in Venezuela and Canada. The largest deposit in Canada is in the Athabasca area of Alberta with an estimated 2 trillion barrels ( The hot water extraction process can be separated into three steps: conditioning, primary separation (gravity separation) and secondary separation (flotation). Bitumen is naturally hydrophobic, that is attachment to an air bubble is thermodynamically favored. On the other hand, both bubble and bitumen tend to be negatively charged ( Recently, Xu and co-workers have applied the oily-bubble concept for bitumen flotation (  In this study, the foaming properties of some organics (including ones currently used in oil sand processing, e.g. Toluene, Hexane, Heptane ( The bitumen sample (Syncrude, Plant 6–bitumen froth, taken on September 6, 2006) was supplied by Imperial Oil. Seven organics, Hexane, Heptane, Petroleum Ether, Benzene, Toluene and Kerosene (Fisher Scientific) and Hexadecane (Acros), and their binary mixtures were used for the experiments. Silicone Oil, Span-20, Nonyl-phenol (SIGMA) and a mineral flotation frother, the polyglycol F-150 (Flottec), were the surfactants tested to produce foam. The tests were carried out using 30 mL rubber sealed vials, each containing 20 mL of organic with 1.5–3 mg/L surfactant addition. In each test, the vials were hand shaken for 30 s and left for observation. This is a common procedure to test for foamability. The surface tension was measured using Wilhelmy Plate method (Kruss Tensiometer K 12) at room temperature. One hundred mL was used for each experiment. Measurements were preformed 3 times, and the average is presented. The ERTCO (CFRC-100) viscometer was used to determine kinematic viscosity. In each experiment, the viscometer was placed in a water bath to control the temperature, then 100 mL of each organic was introduced into the chamber and left for 2 h. The liquid flow rate is determined by timing the flow of liquid between two positions. All measurements were made at room temperature, and repeated 5 times, with the average presented. The maximum standard deviation was ca. ± The calibration curve ( The dynamic foam stability was measured using the “foam meter” ( The foaming area results are given as Af The “layer” refers to the coating on an air bubble blown in the organic. Thickness is measured using spectroscopy ( A schematic of the custom-made glass spectroscopy cell is shown in A Genesys 10 Thermoelectron UV-visible spectrophotometer ( Two bubble sizes (diameters) were targeted, ca. 20 mm ( The film thickness ( A thin bitumen layer was coated on PTFE slides ( The experiments involved two set-ups ( There are three types of surfactants known to produce foam from organic liquids namely: hydrocarbons, polymethylsiloxanes and fluoroalkyls ( Silicone oil was the only surfactant to produce foam from many of the organic liquids. It did not, however, function for Hexane and Heptane, two organics which have recently been used in oil-sand processing test work ( Unless otherwise stated, 1.5 ppm silicone oil was added to all organics for the foam area, stability and layer thickness, surface tension and viscosity measurements and bitumen-droplet attachment experiments. It should be noted that silicone oil behaves as a foam breaker if added above its solubility limit (3 ppm) ( The results are given in The layer thickness measurements take about 90 s. To establish which organics produced bubbles with at least this stability, the life time of the bubbles produced from the various organic compositions was measured. The results (  The typical, unvarying narrow spectra are shown on all with evolution of a broad spectra evident by 5 min. The fit to the interference envelope is illustrated; only the broad oscillations are analyzed to yield film thickness data. Further details are given by An example of the calculated time dependant layer thickness on a Theories of foam stability are similar for both aqueous and nonaqueous liquids ( The viscosity measurements, made with and without silicone oil (1.5 ppm) are reported in The results show that the alkane mixtures are more viscous than the aromatic Surface tension measurements, also made with and without addition of silicone oil, are shown in The large difference in viscosity at on-set of foaming for Toluene-based compared to Hexadecane-based organics ( The room temperature equilibrium surface tension of silicone oil is 21 mN/m ( With Hexadecane-based organics foaming occurs in mixtures with a surface tension down to virtually the cut-off 21 mN/m; silicone oil continues to act as a foaming agent to the limit of its own surface tension. In the case of Toluene-based organics, foaming occurs only down to mixtures with surface tension ca. 23 mN/m; i.e., in this case, silicone oil has a more limited surface tension range for Toluene-based organics over which it acts as a foaming agent. It is not possible to arrive at a conclusion regarding the mechanism of foaming, which probably involves a combination of actions. Using disposable pipettes, bubbles and droplets were generated and attachment experiments on the bitumen surface performed. Droplets were made from all organics, with emphasis on Hexadecane–based as these have been shown to readily foam. For the horizontal set-up ( The ideal candidate organic for the projected oily bubble production scheme should readily foam, not produce excessive foam stability in flotation, be low in viscosity and have no health related problems. The organic mixtures used in this work vary significantly in this regard. Toluene-based mixtures have short bubble life time and low viscosity, which argues against their use for coating bubbles; in addition the aromatic organics employed raise health issues. The alkane mixtures pose fewer health risks but bubble life times are quite long (more than 10 min), suggestive of a stable foam which may be a disadvantage in flotation where froths are required to break down rapidly once leaving the flotation machine ( The preferred candidates at this point are Hexadecane mixtures with high Hexane or Heptane concentration. For the first trials of the oily bubble process using the foam injection technique, we plan to use the 25:75 Hexadecane/Heptane mixture. In this study to identify organics suitable for oily bubble flotation of bitumen using the foam injection technique for bubble coating, the following observations were made. Silicone oil can produce foam from Hexadecane and Toluene and their mixtures with Hexane and Heptane. The ability to reduce surface tension appears to be the governing factor. The Alkane mixtures gave higher foamability than Toluene-based mixtures. This may be related to the higher viscosity of the former. Bubbles generated from Toluene-based mixtures did not last more than 90 s, suggesting these organics are not the first choice for the intended process. Bubble layer thickness measurements on Hexadecane-based organics showed an initial thickness of ca. 2000 nm decreasing over time; the bubble life times exceeded 10 min, which may indicate excessive froth stability a disadvantage in flotation. Organic droplets, from all mixtures, attach readily to a bitumen surface at room temperature while air bubbles did not. From the combinations tested, the 25:75 Hexadecane/Heptane mixture is identified as the best initial candidate for oily bubble bitumen flotation using the foam injection technique. The funding was under a Collaborative Research and Development grant from Natural Sciences and Engineering Research Council of Canada (NSERC) with industrial sponsorship from (giving the names at onset of work, 2005): Inco, Teck-Cominco, Falconbridge/Noranda, COREM and SGS-Lakefield. The authors would also like to acknowledge Imperial Oil for additional financial support.