Accurate prediction of stress–strain relationship of concrete is of vital importance to accurately predict the overall structural behavior of reinforced concrete members. The various types of concrete that are available in the construction industry today makes it essential that the models developed for the prediction of their behavior are of high versatility. Review of the existing literature revealed that existing stress–strain models for unconfined and confined concretes are limited in their application domains, defined by the parametric range of the experimental results considered in their development. The review also indicated that a unified model that is applicable to normal- and light-weight concretes is not yet available. The aim of the present study was to develop a unified confinement model that is applicable to various types of concrete, ranging from light-weight to high-strength. To this end, two large databases of experimental results of concrete specimens tested under uniaxial and triaxial compression were assembled through an extensive review of the literature. The databases covered a wide range of concrete properties, thereby allowing detailed observation of the important factors influencing the compressive behavior of concrete. The analysis of the unconfined concrete database resulted in the development of expressions for the prediction of elastic modulus, compressive strength and corresponding axial strain of various types of concrete. In addition, through a comprehensive analysis of the combined test database a unified stress–strain model was developed to predict the peak and residual conditions and the complete stress–strain behavior of unconfined and actively confined concretes.It is well established that lateral confinement of concrete enhances its compressive strength and axial deformation capacity The work presented in this paper was motivated by the need to develop a unified model applicable to various types of concrete under unconfined and confined conditions. To this end, firstly two extensive databases of unconfined and actively confined concrete test results, which covered various concrete types, were assembled. The database results indicated significant differences in the stress–strain behavior of different types of concrete, ranging from light-weight (LWC) to normal-weight (NWC), and normal-strength (NSC) to high-strength (HSC). Based on these results, changes in the compressive behavior of concrete with various test parameters were then investigated, and the influential parameters were established. Finally, through a comprehensive examination of the results in the databases, a unified stress–strain model that it is applicable to: i) both LWC and NWC, ii) both NSC and HSC, and iii) both unconfined and actively confined concretes was developed. The database of unconfined concrete was assembled from 209 experimental studies and consisted of 4353 datasets. 1167 datasets from 161 studies that reported the specimen axial strain at peak compressive stress of concrete ( In the database presented in The database of actively confined concrete, presented in Ref. It is worth noting that, given the limitation of the actively confined concrete database only to specimens with circular cross-sections, for a consistent treatment of the test results, only the specimens with circular cross-sections from both unconfined and actively confined concrete databases were included in the development of the models that are presented later in the paper. However, wherever possible, observations on the influences of the cross-sectional shape on the observed behavior are also supplied. Thereafter, the specimen cross-sectional dimension ( Based on the observed difference in their compressive behavior, concretes with a density ( Several studies have been reported to date on the modelling of concrete compressive strength (Refs. Extensive research has been conducted to study the relationship between compressive strength of concrete (  Extensive research has been conducted to study the relationship between the compressive strength of concrete (  In Eqs. Since the 1920s Based on the results from the test database of actively confined concrete Accurate determination of the residual stress ( The inflection point ( A model applicable to both unconfined and actively confined concretes is presented in this section. The ascending branch of the stress–strain curve is to be predicted using the expression developed by Popovics The descending branch of the stress–strain is to be predicted using a new expression developed in this study, which is given in Eq. For unconfined concrete, the It should be noted that the proposed expression (Eq. As was reported in a number of studies, the total deformation of concretes consists of elastic and inelastic components To illustrate the strain adjustment process,  This paper has presented the results of an investigation into the stress–strain behavior of concrete in compression. Two large databases of experimental results of unconfined and actively confined specimens were assembled through an extensive review of the literature. Based on the unconfined concrete database, a wide range of parameters influencing the compressive behavior of various types of concrete ranging from light-weight to high-strength were carefully studied. This resulted in the development of unified expressions for the predictions of elastic modulus and compressive strength and the corresponding axial strain of various types of concrete. The database was then studied together with the companion actively confined concrete database, in order to capture the change in behavior of unconfined and confined concretes. A unified stress–strain model for the predictions of compressive behavior of unconfined and actively confined concretes was then developed and is presented. The model is applicable to normal and light-weight concretes with compressive strengths up to 120 Supplementary data associated with this article can be found, in the online version, at 