To achieve an adsorbent that has better absorption and extraction performance, carboxymethyl-diethylammoniumethyl cellulose (CMDEAEC), a low-cost cellulose-based ionic liquid that possesses a nanoscale particle size and good swellability to increase the contact area, was prepared through a one-step reaction. The chemically modified cellulose was verified by Fourier transform infrared spectroscopy, elemental analysis and scanning electron microscopy. As an adsorbent, CMDEAEC was used for selective recovery of metal ions. The effects of pH, adsorbent dose, initial concentration, and contact time on metal ion adsorption were examined. CMDEAEC was found to exhibit selectivity only for Au(III). Additionally, the adsorption process follows the Langmuir isotherm model and the pseudo-second-order kinetics model. Furthermore, the desorption of ions from CMDEAEC and the regeneration capacity of CMDEAEC were investigated. In conclusion, as an efficient, low-cost, easily obtained and environmentally friendly adsorbent, CMDEAEC is expected to be used for the selective recovery of gold.Gold, as a type of precious metal, has specific properties, such as being lustrous, ductile, noncorrosive and highly stable ( Liquid-liquid extraction and solid-phase extraction have been extensively used for the recovery of precious metals ( In this paper, diethylaminoethyl cellulose, as the main raw material, not only is cheap but also can be produced in large quantities. The nitrogen atom of the diethylaminoethyl cellulose grafting carboxymethyl group generates cellulose-based ionic liquid carboxymethyl-diethylammoniumethyl cellulose (CMDEAEC), which possesses a nanoscale particle size and good swellability, as shown in the SEM test. The physical and chemical properties of the adsorbent have changed after chemical modification. Especially the extraction and separation performance for metal ions increased greatly. Synthetic CMDEAEC can be used for the selective recovery of gold ions from aqueous solutions. In addition, the effects of pH, adsorbent dose, initial concentrations, and contact time on metal ion adsorption are discussed in detail. CMDEAEC shows higher selectivity and better adsorption efficiency for Au(III) than those of reported adsorbents ( Diethylaminoethyl-52 cellulose (DEAEC) was purchased from Shanghai Yuanye Bio-Technology Co., Ltd. Bromoacetic acid, dimethyl sulfoxide (DMSO) and nitric acid were obtained from Aladdin Industrial Corporation, Shanghai, China. Sodium carbonate anhydrous, sodium hydroxide, absolute ethanol, ammonia solution, hydrochloric acid, sulfuric acid and thiourea were supplied by Sinopharm Chemical Reagent Co., Ltd. Lithium bis(trifluoromethanesulphonyl)imide (LiTf The CMDEAEC adsorbent synthesis was carried out according to the method described by Naoki Haraguchi and Parbhej Ahamed with some modifications ( A Nicolet iS50 Fourier transform infrared spectroscopy (FT-IR) were used to verify the presence of functional groups in the samples. The contents of carbon, hydrogen, nitrogen and sulfur in samples were analyzed by Vario EL cube elemental analyzer. The morphology and size of the samples was observed by Hitachi S-4800 scanning electron microscope (SEM) operating at 5 kV. An aqueous solution containing metal ions was prepared by diluting the standard solutions with deionized water. For the effect of pH, the initial pH was adjusted by dropwise addition of 0.1 mol/L HCl and NH where After adsorption, the solution was separated as much as possible by suction filtration to obtain the adsorbent. Then the adsorbent was dried in vacuum at 80 °C for 12 h. Ten milliliters of desorption solution was added to the drying adsorbent in a 15 mL centrifuge tube, followed by stirring in a thermostatic bath at 25 °C to attain equilibrium. After desorption, the solution was separated as much as possible by suction filtration to obtain the filtrate. ICP-AES was used to determine the concentration of metal ions in the filtrate. The desorption ratio where The graft polymer structure was confirmed by FT-IR spectroscopy. The FT-IR spectra of CMDEAEC are presented in The table in The surface morphology of CMDEAEC was investigated by SEM. As shown in The pH of a solution is one of the most important factors affecting the adsorption process. The adsorbent dose plays a significant role in the degree of adsorption of metal ions from aqueous solutions. The relationship between the adsorption ratio and different adsorbent doses is shown in The relationship between the initial Au(III) ion concentration in aqueous solution and the amount of Au(III) ions adsorbed by the adsorbent under equilibrium conditions shows the adsorption state of the adsorbent in the sorption process. Adsorption isotherms are usually used for analyzing the interactions between an adsorbate and an adsorbent. To further investigate the mechanism of the adsorption process, equilibrium measurements were performed using a Au ion solution. In this study, the adsorption data for Au ions are analyzed by fitting the Langmuir and Freundlich adsorption isotherm models. The Langmuir isotherm model assumes that a monolayer of adsorbate is formed on the surface of the adsorbent, that the surface sites have the same energy, and that the adsorbed molecules do not interact on the surface. The linearized Langmuir equation is given as follows: where The Freundlich isotherms model assumes that multilayer adsorbate is formed on the surface of the adsorbent, that different types of adsorption sites are available on the surface, and that the adsorbed molecules do interact on the surface of the adsorbent. The linearized Freundlich equation is given as follows: where Q Based on the above equations, the coefficients for the Langmuir and Freundlich equations are obtained by means of linear fitting, as shown in To study the effect of the contact time on the adsorption of Au(III), contact times ranging from 5 min to 24 h were tested to determine the adsorption percent of Au(III) by CMDEAEC and the results are presented in To investigate the kinetics characteristic of the adsorption process, the pseudo-first-order and pseudo-second-order kinetic equations are used to evaluate experimental data. The pseudo-first-order equation describes adsorption in solid–liquid systems based on the sorption capacity of solids. A linear form of the pseudo-first-order equation can be expressed as: The pseudo-second-order rate expression describes the kinetic behavior of chemical sorption as a rate controlling step. A linear form of the pseudo-second-order equation can be expressed as: where t (h) is time; Q To recycle CMDEAEC, attempts were made to find suitable reagents for gold desorption. Several reagents were selected, and their desorption efficiencies are shown in Several metals co-exist with Au(III) in e-wastes. The presence of these co-existing metal ions may affect the adsorption of Au(III) on the adsorbent, and thus, it is necessary to investigate the adsorption selectivity of the adsorbent to Au(III) ion. To utilize the adsorbent in practical operation for recovery of Au(III) from e-wastes, adsorption operation was first evaluated. The reusability of the adsorbents is an important characteristic that significantly reduces the cost during industrial applications. In this paper, the cellulose-based ionic liquid CMDEAEC was synthesized by the reaction of diethylaminoethyl cellulose with bromoacetic acid in DMSO solvent. The effects of pH, adsorbent dose, initial concentration, and contact time on metal ion adsorption were evaluated. CMDEAEC only adsorbs gold ions. In addition, CMDEAEC exhibits a maximum Au(III) adsorption of 15 mg/g according to the Langmuir model. Additionally, CMDEAEC exhibits a fast adsorption rate, and the adsorption equilibrium time is 2 h. This result occurs because CMDEAEC possesses a nanoscale particle size and good swellability, which was confirmed by SEM analysis. The mathematical analysis of the metal ion adsorption process shows that the kinetic data fit the pseudo-second-order kinetic model well. Regeneration studies reveal the good potential of CMDEAEC for reuse and show only a 4.1% loss of adsorption percentage after 7 cycles of adsorption–desorption. Thus, CMDEAEC has great potential to be used as an adsorbent for the selective recovery of gold. The project was sponsored by the scientific research foundation for the returned overseas Chinese scholars, state education ministry, 1685(2014), the