The purpose of this study was to analyse clinical results of elderly patients with trochanteric fractures that were treated with use of TARGON® PF nail. Overall, 494 patients (113 males) were available for this study. On the basis of Jensen classification, there were 76 cases in type I, 164 cases in type II, 70 in type III, 129 in type IV and 55 in type V.
                  (1) Sliding amount of lag screw in relation to the Jensen classification, (2) sliding amount of lag screw according to the Ikuta's classification that categorises the reduction in lateral view in three, Subtype A, Subtype N and Subtype P, (3) sliding amount of lag screw in correlation between Jensen classification and Ikuta's classification and (4) postoperative complications (9 cases; 1.7%) were assessed. Cut-out and back-out cases were seen in 6 cases (1.1%), and these severe complications were evaluated in details.
                  In correlation between Jensen classification and Ikuta's classification, the excessive sliding of lag screw was prominent with the Subtype P, which was preoperatively in Jensen type III or V.
                  Cut-out or back-out cases were caused either from (1) Subtype P that were preoperatively Jensen types III or V, or from (2) the fracture where there was bony defect anteriorly. Therefore, special care must be taken for these types.Cephalomedullary implants are considered nowadays to be the gold standard of treatment of proximal femoral extracapsular fractures Loss of reduction related to cut-out or back-out of lag screw generally occurs within 3 months postoperatively. These complications are associated with the following causes: (1) eccentric placement of the lag screw, (2) improper reaming, (3) inability to obtain a stable reduction, (4) excessive fracture collapse and (5) severe osteopenia However, according to Kawatani et al. ‘suboptimal positioning of the lag screw or malreduction of the fracture cannot be avoided in certain occasions’ We have treated 522 patients with trochanteric fractures with the TARGON Between July, 2005 and March, 2012, 522 patients with proximal femoral fractures were treated with TARGON On the basis of Jensen classification Radiographically, the postoperative reduction in the lateral view was assessed by Ikuta's classification – in ‘Subtype A’: the medial fragment is flexed anteriorly and it is placed extra-medullarly, in ‘Subtype N’: the cortical congruence is gained between medial and distal fragments, and in ‘Subtype P’, the medial fragment is placed posteriorly and impacted into the medullary canal, which is called the ‘posterior sag’ ( In this study, we assessed: (1) sliding amount of lag screw in relation to the Jensen classification, (2) sliding amount of lag screw according to the Ikuta's classification, (3) sliding amount of lag screw in correlation between Jensen classification and Ikuta's classification, (4) postoperative complications. Kluskal–Wallis test and Chi-square test were used, and significance was set up at According to the Ikuta's classification, there were 24 cases in Subtype A, 410 in Subtype N and 60 in Subtype P. The number of reduced fractures in Subtype P was significantly bigger in Jensen III, IV and V than in Jensen I and II ( Of these complications, we focused on the cut-out and back-out cases that happened in 6 cases (1.1%) for further evaluation. The mean age of the patients was 85 years. There were one male and 5 female patients, and their fracture types were 2 cases in type III, 1 in type IV and 3 in type V. 4 out of the 6 cases were Subtype P. All the lag screws were placed in posterior position in the femoral head. The remainder of 2 cases were Subtype N with the fracture site being comminuted. In Subtype A, there were no cut-out or back-out cases. The average amount of telescoping was 14.7  This was an 87 year-old woman who sustained a Jensen type V fracture. Comminution was seen anteriorly, which normally does not happen at this site. Bone defect was also visible. The postoperative lateral view showed this was Subtype P, in which the medial fragment was impacted into the medullary canal, and a bony defect was seen anteriorly. Sliding of the lag screw progressed very fast, it went into a cut-out and then, hemi-arthroplasty was performed ( This was a 77 year-old man, who had a Jensen type V fracture. At the time of injury, the fracture site was comminuted. Considering pronounced comminution, a shorter barrel should have been selected to allow for a longer sliding capacity. Sliding of the lag screw continued for three months, and it reached the point of maximum sliding capacity. As the fracture seemed to have healed, we did not decide for re-operation. Unfortunately, back-out happened at 6 months ( The Targon Surgeons often experience complex cases where the femoral neck is displaced anteriorly to the distal fragment in lateral view (Subtype A), the femoral neck is placed posteriorly (Subtype P) or a fracture line extents to the entry point of the nail and after a nail is inserted, the medial fragment is pushed medially To overcome the intraoperative difficulty in acquiring an optimal reduction and to reduce the incidence of complications, we developed special reduction instruments ( To reduce the Subtype A, either one-pointed edge or multi-pointed edge is connected to the pusher, depending on the fracture condition. A 1-cm skin incision is made antero-laterally, and then, the pusher-type reduction tool is inserted ( While an assistant holds the device inserted through antero-lateral skin incision, the operation is continued. The shaft of the reduction tool is curved in order not to impede the image intensifier. The assistant keeps holding the device until a lag screw is inserted into the femoral head. After the lag screw is inserted, the tool is removed. In regard to Subtype P, direct pressure alone cannot accomplish reduction To look into the 6 of either cut-out or back-out cases, 4 of them were in Subtype P, though reduction was attempted intraoperatively. The causes of this consequence may have been (a) surgeons were not aware during the operation that the fracture was reduced in Subtype P and subsequently, it became a progressed Subtype P as the lag screw continued to slide, (b) the fracture was not sufficiently reduced and/or (c) the fracture displaced after implantation of nail and lag screw. In the review of trochanteric anatomy, the posterior cortex is thinner compared to the anterior cortex, and the iliofemoral ligament is widespread over the anterior intertrochanteric line, whereas few ligaments are attached to the posterior intertrochanteric crest. This anatomical structure often results in the posteriorly comminuted fracture According to the above-mentioned correlation between Subtype P and Jensen classification, the excessive sliding of lag screw was prominent with the Subtype P which were preoperatively in Jensen type III and V. These are the fractures where postero-lateral support is defective. Due to this fact, once sliding of the medial fragment occurred in these cases, it hardly had cortical contact with the distal fragment, and for this reason, they may have faced difficulty in consolidation. The TARGON In our study, cut-out or back-out cases were caused either from (1) Subtype P that were preoperatively Jensen type III or V, or from (2) the fracture where there was a bony defect anteriorly. Therefore, special care must be taken for these types. Combination of the use of intra-operative reduction instruments with the implantation of the TARGON