The present work deals with pre-reforming of logistic hydrocarbon fuel (jet fuel) as a part of an integrated approach to developing an on-board fuel reformer for use in a micro-solid-oxide fuel cell system. The purpose of doing pre-reforming is to ensure carbon-free reformulation of JP-8 jet fuel into hydrogen and carbon monoxide for use in a micro-solid-oxide fuel cell. Several model jet fuels have been tested for the pre-reforming at low temperature (450–550 °C) in a lab-scale reforming reactor. Proper temperature control and pre-mixing of feed fuels and steam have been found to be important for the prevention of coke formation prior to pre-reforming. Both noble metal and base-metal catalysts have been prepared and tested. As compared with an Al2O3-supported Ni catalyst, supported Rh catalysts show not only high activity but also high resistance to deactivation due to carbon formation. Removal of residual Cl− from Rh/CeO2–Al2O3 improves the metal dispersion and the pre-reforming activity. The reformates from the current pre-reformer contain mainly CH4, CO, H2, in which CH4 can be further converted to H2 and CO by subsequent main-reforming.Fuel cell has been identified as a potential device for portable power supply because it is more efficient, convenient, quiet and long-lasting. In general, all the fuel cells operate without combusting fuel and with few moving parts, and thus they are attractive from both energy efficiency and environmental viewpoints. Inside a fuel cell there are separate reactions at the anode and the cathode, and charged ions move through the electrolyte, while electrons move around an external circuit. Fuel processing is applicable to both high temperature fuel cells such as solid-oxide fuel cell (SOFC, operating at about 800–1000 °C) and low temperature fuel cells such as proton exchange membrane fuel cells (PEMFC, operating at about 80 °C). The strategy for fuel processing depends on the nature of fuel and type of fuel cells. The choice of liquid fuels such as jet fuel and diesel fuel as logistic fuels is an important consideration for portable fuel cells, because they are widely available and have lower volume and higher energy density. On the other hand, the choice of fuel cells has a significant impact on the fuel processing strategies for on-board fuel pre-processor. The general status of fuel cells and fuel processing are described in a book by Larminie and Dicks Some recent advances in laboratory research has made it possible to make a solid-oxide fuel cell for direct electro-chemical oxidation of light hydrocarbons such as methane and ethane Our approach to solving this problem is to conduct catalytic fuel reformation in two stages with a pre-reformer to break-down most C The conventional pre-reforming of natural gas or light naphtha is usually run in an adiabatic reactor, i.e., there is no external heat supply during the reaction Reaction (1) can be considered irreversible for all higher hydrocarbons under reforming conditions ( There is not much work in the open literature on pre-reforming catalysts for heavy fuels The kinetics of steam reforming of The present paper reports on our preliminary work on the pre-reforming of model jet fuel on Rh catalysts supported on CeO CeO RhCl Pulse chemisorption of hydrogen was performed on an automated catalyst characterization unit (Micromeritics Autochem 2910) to determine the metal dispersion and metal particle size of the catalysts. About 0.1 g of the sieved catalyst (18–35 mesh) was loaded in a U-type quartz tube. The catalyst was reduced using 25 ml/min of hydrogen at 500 °C for 2 h. The sample was then degassed at 500 °C with argon flow (20 ml/min) for 2 h. Returning to ambient temperature the sample was dosed with aliquots of hydrogen at 10-minute intervals until saturation. The amount of hydrogen chemisorbed is then related to the percent metal dispersion and metal particle size assuming a M:H stoichiometric ratio of 1:1. Normal dodecane ( MJF-1: 20 wt.% 1,3,5-trimethylbenzene and 80 wt.% dodecane; MJF-2: 10 wt.% 1,3,5-trimethylbenzene, 5 wt.% ethylbenzene, and 5 wt.% butylbenzene, with the balance being dodecane (80 wt.%). A catalyst (1.0 g with particle size of 18–35 mesh) was placed into the middle of a stainless steel reactor tube (0.54″ O.D. Before introducing the fuel, the catalyst was heated to reaction temperature under 20 ml/min hydrogen flow for 2 hours. Then the carrier gas was switched to nitrogen. At the same time, the pre-heater was turned on, to conditions described in section 3.1, and water flow was started 30 min prior to introducing the fuel. The schematic reactor system is shown in To start the test, water was first introduced for 30 min before opening the fuel flow to ensure that there was always steam accompanying fuel flow in the reactor lines. The fuel was then introduced with one of the two HPLC pumps through the pre-heater into the reactor with a volumetric flow rate of 1.38 ml/h. The water flow was kept at 4.02 ml/h with a steam to carbon ratio of 3:1. The gas hourly space velocity was calculated as around 3500 h During the reaction, the gas products (with flow rate measured by a bubble flow meter) were analyzed online by a multi-gas analyzer GC-TCD with a 3' molecular sieve packed column (for the analysis of H The percentage conversion of model jet fuels was calculated from the periodical gas volume and gas composition data on the basis of the carbon balance under assumption of no carbon deposition. Carbon deposited on the used catalysts was analyzed by temperature-programmed-oxidation coupled with IR detector (TPO–IR) in a LECO RC-412 Multiphase Carbon Determinator. Gases evolved from the sample during the TPO (30 °C/min from 100 °C to 900 °C) were transferred from the furnace by O Based on our experience in the thermal decomposition of jet fuels In order to improve the pre-mixing, we added a wick material (quartz fiber) into the stainless steel tube between the outlet of fuel line and the inlet of reactor (the pre-mixing zone). As shown in We then examined the effects of using wick mixer for feed introduction on carbon formation at different temperatures. In one experiment, the temperature at all three outlets was set above 350 °C so that the simulated jet fuel (dodecane and certain aromatics) could be totally vaporized before mixing with steam. It is then found that the section of wick inside the fuel line becomes yellowish brown and the wick outside the fuel line is even darker. This phenomenon indicates that carbon deposition from fuel itself can take place before fuel is mixed with steam if fuel line itself is heated above 350 °C. No obvious carbon formation was found in the mixing zone packed with quartz wool even though the temperature of this zone is above 350 °C, which further suggests that carbon observed on the wick is from the thermal cracking of fuel before totally mixing with steam. In a comparative experiment, the fuel line was not preheated in order to keep the fuel as cool as possible. Meanwhile the steam line and the pre-mixing zone were still kept at above 350 °C. Consequently, we find that the wick after the second experiment is clean without color change. In addition, the quartz wool in the mixing zone was also clean. The results of these comparative experiments indicate that, in order to prevent carbon formation in the pre-mixing zone as revealed by the color of wick, the fuel should be kept at lower temperatures (below 150 °C) before fuel meets steam, i.e., rather than allowing the fuel to evaporate itself at the wick, the steam should serve to vaporize the fuel, which can thus result in more homogeneous pre-mixing. As introduced above, the conventional pre-reforming of natural gas or light naphtha is usually run in an adiabatic reactor, which is different in furnace design as our lab-scale tubular furnace reactor. It is therefore important for us to set up suitable temperature profiles for pre-reforming of model jet fuels using our tubular reactor. In general, higher reaction temperature will result in higher conversion of the fuels, since the steam reforming is endothermic, as shown in equation (1). However, there is also a higher risk for carbon formation at higher temperature. We carried out blank runs by flowing steam and pure A satisfactory pre-reforming catalyst should be able to exhibit as high an activity as possible under the reaction conditions desired for different utilization systems. The higher conversion under the same conditions means the higher efficiency and thus lower volume of catalyst loading. The latter is important especially for the application of micro-fuel cells such as portable fuel cell system operating on liquid hydrocarbon fuels. Besides the initial activity factor, a parallel factor for screening pre-reforming catalyst is its stability, in terms of anti-deactivation by either carbon formation or sulfur poisoning. Bearing these two factors in mind, we have screened various metal supported catalysts. The present paper, however, will mainly focus on a typical catalyst system, Rh supported on CeO  However, since there is a clear trend of increasing catalytic activity with the slight increasing of reaction temperature, an option to achieve the high conversion is to raise the pre-reforming temperature slightly.  It is well known that platinum group metals (platinum, palladium, rhodium, ruthenium, osmium and iridium) supported on oxides are commonly prepared by impregnation with chlorine-containing salts followed by calcination in air or oxygen and reduction in hydrogen. However, it has been found that residual chlorine cannot be completely removed from the alumina or other supports by conventional oxidative treatments It has been reported that chlorine-containing precursor salts produce catalysts inferior in performance to others made without chloride, for both oxidation of hydrocarbon In order to obtain better catalysts having both high initial activity and good stability (as expected at lower pre-reforming temperature), we further modified the Rh(Cl)/CeO  For comparison, our thermodynamic calculation shows equilibrium composition at 508 °C as follows: H Based on these results, we think that the poisoning effect of chloride does exist for the steam reforming of higher hydrocarbons at lower temperature, and can possibly be explained by a decrease in accessible active surface sites as a consequence of the chemical interaction of the halogen with the catalyst surface. For the utilization of fuel processor for micro-fuel cell application, a catalyst should be able to retain its high activity for a long time. Furthermore, its operating conditions should be flexible and adjustable to meet different circumstances in practical applications of the micro-fuel cell. Therefore, the study of the catalyst performances for a longer duration run is of vital practical importance.   It can be seen that the conversion is stabled at 98%, which is slightly higher than the previous performance for 72-hours pre-reforming run (as seen in In order to verify that the pre-reforming catalyst can be re-used after initial reforming test without any significant decrease of catalytic activity, we then cooled down the reactor with the catalyst (already undergone the above accumulated 7-day runs) to room temperature in H  The initial conversion (within 1 hour) was relatively low (97%) but quickly reaches the range of more than 98% conversion, which shows that the At the end of this third long run (a total of 10-days accumulating pre-reforming using the same catalyst), the conversion of the MJF-2 is finally decreasing to 95%, which indicates that the stability of the pre-reforming catalyst should somewhat still be improved to meet a possible tough situation such as frequent shut-down-and-on processes during the actual use of the fuel processor. Nonetheless, based on the above pre-reforming results, the modified catalyst does show great promise for development of future catalysts in fuel processor for micro-fuel cell application. Pre-reforming of model jet fuel on Rh/CeO  In the components of the oil phase, all the aromatics reactants (trimethylbenzene, ethylbenzene and butylbenzene) show lower intensity and content as compared with initial model jet fuel. This may be related to the higher reactivity (possibly toward carbon formation) of the aromatics and their stronger interaction with Rh/CeO Although base-metal catalysts (e.g. Ni) are of interest in terms of lower cost, our results on pre-reforming of model jet fuels using a commercial Al As a simple comparison, we carried out a short-term (11-hour) run of same fuel (MJF-2) using commercial Ni/Al From  There are several peaks shown in the TPO–IR temperature ranges of 200–400 °C, which are not showing when switching carrier gas from O As shown in Proper pre-mixing of feed liquid fuels and steam has been found to be important for the prevention of coke formation prior to pre-reforming. As compared with commercial Ni supported Al We are grateful to the Palm Power Program of DARPA/DoD for supporting this project and for the permission to publish this work. We also wish to thank Dr. Mehdi Namazian of Altex Technologies Inc. for helpful discussions on the pre-mixing. Thanks also go to Dr. Wei Pan, and Dr. Jian-Ping Shen for their help in designing the flow reactor scheme, and Mr. Ronald Copenhaver and Mrs. Lu Sun of PSU for help in fabricating the flow reactor system and running carbon analyzer, respectively.