Autogenous solid state processing of chrysocolla with sodium sulphide has been carried out at different CuSiO3–Na2S-ratios, particle sizes and temperatures. Water soluble sodium silicate (Na2SiO3) and covellite (CuS) were determined by means of chemical analysis and X-ray examination as reaction products. More than 84% of chrysocolla and 50% of associated malachite were converted to covellite at 80 °C, atmospheric pressure, 10 min contact time, stochiometric CuSiO3–Na2S-ratio and particle sizes of <100 μm. The mechanochemical treatment using a vibrating mill increases the conversion rate of chrysocolla and malachite up to 90% and 70%, respectively. After washing of the products, the sodium silicate solution was converted into sodium sulphate (Na2SO4) by adding sulphuric acid, with precipitation of silica as by-product. In addition, the carbothermic reduction of crystallised sodium sulphate led to sodium sulphide necessary for solid state processing.Oxidised copper ore bodies are generally composed of valuable minerals like malachite (CuCO Solid state pre-treatment through intensive milling at ambient temperatures has the advantage of influencing the metallurgical processing of minerals. This procedure is more often used for the treatment of complex ores of sulphides and oxides ( Malachite associated with chrysocolla could react with sodium sulphide via the following reaction  The total copper content is about 35%. Traces of Ni, Ti, V, Mn, Na, K, P and S are also found. The solid state reaction was carried out in a 50 ml glass tube, maintained at atmospheric pressure and a constant temperature, using a water bath coupled to a thermostat. The mechanochemical processing was carried out in a 5 l vibrating mill (Siebtechnik, Germany) filled to about 75% with balls. 10 g of chrysocolla were used for each test. The product of the reaction was then washed by means of agitation using a mechanical stirrer to remove water soluble sodium silicate. Copper, cobalt, iron, silicon, calcium, magnesium, sodium, carbon and sulphur were analysed in the solids (filter cakes) and filtrates by means of AES/ICP, AAS or CNS. Qualitative analysis was carried out using X-ray diffractometry and a scanning electron microscope. The Na  The scanning electron micrographs of the original sample and the reaction product are shown in The particle size is known to be an important parameter in solid state reactions. The effect of the particle size was investigated within a range of 0–100 μm at a temperature of 80 °C, a CuSiO Processing in the upper range of 100 μm remains superficial, regard of a given extended reaction time. More than 70% of chrysocolla was converted into CuS. But only less than 50% of total copper was converted in the particle size range of 80–100 μm, because of the low reaction rate of the associated malachite. Processing with fine particles tends to be suitable for copper conversion from malachite. It is also evident that the conversion of chrysocolla could not exceed more than 78% at all particle sizes <100 μm. The reaction products at particle sizes <80 μm contain about 45% CuS, 30% CuSiO The impact of the temperature has been studied in the range between 20 and 80 °C. All tests were carried out at identical reaction conditions, a CuSiO No diffusion problems were observed due to the formation of viscous layers of sodium silicate on the surface of chrysocolla. This could be attributed to the increased processing temperature of 80 °C which is above the melting point of sodium silicate Na Solid state processing involving chemical reaction and accompanied by intensive mechanical stressing would result in faster kinetics by using fine particles as well as maintaining a clean reaction surface (to minimise diffusion problems). Vibration milling using impact as the main stress factor has already been proven to be effective in several applications ( The reaction products from the mechanochemical processing of chrysocolla with sodium sulphide were washed and filtered in order to separate water soluble sodium silicate from covellite. Sodium silicate (filtrate) could be used for the flotation of non-ferrous minerals as a dispersant and depressant of gangue minerals. It could also be converted into sodium sulphate or sodium sulphide for use in the textile industry. The most important application would be its conversion into sodium sulphide, which can be used for the processing of chrysocolla. The filtrate containing 5–10% of sodium silicate was treated with sulphuric acid in the pH range of 3.5–5.5 at 80 °C. “Silica precipitate” and sodium sulphate solution were obtained as per the following reaction (Winnacker, 1983) The innovative mechanochemical processing as a pre-treatment can be efficiently used for the recovery of copper from chrysocolla, as an alternative to pre-heating or direct leaching. The following advantages have been verified: Covellite (CuS) and sodium silicate were obtained as reaction products by means of solid state processing of chrysocolla (CuSiO In contrast to a mechanochemical pre-treatment, about 84% of copper from chrysocolla and 70% of copper from associated malachite were converted into covellite by means of a solid state reaction at 80 °C and at atmospheric pressure. The use of a mechanochemical pre-treatment can achieve more than 90% of chrysocolla conversion. Copper concentrations of 35–50% have been realised through washing after mechanochemical pre-treatment. Recycling of sodium sulphide (Na “Silica precipitate” (SiO The support and advice of Prof. P. Balaž (Košice, Slovakia) are hereby gratefully acknowledged.