The conversion of magnesium fluoride to magnesium hydroxide was studied as part of a process to bleed magnesium from zinc sulphate electrolyte. Most electrolytic zinc plants have to deal with accumulating magnesium in their process liquors as the natural magnesium bleed usually does not balance input from concentrates. The most common forced magnesium bleed produces large amounts of waste gypsum and could potentially be environmentally unfriendly. An alternative process was suggested and discussed, which involves magnesium fluoride precipitation from zinc electrolyte. The magnesium fluoride is converted to magnesium hydroxide in order to produce a saleable product. Regeneration of chemicals from the resulting sodium fluoride solution can be accomplished by means of an electro-dialysis process. Previous experiments indicated a relatively high residual fluoride content in the conversion product, which might limit the application possibilities of the magnesium hydroxide. From the experiments described in this paper it followed that it is not possible to reduce the residual fluoride content of the magnesium hydroxide product to <1 wt.% by optimising operating conditions such as leach concentration, reaction temperature, reaction time and wash procedures. From X-ray diffraction analysis, it was deduced that the residual fluoride was incorporated into the brucite crystal structure. Therefore, the sharp conversion of magnesium fluoride to magnesium hydroxide, derived from thermodynamic analysis, is in practice not entirely valid. It is possible to reduce the fluoride content of the product by burning the (fluoride containing) magnesium hydroxide to magnesium oxide (with <1 wt.% F) at temperatures of >1273 K. Thus a saleable product could be obtained.Most electrolytic zinc plants tend to experience accumulation of dissolved magnesium in process liquors as the natural magnesium bleed of the process usually does not balance the input from concentrates (which is typically 0.2 wt.%, Recently, an alternative process was suggested and discussed, which involves selective precipitation of magnesium fluoride from electro-winning feed ( Magnesium hydroxide has a wide range of applications. It could be used to neutralise acid waste streams and treat flue-gases (sulphur dioxide), thus providing cost-effective solutions to environmental problems. Other applications are as fertiliser additive, flame retardant or in the pulp and paper industry. Introductory experiments ( The preparation conditions of the converted product were the following: Industrial zinc electrolyte (electro-winning feed) was slowly mixed with zinc fluoride solution (0.12 M) in a ratio 1:2.5 over a period of 40 min. After an additional stirring (200 rpm) time of 75 min, 1 l suspension (containing ≈5 g magnesium fluoride) was filtered and subsequently washed with 160 ml dilute sulphuric acid (pH=4). After a second filtration step, the washed precipitate was added to 0.8 l 0.5 M NaOH and stirred at 300 rpm. After a long reaction time (114 h) and solid/liquid separation, the magnesium hydroxide was washed with distilled water, dried at 378 K and analysed with X-ray fluorescence (XRF) spectrometry ( XRD confirmed the presence of brucite (Mg(OH) Under these precipitation conditions, the converted product does not comply to the product specifications of Nedmag and it could well be possible that the magnesium hydroxide is not pure enough for other applications too. Therefore, one of the objectives of this paper is to investigate the possibilities to improve the conversion reaction (especially regarding the residual fluoride content) by varying the following parameters: reaction temperature; stirring velocity; washing intensity; leach concentration. To ensure practical relevance magnesium fluoride produced from zinc electrolyte and zinc fluoride solution was used instead of pure, laboratory grade magnesium fluoride. The experimental method was similar to the method described above. The industrial electrolyte was slowly mixed with zinc fluoride solution (0.12 M) in a ratio 1:2–1:3. The suspensions were filtered and subsequently washed with 250 ml dilute sulphuric acid (pH=4) and dried overnight at 378 K. The composition of seven magnesium fluoride precipitates, which were used as precipitate feed in conversion experiments, is given in Despite the slight variations in the precipitation conditions, the composition of the precipitates is rather constant. Therefore, it was considered legitimate to assume a constant feed input, i.e. in the discussion below, variation in the composition of the conversion products is assumed to be only a function of differences in the conditions of the conversion process (and not of differences in magnesium fluoride feed). The molar fluorine to magnesium ratio is not equal to 2:1, but on average about 1.9:1, which is in excellent agreement with the results of The magnesium fluoride precipitates were used in conversion experiments, which were carried out as follows: The precipitates were ground in a porcelain mortar and suspended with distilled water to 100 g/l. The suspensions were added to a (preheated) sodium hydroxide solution and stirred for a predetermined reaction time. After the solid/liquid separation (filtration or decantation), the precipitates were washed with 100 ml 0.1M sodium hydroxide solution and dried at 378 K. Dried precipitates were analysed with XRF spectrometry and XRD. Diffractograms confirm the presence of fluorite in magnesium hydroxide products. As the solubility product of CaF As it was anticipated and soon discovered that the leach concentration dominates all other variables, it was decided to assess the other variables in a limited number of experiments (by varying the respective variable while keeping the others constant). It should be realised that investigating the variables separately implies the assumption of variables being independent of each other. The reaction temperature was already investigated in the previous conversion experiments (described by Increasing the reaction temperature with 40 K only results in a slight decrease of the residual fluoride content. It will be clear that increasing the reaction temperature is not an effective measure for the reduction of the residual fluoride content. It could be argued that the [OH The effect of the stirring velocity on the conversion reaction was investigated at a higher leach concentration and at intermediate temperature. The experimental conditions and results are summarised in The influence of the wash method of the magnesium hydroxide products was also investigated. Not only the difference between washing the product once or twice with dilute sodium hydroxide solution and not washing the product was examined, but also the difference between washing with dilute sodium hydroxide solution and washing with distilled water was assessed. The experimental conditions and results are summarised in Washing the conversion product with distilled water results in a slight reduction of the measured residual fluoride content as a result of the deportment of the entrapped sodium fluoride solution. It will be clear that washing the product a second time with water is not effective at all. Washing with dilute sodium hydroxide solution is slightly more effective than washing with water. The second washing step of sodium hydroxide is hardly effective. The conversion experiments described in the previous paper ( Increasing the reaction time from 60 to 120 or 180 min seems to result in a slightly lower residual fluoride content. However, the difference between the residual fluoride content of the three-hour experiment and the value of the one-hour experiment is very small. The influence of the leach concentration on the residual fluoride content was investigated in two experiments of which the results are summarised in From The residual sodium fluoride solution is to be treated in an electro-dialysis reactor in order to regenerate chemicals. This reactor, however, is not suitable for the treatment of a NaF/NaOH-mixture. Therefore, the NaF/NaOH-mixture has to be neutralised with hydrofluoric acid. Thus, the process can cope with a small amount of hydroxide. However, the amount of sodium and fluoride ions to be transported across the membranes is increased, thus contributing to higher energy consumption. Unfortunately, Neutralising such an amount of sodium hydroxide would lead to an unacceptable increase of the energy costs in the membrane cell reactor. Therefore, the intermediate range of the [OH In Based on the calcium content, it can be calculated that the amount of fluoride present as CaF The discussion regarding the purity of the magnesium hydroxide product focused on the residual fluoride content for two reasons. Firstly, because the residual fluoride content is by far the largest impurity and secondly, because most other impurities are not affected by the conversion process. When impurities are present in the magnesium fluoride feed, there is no mechanism in the conversion process to liberate them. As an example, the impurities of the conversion products of the experiments investigating the washing method (described in The respective impurities will be shortly discussed below. The zinc content of the conversion products is not affected by the washing method, which could be expected. Any zinc in magnesium fluoride feed immediately precipitates in the form of zinc hydroxide when the magnesium fluoride product is contacted with sodium hydroxide solution. Therefore, reduction of the zinc content in the magnesium hydroxide product can only be realised by enhanced washing of the magnesium fluoride precipitation product. As discussed, calcium is present as CaF A very small amount of manganese is still present. However, this small amount falls within the product specifications of Nedmag ( Sodium is present due to evaporation of entrapped NaF/NaOH solution. Washing magnesium hydroxide precipitates with dilute sodium hydroxide solution obviously will leave some sodium in the conversion product. When distilled water is used, virtually all sodium can be removed. The only impurity that completely has been removed by washing the magnesium hydroxide product is sulphate. As a first attempt to understand the equilibrium of this conversion step, the reaction of pure magnesium fluoride to pure magnesium hydroxide is considered:    Substitution in Eq. Taking the logarithm of Eq. The stability diagram can be extended by including an additional log(F)-axis. This way, the three-dimensional stability diagram, which is sketched in The three-dimensional stability diagram suggests that there is a sharp conversion plane where magnesium fluoride converts to magnesium hydroxide. However, the experiments described in this paper and in the previous paper ( In At different temperatures, it was tried to convert magnesium hydroxide products with varying amounts of substitutional fluorine to magnesium oxide. In each experiment, ≈2 g of magnesium hydroxide product was calcined for 45–90 min at the specified temperature. The XRF analyses of the calcined products are summarised in The differences in the measured residual fluoride content stem from the varying amount of residual fluoride in the magnesium hydroxide feed. The amount of residual fluoride even increases due to the release of water vapour. At the relatively high temperature of 1273 K, a conversion to magnesium oxide is accomplished. The results at lower temperature suggest that the following reaction occurs: periclase sellaite fluorite This means that upon heating, the compound decomposes to form Mg(OH) Experiments performed at or above 1000 °C (without air blown through the furnace) show a different result. XRF-analyse results from these burned precipitates show very low fluoride concentrations (F<1 wt.%), indicating that reaction Only two phases are present, periclase and a small amount of fluorite. Sellaite has completely disappeared and it seems reasonable to assume that fluorine leaves the system as HF Based on the equilibrium constant, conversion is not expected. The experimental results, however, suggest that  It is possible to convert magnesium fluoride (sellaite) to magnesium hydroxide (brucite) by contacting it with sodium hydroxide solution. Magnesium hydroxide has a wide range of applications. Therefore, the converted product can be sold if it is pure enough. However, when a stoichiometric amount of NaOH is added, a complete conversion is not realised. The magnesium hydroxide product still contains approximately 10 wt.% fluorine. Even if a large excess is used, the magnesium hydroxide still contains too much fluorine. It is not possible to reduce the residual fluoride content in the magnesium hydroxide product to <1 wt.% by optimising operating conditions such as stirring velocity, reaction temperature and leach concentration. The sharp conversion of magnesium fluoride to magnesium hydroxide, derived from thermodynamic analysis, in practice is not entirely valid. The residual fluoride is incorporated into the brucite crystal structure. X-ray diffractograms do not show any sign of sellaite (MgF It is possible to burn the (fluoride containing) magnesium hydroxide to magnesium oxide (with <1 wt.% F) at temperatures of >1273 K. Thus, a saleable product can be obtained. The gaseous HF should be recovered and recycled to the magnesium removal process. The project is supported with the Dutch E.E.T. grant (Economy, Ecology and Technology) from the Ministry of Economic Affairs, the Ministry of Education, Culture and Sciences and the Ministry of Housing, Spatial Planning and the Environment. M. Bayirli is thanked for his laboratory work, which formed a crucial contribution to this paper.