Mineral engineering plays a critical role in the resource industry that includes mining, mineral processing and extractive metallurgy. The design and control of an operation or a plant as a whole must be optimized in order to be competitive and sustainable, particularly under the more and more demanding and tough economic and environmental conditions. This aim can be achieved through continuous innovative research and development in products and processes. The problems encountered are very complex, involving phenomena at different time and length scales. For example, they can be related to thermodynamics and/or reaction kinetics at an atomic scale, dynamics of particles, droplets and/or bubbles at a particle scale, and performance of an operational unit at a process equipment scale. Such problems are traditionally studied by experimentation combined with theories which are often empirical and may have limitation in application. However, computer simulation and modeling has gradually emerged to be a powerful tool in mineral research, particularly in the past decade or so as a result of the rapid development of computer technology and new simulation techniques. With this realization, Mineral Engineering International (MEI) organized its first international conference on computational modeling in mineral engineering in 2005. The aim of the conference is to bring together academic researchers, plant operators and software developers to present and discuss the application of computational modeling to minerals and metallurgical industries. Its success led to the second conference held in Cape Town, South Africa in November 2008. This special issue contains papers selected from the presentations at the second MEI conference on computational modeling in mineral processing in 2008. It is intended to illustrate the recent development and application of various state-of-the-art simulation techniques to study various processes in mining, mineral processing and metallurgy. The papers are contributed by investigators from different institutions of different countries. The techniques used include Discrete Element Modeling (DEM), Computational Fluid Dynamic (CFD), Finite Element Method (FEM) and other methods. It can be seen from these papers that it is now possible to carry out highly sophisticated and realistic simulations of scientific and engineering processes. Computational modeling has indeed become an indispensable adjunct to the traditional modes of investigation via theory and experiment, and is useful to the design, control and optimization of mineral processes. This special issue represents an outstanding effort of the authors and referees who have worked so efficiently and cooperatively. We thank them very much for their useful contributions. We would also like to give our special thanks to Dr. Barry Wills, the Editor-in-Chief of Minerals Engineering, for his encouragement and support to produce this special issue.