An empirical Weibull function is proposed to represent partition surface of gravity concentrators in terms of size-density attributes. Model derivation is keyed with observed pivot phenomenon. The model is found adequate to represent partition surface of gravity concentrators. The model yields analytical expressions for computing cut-density and ecart probable. The suitability of the model is examined using several sets of measured data from literature.Parameter in Eq. Parameter in Eq. Parameter in Eq. Particle size (in mm) Ecart probable (in kg/m Parameter in Eq. Sharpness index of Plitt model Parameter in Eq. Parameter in Eq. Parameter in Eq. Partition number, a function of particle size and density Pivot partition number, representing fraction of by-pass in gravity concentrators Particle density (in kg/m Pivot density (in kg/m Cut density (in kg/m Gravity concentrators of various designs are used to beneficiate vast tonnage of coal and mineral ores, usually in the size range of 0.01–100 mm. Particle separation efficiency is typically expressed in terms of partition numbers that represent the recovery of feed particles in specified attribute (say, size or density) to one of the product streams. Separation efficiency of gravity concentrators is generally expressed in terms of particle density. Moreover, detailed examination of size-based separation efficiency curves reveals gradual flattening of efficiency curves with reducing particle size. The simultaneous consideration of size-density effects on separation efficiency necessitates a single bivariate mathematical representation of partition numbers typically formulated as a partition surface. Such mathematical representation allows separator performance monitoring in terms of size-density attributes. Two of the most prominent partition models proposed to account size-density effects in heavy media separators are the logistic model by In the present work, a Weibull model is proposed to represent partition surface of gravity concentrators in a more elegant and compact Weibull functional form. Pivot constraint of Size-dependent Plitt efficiency equation in density attribute is given by The validity of the proposed model is examined using 29 sets of measured data from literature for various gravity concentrators. Data are taken from the works of Size-dependent separation indices such as cut-density Considering 50% partition number at cut-density, Eq. An empirical Weibull function is proposed to represent the partition surface in terms of size-density attributes. The model describes the efficiency of particle separation of various gravity concentrators that distinctly differ in equipment design and operational slurry flow patterns. The model can be potentially used in on-line control of gravity concentrators in bivariate size-density attributes provided that the model parameters can be predicted from equipment design and operational variables. The author acknowledges Prof. Mathai Joseph, Executive Director, Tata Research Development and Design Centre (TRDDC) for his encouragement and for providing management support.