The effects of glucocorticoid (GC) excess, thyrotoxicosis, and hypothyroidism on linear growth indicate that growth plate chondrocytes are exquisitely sensitive to GC and thyroid hormone (T3). Murine ATDC5 cells undergo chondrogenesis in vitro and were used to evaluate the effects of dexamethasone (Dex) and T3 on cell proliferation and differentiation. Immature and differentiated ATDC5 cells expressed glucocorticoid and T3-receptor mRNAs. Cells proliferated and organized into cartilage-like nodules after 7 days. Chondrocyte maturation progressed over 9–40 days, with increasing alkaline phosphatase (ALP) activity, secretion of an Alcian blue-positive matrix, and mineralization of cartilage-like nodules. Dex reduced cell number over the 40 day period, causing inhibition of ALP activity and matrix production with failure of mineralization. Following withdrawal of Dex, chondrocytes proliferated and re-entered the differentiation and mineralization program, indicating that GC inhibition of chondrogenesis is reversible. In contrast, T3 reduced cell proliferation, but induced ALP activity and increased matrix secretion earlier than in control cultures. Thus, GCs and T3 regulate growth plate chondrocyte differentiation by distinct mechanisms. GCs arrest cell proliferation, differentiation, and cartilage mineralization and maintain chondrocyte precursors in a state of quiescence with the capacity to re-enter chondrogenesis. T3 inhibits cell proliferation but accelerates differentiation to stimulate chondrogenesis.Normal growth requires physiological concentrations of glucocorticoids (GCs) and thyroid hormones (T The effects of GCs on the cellular events that occur during endochondral ossification are poorly understood. In growing rats treated with pharmacological doses of corticosterone there was evidence of reduced growth plate width, which was attributed to impaired chondrocyte proliferation and increased hypertrophic chondrocyte apoptosis. Our previous studies suggest that hypothyroid growth arrest results from disorganization of the growth plate, in which there is a relative failure of hypertrophic chondrocyte differentiation and production of an abnormal cartilage matrix. The literature, therefore, indicates that GCs impair the maturation of growth plate chondrocytes and induce growth retardation in vivo, while similar features are seen in thyroid deficiency. These observations suggest that GCs and T GR expression was determined in growth plates of 21-day-old male Sprague-Dawley rats. Studies were performed under license in compliance with the Animals (Scientific Procedures) Act 1986 and approved by Imperial College Biological Services Unit ethical review. Tibiae were excised and fixed overnight at 4°C in 3.7% formalin before decalcification in 12.5% ethylene-diamine tetraacetic acid (EDTA). Three-micron-thick sections were cut onto 3-aminopropyltriethoxysilane-coated slides, deparaffinized, and rehydrated. GR expression was determined using a monoclonal mouse anti-GRα antibody (Affinity Bioreagents, Golden, CO). Endogenous peroxidase activity was quenched with 0.3% H ATDC5 cells ATDC5 cells were incubated with 0.5 μCi/mL Total RNA was prepared using Trizol (Life Technologies) and GR, TR-α1, -α2, and -β1 mRNA expression was determined by reverse transcription-polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR). In cases where primers did not bridge intron/exon boundaries because of homology between TR isoforms, RNA was incubated with RQ1 DNase (Promega, Southampton, UK) to digest genomic DNA. One microgram of RNA was incubated in a 25 μL reaction containing 10 μg/mL random hexamers, 16 U/mL Mouse-Moloney Leukemia Virus (M-MLV) (reverse transcriptase) and 1 mmol dNTPs (Promega) at 42°C for 1 h. Hot start PCR was performed in 50 μL reactions containing 1 μL cDNA, 2 ng/mL of forward and reverse primers, 20 mU Taq polymerase in 1 × polymerase buffer (Promega), and 250 μmol dNTPs. H    Data are expressed as mean ± SEM and analyzed by two-tailed Student’s Growth plates of 21-day-old rats were organized into zones containing chondrocytes at distinct stages of maturation. Reserve zone progenitor cells were located toward the epiphysis and proliferating chondrocytes were organized into discrete columns, whereas enlarging and differentiating hypertrophic cells were positioned proximal to the resorption front and primary spongiosum, toward the metaphysis. These features are characteristic of long bones undergoing longitudinal growth by endochondral ossification in unfused epiphyses. In the reserve and proliferative zones, progenitor cells and proliferating chondrocytes clearly exhibited specific nuclear staining for GR. The number of GR-positive nuclei in columns of growth plate chondrocytes decreased with increasing distance from the epiphyseal border ( ATDC5 cells form cartilage-like nodules and undergo chondrogenic maturation over a 21 day period, although such cultures consist of heterogeneous cell populations. ATDC5 cells grew rapidly until confluence on day 5. Their growth decreased markedly by day 7, as indicated by Measurement of protein production reflects both the change in cell number as cells proliferate as well as the production of extracellular matrix (ECM) by mature differentiated chondrocytes, but does not necessarily accurately reflect the absolute numbers of cells in culture. The protein content of control cultures increased throughout the 21 day period, thus reflecting the initial increase in cell number followed by ECM production as proliferation declined and chondrogenic maturation proceeded ( Postconfluent ATDC5 cells have been shown to express ALP and synthesize ECM. Calcification of cartilage-like nodules commenced after day 21 and was readily identified at days 32 and 40 by Alizarin red staining in control cultures ( The reversibility of the inhibitory actions of Dex was tested in experiments in which Dex was removed at days 7 and 12. These experiments were performed in both the presence of stripped serum ( We have previously shown that primary growth plate chondrocytes in agarose suspension cultures exhibit proliferation and differentiation profiles that resemble in vivo events. In the course of chondrogenesis there are at least two steps regulated by local and systemic factors. The first is mesenchymal condensation, which gives rise to proliferating chondrocytes, and the second comprises differentiation of proliferating chondrocytes to hypertrophic cells followed by mineralization of cartilage matrix. In these studies we demonstrated for the first time that both growth plate chondrocytes in vivo and ATDC5 cells express GR ( Treatment of ATDC5 cells with Dex inhibited cell proliferation and nodule formation and prevented chondrocyte differentiation and matrix mineralization, even in the presence of insulin. These results are consistent with the Dex-induced inhibition of chondrocyte proliferation and cartilage matrix production observed in 3-month-old rats in vivo, T In conclusion, we have shown that ATDC5 cells undergo a program of chondrogenesis and mineralization that is regulated by the physiologically important glucocorticoid and thyroid hormones. The system can be manipulated reproducibly and easily to allow for characterization of the chondrogenic program at multiple timepoints by functional and mRNA analyses. ATDC5 cells express GR and TR and respond to the hormones throughout chondrogenesis, enabling them to be used as a novel system in which to investigate interactions between GC and T This work was supported by an MRC Career Establishment Grant (G9803002) and Wellcome Trust Project Grant (50570) to G.R.W. T.S. was on leave from the University Children’s Hospital, University of Leipzig, Germany, and supported (in part) by a European Society for Paediatric Endocrinology Research Fellowship, sponsored by Novo Nordisk A/S.