Bauxite residue (red mud) that is generated from karst bauxite ores is rich in rare-earth elements (REEs). The REEs can be recovered from bauxite residue by direct acid leaching but the extraction yields are generally low. The extraction yields can be increased by increasing the acid concentration but this will increase the dissolution of iron as well. Large amounts of iron in the leach solution create problems in the further recovery processes. Therefore, a combined sulfation–roasting–leaching process was developed to selectively leach the REEs while leaving iron undissolved in the residue. In this process bauxite residue was mixed with water and concentrated H2SO4 followed by drying, roasting and then leaching of the roasted product with water. Most of the oxides were converted to their respective sulfates during the sulfation process. During subsequent roasting, unstable sulfates (mainly iron(III) sulfate) decompose to their respective oxides. Rare-earth sulfates, on the other hand, are stable during roasting and dissolve during water leaching, leaving the iron oxides in the residue. The effect of the roasting temperature, roasting time and amount of acid on leaching of the different elements was studied. Decreasing the roasting temperature increased the dissolution of the REEs, but also that of iron and aluminum. Increasing the amount of acid led to higher REEs extraction. Acid to bauxite residue mass ratio beyond 0.75 at 650°C increases the iron and aluminum dissolution due to increase in the iron(III) and aluminum sulfate amounts. The extraction of REEs slightly increased (<5%) with roasting time up to 2h at 675°C, but a further increase of the roasting time has a negative effect on the REEs extraction as the low amount of iron sulfate in the roasted mass increases the pH of the leach solution. About 60% of scandium and more than 90% of the other REEs can be dissolved at optimum conditions, while only a very small amount of iron (<1% of total iron) is solubilized. The residue after leaching was rich in Fe2O3, Al2O3, SiO2 and CaSO4·0.5H2O.Bauxite residue (red mud) is a waste generated during the Bayer process for alumina production. The annual global production of bauxite residue is about 140 million Sulfation–roasting–leaching of a Greek bauxite residue was investigated in the present work for the purpose of REEs extraction. This is the first study for extraction of REEs from bauxite residue by this type of process. The effect of different process parameters including the amount of sulfuric acid, the roasting temperature, roasting time and different leaching parameters on the leaching efficiencies of the different elements were studied. The flow sheet of the sulfation–roasting–leaching process consists of three major steps: (1) mixing the moistened feed material with concentrated sulfuric acid; (2) roasting and (3) leaching with water ( The water-soluble rare-earth sulfates, on the other hand, are stable at such roasting temperature ranges ( The main advantages of the sulfation–roasting–leaching process can be summarized as follows: (1) limited leaching of iron, titanium and aluminum; (2) no or very limited silica leaching, so that filtration problems can be avoided; (3) the possibility of (consumed) acid regeneration and therefore low acid consumption and (4) small volumes of waste water generation compared to direct leaching. Additionally, the pH of the residue after water leaching is close to neutral and very low in sodium content (management and utilization of this stream in other applications is easier). The main drawback of this process is that it needs an extra processing (roasting) step. The bauxite residue used in this study was provided by Aluminium of Greece. The residue was first dried at 105 Analytical reagent grade sulfuric acid (95–97%) (Sigma–Aldrich) was used in the present study. During the acid mixing step (i.e. sulfation), the dried sample was moistened with deionized water (bauxite residue to water mass ratio is 1:0.4, unless specified) in a porcelain crucible and then mixed with concentrated sulfuric acid based on the experimental conditions. The addition of water was to ensure homogenous mixing. After mixing, samples were heated at 120 The chemical analysis of the bauxite residue used in this study is shown in After sulfation at 120  Experiments were carried out at 650, 675 and 700 A series of experiments were carried out by varying the mass ratio of sulfuric acid to bauxite residue from 0.25 (1:4 ratio) to 1 (1:1 ratio). The samples were roasted for 1 Roasting experiments were conducted for different durations to understand the effect of roasting time on dissolution of REEs and major elements. In these experiments samples were prepared with a constant sulfuric acid to bauxite residue mass ratio 1:1. Samples were roasted at 675 The bauxite residue is moistened with deionized water before sulfuric acid is added. The aim of moistening is to improve the mixing of the acid with the bauxite residue and therefore aid the conversion of metal oxides to sulfates ( Leaching experiments were conducted without agitation at different time intervals for samples roasted at 650 Leaching experiments were conducted at different L/S ratio to see its effect on dissolution of REEs and major elements ( It was observed from the leaching results that the pH of the leach solution affects the dissolution of different elements in the solution. The pH of the leach solutions was typically between 2.3 and 6.5 in the studied conditions and is closely associated with the elemental composition of the roasted sample. It mainly depends on the amount of iron(III) sulfate (and to a lesser extent aluminum sulfates) present after the roasting step. It was observed that when higher amounts of ferric and aluminum sulfate remain after roasting, the pH is lower. For instance, the leach solution of a sample roasted at a 700 The residue of the leach solution was characterized by SEM–EDX and XRD. The results depicted in A preliminary economic analysis of the process is shown in The acid used at optimized conditions was one ton per ton of bauxite residue. However, the consumption during the process is around 0.38 A sulfation–roasting–leaching process was developed to selectively leach REEs from bauxite residue (red mud). Most of the elements in the bauxite residue convert to their respective sulfates during sulfation. Iron and aluminum sulfates decompose to their respective oxides at temperatures around 700 This work was supported by