Several CeO2 powders with different morphologies were synthetized thanks to four different processes (two at the laboratory by sol-gel and oxalic routes and two commercial powders). These powders were divided into five batches each and calcined at several temperatures. Thus, twenty different powders were made, each possessing different structural or morphological properties. After a thorough characterization of the 20 powders, this work is dedicated to the study of their dissolution in nitric acid using the same experimental conditions to exhibit the morphology effect on dissolution kinetics. Significant differences in dissolution kinetics were observed meaning that the morphology of the powders was found to be a key parameter that has to be considered in studies of dissolution kinetics. The effect of the morphological parameters on dissolution kinetics was quantified and a kinetics law was established and then, applied with success to PuO2 dissolution.Nuclear fuel used in pressurized water reactors consists of UO Cerium oxide has many similarities with plutonium oxide, notably in terms of its crystalline structure ( In parallel with this, since the 1980s, CeO In a first part, a study using ceria will be conducted to eliminate morphological parameters having an insignificant influence on dissolution rates and a kinetics law is established. In a last part, validation tests on plutonium dioxide will be presented to perfect the demonstration of the influence of morphological characteristics on the dissolution kinetics of the actinide oxides of fluorine structure. This paper presents our contribution done recently in Atalante facility at CEA Marcoule to understand the phenomena occurring during the dissolution of ceria in nitric acid and its application to the dissolution of actinide oxides. As the aim of this study is to elucidate the effect of the morphology of the powder on its dissolution, different synthesis routes had to be used to make different CeO The oxalic conversion is usually reported to synthetize actinide oxides ( Articles referring to the sol-gel method deal with the synthesis of microspheres ( Two additional commercial powders were used for this study. There is little information concerning the synthesis of the commercial powders. The powder Ref 44662 ( In order to have as many morphologies as possible (size and shape of the crystallites and agglomerates, porosity, specific surface area), each of the four powders (two commercial ones, an ex-oxalate and an ex-sol-gel) was separated into five batches each in order to carry out different thermal treatments ranging from 600 °C to 1600 °C with a ramp of 20 °C·min Because of the radioactive nature of actinides, especially plutonium, the experiments involving this element were carried out in glove boxes with very restrictive protocols. Plutonium(IV) nitrate solution was used to prepare PuO Four PuO XRD (X-Ray Diffraction) analyses of the synthesized powders were performed using a D8 Bruker Advance diffractometer (LynxEye detector) using Cu-Kα radiation (λ = 1.5418 Å) especially equipped for radioactive material measurements. Gold was added as an internal standard to calibrate the angular positions of the observed XRD lines for characterization of PuO N Micrographies of powders were performed by secondary electron imaging using a ZEISS SUPRA 55 WDS scanning electron microscope (SEM) available in a shielded cell (8 cm steel) in the ATALANTE facility was used nuclearized, installed in for, allows. Previously, each highly radioactive sample was deposited on a carbon substrate and then metallized with gold during 4 min. Laser granulometry was used for the ceria samples agglomerate size determination using Malvern Spraytec software. Powders were put in water; agitated during 3–5 min. Densities of CeO The ICP-AES device used was a Horiba Jobin Yvon from Activa. From pre-established standards, it is possible to convert the absorbance into concentration of cerium in solution. A 3% error bar has to be applied to experimental cerium concentration data. This error was calculated from standards. To determinate the plutonium concentration in solution, the error bar applied to the experimental measurement is equal to 10% due to a lower precision of the alpha counter. All the dissolutions described in this work consisted in dissolving 300 mg of synthetized CeO XRD patterns of CeO The third column of the Also on this table, it appears that the average crystallite sizes increase while the calcination temperature of precursors also increases. The crystallites of the powders obtained from the commercial powder Ref 11328 do not appear to increase significantly with the calcination temperature, which can be explained by a significant heat treatment already applied in the industrial manufacture of these powders. At the same calcination temperature, the oxides from the oxalic route have the largest crystallites. Both oxides obtained by sol-gel route have crystallite sizes of the same order of magnitude. These increases are coherent with data from the literature describing crystal growth during the sintering process ( About the microstrains rates, for commercial powders, the value does not significantly evolve with the increase of the calcination temperature. For laboratory-synthesized powders, the microstrains rates decrease while the calcination temperature increases. This observation can be explained by a possible erasing of the crystalline defects with the increase of the calcination temperature. To conclude on the structural evolution, these structural changes with the calcination temperature seem depend on the synthesis route used to synthetize the oxide. The To minimize errors due to the calculation hypotheses (cylindrical pores, ink-bottle effect) ( To conclude on adsorption-desorption methods, for the four types of analyzed powders, the specific surface area and the average pore volume decrease as the calcination temperature increases, in accordance with what has already been observed in the scientific literature ( Then, the density does not change and remains lower than the theoretical density of CeO To conclude on these density measurements, these analyses show that the densification of the material increases with the calcination temperature, in accordance with the publications of the literature on this oxide ( SEM micrographs in The laser granulometry was also carried out for the characterization of the cerium oxide powders. The results are shown in the The materials synthesized in the laboratory seem to have an important morphological evolution between 600 °C and 850 °C and then follow a linear evolution until 1600 °C. This difference reflects an important evolution of the powders morphology at the macro and the microstructure level. Concerning the powder resulting of a calcination of the commercial powder Ref 11328, its morphological evolution as a function of the calcination temperature is low and the results are always constant, within the error. It is supposed that this powder has undergone a high-temperature thermal treatment during its synthesis, leading to the production of a dense starting material. Characterizations also showed a similitude between powders ex-sol-gel and commercial powders Ref 44662. This similarity is explained by the same synthetic route used to prepare these materials. Finally, the observations of the SEM micrographs lead to the definition of the various ceria powders morphology. The ex-oxalate powder is based on big stick agglomerates, the sol-gel powder presents big porous agglomerates and the two commercial powders lead to compact agglomerates. Each agglomerate size was also determined by laser granulometry. The experimental dissolution conditions of all samples were kept constant (i.e. [HNO This observation is expected because it has already been shown that the more the material is dense, the more it will be resistant to the dissolution ( It is therefore essential to define the effect induced by morphology on dissolution kinetics. Previous characterizations of powders correlated to their dissolution kinetics will be used for understanding this phenomenon. Dissolution rates for all the materials in the same experimental conditions are reported in All morphological parameters will be used to determine a model which can describe the dissolution kinetics of CeO A first model was determined from many morphological parameters. The Eq. This previous model, purely mathematical, presents some inconsistencies. The agglomerate and the crystallite sizes should affect dissolution kinetics in the same way (same sign for the exponent). There is again a sign problem considering the average pore volume and the microstrain rate exponents. In this model, an increase in average pore volume leads to a smaller dissolution rates. For the microstrain rates, the model told us that the more the powders have crystal defects and the lower will be the dissolution kinetics. These explanations have no physical sense. Different combinations of parameters were tested and finally, Eq. This model presents a correlation coefficient of 0.91. To really conclude about the precision of the model, the errors for each point have to be measured. There are two types of errors, one from the experimental data and the other from the model values. Experimental error is determined from the Eq. With ΔT°C corresponding to the error on the dissolution temperature (3%), ΔDF is the error on the dilution factor for the ICP measure (3%), Δ[Ce] is the possible variation of the cerium concentration in solution (5%) and Δm is the precision on the mass of CeO An error of 7.2 rel.% has, therefore, to be applied to each experimental point. To refine the error of the experimental dissolution kinetics, then the tunnel method has to be applicated ( The error of the modelled dissolution rate must consider the partial derivatives for each parameter. Thus, the uncertainty associated to the modelled dissolution kinetics is calculated from the Eq. An error of 10% is use for the determination of the size of crystallites. The uncertainty of the specific surface area is split in two categories. The specific surface areas superior to 10 m The final step is to confirm that PuO As the cerium dioxide, plutonium dioxide is refractory to dissolution in nitric medium ( The correlation coefficient associated with this formula is 0.96. This coefficient is acceptable considering the errors of the quantification of the powders average crystallite size and specific surface area. As a reminder, the constant linked to the model on the cerium dioxide is 0.13. There is a difference between the constant of the two models. It is also possible to conclude to a quasi-three times higher reactivity of CeO This study described the morphology evolution of the different powders as a function of the synthesis route and the calcination temperature used. It appears that the density of the powder increases with the calcination temperature, in accordance with the morphological evolution commonly observed during sintering. Determination of the dissolution kinetics in the same experimental conditions indicates a decrease of dissolution kinetics rate while calcination temperature increases. This result indicates that a densification of the powder leads to a reduction in dissolution kinetics. The normalization of the experimental dissolution kinetics to the specific surface area of the oxide did not lead to a perfect understanding of the effect induced by the morphology of the oxide on the dissolution rates. This normalization would lead in a case to an erroneous conclusion describing an increase of the normalized dissolution kinetics with the densification of the material. By coupling the various experimental data, a mathematical model was proposed to describe the dissolution kinetics of the CeO The comparison of the two models allows concluding on the character simulating of CeO There are no conflicts to declare. This research was partly funded by AREVA NC, France. The authors specially thank C.·Lavalette (AREVA) for encouraging this work and for fruitful discussions. The authors are also thankful to J-R. Sevilla, G. Jouan and R. Lauwerier for SEM imageries and J. Hennuyer and V. Bretenoux for XRD analyses (DMRC/SFMA).