An industrial scale FLSmidth® three-compartment cement grinding ball mill operating in open circuit was sampled at the steady state conditions. The three-compartment ball mill was modelled by using the perfect mixing modelling approach [1]. Classification performance of the intermediate and discharge diaphragms of the ball mill were modelled by the efficiency curve approach [2]. Second and third compartments were combined and the mill was simulated as a two-compartment by using the JKSimMet simulation program. Grinding capacity increase when the three-compartment ball mill was converted to a two-compartment ball mill was evaluated by simulation. The same cylpebs size distribution and load were assumed to be applied in the second compartment of the new mill design. Simulation result showed that, 10% capacity increase can be achieved with 16% material retained on 0.045mm in the mill discharge when the mill was converted to a two-compartment mill.Clinker feed Gypsum feed Calker feed Mill discharge (overflow) Electrofilter return Final cement Mill feed particle size fraction i particle size fraction j mass flowrate of size fraction i in the mill feed (t/h) mass flowrate of size fraction i in the mill discharge (t/h) specific breakage rate of size fraction i (h specific discharge rate of size fraction i (h normalized discharge rate of size fraction i single column step triangular breakage function matrix mass of size fraction i (t) ratio of specific breakage rate to specific discharge rate volumetric feed rate (m mill diameter (m) mill length (m) ratio of breakage rate to normalized discharge rate fraction of feed reporting to overflow fraction undergoing “real” classification (1-bypass fraction) reduced efficiency curve fish hook parameter size of a particle in feed which has equal probability of going to underflow or overflow (cut size) model parameter to preserve the definition of d particle size ratio of d reduced efficiency curve sharpness parameter Portland cement clinker is a black nodular hydraulic material. It is made by burning in a rotary kiln (pyro-processing), at least to sintering a precisely specified mixture of raw materials containing CaO, SiO Cement grinding stage is energy intensive and consumes approximately 40% of the total electrical energy in the cement manufacturing process. This amount is considerable when compared with energy consumptions of other processes involved ( Ball mills used in the cement industry are inefficient grinding technologies. Any small improvement in the operation of ball mills can lead to significant annual energy savings ( There are many parameters that influence the energy efficiency of the grinding operation in ball mills. Arrangement of the grinding plant (i.e. open or closed circuit), amount of the circulating material, type of the system used for removing the grinding heat are overall process parameters that influence the energy consumption of the mill. The relationship length to diameter, number and length of the grinding compartments, type of lining, type of material transfer and discharge devices, degree, type and size of grinding ball charge and mill speed are important parameters when the design of the mill is considered. On the other hand, grindability, grain size, flow characteristics, influence on the friction between grinding ball and lining, temperature, microstructure, tendency to agglomerate are parameters that should be optimized for the optimal mill operation when the mill feed material is considered ( Some of the recorded problems encountered in ball mills are ( Liner wear Material having practically no meeting with the media Lifting liners without lifting (with poor efficiency) Lifting liners lifting too much (with liners and ball breakage) Too much air velocity in the mill Classifying liners without balls classifying Classifying liners with not enough lifting Too much velocity in the partition slots Head loss in the mill limiting the air throughput and the capacity Airflow so low that the particles are overground Agglomeration of particles Overfilling in the mill. Size reduction performance of the three-compartment ball mill which is examined in this paper was previously evaluated with respect to the applied grinding media size. Grinding performance of cylpebs applied in the third compartment was found to not improve the size reduction performance as compared to that of the first and second compartments ( Plant site and laboratory studies were conducted to collect data for modelling and simulation of the three-compartment FLSmidth® ball mill. Design specifications of the ball mill and applied grinding media size distributions are given in Sampling survey was conducted at the steady state condition of the open circuit. Flowsheet of the grinding operation with the sampling points is given in Steady conditions of the circuit were verified at the control room. Then, samples were collected from the shown sampling points. Ball mill was crash stopped after completing the sampling survey around the circuit. The mill was cooled down for about 8 Mill inside sampling locations and variation of fineness as 80% and 50% cumulative passing sizes are given in Specific grinding energy consumptions were estimated for each compartment according to the Bond's theory ( Particle size distributions of samples collected from the circuit and the mill inside were determined from the top particle size down to the 150 Mass balance calculations were performed by using the JK SimMet simulation software. Control room recordings of tonnage flowrates at the steady state conditions and particle size distributions of circuit samples were used to perform mass balance calculations. Operational parameters of the circuit at the steady state conditions are given in Standard bond ball mill grindability of the mill feed material was determined using a standard Bond ball mill with an effective diameter of 30.5 Single particle breakage function of the mill feed clinker was determined by using a modified manual version of a JKTech drop weight test device ( The three-compartment ball mill was modelled by using the perfect mixing modelling approach ( f p a r d Specific discharge rate function can be estimated by Eq. d D L r/d Intermediate and discharge diaphragms were modelled by using the efficiency curve model. The mathematical equation of the efficiency curve model is given in Eq. E C α β β* x d The fraction of feed reporting to underflow (E The three-compartment ball mill model structure is given in i j k s p d Ball mill model parameters were determined in each grinding segment by using the JKSimMet simulation software and tabulated in Model fitted tonnage flowrates and fineness (80% passing particle size in mm) are given in in Simulation model of the circuit was designed in the simulation module of the JKSimMet simulator. The three-compartment ball mill was considered as a two-compartment by eliminating the intermediate diaphragm between the second and third compartments. Second compartment of the mill was model fitted and the variation of the r/d* function was determined for the new design. Perfect mixing model fitted breakage rate parameters are given for the selected particle sizes in Agreement between mass balanced and model fitted particle size distributions of the mill discharge for the two-compartment ball mill model structure is presented in The three-compartment ball mill was simulated as a two-compartment. Efficiency curve model parameters of diaphragms and perfect mixing model parameters of the ball mill which are given in A performance evaluation study on the open circuit three-compartment ball mill grinding process was conducted. It was determined that, second compartment of the mill consumes approximately the same amount of energy with the third compartment which indicated inefficient grinding conditions. Shapes of r/d* functions were also indicated the decrease in the grinding performance in the third compartment. In this respect, it was proposed to operate the mill as a two-compartment due to the inefficiency in size reduction performance. Second and third compartments of the three-compartment ball mill were combined and the mill was simulated as a two-compartment to investigate the response of the mill. The three-compartment ball mill was modelled by the perfect mixing ball mill modelling approach ( Author would like to gratefully acknowledge the staff of SET Italcementi Group Balıkesir Plant (Turkey) for providing the access to the plant and their valuable support during the sampling survey. Prof. A. Hakan Benzer and Assistant Prof. Okay Altun from Hacettepe University are also gratefully acknowledged.