The operation of AG/SAG mills is sensitive to mill filling, therefore developing grindcurves to relate mill filling to performance indicators such as throughput, power draw, and product size can assist in achieving optimal mill operations. The throughput, power draw, and product size have been shown to peak at different mill filling levels. Establishing grindcurves can assist operators to decide on the best set point for operating their mill. Factors such as mill speed, mill inlet water, feed size distribution, and ore hardness all have an influence on the grindcurve, and form an integral part of the optimisation process.
                  Test work has been conducted at a number of sites to develop grindcurves for different mills treating a range of ores. The results show great promise for use in optimising the operating set points for use in mill control. The methodology for developing grindcurves is described and the results from the case studies performed on fixed and variable speed mills are discussed.Due to their capacity and favourable capital and operating costs, SAG mills are a favoured grinding device for most new milling plants. However, these single-stream devices do have a major drawback: for all operations the ore type and its size distribution always vary, both in the short term and long term, and the mill operation varies with the ore. The consequences of this are expressed in a simple logic flow as: Variable ore → variable operation → variable grind → variable recovery → lower recovery. It is therefore an intrinsic drawback of a relatively inflexible process, that recovery will be sacrificed. Thus it is desirable to apply process control to minimise the variation. Grinding is driven by the mill load – as defined by the density, volume, and size distribution. A change in feed type changes the mill contents, which in turn changes the grinding rates, which changes the mill contents, etc. with the mill responding in a non-linear manner to the change until a new point of equilibrium is reached. This is illustrated conceptually in For a fixed mill filling and mill speed, the product size will change for a target feed rate as the feed type fluctuates. For an operator or an expert control system, the question then becomes: “What are the control conditions to target for optimal mill operation?”. It is most desirable to supply the control system or operator with a new target set of operating conditions to aim for. These can be based on downstream requirements, such as a consistent product size, with an average target feed rate. The key here is that variable operation leads to lower recovery. Control systems can generally succeed in stabilising mill throughput, but at what cost to recovery? This stabilisation versus optimal recovery problem should provide the motivation to study how operational conditions affect the mill response, so that a target operating regime can be selected. A number of researchers, including those at the Julius Kruttschnitt Research Centre (JKMRC) and the university of Cape Town (UCT), have measured the response of power and mill load to mill filling, The plots in  In a study carried out at the Amandelbult Merensky plant of Anglo Platinum, as part of the AMIRA P9M project, an excellent set of data was collected by Green on the variation of mill performance with filling ( The collection of these data took a great deal of effort with 4–6 full surveys conducted at each site. The outcomes of these were used to modify the JKMRC SAG mill model ( It also became apparent to the researchers that it would be most useful to have this information prior to running major mill surveys, so as to ensure that the mill modelling data is collected under appropriate mill operating conditions. The key here was to conduct the surveys in a short time period, with minimal interruption to, or disturbance of, the plant operation. The outcomes also had to be available almost immediately, so that they could be used to establish the desired mill operating condition. Based on this, Collection and analysis of this data lead to a realisation of just how valuable it may be to daily mill operation. The grindcurves vary for the feed type, so the signature of the mill response can be related to each feed type. It was thus conceived that a map of grindcurves for the range of feed types that a mill receives, could be a valuable tool to inform the control strategy. With an understanding that conducting a massive matrix of grinding studies was out of the reach of operators, it became desirable to make the grindcurve technique more accessible. This paper therefore sets out to establish the value of developing grindcurves, and some ideas on how to establish them with a realistic degree of effort for operating plants. The value of grindcurves was illustrated in the paper of The real interest arises from knowing the relationship between mill filling, throughput, and product size. A simple set of response curves was set up for survey work that was conducted at Kopanang mine of the AngloGold Ashanti group, as part of AMIRA P9N research, The act of establishing the mill response for a range of mill fillings, is most educational in itself. In observing the reaction of the mill to changes in feed, and responding to stabilise the filling, the person operating the mill learns a lot about the grindability of the ore, the retention of competent media in the mill, the overall milling rates, and the mill residence and response time. This is precisely the knowledge required to successfully control a milling circuit. Under these conditions the operator learns in a controlled and objective manner, rather than in a responsive manner to unwanted variations in mill performance. In establishing the set of curves for Kopanang, the metallurgist who had been responsible for the successful implementation of the milling control software was amazed at how much he learnt, and wished he had conducted such a test prior to working on the control system. In an extensive and thorough set of work conducted by A summary of the outcomes are presented in What is immediately clear from these curves is: the throughput and power peaks do not coincide, the shape of the curves is dramatically affected by mill speed, the peak values change considerably as the speed varies, the grind becomes considerably coarser as mill speed increases, the throughput increases with mill speed. An immediate deduction that can be drawn upon viewing these outcomes, is that in varying mill speed as a control parameter, it is unlikely that either the operator or control system has any idea of how dramatically the mill grind is responding to this change. Thus in optimising the operation of variable speed mills, speed should be included as a key variable. It should also be noted that speed selection needs to also accommodate the design and state of wear of the liners, typically holding back on speed for new liners and pushing up the speed for worn liners. From a control perspective, this complex response offers considerable opportunity to manipulate the mill performance. For a given operating window of desired range of throughput and grind, there is a family of operating conditions that can be chosen to drive the mill towards the optimal economic regime, based on the throughput–grind trade-off. Even with such an intensive set of work, the number of data points per condition are limited to four or five, and more importantly there is a limited range over which the data can practically be collected. It is therefore desirable to derive a curve fitting technique by which consistent and physically meaningful fits can be obtained. To this end, a number of known physical constraints were applied, as illustrated in For zero filling, throughput must be zero, and power will be the no-load value. For 100% filling, the same constraints apply. Once the mill is packed solid with ore it reverts to being a spinning solid cylinder. The only extra power draw over an empty mill would be any additional frictional losses at the bearings. Without any theoretical derivation of the form of the curves, it was found that a simple second order polynomial gave the best fit to the range of data. A simple optimisation function could be used to maximise the tons per hour of recoverable product, such as −150 The grind-rates are a product of throughput and % −150 It is clear from this that the mill filling at which peak production occurs increases with mill speed, from about 25% up to 43% filling. This is a dramatic variation in optimal operating point as the mill speed is varied. Due to the lack of data at the high fillings at which the peak for 75% critical speed occurs, the location of this peak is rather uncertain, but it undoubtedly occurs at above 40% filling. What is particularly interesting from an operation point of view is that the peak production is at a higher filling than the mill is ever operated at. This highlights a potential opportunity in mill operation, provided the mill does not hit operational constraints, such as damage to the feed chute seal. Pushing for maximum throughput is probably what the operators and the control systems are best trained to do. However, what is most likely not appreciated, is that as the mill speed is varied, the target mill filling should also be changed. This is clear from the feed rate curves in The mill filling values at which peak throughput is achieved vary from 23% to 34% as the mill speed is increased. It is also clear just how sensitive the throughput is to mill speed. The ‘Mer fill’ point on the graph gives the mill filling at which the Merensky mill presented earlier achieved peak throughput. This is very close to the value for this far larger mill. The plots of power give smooth and consistent responses, The grind responses are given in A key aspect to appreciate about grindcurves is that they change with ore type. These researchers have not had the opportunity to systematically calibrate a mill with known changes in ore, but would find such an exercise of great benefit. This is where the method can be particularly useful at operations. If a generic form of the response curves can be established, then it is anticipated that the mill response can be recalibrated with a few snapshot surveys when the ore changes. This will make this simple tool much more powerful, as it will enable a responsive control system to implemented. In fact the shape for the curves will indicate to a control system what ore is being treated. A shift in mill response can immediately trigger a search for a new operating regime, possibly with a bit of deliberate shifting of the mill operation for a period so as to assist in selecting which response curve the mill is now on. As the different parameters, throughput, power, and grind, respond quite differently with very different curvatures and peaks in their response curves, this renders such a search quite feasible. Having hopefully demonstrated the power of grindcurves in mill control and optimisation, it remains to describe how to calibrate a mill in practice. This survey methodology has been developed to allow the rapid development of a grindcurve, while minimising sample processing ( The mill condition is changed through sufficient range to find the peak in throughput, power, and fineness of product. The pertinent data is plotted as the tests progress so as to provide a live measure of the test progress. When snapshot surveys are combined with the single-point sizing technique, four to eight conditions can be established in one (often long) day, depending on the size and residence time of the mill, and unplanned changes in mill feed. An example of one developed over a day prior to some survey work is presented in In all these considerations, the mill filling is the critical operating parameter, yet in plant control rooms there are no percentage mill filling indicators. Normally only a mill load reading obtained from load cells under the feed and/or discharge ends, or a mill bearing back pressure reading are available. Thus, during mill surveys a prime objective is to find the relationship between mill load and mill filling. Accurate measurements of mill filling after mill stops are used to develop this calibration. These can be obtained from using the mill load reading taken over a few minutes just prior to the mill stop. No special preparation is required. The key requirement is that the readings are obtained at significantly different mill fillings, so as to obtain a reliable correlation. Two such filling–load curves are shown in The broken lower parts of the curves show the filling–load relationship if the balls were to be removed after grinding out. If the calibration point of the load cells was for an empty unlined mill, then the intercept can be predicted, as the mass of the remaining liners. A shift from this, as in this instance, indicates that the mill was likely calibrated for some intermediate mass liner. This calibration is a strong function of liner mass, as is clear from the calibration curves. In this instance, if the operators were locked into a fixed load cell operating point, of say 190 The calibration of mill filling to bearing back pressure is non-linear, as illustrated in It would be of great benefit to mill operation if this filling–load relationship can be continuously updated. Some ideas for calculating this from minimal data are given in An issue with mill filling measurements is the time required for safe mill entry. Typically after a full lock-out and check by the safety officer on mill gas, entry can be obtained. For some sites there is strict control on maximum internal temperature (that can take hours to achieve) but generally permission can be gained to enter for a limited period for inspection only, as opposed to physical work. Adequate planning and preparation in conjunction with the health and safety officer and the development of sensible and safe operating procedures can facilitate rapid filling checks. A personal record for Powell on a large SAG mill from stop to start and with all the lock-out and safety procedures properly observed, is 12 Mill filling measurements are easily subject to errors of a few percentage points, unless carefully conducted. So procedures such as those laid out by A particularly useful technique for on-line measurement of mill filling is the locating of the positions of the toe and shoulder of the charge. These are independent of mill mass, and thus of liner mass and fraction of balls in the charge. A number of measurement techniques have been developed but none are yet of sufficient accuracy (or are insufficiently robust) to be commercially available for SAG mills. A technique to calibrate the performance of SAG mills has been proposed and data from a number of tests sites is presented. It is concluded that the relationships between filling and the three key operating variables of throughput, power, and grind size form a useful control optimisation tool. The responses change with ore type, so can be used both as an indicator of changes in feed, and to provide the key information required to deduce the optimal control point. This in turn can be used to set the target for an optimising control system. With knowledge of the downstream recovery response as a function of throughput and grind for different ore types, the control objective can be made a more sophisticated function aimed at maximising production of product within operating constraints. The grindcurves provide essential information for such a strategy, in the form of the interaction between throughput and grind size as a function of the objective mill filling. It is proposed that it is worthwhile pursuing this line of investigation to a greater depth, so as to establish robust generic grindcurve relationships, that can be fitted to specific mills and for different ore types with minimal calibration test work. The aim would be to bring this operating tool within the grasp of plant metallurgists and operators. The generous support and cooperation of the South Deep Gold Plant management is gratefully acknowledged. The support of the plant manager, Stephen Joseph, the senior metallurgist, Ismail Kola, and the milling section production supervisor, Dries Coetzee, is specifically mentioned. The assistance of the Kopanang and Amandelbult plant personnel is acknowledged, and AngloGold Ashanti and Anglo Platinum are thanked for permission to publish the data. The long hours of our research staff and students, Jason Waters, Michael Bekapi, Percy Condori, Sonny Mwansa, and Paul Green is gratefully acknowledged.