The present study explores the use of silicotungstic acid anchored to mesoporous siliceous support, Korean Institute of Technology-6 (KIT-6), as a catalyst to produce biodiesel. Silicotungstic acid loaded KIT-6 was synthesized and the physicochemical properties were characterized using scanning electron microscopy, surface area and pore size distribution analyzer, Fourier transform infrared spectroscopy, X-ray diffraction, X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy and inductively coupled plasma – optical emission spectroscopy techniques. Efficiency of the silicotungstic acid loaded KIT-6 in the production of biodiesel from a variety of high free fatty acid containing feedstock was then evaluated. The composition of free fatty acids in all the feedstock oils (algae oil, coffee oil, palmitic acid and used cooking oil) and their biodiesel resulting from the feedstock were also analyzed. Compared with other solid acid catalysts, the resulting materials show stable and highly efficient catalytic performance in biodiesel production with the highest conversion reaching 99%. A sample containing 26 wt% of silicotungstic acid supported on KIT-6 was found to be the most active catalyst for esterification at 70 °C whilst stirring constantly, with an alcohol/acid volume ratio of 2 and 1.5 wt% loading catalyst for 3 h. Furthermore, the catalyst was reused for four cycles indicating recyclability of the catalyst.Global production of biofuels is growing steadily, will continue to do so and the importance of biofuel cultivation in developing countries has been thoroughly discussed recently ( KIT-6 (Korean Institute of Technology-6) is a specific mesoporous material that exhibits a three-dimensional cubic la3d symmetric structure with an interpenetrating bi-continuous network of channels ( The procedure for the preparation and characterization of the solid acid catalyst, followed by catalytic studies to investigate its use and recyclability for transesterification of various feedstocks into biodiesel is provided below. Pluronic P123 triblock co-polymer [poly (ethylene glycol)-block-poly (propylene glycol)-block-poly (ethylene glycol)] with molecular weight of 5800 (EO20PO70EO20) and n-butyl alcohol (n-BuOH) were Sigma–Aldrich and VWR International respectively and used as the structure directing agent and co-surfactant, respectively. Tetraethylorthosilicate (TEOS) was used as a source of silicon for the synthesis of KIT-6. Hydrochloric acid (35 wt%) was used as a co-solvent for the synthesis of mesoporous 3D cubic KIT-6 molecular sieves. Silicotungstic acid was used for immobilization on the mesoporous framework. All chemicals were of reagent grade or better and were purchased from VWR International. Used cooking oil (UCO) was obtained from a local restaurant. UCO was subjected to a simple pre-treatment which consisted of filtration of the solid particles and followed by heating to 100 °C and maintaining for 15 min to remove any moisture. Temperature was then maintained at 70 °C. Coffee oil was extracted from spent coffee grounds using a solvent (hexane) extraction method that was developed earlier ( KIT-6 was synthesized by following a previously published protocol ( The specific surface area of the catalyst/support material was measured using an Autosorb 2010™ surface area and pore size analyzer. Nitrogen adsorption–desorption isotherms were measured in liquid nitrogen using a Micromeritics ASAP 2010 system. The morphology was characterized using a Hitachi S-4700 scanning electron microscope (SEM) using a standard secondary electron detector at 11.0 kV. Chemistry was confirmed using Fourier transform infrared spectroscopy (FTIR). The separate samples were ground with KBr and pressed into thin wafers to measure the IR adsorption of the groups. X-ray diffraction patterns (XRD) were obtained using PANalytical X'Pert Pro X-ray diffractometer with Cu Kα radiation. A PHI 5600 X-ray photoelectron spectrometer (XPS) with a monochromatic Al source was used at 14 kV and 300 W to identify the surface chemistry of the catalyst. Perkin Elmer OPTIMA 8000 inductively coupled plasma – optical emission spectroscopy (ICP-OES) was used to quantify the amount of acid exchanged with the framework. The wavelength chosen was 207.91 nm and limit of detection for tungsten was 7 ppb. The W-ion concentration was used to calculate the amount of acid exchanged with the framework. For this purpose, STA-D (0.1 g) catalyst was accurately measured and digested with 5M NaOH solution (15 mL) for 4 h. The solution was then diluted to a known volume and was analyzed for tungsten using ICP-OES. Amount of STA that leaches from the KIT-6 framework material into the reaction mixture was also evaluated using ICP-OES analyses. For this purpose, STA-D (1 g) catalyst was mixed with triple distilled water (10 mL) and was refluxed for 16 h. The leachate was then analyzed for tungsten ion concentration. Control experiments were conducted using 0.4 g of framework-free STA. The identities and relative proportions of fatty acids in the methyl ester product were determined using a Shimadzu GC QP-2010 gas chromatograph mass spectroscopy (GC–MS) equipped with a SHR-5XLB capillary column (25 mm thickness × 30 m length) and an electron ionization detector (70eV) using helium as the reagent gas. A temperature gradient was selected such that the temperature rose from 100 °C to 240 °C at the rate of 1.5 °C per minute. STA was incorporated as a heteroatom into the KIT-6 framework to impart catalytic activity and used as a solid acid catalyst for esterification reactions. Unloaded KIT-6 framework, various STA loaded KIT-6 catalyst, were evaluated for the effectiveness in converting algae oil, used cooking oil, coffee oil and palmitic acid into biodiesel. Ten grams of oil and a catalyst concentration of 1.5 wt% based on the mass of oil was used. This concentration was considered to be the minimum requirement for the esterification of the free fatty acids. Methanol was employed in a 1:2 v/v ratio and the reaction temperature was kept constant at 70 °C. After completion of the reaction, a 24 h pour-off time allowed for the complete separation of an upper ester layer from a lower glycerol layer. The upper layer was collected and excess methanol was removed using rotary evaporation at 60 °C, under moderate vacuum. After alcohol recovery, the methyl ester was transferred into a clean separatory funnel. It was washed gently with warm tap water and 10% tannic acid solution as a purification step. The ester phase was analyzed by gas chromatography to determine the yield of fatty acid methyl esters (FAMEs). All esterification experiments were conducted in duplicates. The AOCS official method CA 5a-40 was used to analyze the FFA content in the oils by titrating against 0.1 N NaOH. The results from the characterization of the catalyst using X-ray diffraction, Brunauer–Emmett–Teller (BET)/N SEM images of STA loaded KIT-6 are shown in Surface area was quantified using the nitrogen absorption/desorption multipoint Brunauer–Emmett–Teller (BET) method. The surface area of materials was relatively high confirming the suitability of these materials for heterogeneous catalysis. Surface area of the catalysts decreased with an increase in acid loading and such behavior has been previously documented ( The N The crystallographic XRD pattern provided in  The wide scan XPS spectrum obtained on the STA-D catalyst confirmed that W was present on the surface following the acid impregnation process. As shown in The acid number of the feedstock and products were determined and was subsequently used to calculate the conversion of FFA to FAME ( The gas chromatograms of representative samples are shown in To estimate the amount of biodiesel formed upon completion of the reaction, the biodiesel weight yield relative to the initial amount of feedstock, was calculated using a previously established method ( Besides activity, another critical point to examine is the catalyst activity loss and reusability. One of the main disadvantages of homogeneous catalysts is that they cannot be recovered. So, in the present study, the catalyst was evaluated to study its efficiency and reusability. The used catalyst was re-tested maintaining a 1.5 wt% catalyst quantity. The results of the recycling studies conducted on UCO have been summarized in Biodiesel production from algae, coffee and used cooking oils with a high content of FFA was investigated using acid supported mesoporous catalysts. Mesoporous silicate material (KIT-6) was successfully synthesized and STA was exchanged with the framework. Analysis of physical properties of the synthesized catalysts substantiated the formation of catalysts with high surface area, their morphological properties and mesoporosity. The present work demonstrates that the synthesized solid acid catalyst could be used for single step esterification of high FFA containing oils such as coffee oil, used cooking oil and palmitic acid. More importantly, the catalyst was found to be stable after calcination, esterification and recycling, which is essential for commercial applications of catalysts. It was also observed that the conversion efficiency is strongly affected by silicotungstic acid concentration in the catalyst and a silicotungstic acid loading of ∼26 wt% favors the near completion of solid acid catalyzed esterification process. We thank York R. Smith for technical assistance with BET and XRD measurements. We also thank Zachary Karmiol for his assistance with XPS. This work was funded by the