This article highlights key aspects of pyrometallurgy. A background on why it may be utilized is initially provided. Then a brief high level comparison to hydrometallurgy and electrometallurgy is detailed. As well, key unit operations within the technology are discussed. Finally relevant conclusions are drawn.The Earth’s crust is the source of almost all the metals. The average concentrations of metals in the Earth’s crust can be relatively low. Fortunately natural geological phenomena, such as igneous intrusions, weathering and sedimentary deposits, have helped produce local areas of enrichment of metallic minerals, i.e., resources, deposits, ore, and ore bodies. Many factors must be taken into consideration to determine if it is economically viable to develop a deposit, such as: valuable metal content of the resource; commercial value of the desired metal; potential by product metal production; levels of undesirable and desirable impurities; location of the ore body in relation to infrastructure, fuel, electricity, labor, and transportation; permitting, geopolitical risks and social license to operate; Once it is determined that a deposit is economically viable as an orebody, the choice of the extractive metallurgy method to be used to exploit this ore body can be made. Extractive metallurgical methods are generally divided into three categories: pyrometallurgy, hydrometallurgy, and electrometallurgy. Historically, pyrometallurgy employs high temperatures to carry out smelting and refining operations to extract metals from their minerals. The relatively new technology of hydrometallurgy uses aqueous solutions to separate the desired metals. Finally, electrometallurgy, which is often classified as a subset of hydrometallurgy, employs electrical energy to extract and refine metals. Several factors play a role in determining the extractive method to be used. Among the most important factors are the orebody grade and tonnage, the orebody location, the orebody mineralogy, the initial capital investment, the operating costs, the energy requirements, water requirements, environmental constraints, political and social constraints, and the purity, grade and type of the metal or metallic compound produced. A comparison of the three extractive metallurgical methods is shown in Pyrometallurgical methods are commonly used to process high-grade ores, such as iron ore, while hydrometallurgical and electrometallurgical methods are often used in combination to extract low-grade ores, such as copper. It is possible, however, to convert a low-grade ore into a high-grade ore (or concentrate) by using mineral processing techniques (i.e., comminution, classification and concentration by separation processes). The concentrate can then be used as a feed material into either a pyrometallurgical or hydrometallurgical method. Pyrometallurgical extraction involves several processes such as: roasting, carbothermic reduction, reduction of sulfide ores, and metallothermic reduction. The selection of the processes to be used depends mainly on the composition of the ore or concentrate and the thermodynamic, kinetic, and environmental constraints associated with each process. Some noble metals such as gold, silver, and platinum can commonly occur in their native (or metallic) state. Consequently, they may need only to be liberated and separated from the gangue materials (i.e., useless minerals associated with any ore) before they can be refined. Other metals occur as oxides and/or sulfides, and they need to be reduced before they can be refined. Oxides are usually carbothermically reduced by using coke, coal, or natural gas as reducing agents. Sulfides cannot be reduced by carbon or hydrogen because metal sulfides are more stable than carbon sulfides (CS and CS There are several different types of roasting processes. The most commonly used roasting processes are: Dead roasting is the complete conversion of sulfides into oxides by heating the ore or concentrate under an oxidizing atmosphere. Sulfating roasting is the conversion of sulfides into soluble sulfates. This conversion is also accomplished by heating the sulfide under an oxidizing atmosphere. The soluble metal sulfates can then be used as the feed material for hydrometallurgical extraction processes. Partial roasting is a common roasting operation for metal concentrates containing several metal sulfides. In this roasting operation, the impurity metal sulfides are preferentially oxidized to enable their easier separation from the desirable metal sulfides during the subsequent extraction operations. For example, during the smelting operation the metal oxide would be absorbed by the slag phase. During the roasting operation, sulfur dioxide and trioxide are formed. Consequently, this type of operation can pose a major environmental problem. Sulfur dioxide and trioxide released into the atmosphere can be major causes of acid rain. Fortunately, much of this can be abated with modern technologies such as baghouses, electrostatic precipitators, scrubbers, and sulfuric acid plants. So, overall, modern roasting furnaces have highly engineered exhaust systems, and the sulfur gas emissions are commonly used as a feed material in the production of sulfuric acid. After the roasting operation the calcine (or roasted concentrate) may pyrometallurgicaly reduced or hydrometallurgically leached. If a dead roasting process is used an oxide is formed, and the subsequent operation may be a carbothermic reduction, as in the case of zinc and lead sulfide ores. However, if a partial roasting process is employed the desirable metallic mineral will still be in the form of a sulfide. The blast furnace process is primarily used in the carbothermic reduction of oxides, such as iron, zinc, and lead. Most of the iron ore bodies commercially explored consist of iron oxides. Consequently, rich iron ore and/or iron oxide pellets formed from concentrate can be added directly to a blast furnace. Carbothermic reduction generally relies upon the Boudouard reaction which is expressed as; In the case of zinc and lead, their ores are sulfidic. Therefore, before the carbothermic reduction can take place, the zinc and lead sulfide concentrates are converted to oxides and agglomerated. Besides the blast furnace process the zinc and lead calcine can for example be used as feed material to the Imperial Smelting Furnace (ISF). The major difference between a lead blast furnace and the ISF is that in the lead blast furnace the lead oxide is reduced by carbon monoxide which is generated by the combustion of metallurgical coke with air within the furnace. The zinc oxide remains in the slag phase and the slag is subsequently treated by adding coal to reduce the zinc oxide to metallic zinc. The metallic zinc is removed by vaporization because of its low boiling point (707 Most of the sulfide ores are normally concentrated and roasted before they can be reduced. There are several pathways for the reduction of sulfides. The copper-making process illustrates well this point. In some cases copper extraction can be divided into three steps: roasting (which can be optional for some copper-making routes); matte smelting (reverberatory, electric, or flash smelting furnaces); converting (conversion of matte to blister copper). There are also now available continuous copper smelting technologies such as the Mitsubishi process that combine all of the above steps. The purpose of matte smelting is to separate the metal sulfides (Cu The converting step consists of oxidizing the liquid matte with air to obtain blister copper (an impure form of copper). The converting process can be subdivided into two stages: Slag-forming stage – FeS is oxidized to iron oxide and absorbed by the slag phase. The product of this stage is the white metal which is mainly Cu Copper-making stage – the remaining sulfur is oxidized keeping the oxidation of copper to a minimum. As previously noted, three steps of copper extraction (roasting, smelting, and converting) can also be carried out continuously in for example the Mitsubishi process. The Mitsubishi process consists of three furnaces in series (a smelter, an electrical settling furnace, and a converter). An alternative way to reduce an ore (or concentrate) is by using a metal that has a higher affinity for oxygen or sulfur as a reducing agent. The metallothermic reduction process is exothermic and self-sustained once it is started. For example, the aluminothermic method uses aluminum as a reductor because of its reactivity. Aluminothermia is extensively used to reduce metal oxides of metals that have a very high melting point and/or can form hydrides and carbides. However, the metallothermic method is not selective, i.e., any oxides present in the ore that have less affinity for oxygen than the reactive metal will also be reduced. In addition, this is a very expensive process because highly reactive metals, such as aluminum and silicon, are used as reductors. The objective of the pyrorefining operations is to remove impurities from a metal. The removal of an impurity is directly related to the final cost of the metal. Therefore, refining is carried out to the extent that is necessary to produce the desired mechanical, physical, and chemical properties in the metal. The pyrorefining operations can be divided into slag–metal reactions, metal–metal equilibria and metal–gas reactions. Slag is a mixture of oxides such as calcium, silica, and iron that is added on top of a metal to accomplish the following main functions: to flux and absorb impurities; to protect the reduced metal against reoxidation; and to minimize heat loss by radiation. The flux and absorption of impurities are accomplished by designing a slag that will have a greater capacity to chemically react, melt, and bind with the impurities. The distribution of the impurity between slag–metal phases should be maximized such that a minimum amount of slag is used. The problem associated with the use of a large volume of slag is an increase in the amount of energy used to heat and melt the slag. Steel and tin production extensively use slag–metal reactions as a refining method. In some cases impurities can be separated from the product without forming a slag. Liquation is a metal–metal equilibrium separation method that relies on the immiscibility between solvent and solute in alloys when the temperature is lowered. Liquation is commonly used in refining the zinc–lead alloy obtained during ‘shock-cooled’ exhaust gases in the ISF. The solubility of zinc in lead decreases and the temperature decreases, therefore as the temperature is lowered a second phase rich in zinc is formed. The zinc-rich phase has a much lower density than the lead-rich phase, and it can be separated easily. Drossing, which consists of the preferential oxidation of a metal in relation to another metal in an alloy, can also be used to promote separation. For example, one of the refining steps of the lead bullion is the removal of copper. This is accomplished by oxidizing copper with elemental sulfur, since copper has a higher affinity for sulfur than lead. Consequently, a copper sulfide layer on the top of the lead is formed which can be separated easily. However, drossing separation is not as good as slag–metal separation because a large amount of metal is usually entrained in the dross. Thus a further treatment of the dross is normally needed to enhance metal recovery. Vacuum degassing and distillation are also common techniques used in refining operations. Vacuum degassing is usually used in the refining of steels, especially in the removal of carbon (as carbon monoxide) and hydrogen. The process consists of placing the liquid metal under a very low partial pressure to promote the removal of gases and other elements present in the alloys that have very high vapor pressures. Distillation exploits the difference in partial pressures among the elements present in an impure metal or alloy. The impure metal or alloy is placed in a distillation column and heated. The volatile constituents are removed from metals which have higher melting points. A criterion for a successful distillation is that the mass distribution ratio of the component to be separated must be greater in the vapor phase than in the condensed phase. Distillation plays a major role in the production of zinc and mercury. Pyrometallurgy will continue to be a dominant extractive metallurgical method of choice for treating high-grade clean ores and concentrates, such as iron ore or copper. However, in the case of low-grade ores or complex concentrates with abundant impurities, a combination of the use of hydrometallurgical and aqueous electrowinning are gaining momentum. The recent shift from pyrometallurgy to hydrometallurgy combined with electrometallurgy is increasingly desirable for lower-grade ores and complex concentrates with abundant impurities due to better separations.