Myricetina flavonoid compound, has been reported to possess antioxidative, antiproliferative and anti-inflammatory effects. However, no study has yet investigated the effect of myricetin on osteogenic differentiation of human bone marrow stem cells (hBMSCs). This study was designed to investigate the effects of myricetin on osteogenic differentiation of hBMSCs in vitro. Cell viability was analyzed by MTT and osteogenic differentiation was evaluated by alkaline phosphatase (ALP) activity assay, Alizarin red S dye, real time-polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR) and Western blot analysis. We found that the ALP activity and the mineralization of hBMSCs were enhanced by treatment with myricetin. Myricetin increased the mRNA expressions of Osteocalcin (OCN), Collagen type I (COL-I), ALP and Runt-related transcription factor 2 (RUNX2). Additionally, we found that myricetin activated the Wnt/β-catenin pathway and increased the expression of several downstream genes including T-cell factor-1(TCF-1) and lymphoid enhancer factor-1 (LEF-1). Depletion of β-catenin almost completely blocked the positive role of myricetin on osteogenic differentiation. Taken together, our findings suggest that myricetin enhanced osteogenic differentiation of hBMSCs by activating the Wnt/β-catenin signaling. The study may aid in the development of a therapeutic approach utilizing myricetin for the enhancement of bone health and prevention of osteoporosis.Osteoporosis increases with aging population and is characterized by a reduction in bone mass and microarchitectural deterioration of bone tissue, resulting in skeletal fragility and fractures ( Flavonoids, which exist abundantly in plant foods, including onions, berries, grapes and red wine, have been shown to be excellent and reliable sources for the development of new drugs ( The Wnt/β-catenin signaling pathway is of interest as a novel therapeutic target for development of osteoporosis treatment. Growing evidence suggests that activation of this pathway increases osteoblast differentiation and subsequent bone formation, while suppressing osteoclastogenesis ( Although a number of studies have established the various roles of myricetin in both in vitro and in vivo models, the effect of myricetin on osteogenic differentiation of hBMSC has yet to be revealed. The present study demonstrated that myricetin enhanced the differentiation of hBMSCs into osteogenic lineage by activating canonical Wnt/β-catenin signaling. Myricetin was purchased from Sigma (St Louis, MO, USA). Myricetin was dissolved in indimethylsulfoxide (DMSO) and then diluted with the medium (final DMSO concentration ≤0.05% (V/V)). 3-[4, 5-dimethylthiazol-2-y]-2, 5-diphenyltetrazolium bromide (MTT) was purchased from Beyotime (Beyotime Inst Biotech, China). All other chemicals and cell culture reagents were obtained from Sigma-Aldrich (St. Louis, MO, USA) and Gibco, Invitrogen (Carlsbad, CA, USA), unless otherwise indicated. Bone marrow (5 Cell viability was assessed using MTT assay ( ALP staining was performed on the 7th day after cells were cultured in 24-well tissue culture plates at a cell density of 1×10 To qualitatively assess cell-mediated calcium deposition, hBMSCs which were cultured in osteogenic medium were visualized by Alizarin red S dye ( Real-time PCR was used to detect the expression of several osteogenic differentiation related marker genes (COL-I, ALP, OCN, RUNX2) on the 4th and 7th day respectively. Total RNA was extracted using TriZol (Invitrogen) according to the manufacturer׳s instructions and quantified. Its concentration was determined spectrophotometrically at 260 Cells were transfected for 24 Protein extract samples (20 All experiments reported in this study were performed independently at least three times. Results are expressed as mean±S.D. Statistical analyses of the significance of differences among values were carried out by one-way ANOVA with a posthoc Dunnett׳s test or Student׳s The hBMSCs viability was analyzed at 1, 4, 7, and 14 days. By MTT assay ( The ALP activity was measured in the presence of 0, 1, 10 and 20 The stain color changed thicker with increased concentration of myricetin on day 14 ( Real-time PCR ( We also analyzed the effects of myricetin on osteogenic differentiation of hBMSCs by following the protein level data of OCN and COL-I at day 7 osteogenic induction. Western blot analysis showed that the level of each protein was dose-dependently increased in cells incubated with myricetin at a range from 1 to 20 In order to confirm whether canonical Wnt/β-catenin signaling is a stimulating regulator for the osteogenesis of hBMSCs, cells were incubated with DKK-1, which binds to LRP5/6 co-receptors and inhibits canonical Wnt/β-catenin signaling, before treatment with 20 Osteoporosis is a disorder in which loss of bone mass and strength leads to fragility fractures. The current clinical treatment regimens for osteoporosis are anti-resorptive drugs, which maintain bone mass by inhibiting osteoclast function. However, the effect of these drugs in increasing bone mass or recovering bone loss is relatively minor, probably no more than 2% per year ( Results obtained from our assay system indicated that myricetin did not exhibit cytotoxic effect on hBMSCs viability at concentrations of 1, 10 and 20 ALP, a cell membrane-associated enzyme, appeared early during osteoblast differentiation, was the most widely recognized marker of osteoblastic differentiation ( OCN was involved in controlling of the mineralization process, appeared at late stage of osteogenic differentiation and characterized by mature cells of the osteoblastic lineage ( Several signaling pathways have been shown to regulate the lineage commitment and terminal differentiation of hBMSCs. During osteogenic differentiation, RUNX2, BMPs, transforming growth factor-β (TGF-β), osterix and Wnt/β-catenin signaling play essential roles in the commitment of mesenchymal cells to the osteoblastic lineage ( As the results of myricetin on osteogenic of hBMSCs in vitro cannot be fully representative of which in vivo, the results still need further validation in vivo. Taken all together, the present study demonstrated that myricetin stimulates the osteogenic differentiation of hBMSCs and canonical Wnt signaling contributes to this processing. Our results suggested that myricetin might be a potential anabolic agent for the enhancement of bone health and prevention of bone-related disorders such as osteoporosis. The authors thank all the staff in the Laboratory of Orthopaedic Research Institute and Scientific Research Center of Second Affiliated Hospital of Wenzhou Medical College. This work was supported by grants from