We integrate constraints from published detrital thermochronometry and detrital 10Be concentrations in a single catchment to infer how erosion is shaping Alpine topography. We apply this analysis to the Codera watershed in the Bergell Intrusion, Central European Alps, where rivers have incised into a glacial valley. Because thermochronometric ages of bedrock samples increase with elevation, a distribution of detrital ages in river sediment provides a tracer for the source elevations of sediment within the catchment, while detrital 10Be concentrations provide constraints on rates of erosion. We find that modern erosion rates within the fluvial portion of the landscape are too low to permit the inferred ∼500 m of incision during the most recent interglacial. Based on the spatial pattern of modern erosion rates, we predict that if the incised fluvial valley was formed during interglacial periods only, it has formed over the last approximately 400,000 years.Measuring rates at which landscapes respond to changes in climate and tectonics is essential to understand the processes and mechanisms facilitating erosion of the Earth's surface. Quantifying erosion rates in mountain belts is, however, challenging as various approaches integrate erosion rate over different time intervals. These methods must therefore be supplemented by morphological observations describing the interaction of surface processes, and their temporal evolution within a landscape. In this study we address this issue with a method of determining spatial variations in modern erosion rate in a small catchment in the Swiss Alps using detrital thermochronometry and cosmogenic nuclide concentrations. An outstanding challenge in this area regards the determination of the relative impact of principal erosional processes during glacial and interglacial cycles. Although these major climatic cycles provide a first-order control on surface processes, the relative impact of associated processes on alpine morphology, and the distribution of present-day sediment production in formerly glaciated regions remains an open question. A promising avenue of research into this topic addresses the formation of deep bedrock gorges resulting from river incision into formerly glaciated Alpine topography during interglacial periods ( The onset of fluvial incision into glacial landscapes within the Alps has been debated for over a century and difficulties in measuring incision rates have left this discussion unresolved. Arguments supporting post-Lateglacial (approximately 10–15 ka; The hypothesis that significant bedrock gorges in the Alps can form by fluvial erosion during interglacial periods, however, is not consistent with long-term erosion rates inferred from regional thermochronometric data. Bedrock thermochronometry provides a key constraint on the total amount of erosion permitted over the last few millions of years, and by extension therefore also provides an upper constraint on the total amount of fluvial erosion ( Alternative lines of evidence may attest to the antiquity of Alpine inner gorges. Within several gorges across the Alps, deposits older than the LGM are found, indicating that the gorges must be older than the LGM ( In this paper, we investigate the potential for preservation of fluvial topography in the Codera watershed on the western side of the Bergell Intrusion (Central Swiss Alps) by combining existing detrital thermochronometric data ( The Bergell Intrusion is delimited to the north–west and to the south by the Val Bregaglia and Valtellina, two large valleys that drain into Lake Como. Topographic relief is characteristically high, with the bottom of valleys at ∼300 m elevation and peaks ranging between 3000 and 4000 m elevation. The lithology is composed of granitoid rocks intruded into the surrounding high-grade metamorphic rocks of the Lepontine dome and Austroalpine Nappes. The timing of emplacement ranges between 28 Ma and 32 Ma ( This study focuses on the Codera watershed, which drains the western edge of the Bergell Intrusion. (See The morphology of the Codera watershed can be split into three geomorphic domains. In the lower reaches, 10–15 km along the channel from the Piz Badile ( We can estimate the degree of fluvial incision into the intermediate portion of the landscape by projecting the relatively flat The erosion rate of Earth's surface can be inferred by measuring the concentration of cosmic ray-produced nuclides (e.g.,  Detrital thermochronometric data have also been obtained from the Codera watershed ( Detrital studies exploit the processes of erosion and sediment transport to obtain samples that are representative of the watershed as a whole. The ability to relate sand-sized detritus obtained at the outlet to bedrock erosion is therefore a function of several factors: the spatial pattern of erosion rate across the watershed; the lithology across the watershed; the grain size produced as a function of erosion mechanisms across the watershed; and, due to the effects of comminution during sediment transport, the distance the sand has traveled since it was liberated from the bedrock. The granitoid rocks of the Bergell Intrusion and metagranitic rocks from the surrounding Gruf Complex contain similar mineral assemblages, and we therefore assume lithological controls on the production of detrital material are minimal. In addition, the watershed is small and steep, allowing us to assume there is little bias associated with grain size due to variations in sediment transport distance. Therefore, spatial variations in erosion rate due to differences in geomorphic processes will be the main factor controlling the delivery of sand from the bedrock to the outlet of the watershed. Given the above assumptions, the probability of observing a detrital grain at the outlet with some characteristic representative of the bedrock is a function of the spatial pattern of erosion rate. As an example, the probability In order to estimate the likelihood of observing a specific detrital age, we need to estimate the likelihood of observing that age at every location in the catchment. As bedrock age increases with elevation, the likelihood of observing a given age of a crystal measured in the detrital population at a bedrock location within the watershed,  In turn, the likelihood of observing a set of The likelihood of observing an individual age In general, erosion rate and The error introduced by not incorporating non-steady state effects on The average The inverse problem is to determine the spatial pattern of erosion rate We parameterize both To describe  In reality, Although Bayesian inference allows us to quantify the full state of knowledge we have about model parameters, the posterior distribution still depends on choices made at the outset, such as the complexity of the model. Thus, the number of nodes describing The rjMCMC algorithm is initialized with a series of random parameter values that describe Proposals are accepted based on the acceptance probability. For Move and Change proposals (i.e., (1), (2), (5) and (6)) the acceptance probability is proportional to the likelihood ratio of the proposed to the current model. This ensures that proposals that improve data fit are always accepted and those which decrease it are accepted with probability equal to the ratios of the likelihoods. For Birth and Death proposals (i.e., (3), (4), (7), and (8)) the acceptance criteria favor models that reduce data misfit yet penalize models that are overly complex. The complex transdimensional posterior distribution is challenging to appraise. To obtain an interpretable solution, we project the posterior distribution onto two different spaces, and simply consider two density plots of sampled We ran the rjMCMC algorithm outlined above with the parameters controlling the model perturbations tuned to provide acceptance rates of 30–40%. We ran the chain for 500,000 models. The first 10,000 models form the ‘burn in’ phase, after which the Markov chain is thought to have converged. These first models are discarded from the posterior distribution. Results are plotted as a function of elevation for both the elevation–erosion rate relationship and the age–elevation relationship ( With the exception of a single age, the data comprising the AER are relatively well reproduced by the model ( The average modern erosion rate within the fluvial section of the landscape below approximately 1200 m is ∼1.8 mm/yr, calculated as the weighted average of the posterior distribution. Erosion rate across the intermediate section is much lower at approximately 0.6 mm/yr and this is in good agreement with the average watershed erosion rate constrained from the Our erosion rates can help determine whether incision of the fluvial portion of the landscape occurred following late-glacial deglaciation, under the assumption that modern erosion rates are representative of interglacial erosion rates. The erosion rate in the fluvial portion of the landscape is approximately 1.8 mm/yr and the maximum depth of the fluvial section below the projected glacial valley floor is ∼500 m. The erosion rate for the intermediate Three possible mechanisms support slow glacial erosion during glacial periods and thus enabling the fluvial portion of the landscape to be preserved. First, observations ( A conceptual model of the formation of the topography in the Bergell is described below. First, we suggest that the majority of glacial erosion occurred early in the history of glaciation at approximately 1 Ma as has been suggested in the Central Alps ( If however, erosion rates were significantly higher following the Lateglacial deglaciation, the fluvial portion of the landscape could have formed more recently. In addition, we cannot exclude the possibility that the fluvial portion of the landscape was in fact deepened during glacial periods by subglacial meltwater ( We also predict high erosion rates at high elevations that may be related to rock fracture by ice segregation ( The use of cosmic ray-produced nuclides to constrain watershed averaged erosion rates has been applied to a range of geomorphic problems since the pioneering works of We have developed a method to infer the spatial pattern of erosion rate using a joint analysis of bedrock and detrital thermochronometric ages and the detrital cosmic ray-produced nuclide concentration. Our approach is based on the work of If we assume that the modern erosion rate pattern is representative of interglacial periods, the spatial pattern of erosion rate allows us to estimate the onset of incision of the fluvial portion of the watershed. If we assume that we can project the modern erosion rate constrained for the fluvial portion of the landscape back through time, we predict that fluvial incision in the lower parts of the Codera watershed has been underway for approximately 0.4 Ma. However, the watershed has been glaciated for approximately half of the last 1 Ma. Therefore, if we integrate the modern erosion rate at low elevations solely through interglacial periods, we would estimate the onset of fluvial incision to be ∼0.8 Ma. We thank P. Vermeesch for stimulating discussions, and M. Tremblay for comments on an early version of the manuscript. We also thank P. Valla and an anonymous reviewer for providing thorough and helpful reviews. This work has been supported by the