Existing dynamic models of the mixer–settler SX process assume that the mixing stage can be modeled as a single mixer, whereas in recently developed technology, there are two mixing chambers (a pump–mixer and a mixer). Moreover, existing dynamic models assume that the hydrodynamics of the aqueous and organic phases in the settler were the same, whereas they are not similar. In this study, the existing dynamic models are extended to more accurately represent the mixing and settling behavior. Firstly, the parameters of the pump–mixer model were estimated using CFD simulation for each mixer–settler unit. Then, the dynamic simulation was performed to test the simulator with practical parameters over a period of 30days of industrial operating data. Compared to existing dynamic models, better fitting was obtained due to the continual updating of parameters, the use of multiple mixer unit models (pump–mixer and mixer) as well as allowance for different hydrodynamics of organic and aqueous phases in the settler.The mixer–settler is one of the most common units used in industrial copper solvent extraction. Modern mixers consist of two mixing chambers ( In well–known models, both pump–mixer and mixer have been modeled as one continuous stirred tank reactor (CSTR) ( Furthermore, the well–known models of solvent extraction settler are too simple for modeling of real industrial data or too complex for calibration (  In this study, to improve the prediction of settler hydrodynamics and industrial SX process performance, an improved methodology was proposed. In other words, in the proposed model, the shortcomings of previous models ( (1) In the previous models, both pump–mixer and mixer were modeled as one continuous stirred tank reactor (CSTR). However, according to CFD ( To validate the proposed model, dynamic modeling of the copper SX process in the Miduk copper mine, Kerman – Iran has been investigated. The results have then been compared with previous models. Moreover, before dynamic simulation, as described in the literature ( The studied solvent extraction process consists of three unit processes, two series mixer–settler units (E1, E2) for extraction of copper from the aqueous phase into the organic phase and one mixer–settler unit (S) for stripping of copper from the organic solution into the electrolyte solution, as shown in The organic phase consisted of one solvent extractor, i.e., 5-nonyl salicylaldoxime, and three diluents, i.e., kerosene, RESOL 8411, and RESOL 8401. The composition of REYSOL is similar to kerosene and is commonly applied as a mixture with kerosene in the ratio 3/2. The quantity of REYSOL 8401 is two times higher than 8411 and the main difference between them is that REYSOL 8411 has more aromatic components ( The mixer–settler is one of the most commonly used pieces of equipment in industrial copper solvent extraction. Copper transfer between the aqueous and organic phases takes place in the mixers, and the phases are separated in the settlers. As shown in An attempt has been made to fit various possible compartment models to detailed CFD simulation results. According to CFD and among the different compartment models ( In the present work, the volume of each reactor in the pump–mixer model was estimated using CFD simulation for each mixer–settler unit. In the first step, the residence time distribution (RTD) data were calculated by CFD simulation. As shown in In these equations, super-indexes “aq and org” refer to the aqueous and organic phases, respectively. Also, sub-indexes “pm1, pm2, and pmp” refer to the CSTR 1, CSTR 2, and plug flow of pump–mixer, respectively; The dynamic models of a secondary mixer for an extraction unit can be written as ( Furthermore, dynamic models of mixer for stripping unit can be written as ( To study the dynamics of the settler process, it is assumed that the inlet flow is divided into two flows for each phase ( The slow fluid flow was modeled by a plug flow in series with two Cholette–Cloutier units ( The extraction isotherm can be written as a nonlinear function between the copper concentrations of the organic and aqueous phases with empirical coefficients where The term The theoretical equilibrium value (100% efficiency) in one mixer–settler unit is the coincidence point of the equilibrium isotherm (Eq. Accordingly, the theoretical equilibrium concentration of extraction unit is determined as follows: Substituting the value of Substituting the value of The efficiency of extraction and stripping units were calculated on the basis of the Eqs. According to the interface theory ( The mixing and settling models consist of the pump–mixer volume, The volume of each CSTR in the turbulent flow model of aqueous and organic phases (upper branch) can be calculated using Eqs. Generally, to change the aqueous to organic phase ratio without changing the flow rates in the equipment (i.e., mixer–settler), one of the phases is recycled. Usually, the recycle flow rates are not measured in the plant. Therefore, the aqueous to organic flow ratios in the pump–mixer and mixer were estimated from the steady state data of the plant. The recycle correction coefficient is defined according to the copper mass balance in the pump–mixer and mixer as follows ( To remove the measurement noise, outliers were removed from the industrial data. Also, a bias correction for the online concentrations was necessary due to the differences between the online concentrations and reliable laboratory analysis (bias between the online and the offline measurements). Firstly, the outliers were removed using the filtfilt–algorithm, i.e., on the basis of the first order filtering to forward and backward directions of the data vector and moving averaging ( To correct the bias, recursive auto-regression with an external output algorithm was used. The algorithm with a forgetting factor of 0.95 and the recursive least squares method was applied to estimate the bias coefficient In Eq. To study the dynamic performance of the plant SX process and, in the future, to use it for the control system, a process dynamic simulator was designed ( Consequently, the output copper concentrations of pump–mixer (i.e., According to the plant process ( The variables of the Miduk copper SX process with their unit and measurement type (online/offline) are presented in The simulator was tested with operational data of Miduk copper SX unit for one month. The test goals were: (1) validation of the ability of the mechanistic models to describe the plant process; and (2) the performance comparison of the dynamic simulator with adapted and constant parameters. In Moreover, the decrease of the mass transfer coefficient of the extraction unit E2 at the time of about 50 Similarly, according to Simulations were performed using the calculated model parameters ( Next, the parameters that had most influence on model fits in the present work were determined. Starting from the arbitrarily assigned values of input variables and model parameters, the model was simulated several times applying one step change at a time in a given parameter. The results showed, by trial and error, that the fractions of copper mass transfer coefficient, i.e., Since the remaining parameters of the model did not significantly affect the simulation results, they were estimated by a small number of simulations. Accordingly, the simulation results were compared with outputs data of process plant ( As shown, a good agreement between the simulations and measured data has been achieved for the extraction and stripping units. The relative mean squared errors of copper concentrations of rich electrolyte, raffinate, loaded organic, and barren organic were 5.02%, 5.91%, 9.03%, and 12.10%, respectively. The results showed that the model is flexible enough to reproduce the dynamics of extraction and stripping units well. Furthermore, for the results of the outlet flows of the extraction unit (i.e., the raffinate and the loaded organic), the results of proposed model were compared with the models proposed by Note that the proposed model has a prediction horizon of 24 In the well–known models of mixing unit, the pump–mixer and mixer were modeled as one CSTR. However, according to CFD, the pump–mixer hydrodynamics behaves like one plug flow in series with two CSTRs. The proposed model is a relatively comprehensive form to describe the dynamic and non-ideal flow in the mixer–settler units. In this study, in the first step, the parameters related to the pump–mixer model were estimated by CFD for each mixer–settler unit. Then, dynamic simulation was performed using the simulator. The model proposed in this work gave lower mean errors than those achieved using previously published models. The improvements were due to the continual updating of parameters, use of multiple mixer models, as well as the assumption of different hydrodynamics organic and aqueous phases in the settler. The main contribution of the proposed model is the ability of the model to provide realistic dynamic simulations of industrial solvent extraction plant. Also, the proposed model can be calibrated with standard available data from current industrial solvent extraction plants. Moreover, the sensitivity analysis results showed that the mass transfer coefficient of copper, the split fractions of aqueous and organic flows in the settler model, and the steady state copper concentration gradients have the most influence on the extraction and stripping units. In the future, the proposed model will be applied for development of control strategy and algorithm. This research was supported by