The water-filled pores have an observable influence on the flotation of porous minerals such as low-rank coal, zeolite, sepiolite, etc. This paper was to perform the fundamental study of pores wetting of the porous minerals using different hydrophobic active carbons as the samples combined with 1H low-field nuclear magnetic resonance (1H LF-NMR) and micro flotation tests. The relationship between wetting percentage measured by the 1H LF-NMR (WPL) and weighting (WPW) for hydrophilic and hydrophobic samples at different wetting times fitted the first-order linear curve, indicating that the 1H LF-NMR characterizing the pore wetting was feasible. The pores of hydrophilic and hydrophobic samples were quickly wetted during 0–10 min wetting, after that their wetting rates were significantly decreased. The micropores and transition pores in the samples of different hydrophobic were mainly wetted. Interestingly, models of total wetting percentages of different hydrophobic samples fitting to wetting times were both the classical first-order model of flotation kinetics. The flotation recoveries of hydrophilic and hydrophobic powder active carbons were gradually decreased at wetting time of 0–10 min, then those stay almost constant, which reflected the effects of pore wetting on the floatability of samples. This paper provides some potential guidance for porous mineral flotation.The wettability is important for the subsequent processing and applications of materials such as oil recovery ( On the other hand, the physical properties on mineral surfaces also have an important influences on the surface wettability of minerals. For the aspect of particle shape, Xia ( Generally, the above-mentioned chemical and physical properties of mineral surfaces directly affect their wettability, hydrophobicity as well as floatability, and finally the subsequent particles handling process. Besides, numerous studies are also performed that the experimental operate parameters, such as pre-wetting/conditioning time of minerals can also affect the floatability of minerals. The longer the pre-wetting/conditioning time during mineral flotation is, the larger their wetting degree is, and thus their floatability is lower ( In a word, the studies regarding the mineral pores filled by water and its effects on mineral flotation has some qualitative analysis and study, but lacks of quantitative analysis. Therefore, this paper aimed to quantitatively investigate the water wetting kinetics (wetting percentage and rate) of active carbon at different wetting times by the The porous cylindrical active carbons were purchased from PURE AQUATIC (Guangzhou, China). About 2 g cylindrical active carbons were used for In this investigation, the hydrophilic and hydrophobic active carbon samples were used to separately investigate their pores wetting processes. The surface of active carbon used in this investigation was hydrophilic and thus it was modified to become hydrophobic through the modification process of active carbons. First, about 2 g cylindrical active carbons were dried in a 90 °C oven for 3 h to remove the moisture contained in active carbons. Second, the dried active carbons were placed in 100 ml ethanol solution with a 0.3 v% tetraethyl orthosilicate to be stirred by 500 r/min magnetic stirrer for 2 h and then were filtered to apparent dryness. Then, they were dried in a 120 °C oven for 6 h. Third, they were placed in 100 ml ethanol solution with a 5 v% hexadecyltrimethoxysilane to be processed by the ultrasound with a power of 40% for 2 h and were soaked for 10 h and then were filtered to apparent dryness. Finally, they were placed in a 120 °C oven for 6 h to obtain the hydrophobic active carbons and then were stored in a drying vessel. In addition, the powder active carbons were also modified to obtain the hydrophilic and hydrophobic powder active carbons using the above method. To indicate the differences in the surface hydrophobicity of cylindrical active carbons before and after modification, they were both carried out contact angle measurements by the water contact angle analyzer (JC2000D1, POWEREACH, China). The size of droplet was about 2 mm. The cylindrical active carbons before and after hydrophobic modification were both cut into a plane and then were measured five times to obtain an accurate contact angle by calculating the arithmetic mean values. The The dipole moment of hydrogen containing fluid components in the samples can be created by means of Eq. In order to investigate the water wetting percentage and rate of cylindrical active carbons of different hydrophobicity, about 2 g hydrophilic and hydrophobic active carbons were respectively weighed for LF-NMR measurements by A LF-NMR nanopore analyzer (NMRC12-010 V, Suzhou Niumag Analytical Instrument Corporation, China). Firstly, the active carbon samples were placed at a 120 °C oven for 3 h to exclude their residual moisture. Then, the dried samples were placed into the 40 ml pure water to be wetted. The water wetting time of samples was selected as 0, 1, 2, 5, 10, 20, 30, and 60 min, respectively. The 0 min wetting water means that the samples were not wetted and were directly used for It is noted that samples after different wetting times were all firstly weighted using the analytical balance (Mettler Toledo, Switzerland) and then were carried out Their relationship needed to be firstly analyzed to provide a basic and workable theory for subsequent analysis of water wetting percentage and rate of different hydrophobic samples. In addition, in order to compare differences in the porosity of samples before and after modification, the samples were saturated by water for 5 h using the pressure saturated water device with a pressure of 35 mPa. The pore structure of water-saturated samples were measured by The measured parameters of The To investigate the effects of pore wetting percentage for hydrophilic and hydrophobic active carbon samples on their floatability, the micro flotation tests were performed with a Hallimond tube with the volume of 200 ml. The wetting times and pre-drying processes of hydrophilic and hydrophobic active carbon samples were the same as the For hydrophobic active carbon samples, the procedures of micro flotation tests were the same as those of hydrophilic samples. The difference was that, the sodium oleate and MIBC were both not used because the hydrophobic samples had a very high floatability (contact angle is 131°). However, the sodium oleate and MIBC were used in the flotation of hydrophilic samples due to its low floatability (contact angle is 64°). The total porosities of samples before and after hydrophobic modification were 44.13% and 40.12%, respectively. The decrease in porosity of the samples before and after hydrophobic modification is because the samples are stirred for a long time. The pore structure of the samples is slightly changed. This change is acceptable for using these two samples to investigate their water wetting kinetics.  The analysis of the relationship between WPL and WPW at different wetting times for hydrophilic and hydrophobic active carbon samples is the first important step for the subsequent water wetting kinetic investigations. the results of WPL and WPW at different wetting times for hydrophilic and hydrophobic active carbon samples were fitted, as displayed in The Based on the discussion of the relationship between WPL and WPW, the wetting kinetics of hydrophilic and hydrophobic active carbon samples are analyzed.  The pores are divided into micropore (0–10 nm), transition pore (10–100 nm), mesopore (100–1000 nm) and macropore (>1000 nm) based on the pore classification method of Hodot ( For hydrophilic samples, the wetting percentage of micropores and transition pores in hydrophilic samples firstly increased and then decreased slightly but the mesopores gradually increased as the wetting time increased. The wetting percentage of micropores and transition pores at each wetting time were both very higher than other pores, indicating that the active carbons mainly contains micropores and transition pores, especially transition pores. The water can quickly enter these pores of the samples to achieve the water-saturation. However, the water wetting percentage of all of pores in hydrophobic samples gradually increased as the wetting time increased ( The cumulative water wetting rates of pores of different types for hydrophilic and hydrophobic active carbon samples at different wetting times is calculated by using the Eq. The models of total wetting percentage of hydrophilic and hydrophobic active carbon samples fitting to wetting times were both exponential functions, as shown in  This paper investigated the feasible, percentage, and rate of pores wetted by water at the different wetting times by the The contact angle of the cylindrical active carbon samples was increased from 64° to 131° by hydrophobic modification. The porosity of the samples before and after hydrophobic modification was not significantly changed. The fitting curves between WPL and WPW of hydrophilic and hydrophobic active carbon samples were both first-order linear curve. The larger the WPL, the more the water volume filling pores in the samples. The pores of 30 nm in hydrophilic samples as well as the pores of 15 and 650 nm in hydrophobic samples were mainly filled by water. The percentage of main peak of the hydrophilic and hydrophobic active carbon samples gradually increased with the increase of the wetting time, but they had not been hardly changed after 10 min wetting. Compared with other pores, the micropores and transition pores in these two kinds of samples were mainly wetted, especially transition pores. The water wetting percentage and cumulative wetting rates of all of pores (except macropores) in hydrophilic samples were large while those of hydrophobic samples are small. Interestingly, the relationship between the total wetting percentage of hydrophilic and hydrophobic active carbon samples and wetting times fitted both the classical first-order model of flotation kinetics. The fitting maximum wetting percentage and wetting rate of total pores of the hydrophilic and hydrophobic samples were was consistent with experimental data. The flotation recoveries of hydrophilic and hydrophobic powder active carbon samples were gradually decreased as the wetting time increased from 0 min to 10 min. However, their flotation recoveries were hardly decreased if wetting time was larger than 10 min, which was very consistent with their own pore wetting processes. The floatability of porous minerals in the flotation depended on their wetting percentage of pores, which affected the both the hydrophilic and hydrophobic minerals. These research results of this paper may provide some potential guidance for the subsequent processing (flotation and so on) of porous minerals with different hydrophobicity.  The authors declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this paper. This work was supported by the Future Scientists Program of China University of Mining and Technology (2020WLKXJ017) and the Postgraduate Research & Practice Innovation Program of Jiangsu Province (KYCX20_2018).