Structural, thermal and electrical properties studies of rubidium phosphite tellurate, RbH(PO3H)·Te(OH)6, were performed. An endothermic peak, which reached a completion at about 315°C accompanied with a weight loss of 4.6wt.%, was attributed to dehydration. Four types of pellets were produced, namely pellets A, B, C and D. Pellet A was tested with platinum–carbon paper electrode, and pellets B, C and D were tested with gold electrodes. Both pellets A and B were studied from 113°C to 317°C for 135h. Pellet C was first investigated from room temperature to 176°C for 360h. After cooling down to room temperature, a second measurement with pellet C was carried out under the same conditions as used for pellets A and B. Pellet D, on the other hand, was heated up to 450°C, kept at that temperature for 2h and then cooled down to room temperature prior to the conductivity measurements. It was observed that the conductivities of pellets A and B decreased to values of 5.2×10−8
                     Scm−1 and 6.6×10−7
                     Scm−1 at 317°C, respectively, and an unexpected rise in the conductivity (9.89×10−6
                     Scm−1 at 317°C) was seen with pellet C. Dehydration of RbH(PO3H)·Te(OH)6 might be responsible for this unexpected rise in the conductivity of pellet C. The monoprotic part RbH(PO3H) of RbH(PO3H)·Te(OH)6 apparently became diprotic (Rb2H2P2O5) part of Rb2H2P2O5·[Te(OH)6]2 after dehydration. The measured conductivity of pellet D, which was dehydrated prior to the measurement, reached a value of 5.41×10−5
                     Scm−1 at 317°C and showed a good stability over-each-run time and temperatures measurement up to 317°C. The dehydrated compound, Rb2H2P2O5·[Te(OH)6]2, has also a higher hydrogen density relative to the starting compound, RbH(PO3H)·Te(OH)6. It is deduced that completion of the dehydration can be responsible for the unexpected rise in the conductivity of RbH(PO3H)·Te(OH)6. This unusual case is important for studies in solid acid proton conductors.Many acid salts of inorganic oxy-acids have gained attention as promising electrolytes. Some of their properties, such as proton conductivity or ferroelectric transition, are due to specific features of hydrogen bonds formed in crystal structures of these compounds Alkali-metal acid sulfates and acid phosphates have been studied in detail since Baranov and co-workers Compounds with general formulas of M Rubidium carbonate (99.8%, Sigma–Aldrich), phosphorous acid (99%, Sigma–Aldrich) and telluric acid (99%, Sigma–Aldrich) with a molar ratio of 1:2:2 were dissolved in deionized water, separately. Concentrations of Rb The reaction is: The powder was dried in an oven in air at about 130 Scanning electron microscopy (SEM) and energy dispersive X-ray spectroscopy (EDS) analysis were carried out using a Zeiss Evo 60. EDS data were analyzed using the NSS 2.2 X-ray MicroAnalysis program. X-ray diffraction (XRD) data were recorded at room temperature using Stoe Theta-Theta XRD (40 Conductivity measurements were carried out using electrochemical impedance spectroscopy (EIS). Four pellets, namely pellet A, B, C and D were produced by pressing RbH(PO The measurements were done under dry air (pH Synthesis with slow evaporation resulted in RbH(PO Thermal analysis reveals the thermal behavior of the RbH(PO  Impedance spectra were obtained in the temperature range of 113–317 Plots of conductivity (i.e. log( Calculation of the equivalent capacity, The average equivalent capacities were calculated for each temperature and their temperature dependence is given in Referring to DTA and DSC data are in an agreement with data from conductivity measurements. It has been reported previously superprotonic phase transitions in MH(PO The endothermic peak that reaches a completion at about 315 X-ray diffraction analysis shows that synthesized RbH(PO All pellets show an increase in the conductivity by changing atmosphere from dry air to humidified air at 113 Moreover, the conductivities of the pellets A and B decrease to 4.04 Monoprotic RbH(PO Dehydrated compound, Rb The heat treatment was done in order to investigate in depth the conductivity of dehydrated compound. In contrast to the other samples, that of applied to the pellet D shows stability under reducing atmosphere (9%H Similar equivalent capacitances were calculated for the pellets A, B and C. The pellet C, however, shows an increase in the equivalent capacity at 317 The RbH(PO The pellet C shows a jump in the conductivity at 317 The authors would like to thank Prof. Dr. Selahattin Gültekin of Istanbul Aydin University for scientific contributions and colleagues at Fuel Cell and Solid State Chemistry Division at Risø DTU for their assistance and discussions, especially Mogens Mogensen, Nikolaos Bonanos, Peter Holtappels and Jens F.S. Borchsenius. The Catalysis for Sustainable Energy initiative is funded by the