This paper aims to demonstrate the potential role of micro/nanoscale investigations in the study of fault rocks, given that a multiscale and multidisciplinary approach linking structural geology, petrology and mineralogy from the outcrop to the unit-cell scale is essential to the comprehensive characterization of geological materials. To explore fault rocks at the sub-micrometer scale, a fundamental contribution is provided by the Transmission Electron Microscope (TEM), which offers a real-time combination of high-resolution images, diffraction patterns, and chemical data for extremely small volumes, providing accurate mineralogical and nanostructural determinations.
                  This paper focuses on a few selected examples, that are particularly appropriate for TEM investigation, in particular: 1) grain-size determinations on ultrafine-grained fault rocks; 2) detection and characterization of poorly crystalline minerals (e.g., clays) and amorphous phases within fault rocks; 3) identification of deformation-induced mineral reactions occurring within fault zones (e.g., dolomite decarbonation and serpentine dehydration); and 4) observations of recurrent deformation nanotextures in phyllosilicates. TEM investigation can provide an unexpected amount of data, much of which cannot be obtained by conventional techniques, and it can therefore significantly contribute to an understanding of the physico-chemical conditions for faulting and fault mechanics.A fault zone is an extremely dynamic system, characterized by specific physico-chemical conditions that typically result in enhanced mineral reactivity and intense microstructural changes. Consequently, rocks that form within a fault zone are among the most complex and heterogeneous geological materials, and their comprehension requires a multidisciplinary and multiscale investigation, from the outcrop to the single-crystal scale. The characterization of a fault rock can be achieved through the identification of 1) fault-rock mineralogy and microstructure, which in most cases, differ from the original protolith; 2) the nature of deformation-induced and deformation-facilitated reactions, which are fundamentally controlled by specific geodynamical and physico-chemical conditions, such that even opposite processes (e.g., hydration versus dehydration or crystallization versus amorphization) may be favoured in different fault zones; and 3) the way that fault rock with specific mineralogical and microstructural characteristics behaved during deformation, from microstructural evidence of deformation mechanisms and strain partitioning. The accurate characterization of these features within a fault-rock sample is commonly complicated by the development of poorly crystalline to amorphous phases and ultrafine grained mineral assemblages (e.g., SEM investigation, coupled with microanalytical techniques, provides microstructural details, but it can suffer of at least two main drawbacks: 1) resolution limits, even if greatly improved by using field-emission-gun, FEG, instruments; and 2) the lack of crystal-structural information (i.e., diffraction data). Basically, the last point means that nanosized quartz, coesite, opal and amorphous silica are difficult to distinguish. This also applies to ultracataclasites and pseudotachylyte glasses that are characterized by the same average chemical composition. The TEM is the only instrument that provides high-resolution images, chemical analyses and diffraction data from sub-micrometric volumes simultaneously. For that reason, a growing number of studies of naturally and experimentally deformed rocks employ high-resolution and analytical TEM (e.g., In this paper, I aim to emphasize the potential role of the TEM in the study of fault rocks, using case histories of broad geological interest to illustrate that TEM can provide data relevant to structural problems. Due to the extreme variability of fault rocks and related issues, and to the multiplicity of TEM experimental modes (e.g., bright versus dark field imaging), this review will be necessarily incomplete. In particular, to avoid too broad a scope, I will limit its scope to bright field TEM observations and to predominantly brittle deformation in the upper crust. To facilitate communication, the next section reports a short overview of TEM principles, providing a key for “reading” TEM images and diffraction patterns. The transmission electron microscope (TEM) has a great and not yet fully explored potential in structural geology investigations. As a “microscope”, it obviously provides enlarged views of the investigated object, with magnification up to ∼1,000,000 times and theoretical point-to-point resolution close to 1 Å. The basic equipment is comparable to a petrographic optical microscope, upside down. The “light” source is located at the top of the microscope column and produces an incident electron beam that is accelerated downward and focussed, through the condenser lens system, onto the electron-transparent specimen, which must be thinner than 100 nm. The electrons emerging from the specimen are received by the objective lens and transferred, through the intermediate and projector lens system, downward to the viewing plane. However, by suitably changing the electrons’ path across the intermediate and projector lenses, electron diffraction patterns can be obtained instead of images. “Switching” from images, referred to as direct space, to diffraction patterns, referred to as reciprocal space, is instantaneous. The addition of energy dispersive spectrometers (EDS) and other detectors, such as electron energy loss spectrometers (EELS), provides complementary chemical data. Thus, the TEM is a powerful tool that produces high magnification images, and, at the same time, electron diffraction patterns and chemical analyses for extremely small volumes, that are several orders of magnitude smaller than can be analysed using conventional X-ray diffraction and spectrometry. The real-time combination of electron images, diffraction patterns and chemical data with high spatial and analytical resolution is probably the most outstanding feature of this instrument, making it an indispensable tool in the study of heterogeneous, ultrafine grained and poorly crystalline materials, such as fault rocks frequently are. The interpretation of TEM images is not straightforward, depending on several parameters including microscope operating conditions (e.g., magnification, astigmatism, defocus value), sample variables (e.g., sample thickness, crystal orientation, beam damage) and imaging modes (e.g., bright versus dark field, amplitude versus phase contrast images). In this paper, I will only deal with bright-field phase-contrast images, neglecting the huge contribution of dark-field imaging to the study of crystal deformation, particularly for dislocation geometry, distribution and evolution (e.g.,  The ring-shaped SAED pattern in  In the proper original orientation, (hkl) lattice planes (direct space) are perpendicular to corresponding [hkl]* axis (reciprocal space). Thus, (001) lattice fringes of phyllosilicates should be perpendicular to the c* reciprocal axis. Unfortunately, due to editorial reasons, TEM images and corresponding SAED patterns are often rotated during figure assembly. For example, (001) The principles of TEM electron diffraction, imaging and spectroscopy are summarized by Fault-rock-related features for which TEM study is particularly appropriate include 1) ultrafine-grained fault rocks, 2) poorly crystalline and amorphous phases within fault rocks, 3) deformation-induced mineral reactions within fault rocks, and 4) deformation-induced nanostructures (limited to layer silicates). Often, a fault-rock sample contains more than one of these features, so that they can be investigated simultaneously. Representative TEM observations from previous studies are shown, but their implications in structural geology are extensively detailed in the Discussion and Conclusions section. The TEM can be considered as an extended petrographic tool for the study of fine and ultrafine (below 100 nm) grained rocks. This important target in structural geology studies reveals ultrafine assemblages, that form in natural and experimental slip zones due to either extreme grain-size reduction, e.g., ultracataclasites ( These studies emphasize that, when ultrafine-grained fault rocks are concerned, unbiased grain size and PSD determinations with distinction between fractal and non-fractal distributions, can be achieved only by TEM investigations. High-magnification images reveal possible aggregation, cementation and healing processes, which are hardly detectable by optical microscopy and SEM, minimizing biased observations and, possibly, wrong genetic and mechanical interpretations. For example, The detection and the nanostructural characterization of ultrafine-grained materials are key to the study of fault rocks, because most mechanical, physical and chemical processes in a fault zone are grain-size sensitive and dependent on the grain-surface area. In particular, as detailed in the Discussion section, the fine and ultrafine fractions are believed to fundamentally influence fault-slip mechanisms, earthquake energy budget and fault-rock reactivity (e.g., As noted above, fault rocks may consist of ultrafine particles. The study of fault rocks can be further complicated by the occurrence of poorly crystalline and amorphous phases, often localized in micrometric or sub-micrometric horizons, films and coatings. X-ray diffraction techniques are generally insufficient to characterize these samples, due to the low intensity of diffracted beams and, most importantly, to the loss of microstructural relationships. SEM with EDS or EMPA (electron microprobe analyses) provides textural and “bulk” chemical data on micrometer-sized volumes, but they do not yield in-situ characterizations of the crystal-structural state, i.e., they are not able to discriminate among crystalline materials with high structural order, disordered poorly crystalline materials or completely amorphous phases. A significant example of poorly crystalline material common in fault rocks, is represented by clays. As detailed in the Discussion section, clays have important implications in fault strength and, specifically, in mineral weakening processes. The most common clays are illite (d Fault rocks may also contain amorphous phases (e.g., Identification of mineral reactions, which occur during or after formation of a fault rock requires the accurate mineralogical identification of reactants and products, and the definition of their microstructural relationships. While these features can be characterized by conventional petrographic or SEM investigations for most rocks, TEM is needed in ultrafine-grained and poorly crystalline fault rocks. The correct identification of mineral reactions and resulting mineral assemblages enhances fault understanding. In many cases, deformation-induced reactions within the brittle crust result in significant mechanical weakening, predominantly through hydration reactions forming weak minerals (e.g., Dolostone-hosted fault zones are often characterized by the occurrence of talc, formed by interaction of dolomite with silica-rich fluids at relatively low temperature (250–400 °C at 1–2 kbar), according to the reaction 3MgCa(CO At different geodynamical and chemical conditions, dolostones may breakdown to Mg-rich calcite + periclase (MgO) + CO These two examples point out that, depending on P/T and stress conditions, and on the nature of circulating fluids, dolomite decarbonation may result in completely different fault rocks, with different mechanical behaviour. In the first example, the pervasive, low-temperature crystallization of weak talc causes a significant reduction of the fault friction coefficient, leading to a dominant deformation mechanism of mineral weakening. In the second example, the decomposition of dolomite by frictional heating causes, on one side, a significant release of CO Serpentinitic rocks consist predominantly of poorly crystalline assemblages of fine/ultrafine lizardite, antigorite and chrysotile (i.e., they are typical subjects for TEM investigation), and are believed to play a chief role in lithosphere dynamics (e.g., Evidence of serpentine dehydration has been observed in experimentally deformed lizardite + chrysotile serpentinites (torsion experiments at 550–650 °C and 300–400 MPa; As with dolomite decarbonation, serpentine dehydration can be triggered by frictional heating during seismic slip (e.g., The TEM has been largely used to study the intracrystalline deformation structures in rock-forming minerals such as carbonates, feldspars, quartz and olivine (e.g., TEM-scale kinking has been documented in experimentally deformed talc at relatively high pressures and temperatures ( The occurrence of kinks in experimentally deformed serpentine was documented by Interlayer delamination is almost ubiquitous in deformed phyllosilicates, and is typically associated with (001) slip (e.g., Deformation of layer silicates may also induce stacking faults, i.e. “mistakes” in the overlapping sequence of (001) planes (e.g., Previous sections aimed to demonstrate the potentials of TEM investigation in fault-rock studies, giving special emphasis to the accurate characterization of ultrafine-grained polymineralic assemblages, poorly crystalline minerals, amorphous phases, deformation-induced nanostructures and mineral reactions. The fine/ultrafine fraction has a fundamental role in fault slip mechanisms, in the earthquake energy budget and in fault rock reactivity (e.g., The occurrence of ultrafine grained particles is thought to play a role in slip weakening mechanisms, as reported by The importance of nanoscale investigations in mechanical studies is also emphasized by the recent development of new disciplines such as nanotribology and nanomechanics (e.g., The examples reported in this paper also demonstrate that the TEM can be indispensable for the (typically not straightforward) identification of poorly crystalline, fine-grained minerals, like clays and talc. The main implication in structural geology studies is that clays, particularly smectite, and talc are among the weakest materials in geological samples with friction coefficients as low as ∼0.05–0.2, and are thought to significantly influence fault frictional properties, causing weakening and aseismic slip (e.g., TEM can be necessary for the correct identification of deformation-induced mineral reactions as well as for the detection and characterization of possible amorphous phases. Cyclic oscillations in the physico-chemical conditions, both in time and space, may trigger mineralogical and structural changes at the sub-micron scale, that obviously affect the mechanical properties of the fault rock. For example, weak minerals like clays, talc or chrysotile may evolve to stronger assemblages under increasing metamorphic conditions, but subsequent retrograde metamorphism may reverse the reaction, leading to the precipitation of weak phases (and vice versa). The knowledge of reactants, products (either crystalline or amorphous) and of their nanostructural relationships allows, on one hand, discrimination among multiple genetic mechanisms. For example, does a pseudotachylite sample have a melt origin or does it derive from ultracomminution processes? On the other hand, the identification of the mineral reaction may provide useful constraints about the physical and chemical conditions during faulting. For example, Summarizing, the examples addressed here have highlighted the advantages of a multidisciplinary approach, showing that several fundamental features of fault rocks occur at a submicrometric scale. These submicrometric features can be accurately determined only by combining images with diffraction and chemical data at a nanoscale resolution. This nanoscale inspection does and will significantly contribute to our understanding of fault mechanical behaviour and faulting conditions. Most of the observations reported in this review derive from scientific collaborations with Cristiano Collettini (University of Perugia, Italy), that is acknowledged for its fundamental scientific support, Takehiro Hirose (Kochi, Japan) and Nicola De Paola (Durham University). L. Goodwin is acknowledged for her excellent review and helpful suggestions.