Mining investment has been recognized as capital intensive due mainly to the cost of large equipment. Equipment capital costs for a given operation are usually within the order of hundreds of million dollars but may reach to billion dollars for large companies operating multiple mines. Such large investments require the optimum usage of equipment in a manner that the operating costs are minimized and the utilization of equipment is maximized through optimal scheduling. This optimum usage is required to ensure that the business remains sustainable and financially stable. Most mining operations utilize trucks to haul the mined material. Maintenance is one of the major operating cost items for these fleets as it can reach approximately one hundred million dollars yearly. There is no method or application in the literature that optimizes the utilization for truck fleet over the life of mine. A new approach based on mixed integer programming (MIP) techniques is used for annually scheduling a fixed fleet of mining trucks in a given operation, over a multi-year time horizon to minimize maintenance cost. The model uses the truck age (total hours of usage), maintenance cost and required operating hours to achieve annual production targets to produce an optimum truck schedule. While this paper focuses on scheduling trucks for mining operation, concept can be used in most businesses using equipment with significant maintenance costs. A case study for a large scale gold mine showed an annual discounted (10% rate) maintenance cost saving of over $2M and more than 16% ($21M) of overall maintenance cost reduction over 10 years of mine life, compared with the spreadsheet based approach used currently at the operation.Mining is a capital intensive business requiring large size, expensive equipment, such as 20–40 trucks with over 200 tonnes capacity, large excavators, loaders and ancillary equipment fleet. The capital costs of these large fleets can be as high as a few hundred million dollars. To sustain the business in a financially strong and stable condition, all aspects of the mining operation must be managed in an optimal manner as much as possible. Equipment maintenance cost is one critical financial aspect of a mining operation. Maintenance cost can constitute around 30–50% of the overall haulage costs of a surface mining operation that uses truck and shovel fleets for overburden and ore removal. As part of the process of maximizing profit and minimizing costs, mining operations are constantly striving to obtain maximum equipment productivity. Due to the high operating costs associated with mining projects, even a small increase in mining equipment productivity will often result in savings of millions of dollars. As surface mining operations expand and become deeper, more material will need to be hauled longer distances with a consequent increase in truck cycle times. More trucks will need to be purchased to compensate for longer cycle times. There will also be a requirement to replace older trucks with very high maintenance costs and inefficiency (too much downtime reducing operation’s productivity). This will result in an increase in demand for truck fleets, which ultimately increases the importance of future maintenance planning. Large mining trucks are used at surface mines to move material to either a dumping area or processing plant, depending on the mineral content. The amount of material that needs to be moved periodically is identified by generating a mine production schedule. Based on the identified total material movement, the required periodical equipment hours are determined. Subsequently, the equipment schedule is produced to meet the periodically required truck hours. The age of a mining truck can be defined as the total hours that a truck has been operated. A mining operation can involve different truck types of varying ages and associated maintenance costs. These maintenance costs can be obtained from historical data at the existing operation, from other operations using the same trucks and/or estimated values from the truck manufacturer. These cost data are presented in a tabular form where a truck maintenance cost corresponds to a certain truck age. This means that when a truck has been operated for certain number of hours, maintenance is required at a cost as shown in Since the early 1960s, optimization techniques have been applied to mining problems. Mixed integer programming (MIP) models are recognized as having significant potential for optimizing both surface and underground mining operations. MIP type optimization techniques to date have mainly been focused on production scheduling. The methods of production scheduling are discussed extensively in the literature by, for example, A new MIP model is proposed to optimize the scheduling of a truck fleet with the objective of minimizing the overall discounted maintenance cost. Although this paper focuses on a truck fleet for a surface mining operation, the methodology can be applied for any businesses involving large equipment fleets requiring significant maintenance cost. The following section reviews scheduling literature and current practices in the mining industry. The proposed MIP model formulations are then discussed. Subsequently, a truck fleet for a gold mining operation is scheduled using both a traditional approach (TA) and the proposed MIP model approach. Finally, the results are evaluated and compared for benchmarking the proposed MIP model. The concept of scheduling mining equipment with the aim to achieve a budgeted maintenance cost over the life of a mine is not new; however, scheduling equipment via an approach to minimize the maintenance cost as the primary focus of the scheduling process is new. There is no mathematical based method that considers the entire truck fleet and entire mine life to minimize the equipment maintenance cost and properly integrates the cost of engine rebuild and overall maintenance at a certain age.     Further formulations and applications of MIP to different areas can be seen in the literature, but as A major focus of optimization related to truck fleets has revolved around the DISPATCH system for many years. This system assigns trucks to a loader and manages the truck destinations. The efforts in optimizing truck dispatching systems do not cover the equipment’s schedule of utilization to minimize the maintenance cost. In the literature, the only related study has been reported by The most common way of scheduling trucks in the mining industry is manual scheduling through extensive spreadsheets that rely heavily on the experience and skill of the scheduler. Each year trucks are scheduled to satisfy the required truck hours. This approach relies on using newer trucks as much as possible assuming that the maintenance cost increases as the age of the truck increases. There is, however, no such relationship between truck age and maintenance cost. This approach also cannot handle properly the situation where, at a certain age, the truck needs an engine rebuild and overall high cost maintenance. Usually, after major maintenance on a truck, the cost of that truck is likely to be lower than that of newer trucks. Thus the distribution of the maintenance cost is often irregular throughout the life of the trucks. Furthermore, the problem becomes more complicated when various type of trucks are used; this is often the case for many large mining operations. The proposed mathematical programming model is based on MIP techniques and is deterministic in nature. It aims to minimize truck maintenance cost while meeting the yearly required truck hours for a given operation. The proposed model considers the maintenance cost variation with truck age and the periodical required rate of material movement for the life of mine to produce a globally optimum truck schedule. It is common for many operating mines to have fleets containing trucks of different ages. When a new mine is started, usually a fleet of new trucks are purchased. Due to different downtimes of each truck, the operating hours of all the trucks are not expected to stay the same throughout the mine life. Some trucks may need to be replaced by new trucks when they start to become inefficient for production (too excessive maintenance cost and frequent long down time). The maintenance cost data of the truck fleet are usually available at mines for a range of truck ages (or age bins). There are no set rules for making the age bin ranges, but as the number of bins increases, the number of variables needed for the mathematical model also increases. In the case study presented in this paper, a 5000 hours range is used. That means when a truck age is less than 5000 hours, it is allocated to bin 1 and when it is between 5000 and 10000 hours, it is allocated to bin 2, etc. This data set includes planned maintenance as the main part of the cost and also some estimates for unexpected repair costs. Solving the following MIP model provides values for decision variables that correspond to truck fleet schedule; that is, whether or not to use a given truck and age bin (s) in a given time period. This model addresses the variability of maintenance for truck types and ages over the life of the operation with its own restrictions, such as cost values that may not be exactly the same as in the historical data and the estimated costs for the new trucks obtained from the manufacturer that can vary depending on the conditions at the operations. This proposed model has three main unique aspects. The first is that the sequencing of age bins is achieved by using binary variables while allowing the age bins to be used at less than full capacity. This means age bins can be used partially within a time period by implementing binary and linear variables in Eqs. The MIP model formulation is as follows: truck ID age bins time period (year) critical bin hours the discounted cost value ($/hour) for truck the amount of money for rebuilding the truck the available hours for truck the maximum available hours for truck the cumulative used hours for truck the required truck hours for a given time period the number of hours scheduled for truck   Constraint Constraints Data from a mine located in Western Australia are used to implement the formulations and enable a comparison between TA and the proposed MIP model. After a truck is used for 70,000 hours (critical bin number,  The mine truck fleet scheduled using TA is based on Excel spreadsheets. The method aims to first use the new trucks and then older trucks, as it assumes that newer trucks have lower costs. This assumption is made to simplify the problem due to the limitations of the Excel spreadsheet model to incorporate the complexities of the truck scheduling problem. Each year, it schedules the trucks to satisfy the required truck hours. The results of the truck schedule using the TA are presented in It is not possible for the TA to integrate the all the cost information and possible variations. For example, as new trucks age, their costs might increase and after an expensive repair, maintenance costs often decrease. The difficulty is mainly due to the interaction between trucks at certain age bins over the entire mine life. The schedule produced using TA has some variations from the available truck hour capacities. This is caused because of that the total available truck hours are calculated in a year and it is averaged over the available trucks in that year. This averaged available truck hour is used as available truck capacity. For example, in the first year for truck 7, it is scheduled to run for 7261 hours, but the maximum possible available operating hours is 7138. Furthermore truck 19 has 7412 hours available, but it is still scheduled for 7261 hours. Since the schedule is completed using average available hours that a truck can run in a year, it does not violate the yearly total available truck hour capacity. It doesn’t make any difference if it would consider individual truck hours availability or annual overall availability, because it cannot consider the cost of individual bins. The schedule obtained using TA does not use trucks 1 and 2 for the first two years. These trucks are relatively older when compared with the rest of the fleet. The newer trucks, (i.e., 32, 33 and 34) are used as much as possible and the older trucks are used only when needed. Furthermore, the first 3 trucks (relatively old) are not used after the 70,000 hours limit and the major repair costs for them are avoided. The three newest trucks, however, also did not reach the 70,000 hours limit even though they are scheduled for high usage hours. The remaining 28 trucks are required to undergo major repair to satisfy the total required operating hours. In this section, the trucks are scheduled using the MIP model which was presented in Section The proposed MIP model is programmed using the Visual Basic code and the formulation is solved with CPLEX solver, Version 11.2 ( To measure the computational time of the problem, two more randomly generated instances have been solved. The optimal solution was obtained instantly (in 0.91 second) for the first case which contained 25 trucks and 3.45 hours for the second case which contained 45 trucks with 5% gap. As experimented, as the number of trucks increase so do the number of binary variables, which results in longer solution times. In order to obtain an optimal solution for the larger models within a reasonable time frame, binary variables can be reduced by increasing the age bin ranges. However, it would be very exceptional case to have a mine, which contains more than 45 trucks in a single operation. A financial evaluation of the truck schedules is performed using 10% discount rate with the maintenance costs provided in   A new MIP model has been proposed to provide substantial cost savings for equipment scheduling by optimizing truck usage. The MIP model used for this case study provides a saving of approximately $15.6M in discounted cash costs for the first 5 years and $21.3M over the 10 year mine life. While it is not possible to predict precisely the savings that the MIP model can generate for any mine, generally a 10–25% maintenance cost saving can be expected. A great deal of experience and simplifying assumptions are required to produce the TA generated schedule. Moreover, this schedule will often vary from person to person and it is difficult to quantify its quality. On the other hand, the proposed MIP based model can generate the solution in a relatively short time period without simplifying assumptions. It also helps the operation to evaluate different scenarios within a reasonable time period. There is a common misconception that truck scheduling can be successfully achieved by simply examining the cost bins and one may spend more time on it trying to reduce the cost by a trial-and error approach. There is, however, a complex interaction between the trucks and age bins due to the fact that the cost does not linearly increase with the truck age. This is why the globally optimal MIP model is able to produce substantial savings. Furthermore, the traditional approach also fails during the scheduling process to consider effectively some of the financial parameters, such as major engine re-build costs if trucks are used over a specified number of hours, the effect of this rebuild on the costs for the upper bins and also the interaction of age bin costs between trucks.