The microwave irradiation is used to the oxidative roasting of copper sulfide concentrate in the presence of CaCO3 with the aim of eliminating sulfur dioxide emissions and accelerating roasting process. The calcine obtained is leached with NH3–(NH4)2CO3 solution for the recovery of copper. It is shown that the copper extractions from the calcine roasted with microwave heating are as high as 90–96.6%, while those with conventional heating are only 71–77.4%. The sulfur retention is greater than 96% for both the microwave and conventional heating. The reaction rates of the roasting process increased 3.97–17.15 times when using microwaves instead of conventional heating. The phase changes and reaction mechanism of the roasting process are also investigated with X-ray diffraction and thermal analysis.In most cases, copper sulfide concentrates are smelted in a flash or bath smelting furnace to produce copper matte which is then converted to blister copper by air or oxygen-enriched air in a Peirce–Smith converter. The blister copper is refined in either reverberatory or rotary furnaces to produce the anode copper containing low oxygen levels which is further refined to cathode copper by an electrolytic refining process. This traditional pyrometallurgical process is fundamentally sound when high grade copper concentrates are smelted. The exploitation of low grade ores, pocket deposits and complex sulfide reserves must be taken into consideration with the decrease of rich copper deposits. When smelting the above copper resources with the traditional pyrometallurgical process, the ores must be beneficiated to concentrates of certain grade and specification by flotation because the traditional pyrometallurgical process will become unmanageable without the desired grade of copper concentrates. However, it is often difficult to produce the desired grade of copper concentrates from these low grade copper resources. In addition, the problem of SO In search of alternative processes, several hydrometallurgical and pyro-hydrometallurgical routes have been attempted in the recent past The copper sulfide concentrate used in this investigation was from Yunnan Province of China. Its chemical composition is given in The calcium carbonate used as a sulfur-retention reagent is natural calcite powder with 99% purity. The particle size of the calcite powder is 43–65 Roasting experiments were conducted with pellets of CuFeS The pellets prepared with CuFeS The sample temperatures with conventional heating was directly measured by a Pt–Rh(Pt) thermocouple. However, it was not possible to measure the sample temperature with the thermocouple under microwave condition. In this investigation, therefore, the sample temperatures with microwave heating were determined by instantly inserting a metal-sheathed Ni(Cr)–Ni(Si) thermocouple into the center of samples as soon as the microwave irradiation was stopped. The thermal analysis for the oxidative roasting of CuFeS The first stage starts at 355 The second stage starts at 575 In each run, 20 Microwave heating is based on the heat effects generated by the dissipation of microwave energy within materials. The microwave heating process in solid materials can be described by The dielectric heating effects depend on both the dielectric and the magnetic properties of the medium. For a material, which does not have significant magnetic properties, then only the complex permittivity needs to be considered and the heat effects can be represented by The overall heat effects of chemical reactions can be expressed as Thus, the internal heat source In experiments, the size of CuFeS The effect of ample mass on the microwave roasting of CuFeS In this group experiment, 33 However, it should be pointed out that the temperatures measured in this work may lead to underestimation of the actual temperatures of samples because the power was turned off during the temperature measurements and then there would be a temperature drop due to heat loss. The localized temperature within sample may exceed 400 The roasting experiments with conventional heating were conducted in the temperature range of 600–900 The effect of temperatures on the copper extraction is shown in When the experimental data in From The oxidative roasting of CuFeS  The application of microwave irradiation to the oxidative roasting of copper sulfide concentrate in the presence of CaCO The calcine obtained can be leached with NH The heating rate of CuFeS Copper, iron and sulfur in the concentrate are, respectively, transformed into CuSO In the microwave roasting process, some of the CuSO The roasting process could be described with shrinking core model. The apparent activation energy for the process is 6.66 The authors are grateful for the financial support of this work by the Natural Science Foundation of Yunnan Province under Grant No. 2002E0024M. Special thanks are due to Associate Professor Jian Li for her contributions in thermal analysis.