Phosphate rock (PR) contains traces of rare earth elements (REEs), ranging from 100 to 1000μg/g. However, REE may be regarded as s secondary source for REE since large tonnages of PR are mined annually and used in phosphoric acid production.
                  In this work, batch leaching tests were conducted to simulate (DH) and (HDH) wet processes in order to determine REE distribution in the product acid and phosphogypsum (PG). Then REE was extracted in-line during PR acidulation using Tributyl Phosphate (TBP) diluted with kerosene and ion exchange resin DOWEX- 50WX8 (−300+150μm).
                  It was found that in DH process, approximately 80% of the feed REE reported to PG; about 65% of them were LREE while HREE constitute 64% of REE reported to the product acid. On the other hand, REE reported to PG in HDH process was slightly higher than DH; approximately 84% of the REE was reported to PG; 62% of them were LREE while 70% of REE reported to product acid was HREE.
                  It was also found that REE was efficiently extracted by ion exchange resin than TBP solvent: REE in PG was increased by 230%, from 335.3 to 1106.6μg/g, with ion exchange resin compared to 45% REE reduction (from 335.3 to 182.27μg/g) when TBP solvent was added. The main challenge is to efficiently separate the loaded resin beads from the fine grained PG and acid insoluble residuals.Rare earth elements (REEs) are the 15 lanthanides plus yttrium (Y) and scandium (Sc). They are rare not due to their abundance in earth crust but because they are rarely found in economic and mineable deposits. REEs are critical to several fast growing industries such as clean technology, hybrid cars, electronics, advanced military applications as well as traditional industries such as metallurgy, surgical instruments, battery, and nuclear energy ( Phosphate rock (PR) contains 100–1000 REE can be extracted from wet process products (PG and phosphoric acid) or from beneficiation streams (concentrate, sand tailings and waste clay) by solvent or ion exchange resin; also they can be extracted inline during phosphoric acid production. Extraction from wet process products was conducted by several researchers:  In wet process, PR is digested at elevated temperature of 72–83 Limited research was conducted on extracting REE during PR acidulation of phosphate rock. Actually, the presence of REE in PR is not desirable from the fertilizer industry's point of view; the aim of industrial wet process practice is to get rid of REE and any other impurities that may affect PG crystal growth. According to Some attempts were conducted to use ion exchange resin in uranium and REE extraction. Ion exchange resin is usually used in packed column where loaded solutions are passed over the resin. Nevertheless, passing slurry rich in REE such as phosphoric acid pulp will cause column clogging. On the other hand, REE PG uptake measured by the distribution coefficient of REE in PG compared to phosphoric acid pulp, increased with the decreased deviation from Ca The mechanism of REE extraction by ion exchange resin mainly occurred due to film and particle diffusion, movement of resin particles through the thin film around REE ions as well as movement of resin ions through the thin film around resin particle itself. Therefore, extraction depends on the following parameters: REE ionic radius, REE hydration energy i.e., hydrated REE ionic radius, crystallization kinetic, and the strength of the resin measured by equivalent charge produced by its functional group In this contribution, a solvent (TBP) and ion exchange resin (DOWEX-50WX8,-300 Approximately 10 It was found that phosphate (%P Flotation concentrate was then leached with diluted sulfuric acid and rinsed with tap water to remove any traces of unwanted impurities e.g., traces of amine collector, organics. Approximately 2 Flotation reagents were prepared as follows: 5% of sulfuric acid and 2% of soda ash solutions were diluted by water and used for pH control and acid scrubbing. Fatty amine emulsion (2.5%) was prepared by mixing 2.5 Chemical analysis was conducted by inductively coupled Plasma Atomic Emission Spectroscopy (ICP-AES)/PerkinElmer-Optima 8300. One gram of dry solids was digested by 20 Acid insoluble (A.I) was fired (900 Loss on ignition (LOI) which represents the amount of volatile (organic and inorganic) material in phosphate sample can be used as indirect estimation of dolomite in flotation feed. Francolite (carbonate–flourapatite), the main mineral of Florida phosphate approximately assays 1.2% C (4.5% CO PR digestion was conducted in 2-l double glass reactor (Columbia-International), connected to a 5 DH process was simulated by mixing 20 Simultaneous REE extraction experiments were conducted as follows: in SX part, TriButyl Phosphate (TBP) solvent was added at the end of the first hour of digestion after the mixing speed was reduced to 100 On the other hand, IX was conducted by mixing 10 Single filter process as described by   PG (CaSO  The addition of TBP solvent at elevated temperatures (72   Nevertheless, TBP addition causes filtration problems, aggravating phosphoric acid losses. The addition of ion exchange resin (DOWEX-50WX8) increased REE in PG as shown in A comparison between REE distribution in PG and product acid with both TBP solvent and ion exchange resin shows that REE recovery to PG was reduced by approximately 45% with TBP compared to 1% increase with ion exchange resin. This indicates that TBP solvent was more effective for inline REE extraction than ion exchange resin. However, REE in PG was increased by 230%, from 335.3 to 1106.6 The mechanism of REE extraction by ion exchange resin mainly occurred due to film and particle diffusion, movement of resin particles through the thin film around REE ions as well as movement of resin ions through the thin film around resin particle itself. Therefore, extraction depends on the following parameters: REE ionic radius, REE hydration energy i.e., hydrated REE ionic radius, crystallization kinetic, and the strength of the resin measured by equivalent charge produced by its functional group ( A comparison between TBP solvent addition during HDH process slightly increased REE in PG as shown in Based on the previous discussions, the following conclusions can be withdrawn: In the simulated DH process, approximately 80% of the feed REE was reported to PG; about 65% of them were LREE while HREE constitute 64% of REE reported to the product acid. On the other hand, REE reported to PG in HDH process was slightly higher than DH; approximately 84% of the REE was reported to PG; 62% of them were LREE while 70% of REE reported to product acid was HREE. Higher LREE in PG of DH process indicates that LREE was easily co-crystalized with PG due to their isomorphs substitution for Ca The addition of TBP solvent to DH process reduced REE in PG by approximately 45%. The solvent probably reduced LREE distribution in PG by preventing them from co-crystallization with PG. On the other hand,TBP solvent addition during HDH process slightly increased REE in both PG and product acid. This indicates that even though the addition of TBP solvent increases REE concentration in product acid, acid losses due to filtration difficulties reduce the benefits gained from using TBP solvent. A comparison between REE distribution in PG and product acid with both TBP solvent and ion exchange resin for DH process showed that REE was efficiently extracted by ion exchange resin than TBP solvent: REE in PG was increased by 230%, from 335.3 to 1106.6 This work was funded by the The authors would also like to thank the anonymous reviewers for their valuable comments which significantly improved the quality of our paper.