In this study, local scour around two identical pipelines in a tandem arrangement are investigated numerically. The two-dimensional Reynolds-averaged Navier–Stokes (RANS) equations, together with the conservation equation of the sediment mass are solved to simulate the flow around two pipelines and the evolution of the local scour profile below the pipelines. The gap ratios between the two pipelines (G/D) range from 0.5 to 5 with an interval of 0.5, where G is the gap between the two pipelines and D is the diameter of the pipelines. The focus of the study is to investigate the effects of the gap ratio on the scour depth and scour time scale. It is found that the scour depth below the downstream pipeline is greater than that below the upstream pipeline under both clear water and live bed conditions because of the effect of the vortex shedding from the upstream pipeline. The maximum scour depth below the downstream pipeline occurs at G/D
                     =2.5 under both clear water and live bed conditions, which is about the critical gap ratio beyond which vortex shedding from the upstream pipeline occurs. As the gap ratio exceeds 2.5, the scour depth below the downstream pipeline decreases with increasing gap ratio due to the weakening effect of the vortex shedding from the upstream pipeline on the scour. The scour under the clear water condition is simulated at a velocity 25% lower than the critical velocity for live bed scour. The variations of the scour depths below the two pipelines in the clear water and live bed conditions are found to be similar to each other. Strong positive mean lift coefficient on the downstream pipeline was observed during the scour process, which is believed to have a negative effect on the stability of downstream pipeline. The RMS lift coefficient on the downstream pipeline increases significantly when the vortex shedding from the upstream pipeline occurs.Local scour around subsea pipelines has been studied extensively in the past decades due to its significance in the offshore oil and gas industry. A number of numerical models have also been developed for predicting the scour process. Studies of scour below pipelines have been extended to some more complex cases. Some studies were focused on the scour process below two pipelines. Although many studies have been conducted to investigate scour below a single pipeline, the effects of the spacing between two pipelines on scour behavior are not properly understood. The present numerical study will focus on understanding scour behavior of two tandem pipelines under different pipeline spacing conditions. Specifically, local scour below two pipelines of an identical diameter in a tandem arrangement in steady current is simulated numerically. The flow field around the pipelines is simulated by solving the two-dimensional Reynolds-Averaged Navier–Stokes equations with a  The RANS equations and the SST A computational domain with a length of 60 On the seabed surface, the standard wall function is used in order to avoid modeling the time consuming boundary layer flow ( The critical Shields number for the motion of the sediment calculated based Eq. The suspended load is calculated by integrating the sediment flux over the water depth numerically: To speed up the simulation of local scour, which is a very slow process, the morphological time step for solving Eq. In the numerical simulation, the RANS equations are solved until the flow and the sediment concentration reaches equilibrium. Then the bed load and the suspended load transport rates are calculated and the conservation of the sediment mass is solved to predict the scour. To validate the present numerical model, two laboratory tests were conducted to measure the local scour depths below two tandem pipelines under the live bed condition. The tests were conducted in the O-tube recirculation water flume located at The University of Western Australia. The flow in the fully enclosed O-tube flume are generated by a computer-controlled water pump as shown in Two laboratory tests with gap ratios of   The validation of the numerical model under the clear water scour conditions is testified by comparing the numerical results with the experimental data by  The comparisons between the numerical and experimental results show that the present model predicts the scour depth reasonably well under both the live bed and the clear water conditions. Although the numerical model slightly overestimates the scour depth, it is expected that the influence of the gap ration on the scour process can be identified by extensive numerical simulations. After the numerical model is validated, simulations are conducted for gap ratios ranging from 0.5 to 5 and the effects of the gap ratio on the scour under the live bed and clear water conditions are discussed in The effect of the gap ratio on the scour under the live bed conditions is examined by simulating the scour for    The variation of the scour depth with the gap ratio can be explained by examining the vortex shedding in the wake of the two pipelines. For two cylinders in tandem in a uniform flow (without the influence from the bed), the vortex shedding from the upstream cylinder does not occur until the gap between them exceeds a critical value and this critical value is dependent on the Reynolds number (    The scour below the two pipelines has direct influences on the hydrodynamic forces. The drag and lift coefficients on each pipeline are defined as The mean drag coefficient on the upstream pipeline is much less affected by the gap ratio as shown in   The effects of the gap ratio (   Local scour around two subsea pipelines in a tandem arrangement is studied numerically. The RANS equations are solved for simulating the flow past the two pipelines and the conservation of sediment mass is solved for predicting the evolution of the sea bed profile. The numerical model is validated against the experimental data under both clear water and live bed scour conditions. Then, the effects of the gap between the two pipelines on the scour are studied by extensive numerical simulations with the gap ratio between the two pipelines ranging from 0.5 to 5. Under the live bed scour condition, it is found that the in the simulated range of Significant positive lift coefficients of the downstream pipeline are observed at the early stage of scour, which has a very negative effect on the pipeline stability. Both the RMS drag and lift coefficients of the downstream pipeline are greater than their counterparts of the upstream pipeline because the vortex shedding form the upstream pipeline affects the downstream pipeline. The simulation of clear water scour was conducted at a velocity 25% smaller than the critical velocity for scour. The scour depth under the clear water condition for a single pipeline and that under the upstream pipeline in the two-pipeline system are slightly greater than their counterparts in the live bed condition, because of the strong erosion below the two pipelines and no supply of sand from the upstream. However, the scour depth below the downstream pipeline is found to be slightly smaller than that in the live bed condition. The vortex shedding from the pipelines under the clear water scour condition is similar to that under the live bed condition. To reduce the scour depths, the two pipelines should be put as close to each other as possible under both the clear water and live bed conditions. It should be noted that the conclusion made for the clear water condition is for the case where the flow velocity is 25% smaller than the critical velocity for scour. The scour depths below the pipelines are expected to reduce with the decreasing flow velocity as demonstrated in The authors would like to acknowledge the support from