Crushing is a harsh process and production units are subjected to wear and failure over time which will reduce the overall performance of the plant. To achieve optimum process performance, both time dependant process dynamics and operating conditions should be taken into account.
                  In this paper the aim is to simulate the process from a more operational perspective to evaluate process performance and process optimum for different operations. The objective is to model and simulate the discrete phenomena that can cause the process to alter performance and implement it with dynamic process simulations. An approach for combining discrete event simulations with time-dependent simulations for process evaluation and optimization is presented.
                  The proposed approach demonstrates a systematic way to evaluate the process performance and locating optimum process configuration, for a given condition. The developed models can be used to optimize different aspects of the operation depending on the defined objective function and the system boundaries. Optimization of process throughput by manipulating configuration of both the grizzly and the crushers, as well as the time between calibrations has been illustrated in this paper. Adjusting the process continuously and calibrating it at the appropriate time can have major benefits when it comes to the process availability and utilization, increasing performance by 4.1–9.3% in these cases. Evaluation of process robustness and availability with regards to process specific factors and variation gave an indication of the process and unit performance under a long operating period. By combining discrete and dynamic simulation, a higher simulation fidelity can be achieved to provide a more operational perspective to the optimization and process analysis.Crushing is a harsh process and production units are subjected to wear and failure over time which will reduce the overall performance of the plant. To achieve optimum process performance, both time dependant process dynamics and operating conditions should to be taken into account when modelling. According to Overall Equipment Effectiveness (OEE) originates as part of Total Productive Maintenance (TPM). The OEE method is a measure of process effectiveness and gives a good indication of the state of the process performance by dividing the process effectiveness in availability, utilization and quality, Eqs. The changes within the process can be considered to be stochastic or deterministic depending on the phenomenon. Stochastic events are unplanned and can happen at any given time, such as equipment failure. Deterministic events are planned and scheduled such as breaks, shifts, and maintenance which aim to maintain a reliable and productive process. Discrete events are usually described by different phases: mean time between failures (MTBF), downtime (DT), waiting time (WT) and time to repair (TTR) ( The use of discrete event models in mining and comminution simulations has been proposed to represent different discrete operations. These discrete operations include dispatching of trucks, truck and shovel operation, truck dumps, batch processes, conveying, feeder and bin interlocks, process variations, expert system rules and scheduled and unscheduled DT. ( The use of discrete event simulation incorporated in continuous simulation in crushing is steadily increasing. According to In this paper the aim is to simulate the process from an operational perspective to evaluate process performance and process optimum for different operations. The traditional use of a combining DES with dynamic simulation has been to evaluate different what-if scenarios with predefined cases and static process models as explained by The objective of this study is to simulate the process from a more operational perspective to evaluate process performance and process optimum for different operational scenarios by integrating discrete event based and mechanistic models. This is achieved by running a probabilistic discrete event simulation to provide input into a continuous time based crushing plant model. The plant model used in this study represents a conceptual closed-loop circuit configuration containing feeders, two bins, conveyors (1, 3, 4, 7 and 9), two CH660 hydrocone crushers (5 and 8) with medium and fine crushing chambers, a grizzly (2) and a single deck screen (6), as shown in Crushing plants like any other production process are affected by changes over time. To be able to model the dynamic behaviour of any system an understanding of the entities and interaction is essential. System complexity is dependent on the level of detail. Simple models are single input single output (SISO) but that is seldom the case in reality, actual systems are often complex with multiple input, where an output ( To be able to simulate plant dynamics, mathematical models for every production unit, e.g. crushers, screens, conveyors, silos, etc., has to be created. The models describe the changes in flow and particle size of the material travelling through the plant. Plant modelling generally focuses on single production unit and plant configuration, but due to accumulation of material the flow needs to be controlled in dynamic modelling. Additionally the process can be sensitive to start ups, discrete events, wear, segregation, natural variation and other effects not uncommon in daily operation, all depending on interaction between single production units, plant configuration, plant control and diverse events and disturbances that can influence the process, The model for size reduction used in this study is defined as mechanistic model or semi-empirical, i.e. the aim is to describe the physical phenomena of the system together with empirically fitted parameters. The crusher model is based on the crusher model presented by The crusher capacity is estimated with Evertsson’s crusher flow model, Eq. The residence time of the material properties ( The pressure distribution on mantle is estimated using a function derived by The mechanical principles of a screen have been described in detail by The conveyors have been modelled with a constant time delay To evaluate the stability of the process under different feeding conditions a wide variation of the feed size distribution for the process was modelled, Eq. The process control is designed to ensure safe operation while striving for high product quality and high production throughput by keeping the process stable. The level of control is dependent on the complexity of the process and the control system designer’s ability to provide an appropriate solution to the task. Most crushing plants are usually equipped with some sort of feedback control to stabilize the material flow in the process. In order to design a PI controller for the process a linear approximation was done around the operational condition. Linear approximation has been used by The transient behaviour of the feeder is expressed with the following first order transfer function A large majority of industrial controllers are proportional-integral-derivative (PID) controllers and as high as 90–95% of industrial controls are PID based ( Multiple controller tuning methods have been described by The framework of the study can be broken down into three main phases, see A discrete event simulation (DES) model is used to simulate systems that only change at a discrete point in time. Each discrete event has specific attributes that determine the MTBF and DT of each event or activity. All DES models are considered to be mutually exclusive events. All events are given a probability of occurring with different frequency and duration distribution. In In These disturbances will reduce the overall utilization of the process. To obtain a better prediction of a monthly operation the production is reduced with regards to external, upstream and downstream disturbance, in-stream fluctuations, failures and maintenance events. Upstream, downstream, maintenance and external deterministic incidents while the failures vary depending on how the operators maintain the process. Mechanical failures in the process are included as stochastic events with a certain probability of failure. The failure probability is modelled as Weibull distribution in Eq. The process consist of 9 units, each unit will have a certain MTBF and DT, information that can be compiled and adjusted to site specific information. The failure time distribution is defined with different distribution depending on the type of event. The distribution used are Weibull, constant and Gaussian. For the simulated process each units has been given a failure rate and failure duration, defined in The production will be optimized for a maximum process throughput with regards to changes in the operating condition and discrete events. The optimization statement can be written in the following way, Eq. The optimization will give the optimum solution ( For the optimization an evolutionary algorithm called genetic algorithm (GA) was used. The GA is a stochastic algorithm which has a high probability of locating a solution close to the global optimum. In a GA, a candidate solution to the problem at hand is represented as a fixed-length string of digits known as a chromosome. The chromosome, when decoded, generates an individual (in this case the process parameters The process, which is inspired by Darwinian evolution, is repeated until a satisfactory solution to the problem has been found. The number of chromosomes was set to 20 and target generations to 100. GAs will not be described in more detail in this paper. For detailed information concerning the use of GA in comminution, see First simulation did not include any wear. This was to create a reference point for the rest of the simulation scenarios and to further tune the controllers around the operational condition. The average throughput from the circuit for 24 The process is under continuous variations in the incoming feed size distribution. To evaluate process robustness and the process ability in maintaining high process performance while operating at a constant CSS the feed size distribution was varied. In The nominal standard deviation of the feed at the optimized parameter configuration was calculated at 0.38 for crusher 1 and 0.32 for crusher 2. Increasing the internal pressure within the crushing chamber and therefor increasing the risk of fatigue failure ( The second iteration included a wear rate in the crushing chamber. Each calibration was estimated to take 10 The third iteration includes a month of operation with calibrations, maintenance and mechanical failure depending on the defined probability of failure from For the simulated month of operation the start CSS for crusher one was set to 28 Calibrating the crushers is essential in order to keep the process operating at the highest possible throughput. The difference in OEE by calibrating the crusher at 10 Frequent calibrations will keep the crusher at a higher but more stable load. Infrequent calibration will however increase the pressure distribution within the crusher chamber. Adjusting the crusher during operation will maintain a stable operation until minimum CSS is detected by the system. Highest efficiency is achieved with a balance between wear, adjustments and calibrations. This paper has shown a systematic approach to evaluating production performance with simulations over a long time perspective, taking into consideration adjustments, calibrations, failures and maintenance. Process performance will change during operation due to wear and changes in the composition of the incoming feed. If left unattended the performance will diminish. To compensate for wear production units need to be maintained, calibrated and adjusted. However, during each stop the process performance is reduced, since the process is not producing a product during that period, calibrating the process regularly will however reduce pressure variation and increase the performance of the process. Adjusting the process continuously can have major benefits when it comes to the process availability and utilization, increasing performance by 4.1–9.3% in these cases. The selection of maintenance is balance of cost. Changing a wear part prematurely involves increased cost for the production since the part may have longer operational time left however, with more controlled DT. Waiting until the parts are worn or broken can drastically reduce the productivity of the plant. Cost of changing a wear part is reduced but the cost of lost production is increased. Plant operators need to be attentive to the condition of the process and prepared for sudden failure. A detailed estimation of the different costs during the operation will be included in the future work. The approach provides more details regarding simulating the operational aspects of the process. To compare the results to an existing process the DES models’ failure rates and maintenance scheduling needs be based on site-specific data or unit information from the suppliers. The selection of comminution models in this study was based on the how they can represent condition-based operation. Steady-state crusher models would have decreased the computational time but it would also shift the focus to minimizing the DT instead maximizing the performance of the process as in this study. Since the performance would not change during the simulated time period. Future work will focused on including the cost of operation, validating the approach with site-specific data and increase the resolution of different unit modules to further increase the fidelity of the simulations. This work has been performed within the Sustainable Production Initiative and the Production Area of Advance at Chalmers; this support is gratefully acknowledged. The authors wish to thank the