True clinical fracture of bones in bovine, race horses or humans occur predominantly during impact loading (e.g. car accidents, falls or physical violence). Although static fracture tests provide an estimate of fracture toughness or R-curve behavior in bones, the static toughness values may be ill suited for predicting failure under dynamic loading conditions due to the visco-elastic response of bone (i.e. strain rate dependent properties). Despite decades of the study on deformation rate dependency of bone properties such as compression and fracture toughness, high-quality dynamic fracture data remain limited. Preliminary tests (compression and fracture toughness) have been conducted on dry and wet bovine bone under both static and dynamic loading conditions. While compression tests have been conducted with loading direction parallel and perpendicular to the bone axis (longitudinal and transverse, respectively), fracture tests were performed only in the transverse direction. The strain rate in compression tests varied between 10−3 and 103 s−1, and the stress intensity rate varied between ∼10−3 and 105 MPa√m/s. While low strain rate tests were conducted on conventional mechanical testing machines, high strain rate experiments were conducted on a split-Hopkinson bar under compression and a novel three-point bend configuration. The fracture morphology and the extent of damage of bone in each case were characterized using SEM, and an attempt is made to relate these to the rate dependent fracture toughness of the bone. It is believed that such understanding is crucial for mechanistic interpretation of bone fracture phenomenon and eventually for predicting bone failure reliably.Often when nature is faced with a design requirement for structural integrity of an organism (especially vertebrates), having at its disposal only weak building blocks (e.g. organic collagen fibers, brittle calcium carbonate or hydroxyapatite), it opts for a design based on a complex hierarchical structure at different length scales Since bone fracture is common during impact loading such as car accidents, fall or physical injury, the need to quantify the dynamic properties of bone is important. One of the earliest investigations on the viscoelastic nature of bone was conducted by McElhaney Accordingly, the present work addresses the strain rate and hydration effects on the mechanical properties, specifically compression and fracture, with special attention to the dynamic properties. Whole, fresh bovine femurs of slaughter age cattle were obtained immediately following slaughter from a local abattoir and were stored in frozen condition, except during specimen preparation. To study the effect of strain rate on the compression properties, 5 mm Quasi-static compression tests (10 For toughness investigations, three-point bend specimens were prepared with dimensions listed in The bovine bone used in the present study exhibits a plexiform (or laminar or fibrolamellar) structure. The structure essentially consists of an alternating layering of parallel-fibered bone and lamellae.   A similar trend in properties was exhibited by the bone tested in the transverse direction. However, the failure strength was lower than the longitudinal direction. Additionally, the failure strain was larger in transverse samples. Failure of bone loaded in the transverse direction occurred by the formation of shear lines. While at low strain rate (10 If one assumes that the time of contact during impact between an object traveling at 75 miles/h or 33.3 m/s (a typical speed of a vehicle or the speed of a baseball just before it hits the bat) and bone is of the order of ∼ For stress intensity loading rates of 0.7  The fractured surfaces of the bone are shown in Bovine bone shows significant anisotropy in compression property, with strength in the longitudinal direction greater than in the transverse direction. Additionally, dry bone was observed to exhibit greater strength than wet bone. Bovine bone also exhibited significant sensitivity to strain rate, with strength and stiffness increasing with strain rate from 10 Between loading rates 2