Blast walls on offshore topsides are designed to protect personnel and critical equipment. The traditional design that relies on the panel as the sole energy absorber is difficult to achieve the code compliances. While studies on dual absorber system such as foam cored sandwich panels overlook the boundary effects. This study investigates the blast alleviation effects of a hybrid barrier system with triple energy absorbers (i.e. panel, foam and springs), in which the foam and springs are placed at the supports to prevent weld rupture. Accordingly, a novel design concept is proposed by using flexible supports filled with polymethacrylimide foam and rotational springs, allowing the wall to slide/rotate a certain distance/angle to release the high stresses at supports and meanwhile dissipate blast energy through material deformations. The panel deflection, energy absorption and weld rupture of the proposed system are the focal points. An analytical model based on beam vibration theory and virtual work theory has been developed, in which the boundary conditions at each support are simplified as a translational spring and a rotational spring. Finite element method has been applied to corroborate the analytical model. In addition, the interaction effects between the three absorbers have been investigated through energy absorption breakdowns. In the end, a numerical comparison study with the traditional design has been presented to demonstrate the privilege of the proposed system in minimising weld rupture risk due to the high stresses being realeased through controlled displacements and rotations at supports.Blast resisting structures have been widely used in civil and military sectors to mitigate explosion effects. Blast walls in the offshore platform are critical structural elements to protect personnel and critical equipment from hydrocarbon explosions. Different from onshore concrete blast walls that rely on high stiffness and large weight to resist blast loading, in offshore circumstances, the requirements for blast walls are more rigorous that they should be lighter, more robust, and are able to maintain their integrity during blast events. Stainless steel profiled panel is an excellent choice for offshore blast wall due to its easy fabrication, considerable ductility, and good corrosion and fire resistance. As the sole energy absorber during a blast, the dynamic structural performance of the profiled panel has been studied intensively. Boh et al. [ In 2003 (revised in 2007 afterwards), Oil and Gas UK and Health & Safety Executive (HSE) [ In traditional design, blast wall connections that consist of welded endplates are extended from the supporting plate girders as shown in As a result, new designs with dual energy absorbers have been developed and studied. Nwankwo et al. [ However, the majority of the studies of cellular foam are as the core of sandwich panels, furthermore, the panel responses are usually isolated from the influence of the boundaries (i.e. they are either fixed or pinned), which overlooks the weld rupture as the other critical design requirement. Therefore, this study investigates the blast alleviation effects by placing cellular foam at the panel supports. Besides, a third energy absorber (i.e. spring) is introduced to the system to provide additional energy absorption capability. The blast alleviation effects of the hybrid system with triple energy absorbers (i.e. panel, foam and spring) in terms of panel deflection, energy absorption and weld rupture are the primary focus of this study. Inspired by the triple energy absorbers concept, a novel design scheme for offshore blast wall has taken shape by introducing energy absorption devices at the supports. Instead of end plates, energy absorption devices will be installed between the supporting plate girders and the blast wall panels to form flexible supports as shown in In the present study, an analytical model is developed and then validated to study the blast alleviation effects of the proposed system with three energy absorbers. Furthermore, discussion on energy absorption ratios reveals the interaction effects between the three energy absorbers and also identifies the contributions (or role) of the two introduced absorbers (i.e. foam and spring). In the end, practical engineering design cases comparing plastic strains at the welded supports are presented to demonstrate the privilege of the proposed system in minimising weld rupture risk. The response of a reinforced concrete beam under blast loading with linear spring supports suggests that peak responses are delayed rather than reduced, as energy is stored rather than absorbed [ The present study further advances the theoretical model of linear spring supports to account for the elastic compression, crushing and unloading of polymethacrylimide foam. Efforts are also made to incorporate the material nonlinearity such as strain hardening of steel after plastic hinge formation so that both the maximum and permanent (plastic) deflections can be predicted by this improved model. However, the effect of axial restraint and corresponding geometry nonlinearity are not considered in this model. This is deemed conservative in the preliminary design stage. Friction effect is considered to be minimal and hence neglected in this study. Damping is usually conservatively ignored in blast-resistant design [ The corrugated blast wall panel is modelled as a beam and the supports are simplified as two sets of springs (translational and rotational). An overview of the analytical model is shown in In elastic stage, the beam deflection can be derived with the simultaneous beam vibration governing equation and the equation of motion. The blast loading can be defined as in Eq. For simplicity of derivation, it is assumed that both supports move spontaneously with the same displacements. The beam total displacement The support displacement The governing equation of beam vibration takes the following form A typical vapour cloud explosion in oil and gas industry generates a spherical blast wave front with small curvature. Thus, it is considered to be uniformly distributed over the beam span (i.e. According to Biggs [ For simplicity, the blast profile is idealised as triangle with zero rise time as shown in It should be mentioned that the negative phase is normally neglected in engineering design. With a free body diagram as seen in  Combining Eq. Free vibration is a special case of the forced vibration when When at time The formulation for beam plastic stage is based on virtual work theory under the following two assumptions: The plastic hinge length is assumed to be constant throughout the blast; The support rotation angle Assuming at the time instant The system of equations for beam plastic stage Eq. For free vibration phase ( The initial rotational velocity at supports can be determined by the conservation of momentum, so that In  The present study simplifies the procedure and specifies a moment unloading path as shown in As the beam translational deflection increases, the plastic hinge length at mid-span will develop. According to Nonaka [ According to Jones [ The slope of the moment unloading curve is assumed to be close to the elastic stiffness of the beam. In this study, 20 Eq. A single strip of the corrugated blast wall panel of 3 m long is taken as example to validate the analytical model by comparing the results to the numerical analyses. The panel sectional dimensions are given in AISI316L stainless steel is adopted due to its good energy dissipation ability [ The blast duration Energy absorption foam with 62.5 mm in height, 100 mm in depth is placed along the overall width of the panel strip in the direction of blast incidence. Polymethacrylimide foam is a closed cell foam that the elastic unloading is measured at a compressive strain of 5% [ The numerical simulation is implemented by using ABAQUS. One strip of corrugated blast wall panel with the same dimensions as analytical model is modelled with S4R elements. To balance simulation time with accuracy, mesh size 20 mm is adopted for the subsequent analysis. The FE blast wall model consists of 7121 elements. In the traditional design, blast wall panels are fillet-welded to plate girder with end plates that have limited bending stiffness. Therefore, the assumption of simply support conditions for the end connections is sufficient for a preliminary design [ For the proposed design, similar to the study of Chen and Hao [ It is reported that the original Ramberg-Osgood expression (i.e. the first equation of Eq. The material properties of AISI316L are given in Rasmussen [ The blast load is applied to all shell elements of the blast panel as distributed pressures normal to their faces by using the key word card *DLOAD. For validation purpose, the imperfection and geometry nonlinearity are turn off in this stage. Their influences are discussed in Section In the preliminary design stage, the blast wall deflection is the governing specification for determination of the blast wall layout and profiled section. Analytical method is normally adopted in this iterative design process as it is quicker and less expensive. In this study, in order to verify the effectiveness of the analytical model, the numerical results are compared with those from theoretical analysis results in terms of panel deflection. Meanwhile, the dynamic structural responses of the proposed design are also compared with their counterparts of traditional design to evaluate its performance.  The structural responses of the deflection time-histories and stress contour plots for plots for 2 bar and 3 bar cases are shown in From the corroboration of the numerical and analytical results, it is found that the correlations for 1 bar and 3 bar cases are relatively strong, and the analytical solutions can also capture the beam post-peak responses accurately. The differences of the peak deflections between the numerical and analytical results are less than 1 mm for both 1 bar traditional and proposed design cases, and less than 4% for both 3 bar traditional and proposed design cases. However, it is noticed that the correlations are slightly weaker in the peak deflections for 2 bar cases (difference at around 8%). It could be caused by the simplification in material strain hardening modelling. In the analytical model, material is simplified to be bi-linearly with the post-yield behaviour to be linear strain hardening. Therefore, as shown in  From the perspective of energy absorption, the explosion energy is transferred to the hybrid system as it displaces and deforms. Neglecting the energy loss, the total energy  It is clear that the purpose of introducing the foam to the system is to become a primary energy absorber that unloads the burden of the panel, as its energy absorption ratios can be more than 50% in the range of Unlike other configuration, the spring in the proposed design system is also an energy absorber. This is because when the panel permanent deflection occurs, which is normal under large blasts, the linear springs at supports are not able to release energy to restore to their original positions, which turns linear spring into energy absorber as well. Even so, its contribution to the total energy dissipation is relatively small (maximum at 7%) regardless of For a DLB event, an important design requirement is to maintain the overall integrity of the blast wall. It implies that the blast wall shall remain in-place to resist the subsequent fire without rupture. FEA is usually applied to verify this design requirement in the detailed design stage. In this section, certain modifications are made to the previous FE models (Section The rupture failures usually happen at the support welds. In engineering design, to capture a more realistic representation of the support stiffness, the blast wall supporting endplates and the surrounding structural components shall be modelled in the numerical simulation. In the present study, for simplicity and demonstration purpose, only the endplates are modelled, while the surrounding structures are assumed to be rigid for both traditional and proposed designs. The endplates are normally angle sections as shown in In order to represent practical design cases, nonlinear geometry is turn on. The global imperfections of strict tolerances (L/300 ≈ 10 mm, L is the total length of the panel) and local imperfections (s/200 ≈ 3 mm, s is the spacing between two adjacent bays of the panel, in this study s equals to the panel width in Weld failures can occur in a number of ways, such as stress concentration, weld defect and the material degradation in the heat-affected-zone (HAZ). It is difficult and tedious to assess all these factors even with the assistance of sophisticated FEA. To be cost-efficient in engineering design, two failure models, namely force-based and strain based failure criterions, are normally adopted for the weld integrity assessments of spot-welds and continuous welds respectively [  The reduction in plastic strain can be better explained by comparing the section forces at panel endplate connections. Similarly, remarkable decreases in plastic strain from the present design are also observed from 3 bar case shown in  This paper investigates the blast alleviation effects of a hybrid barrier system with triple energy absorbers (i.e. panel, foam and spring), in which the foam and spring are placed at the supports. The panel deflection, energy absorption and weld rupture of this proposed system are studied analytically and numerically. An analytical model of the proposed system is developed and then collaborated with the numerical findings. The predictions with analytical model are in reasonable agreement with numerical simulations, which validates the analytical model as a quick assessment tool for the deflection estimation in the preliminary design stage. Further comparisons to the traditional design also give credit to its blast alleviation capability as the peak panel deflections are reduced by approximately 40%. The study of energy absorption breakdowns investigates the interactions between the three absorbers. The foam is the primarily energy absorber, it can dissipate more than half of the input energy if carefully selected. The spring also has certain energy absorption capability but its main function is to enhance the energy absorption of the foam through its restraint to the panel. In the end, practical design cases for both traditional and the proposed design are presented to compare the plastic strains at supports for the weld integrity assessment. Results imply that with controllable rotations and displacements by the springs and the foam of the proposed design, the tensile and shear forces at blast wall panel supports can be effectively maintained at the non-destructive level and hence prevent weld rupture. This research did not receive any specific grant from funding agencies in the public, commercial, or not-for-profit sectors.