Rapid and one-step green synthesis of carbon nanodots (CDs) from Nerium oleander leaves was accomplished via domestic microwave oven and microwave-assisted hydrothermal synthesizer under various physical conditions. Effects of the synthesizer system, extract type depending on the solvents used in plant extraction, and synthesis conditions; such as reaction time, reaction temperature, surface passivation agent inclusion into the reaction medium, on the physicochemical properties and optical feature of CDs were investigated. The impacts of relevant conditions on CDs feature were determined clearly via UV–visible spectrophotometry, fluorescence spectrophotometry, dynamic light scattering analysis, and Fourier transform infrared spectroscopy. According to the results, while the most effective parameter on the fluorescence feature of CDs was determined as the presence of surface passivation agent (polyethylene glycol, PEG), the alteration in the fluorescence intensity depending on the reaction time and the reaction temperature was also observed. It was reported that the synthesis system and PEG existence in the reaction medium were more effective than the other inspected parameters on the hydrodynamic particle size, in general. Under optimum conditions, nanoparticles with a hydrodynamic size of less than 5nm were obtained. The surface zeta potential charges of all particles were found as negative. While the extract type was significantly effective on the surface zeta potential of CDs synthesized by domestic microwave oven, the reaction temperature was found to be significant for the ones synthesized via microwave-assisted hydrothermal synthesis.Carbon nanoparticle studies have been gaining popularity since their accidental exploration in 2004  Even, microwave/microwave assisted methods are used for CDs synthesis, also using these techniques combining with the other synthesis methods for photoluminescence (PL) enhancement of CDs have been reported  Ethanol and polyethylene glycol (PEG) 10000N were purchased from Sigma-Aldrich. Elma, TI-H 5 ultrasonic bath was used during the extraction process. Microwave syntheses were accomplished at Arcelik MD 565 S domestic microwave oven and Mars (CEM) microwave assisted hydrothermal synthesizer. Characterization studies of CDs were performed using Shimadzu UV-1800 UV-Vis spectrophotometer, Agilent Cary Eclipse fluorescence spectrophotometer, Malvern Zeta Sizer Nano ZS, and Perkin Elmer Frontier FT-IR. Oleander fresh leaves were collected from nature and cleaned up by distilled water three times. An oven at 70 For the synthesis of CDs via domestic microwave oven, a kitchen type microwave oven with 800 For the CDs synthesis via MWO, ceramic crucibles containing reaction medium were placed at MWO with 800 The MAH synthesis of CDs was fulfilled in a Mars (CEM) microwave synthesizer at 200 and 250 Photoluminescence spectroscopy (Agilent Cary Eclipse) was conducted for optical characterization and the UV absorption spectra of CDs were recorded on a UV-spectrophotometer (Shimadzu UV-1800) using a 1 Fluorescence feature of CDs was observed and photographed under 365 For CDs synthesized via MAH system, the highest PL intensities were achieved at 250  Hydrodynamic particle size ( For CDs synthesized via MWO method, As for CDs synthesized via MAH method, ʐ-Pot measurements showed that all CDs synthesized had negatively charged surface regardless of the operation parameters evaluated and changed in the range of −8.9 and −28.3 The changes in the surface functional groups depending on the reaction conditions were investigated by FT-IR spectrometer. For CDs synthesized by MWO, while the general profiles of FT-IR spectra were quite similar to each other, only CDs synthesized for 5 For CDs synthesized via MAH, O Herein, the application of two microwave based methods for one-step synthesis of CDs were demonstrated; and the impacts of the system, extract type, reaction medium, and reaction conditions were determined clearly. The main findings were summarized as follows: Reaction period was found as critically significant on the fluorescence feature of CDs synthesized using MWO. Both CD For CD The dramatic effect of the surface passivation agent on the particle size was reported for MAH synthesis while the hydrodynamic size range of CD For MAH synthesis of CDs, a recognizable decrease on the negativity of the particles’ surface potential was observed with ascending synthesis temperature as from −11 to −8.9, −14.8 to −13.9, −13.4 to −9.7 and −14.6 to −8.5 Although, the chemistry and fluorescence features of CDs synthesized by MWO were similar in general for both solvent extracts of Oleander, the hydrodynamic particle size and the surface potential of CDs were varied depending on the extract types due to variations of the extract contents. When two microwave-based synthesis methods were compared, MWO synthesis was determined as a better alternative to generating photoluminescence enhancement on CDs. However, the opportunity of CDs synthesis at really short reaction times via MAH synthesis is undeniable. The results of the present study add piece of new insight to the PL mechanism of CDs prepared from two different extracts (aqueous and ethanol) of The authors declare no conflicts of interest. Sinem Simsek gratefully acknowledges TUBITAK (The Scientific and Technological Research Council of Turkey), and Melis O. Alas thanks the Council of Higher Education of Turkey for the post-graduate scholarship.