Leaching results are used in the assessment of slag for use in construction. The stability of the major phase in iron- and steelmaking slags has a direct influence on the leaching of all elements enclosed in the matrix. Steelmaking slags have varying content of glass and puzzolanic minerals, and water granulation is a means of enhancing the glass content. A crystalline and an amorphous blast furnace slag have been investigated with a long-term test to determine if diffusion or dissolution was the controlling leaching mechanisms for each slag type. Both slag types were leached by dissolution according to the results. However, leaching of slags with puzzolanic phases implies that reactions take place, resulting in both dissolution and stabilization of elements. The phase transformations probably hamper the evaluation of leaching results and should be considered.Rapid cooling by water granulation is a method of transforming a material into a glassy matrix with properties different from the crystallized material. In general, an amorphous phase has lower solubility compared to a crystallized phase with similar chemical composition. Glass matrices with high stability are developed and used for solidification of nuclear waste, for which long-term stability is crucial. With respect to kinetics, the amorphous phase has a stability that resists dissolution in an aqueous solution. On the other hand, the glass phase is a metastable solid with higher free energy than crystals of the same composition and has a tendency to form more stable hydrated phases in aqueous solutions. According to White When a material, such as slag, is assessed for use in construction the solubility of the material is important and the focus is on trace elements. However, as Yan and Neretnieks Similar discussions regarding the leaching of trace elements in the case of nuclear waste glass and combustion ashes may be relevant in the case of slags from iron- and steelmaking, as minerals with puzzolanic properties and glass are often major components of these products. Long-term investigations are necessary if we are to gain a better knowledge of the stability of the major phase of slags processed for use in construction, and it is important that the mechanisms that are likely to control the release of the matrix of the slag are identified. Leaching results of both long- and short-term tests are of major importance when slags are evaluated for utilization and in such decisions it is important to understand in what way the reactivity of the slag may influence the results. The investigation presented here is a long-term leaching test of crystallized and amorphous blast furnace slag. The aim was to investigate whether a granulated, amorphous slag is less soluble than a crystallized slag with the same chemical composition. The hypothesis is that the major leaching mechanism in the glass phase is diffusion. Short-term leaching tests have been used for comparison and evaluation of the leaching behaviour. Important mechanisms dominating the leaching of granular material are dissolution, surface wash-off and diffusion through the material to the water-product interface The ion flux through a unit surface area of a particle under diffusion-controlled conditions is described by using Flick’s second law of diffusion A leaching test for compacted granular material has been developed by Kosson et al. The effective diffusion coefficient relates to the physical and chemical retention factors as Sodium, chloride and potassium are assessed to be inert Blast furnace slag (BF slag) is derived from the slag-forming materials, mainly limestone, during pig iron production in the blast furnace. After tapping, the molten slag, which is very similar to molten glass, can be cooled in two different ways: either slowly cooled in air or semi-quenched by water granulation. The slow cooling results in a half-crystallized, rock-like material, whereas the water granulated slag is amorphous and glassy. For the investigations, the granulated slag was not pre-treated in any way, but was used in the sand-like, 0–4-mm sized form in which it was produced. The crystalline air-cooled slag, on the other hand was successively crushed and sieved so as to obtain a sample closely approximating the particle size distribution of the amorphous slag. The initial material had a grain size of 0–32 The material used in the long-term test and the compliance test in this study was freshly produced. For the availability test, the air-cooled BF slag was tested in two forms: freshly produced and weathered by storing outdoors for one year. Total chemical analysis of the slag was performed by ICP in combination with X-ray fluorescence. The amounts of Fe Grain size distribution was determined by sieving and the compact density investigations were performed using a Micromeretics Multivolume Pycnometer 1305. The specific surface area (BET) was determined with a Micromeretics Flowsorb 2300. For the determination of the glass content of the solid slag, a representative sample was crushed and screened. A fraction 32–40 For conductivity measurements, 25 A long-term leaching test, based on the pre-standard NVN 7347 The material to be tested was placed in a 4–6-cm thick layer in a wide-necked flask, saturated with deionized water and covered with a 2-cm layer of glass beads. After 24 The determination of leaching mechanism was done with use of the analyzed amounts of the inert elements sodium (Na) and potassium (K). By plotting the logarithm of the cumulative release versus the logarithm of time, the slope ( When the values for the measured and the calculated cumulative release are the same the leaching is actually controlled by diffusion. Verification of the findings was done according to NVN 7347 A short-term leaching test was carried out using the standardized compliance test EN 12457-3 The availability test, NT ENVIR 003 The results from the characterization of the materials are summarized in As can be seen in The values of the measured and the calculated release/m The results for the duplicate tests showed similar development regarding the release, and the values of Test A are summarized in release plots for Na and K from the air-cooled BF slag and the granulated BF slag, Conductivity and pH values of the leachates are given in The test was completed in 58 days. The liquid/solid relation (L/S) for the accumulated leachates was 9.4 for the air-cooled BF-slag and 12.4 for the granulated BF-slag in Test A and 9.8 and 14.5, respectively, in Test B. This is a deviation from NVN 7347, in which the flask should be immersed in a large vessel with water, and the L/S ratio thus become higher. The values of the measured and the calculated release were not equal for Na or K in either of the tests, which should be the case if leaching was controlled by diffusion. As can be seen in The cumulative amounts of dissolved K and Na were significantly higher from the air-cooled BF slag compared to the granulated slag and, as can be seen in Both Mg, Si, Al and Ca are major elements in the BF slag, and the air-cooled slag consists largely of ternary compounds of theses elements, of which the most common is melilite, a series of solid solutions from akermanite (2CaO The change in the release towards the end of the test from both the air-cooled and the granulated BF slag shows that reactions take place. However the progression of the release from each slag is not obvious, but was not within the scope of this investigation. The release of major elements was higher from the air-cooled than from the granulated slag in both the long-term test and the compliance test. Exceptions are magnesium (Mg) and silicon (Si). The releases of these two elements, as well as the inert elements, Na and K, according to the three leaching tests are shown in The long-term test and the compliance test resulted in similar amounts of released Na and K. The L/S relation was in the same range in both tests, The varying release of Mg and Si in the three tests (Si not analyzed in the availability test), shows that these elements are present in minerals that react with the leachant and leaching parameters, such as L/S, percolation, etc., have a major influence on the result. Quenching the molten slag, thereby increasing the glass content, is a means of enhancing the cementitious properties of the slag, as has been reported by several authors e.g., Daugherty et al. The availability test The differences in the correlation of the duplicate tests for the three materials may be due to the varying reactivity of the materials, and indicate in that case that the weathered slag has become more reactive during storage, probably due to reactions with the atmospheric moisture, CO The impact of the puzzolanic properties on the leaching result seem to be obvious when comparing the results with the availability test of the air-cooled and the granulated BF slag in this investigation, with results of two materials with no cement-forming minerals: a crystalline rock material, gabbro-diorite, and an amorphous fuming slag with a concentration of elements almost identical to the composition of the mineral fayalithe (Fe The fuming slag is almost completely glassy but contains no puzzolanic minerals and remains very stable during the availability test, while both types of the BF slag react with the water and are dissolved to a high degree. The stabilizing reactions of the BF slag seem to have little impact in this test, and equilibrium is most likely not reached in that respect. This very important property of the slag may hamper evaluation of leaching results if the reactions have only partially taken place. Similar discussion should be conducted regarding results from other leaching tests of reactive materials, such as BF slag and other slags from iron-and steel making. This effect is most likely not as enhanced in all leaching tests. Both the crystalline and the amorphous BF slags showed mainly dissolution-controlled leaching in the three different tests in this investigation. Quenching of a slag for increased glass content and reactivity implies a greater extent of phase transformation in contact with water and results in both dissolution and stabilizing of elements. The stabilizing reactions have probably only partially taken place in the tests used in this investigation. The reactions of the cement-forming minerals in slags hamper the evaluations of leaching results and should therefore be considered. The impact of the reactivity seems to be enhanced in the availability test in which the leaching conditions are optimal. Minerals with puzzolanic properties in a slag will probably react with moisture, CO Further investigations are recommended regarding the behaviour of reactive materials in leaching tests with prolonged testing time as well as regarding the relation leaching of major phase – leaching of trace element. One investigation regarding the latter relation is performed for slags with different cooling conditions by Tossavainen et al. This work was financed by MiMeR, the Minerals and Metals Recycling Research Centre, and Vinnova. The authors wish to thank the members of MiMeR for the opportunity to present the data and results.