The evolution of the electrical grid requires flexibility in electricity consumption. Given the tremendous amount of electricity consumed by mineral processing, these facilities could become a grid asset if they can leverage sources of flexibility. Shifting facility electricity consumption to limit demand and be predictable is valuable for grid management and stability. Enhanced stability from demand side management allows for the increased penetration of de-stabilizing intermittent renewable energy onto the grid. Two case studies of untapped mining facility flexibility are examined. While facilities generally try to maximize ore throughput, de-watering represents one source of flexibility due to the holdup capacity of the water table itself and storage tanks to which the water is pumped. A second source of flexibility is intermediate product transportation with storage capabilities at each end. By developing predictive automation algorithms, these holdup capacities can be effectively leveraged. This makes the facility able to respond to grid signals, which can save on demand charges, while also becoming an asset to the grid. This work uses real, facility-level power data and presents a novel automation algorithm for both predicting facility peak demand and proactively automating the de-watering and intermediate product transportation for peak shaving. De-watering costs are cut by 10% ($570,000) and slurry pumping costs are cut by 36% ($180,000) annually.Mining and mineral processing is electrically intensive ( A majority of the electrical consumption of a mineral processing plant is accounted for through eight activities ( Two factors limit the flexibility of electrical loads for mineral processing facilities. First, non-stop, continuous processes, such as grinding, separating, and concentrating have no or minimal margins in operating conditions. Second, although electricity costs are on the rise for mineral processing ( DSM of mining and mineral processing facilities is still in the early stages of development. As a precursor to DSM, Rea and Monaghan mentioned that significantly lower pumping rates were required once mines had reached target drawdown levels, resulting in inefficiencies over the lifetime of operation far larger than the cost of purchasing new, properly sized pumps ( For facility-wide DSM, monitoring total power consumption is the first step. This information allows engineers and a distributed control system to make decisions about equipment operations. Afterwards, flexible power consumption patterns in the process may be operated in a way that holistically reduces facility energy costs, most commonly through a reduction in peak demand. In this paper, two case studies of load shifting in mining and mineral processing with novel approaches are examined. The first study examines the de-watering process of a copper mine. The second study evaluates the batched pumping of phosphate slurry from a slurry producing facility to a slurry refining facility with large storage tanks at each end. Each case study models a real facility operating in a fixed or traditional manner and evaluates potential benefits from intelligently adjusting the flexible loads. The flexibility of the loads is constrained to not disrupt operations of the central mineral processing facilities. The novelty of the research is highlighted in the presented advanced DSM control algorithm for the flexible loads that goes beyond turning equipment down during on peak hours and dovetails with the other power consumption at the facility. The operation of the flexible loads is arrived at through optimization analysis and then adjusted to reduce the probability of process disruptions and increase the viability of implementation. The first case study examines the de-watering operation of a mining and mineral processing facility. The mine de-watering operation at the facility is performed with five multi-stage pumps as shown in Based on reports from the facility, the water removal rate is 11,550 gallons per minute (gpm) or 0.79 hP/gpm (the value However, there is flexibility in how the pumps can be operated. Each pump is on a variable speed drive (VSD). The VSD allows the pumps to vary the power delivered to the pumps. Eq. This flexibility can be leveraged to manage facility power consumption. The objective of this optimization is to minimize the monthly facility electrical bills. The facility operates under a demand rate structure, which means it is charged for the maximum power consumption of the facility over the course of an entire month, shown as Eq. The sum of The facility must remove at least 7 feet of water per month from the water table in order to access minerals at the bottom of the mine in a safe manner. The area where the mine is located receives approximately 10 inches of rain a year, which is negligible compared to the amount of water removed, therefore flooding or major water disruption were not considered. The integrated water flow rate over the course of the month must equal the minimum water volume, The energy cost minimization is therefore formulated as Eq. The demand cost, Solving a simplified problem gives insight into allocating power to each pump optimally. The simplified problem, shown as Eq. Fortunately, this problem has an analytical solution. The ideal power allocations for this problem are: These results are significant to help understand underlying properties for the pump power distribution. First of all, the optimal pump power allocation for the problem scales with the ratio of nominal flow rates, which are constants. The result is that instead of maxing out flow to one pump and minimizing it for another, the total flow is allocated proportionally. This means that all of the pumps can be aggregated to act as a single pump since the most efficient pumping is when they scale together. The pump power, nominal pump power, and nominal flow rates can be grouped as: The optimization can be reformulated as Eq. However, this formulation still requires a different pump variable at each time step - this is still not tractable. The two pump problem can be re-contextualized to reveal how to optimally allocate pump power through time. The solution to the problem remains the same, with one small difference. The pump power is ideally allocated exactly the same in each interval (since the pump has the same nominal flow in both intervals). Further, when the context shifts to be through time, then the objective function becomes minimizing power over time or minimizing energy consumption. Therefore, to minimize energy consumption and achieve a minimal flow rate with a single pump operation split into two time intervals, it is optimal to operate the pump the same way in each interval. If, however, power consumption of the pump in the first interval were constrained below the optimal power consumption for the purpose of load-shifting, then the second interval would require excessive pump power consumption to achieve the same amount of water flow. This constrained solution is sub-optimal. It follows that running the pump slow and then very fast (or visa-versa) will result in more energy consumed for the same period of time. When possible, it is logical to run the pumps at steady-state to minimize energy consumption. Operating the pumps flexibly results in an energy consumption penalty. Based on the objective function, flexible power consumption can be useful to deliberately minimize the peak demand of the facility. When the mineral processing is consuming a large amount of power it is logical to turn down the pumps to preserve the lower demand peak. This naturally sets up two competing interests between steady (electrically efficient) operation and flexible (demand reducing) operation. This introduces two new variables that can describe the pump operation through time. The first is a controlled peak, Using this equality means that when the facility is strained on available power, the first condition will be the minimum value and a reduced (flexible) amount of power will be sent to the pumps. On the other hand, when there is excessive power available, the facility pumps will run at a baseline value that allows for enough water to be removed, without excessively surging pump power. Using Eq. Note that the pumping inequality constraint was set to an equality constraint because no scenarios provide benefits to over pumping water out of the mine. This optimization is solved using gradient descent (FMINCON in MATLAB).   The monthly electricity use and monthly demand for the current and optimized cases are respectively shown in  To this point, the optimization has been performed under an omniscient paradigm, where the future mineral processing facility power consumption is known. In reality, the future power consumption is partially stochastic. Therefore the applied optimization is not viable, but it can lead to valuable insights on heuristics to solve this challenge. The optimization reveals the trade-off between energy efficiency and flexibility. Instead of seeking to find the lowest possible demand each month, it is logical for the facility to reduce the facility peak to a conservative value, such as 39 MW every month between the nominal 41–45 MW and optimal controlled peaks around 36–37 MW. This is referred to as the engineering implementation. Likewise, the pumping baseline rate is increased to ensure that the de-watering constraint is met. For a pump that nominally operates at 2000 hP, it is logical to have the new pump baseline to be around 2400 hP. The other pumps are scaled analogously. The demand and energy use and cost comparison for the current operation, optimal fixed peak operation, and engineering implementation are summarized in The second case study is a phosphate slurry pumping operation that connects a mine and slurry producing facility to a slurry processing facility. The pipeline between the plants is 110 miles in length. To move slurry across this distance, a series of 3 large pumps and booster pumps are used. The maximum capacity of these pumps, when switched on, is 1290 gpm (4.87 m Based on facility records, over the course of about 20 days, the facility moves approximately 100,000 m Similarly to the de-watering process, the objective of this load shifting is to minimize the energy bills of the facility. Unlike the de-watering facility, the slurry pumping facility operates on an on-peak demand billing structure. The facility only gets charged for the maximum power draw during peak hours, 7 am to 11 pm. Outside of those hours, the facility wants to efficiently move the slurry from one tank to the next and is not charged for the total power draw. In order for alternative pump operation to be viable, the slurry transportation must meet or exceed the current pumping rate. From the viewpoint of the mine, the slurry production tank cannot continuously be full, otherwise the mine would have to halt production. Therefore modified operation must have high pumping rates. Likewise, from the viewpoint of the slurry processor, the slurry receiving tank must never be empty when there is slurry in the production tank. Slurry pumping is complex, and a number of constraints would exist in its real-world implementation. These constraints would be based on the rheology of the slurry and would require additional rheometric analysis before they could be specified exactly. To be certain that the slurry pumping would be viable in this analysis, a lower bound on the pumping rate was implemented. Based on the expertise of pipeline operators a minimum slurry pumping rate corresponded to a minimum pump power of 600 kW. Intuition indicates fully running the pumps in off-peak hours and then turning them off during on-peak hours. Unfortunately, the pumps run 63% of the time and off-peak hours only make-up 33% of the day. Some on-peak pumping is mandated.  The pump profile should be contrived to minimize total power profile during on peak hours, without the worry of superposing the large pumps with a power draw spike from the mine or slurry processing. Knowledge from the de-watering operation can be leveraged to inform pump operation during on-peak hours when the billing paradigm is the same, specifically the use of a controlled peak.  After the on-peak value is selected, and the mine power at the facility is continually tracked, the process flow chart in Three pump operating scenarios are explored. The first is the baseline (current) operation shown in The power profiles for the three scenarios are shown in The total slurry pumped over time and the volume of slurry in the tank is shown in  The electricity usage is similar for the baseline and 5700 kW peak scenario, because they achieve the same amount of pumping. The 6000 kW peak scenario electricity use is higher over the 20-day scenario because the explored operation showed the excessive slurry pumping scenario. Regardless of the scenario, over the course of a year about the same amount of slurry will be pumped, which will result in similar total electricity uses. The difference is that the 6000 kW scenario is more likely to empty out the production tank and stop pumping. Nonetheless, each peak controlling scenario demonstrates significant savings over the baseline operation. Selecting a conservative peak (6000 kW or higher) is realistic for the facility without risking process disruption. Via extrapolation of the 20-day scrutinized period, smart operation of the pumps with the conservative 6000 kW power regime would lead to reducing over 1000 kW of power each month and $180,000 dollars in annual savings, a 36% reduction in pumping cost. This calculation assumes that the electrical expenditures will be similar for each scenario over the course of the year. In this paper two mining and mineral processing facilities are examined. They both draw significant amounts of power, 40 MW and 7 MW. The large power draws quickly translate to large savings when flexible power loads can be identified and shifted to minimize energy bills. Peak shifting of at least 2 MW and 1 MW are viable for each case, respectively. In the first case the flexible load is the de-watering pumps, and in the second case it is the slurry transporting pumps. In both cases using VSDs or turning pumps on and off strategically leads to sizeable annual savings, $570,00 and $180,000 respectively. Both flexible loads come from mining and mineral refining supporting processes. They do not directly generate valuable product, but are still necessary. Therefore it is critical that the modified processes do not disrupt the central mining or mineral processing. In both cases the key constraints of the facilities, water table reduction and slurry transport, were carefully managed to ensure no disruption occurred. Management of the constraints starts with finding optimal smart operations that edge up to the facility constraints, removing exactly 7 feet of water pumped from the water table each month or exactly pumping 100,000 m A rise in facility-wide information tracking is engendering careful energy management. Equipment decisions can be readily made in real time to optimize facility energy consumption. Additionally, the increased penetration of renewable energy disrupts grid stability. This disruption projects to increase the value of demand side management. Combined, these two forces can propel energy management projects, like those proposed, into existence. The authors declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this paper. This research is funded by the U.S. Department of Energy Office of Energy Efficiency and Renewable Energy through the Industrial Assessment Centers program under grant # DE-EE0007712 and the Utah Governor’s Office of Energy Development.