Fast pyrolysis, hydropyrolysis and catalytic hydropyrolysis are three important methods to produce bio-oil from biomass and are of great interest to researchers. In this research, the comprehensive study of pyrolysis, hydropyrolysis and catalytic hydropyrolysis of poplar sawdust and rice husk was investigated in a modified laboratory Py-GC/MS microreactor system. Rh/ZrO2 (0.5 wt %) was prepared and applied in the catalytic hydropyrolysis process. An evaluation system including estimating method of product selectivity, the calculation method of O/C and H/C ratio, deoxygenation extent (DE) and hydrogen-loss extent (HLE), was established to fully measure the deoxygenation effect. The Rh/ZrO2-assisted catalytic hydropyrolysis showed a good deoxygenation effect as O/C ratios (0.10 for poplar sawdust, 0.11 for rice husk, respectively) are comparable to that of the reported upgraded bio-oil by hydrodeoxygenation (HDO). The highest hydrocarbon selectivity of 49.14% and DE of 87.6% were obtained in catalytic hydropyrolysis of poplar sawdust. For rice husk, the hydropyrolysis process gained a similar DE (82.7%) to that of the catalytic HyPy (83.7%), because rice husk with high ash content (19.4 wt %) contains a large number of mineral elements that are likely to form a self-catalysis effect. The reaction mechanism was further inferred according to product distribution and quantum calculation of oxygen-containing products, suggesting that Rh/ZrO2-assisted hydropyrolysis was accomplished by multistage reactions, involving initial pyrolysis of raw biomass and further deoxygenation of the pyrolysis intermediates. Moreover, this work can also provide a proven methodology and theoretical supports for future studies on catalytic hydropyrolysis of biomass.Hydropyrolysis-gas chromatography/mass spectrometry Hydrodeoxygenation Total ions chromatogram Rhodium/zirconia Inductively coupled plasma-optical emission spectrometer Brauer-emmer-teller theory Scanning electron microscope Energy dispersive spectrometer Deoxygenation extent, % Hydrogen-loss extent, % Energy of the highest occupied molecular orbital, eV Energy of the lowest unoccupied molecular orbital, eV Bond order Dipole moment, Debye Fukui indices based on radical attack, e Fast pyrolysis, hydropyrolysis and catalytic hydropyrolysis are three important methods to produce bio-oil from biomass and are of great interest to researchers [ On the other hand, the in-situ HDO upgrading process of biomass which combines HDO with fast pyrolysis in one reactor also called hydropyrolysis (HyPy), is a promising technology for biomass-derived biofuel production [ In short, as a developing technology for biomass utilization, catalytic HyPy still has several challenges, such as the formulation of efficient HyPy catalyst, the improvement of process and reactor design for different biomass species [ The main purposes of this study were to develop a modified Py-GC/MS microreactor system and to compare fast pyrolysis, HyPy and catalytic HyPy of two common species of biomass for hydrocarbon compounds production. A potential noble metal catalyst (Rh/ZrO Poplar sawdust was selected as the typical representative of woody biomass and collected from a lumber mill located in Suqian city, Jiangsu province, China. Also, rice husk was chosen as the typical representative of herbaceous biomassand collected from Changzhou city, Jiangsu province, China. Both poplar sawdust and rice husk were ground into a particle size of no more than 80 mesh (0.18 mm) and then dried at 105 °C for12 h in a drying oven. Proximate analysis of biomass samples was performed in accordance with ASTM standards (ASTM 0.5 wt % Rh/ZrO The fast pyrolysis experiments were carried out in a Py-GC/MS system which consists of a micro-pyrolyzer (a vertical pyrolyzer with microfurnace, Frontier Laboratories Ltd., Japan) connected to a split injection port on the GC/MS (Agilent, model 7890B–5977B) detector. A capillary column of J&W 122-5532DB-5ms was used for GC separation. The hydropyrolysis and catalytic hydropyrolysis experiments were performed in a modified Py-GC/MS system which is called HyPy-GC/MS. The modification was done by interfacing a hydrogen generator and a well-matched flowmeter connecting to the microreactor. The gas switching and flow rate are controlled by the flowmeter. A deactivated sample oven (Frontier Laboratories Ltd.) was equipped as the sample vessel. A stretchable U-bend holder with a long handle was specifically designed to control the sample oven to stay in the room-temperature area before reaction or to fall into the fast heating furnace when reaction conditions are met. The detailed schematic diagram of the HyPy-GC/MS microreactor system is shown in A large number of pre-experiments were carried out for an exploration of operation conditions for this HyPy-GC/MS microreactor system. The reaction residence time including flash (very short residence time, 5 s and 30 s, were carried out as pre-experiments which indicated that longer reaction time can result in excessive cracking and promote the formation of coke while shorter residence time has an adverse effect on further deoxygenation. Therefore, the reaction residence time of 5 s was used in the final experiments. The split ratio of the split vent was set as 10:1 because the peak intensity and peak pattern are better than those of other split ratios (split ratio for normal pyrolysis is between 1:1 to 100:1). In addition, the different ratios of catalyst to biomass (3:1 and 1:4) and reaction temperatures (450, 500 and 550 °C) were carried out in pre-experiments according to previous studies [ The final experimental conditions were fixed as follows: Py experiments for poplar sawdust and rice husk were carried out at a preset temperature of 500 °C in helium atmosphere. HyPy and catalytic HyPy experiments were carried at the same temperature (500 °C) and reaction residence time of 5 s in H A high-precision analytical balance (with a resolution of 1 μg) was used to weigh biomass, catalyst and residue (biochar) for products yield calculation. The yield of biochar was calculated as the mass of biochar divided by the initial mass of biomass in the feed, as shown in Eq. A semi-quantitative analysis was used for the determination of the gas and liquid products using the peak area percentage. This method was proposed relying on the fact that variations in the chromatographic peak area of a component are considered linear with the variations of its concentration [ Then, the selectivity of different classification groups was calculated from the total peak area of components in group The O/C and H/C molar ratios of the liquid product can be used to assess the success of deoxygenation effect. In this work, compounds detected by GC/MS of ≥95% (peak area) were included in the calculation of the O/C and H/C ratios. The computation methods of O/C and H/C molar ratios are shown in Eq. The deoxygenation extent was defined for the deoxygenation effect, and the hydrogen-loss extent was used as an additional indicator to measure the effect of hydrodeoxygenation. According to the definition, the equations for deoxygenation extent (DE) and hydrogen-loss extent (HLE) were further modified on the basis of previous research [ Gaussian and Material Studio were used to optimize the molecular structure and quantum calculation of the typical oxygen-containing compounds produced during pyrolysis, hydropyrolysis and catalytic hydropyrolysis. The dipole moments (μ), energy of the lowest unoccupied molecular orbital (E Characterization of poplar sawdust and rice husk includes proximate analysis, ultimate analysis, composition analysis and mineral element analysis (by ICP). The characterization of poplar sawdust and rice husk is shown in As presented in The physicochemical properties of the Rh/ZrO A comparison of product distribution of the Py, HyPy and catalytic HyPy process of poplar sawdust and rice husk was carried out as shown in Since the liquid products of Py, HyPy and catalytic HyPy processes include a wide variety of compounds, the discussion on product selectivity is firstly focused on the top 9 high selectivity compounds (selectivity of each ≥2.79%, cumulative selectivity ≥41.08%) of each process. From To comprehensively evaluate the overall product distribution and the deoxygenation effect, compounds in the liquid products were classified into different groups according to their functional structure. As shown in As presented in Various simple non-aromatic oxygenates (as presented in Based on the above analyses on product selectivity and DE of Comparison of the O/C and H/C molar ratios of liquid products obtained from Py, HyPy and catalytic HyPy process of poplar sawdust (PS) and rice husk (RH), and other corresponding value referred from literature is shown in As presented in To intensify theoretical support for the hydropyrolysis pathway, 5 typical oxygenates were chosen as the representative compounds of liquid products produced from Py, HyPy and catalytic HyPy in this study. Guaiacol and phenol, syringol (also called 2,6-dimethoxy-phenol) and its derivatives are general products of lignin [ Bond order (BO) is a numerical value representing the bonding strength of two adjacent atoms calculated by the molecular orbital method, which can reflect the stability of chemical bonds in molecule. BO Since the further deoxygenation of the derivatives of cellulose, hemicellulose and lignin, produced during hydropyrolysis process of biomass, is dominated by hydrogen radical reaction, the Fukui index f(0), which is the measurement of the ability of radical attack, was calculated for the typical oxygen-containing compounds. In this study, the f(0) function map and the targeted BO and f(0) indices were specifically analyzed. In order to better understand how the interior unit of the oxygen-containing derivatives is deoxygenated during hydropyrolysis, a possible reaction pathway was inferred after the in-depth analysis of the quantum chemical parameters and some typical data on final products. The f(0)x and f(0)n indices present the maximum and minimum value of hydrogen atom attack, respectively. Generally, in a molecule, where the f(0) value is larger, it is more susceptible to H atom attack [ As presented in For biomass catalytic hydropyrolysis which is a complex thermochemical process that intersects many reaction types and pathways, quantum computation and analysis of the oxygen-containing derivatives produced can give a better understanding of the process and the possible reaction pathways of the representative components such as aromatic compounds and furans. This can provide a theoretical reference for regulating the final product distribution through targeted control of catalyst and reaction conditions. Through the multi-level comparison and in-depth discussion of Py, HyPy and catalytic HyPy processes of the two typical species of biomass, the reaction chemistry, and catalytic mechanism were further analyzed, as presented in As presented in After the in-depth analysis of the reaction mechanism and quantum descriptors of oxygen-containing compounds, the whole reaction network for the catalytic HyPy of biomass at 500 °C was proposed. As presented in In summary, the hydropyrolysis of biomass was identified as a multistage reaction involving the initial pyrolysis of raw biomass and further deoxygenation of the pyrolysis intermediates. According to the radical mechanism, hydrogen is transformed into hydrogen radicals at a high temperature which greatly promotes the cracking reaction, while catalyst enhances the desorption of oxygen molecules from oxygenates. It can be noted that the optimal solution for low-oxygen biofuel production of biomass pyrolysis is the catalytic HyPy. Especially, for high-ash rice husk having a large amount of silicon and other mineral elements, the oxygen removal effect can also occur in the HyPy process even with no catalyst because of its self-catalysis. Three types of pyrolysis techniques were studied for low-oxygen fuel production in the modified Py-GC/MS microreactor system, and compared using an evaluation system applicable to explore the feasible solution of different biomass species. Also, the corresponding reaction pathway and catalytic mechanism were further inferred based on quantum chemistry calculation and experimental results. Moreover, this work can provide a proven platform and theoretical supports for the development of biomass catalytic HyPy. Main conclusions are summed up as follows: Three types of pyrolysis techniques of biomass have different reaction patterns. Compared to fast pyrolysis (Py), HyPy has a significant hydrodeoxygenation effect, while catalytic HyPy has shown a further deoxygenation effect with the highest hydrocarbon selectivity of 49.14%, which presents a better potential application on low-oxygen biofuel production. The 0.5 wt % Rh/ZrO The biomass species have different effects on the pyrolysis process. For poplar sawdust, the preferable solution for low-oxygen products was the catalytic HyPy treating. For high-ash rice husk containing a large number of mineral elements, HyPy can exhibit high deoxygenation extent and hydrocarbons selectivity even with no catalyst because of its self-catalysis. Therefore, rice husk could be considered to be a better feedstock for the HyPy process to produce high hydrocarbons fuel. Quantum descriptors calculation for oxygen-containing compounds produced in hydropyrolysis or catalytic HyPy process of biomass has provided theoretical support for reaction mechanism study. A multistage reactions network involving initial pyrolysis of raw biomass and further deoxygenation of the pyrolysis intermediates for the Rh/ZrO The authors declare no competing financial interest. Financial supports from The following is the Supplementary data to this article: Supplementary data to this article can be found online at 