This contribution describes the distribution of marine salt aerosols in Belgium, France and Spain, as obtained from applying a kriging model to a set of data. The data was collected over a period of nine years and included wet as well as dry deposition results. It was found that the concentration of the salt particles decreased the fastest in Spain and the slowest in Belgium with increasing inland distance from the sea. These findings have implications for the degradation of monuments and historical buildings as a result of salt attack and ingress that often accompany degradation due to air pollution.Atmospheric marine salt can have quite an effect on building deterioration in Europe. This is particularly important when considering the preservation and conservation of historic buildings and monuments. Of all the components that make up the particulate material introduced into the global atmosphere each year, that of the sea-salt aerosol is one of the, if not The aim of the work described in this short communication is to predict the distribution of atmospheric marine salt in Europe, as a function of the distance from the sea. For this purpose it was decided to apply an existing atmospheric aerosol dynamics model to redict the wet and dry deposition of sea-salt near the coast and inland, covering in particular the Atlantic coastal belt of Europe. The impact of data is most powerful when its is properly and well organised. Much of statistics therefore, deals with the organisation, presentation, and summary of data. In the real world, it is impossible to get exhaustive values of data at every desired point because of practical constraints. Thus, interpolation is important and fundamental to graphing, analysing and understanding of 2D data. Geostatistics is based on the Geostatistical predictions areas about finding the best linear unbiased prediction (the expected value), given observations and a model for their spatial variation. The dataset is composed of measurements of Cl The deposition samples were collected and analysed with different methods, over varying periods of time, at different times. This could probably deteriorate the quality of the dataset, and in addition makes it very difficult to estimate the error on this data. However, it should be stressed that measurements of Cl Depletion of chloride from sea-salt particles has been observed in many field measurements, at various locations (e.g.,  Although contour lines might cross the coastlines of the studied area, no measurements of Cl From the resulting database (5 The Cl The yearly deposition profiles of Cl More complete and accurate mappings of Cl The following conclusions can be made from this work: The results indicated that no significant depletion of Cl The Cl The highest background Cl