Ceramic oxide green pellets for nuclear fuel or targets are manufactured by powder processes producing detrimental fines. Porous brittle microspheres offer an interesting alternative, providing that their fracture behavior is well controlled during pressing. Here we investigate, using experimental characterization and numerical simulations, the effect of porosity and internal defects on the strength of porous microspheres. We show that although the residual porosity is the main parameter affecting their strength, the shape and location of defects also play a role. Real defects characterized by X-ray tomography are reproduced with discrete element simulations, providing new insights on their fracture behavior. We also investigate the departure from monosized microspheres by simulating the fracture behavior of two microspheres of different sizes, and show that it is the minimum radius that allows for a consistent strength normalization. This study offers a method for anticipating agglomerate strength that can be generalized for any ceramic systems.Ceramic nuclear fuel pellets are typically produced by powder metallurgy processes with numerous grinding and milling steps that generate very fine particles The control of the shaping of these ceramic granulated precursors by uni-axial pressing to obtain uniform pellets is essential. Prior to sintering, the green microstructure should be as homogeneous as possible to ensure defect-free pellets. During pressing, the brittle porous microspheres deform and break to decrease the overall porosity of the green pellet. The mutual interaction of these porous microspheres under uni-axial pressing dictates the uniformity of pellets. However, it is not sufficient to study only the elastic interaction of those granulated precursors. The full mechanical history, starting with intact spheres interacting through their contacts followed by large chunks of fractured microspheres indenting each other must be investigated. Indeed, we have shown experimentally and numerically that multiple discrete fracture processes occur at the scale of micronic aggregates (assumed unbreakable for lanthanide oxides) The Discrete Element Method (DEM) is a powerful tool for the numerical simulation of these brittle microspheres that are constituted by a discrete assembly of aggregates. In DEM, the inherently discrete nature of porous microspheres can be taken into account in a natural manner. The use of a simple fracture criterion at the junction between aggregates allows for the simulation of the breaking of micropspheres. The handling of the multiple topological modifications that come with microsphere fracture is much easier with DEM than with FEM (Finite Element Method) simulations. There is no need to predefine the location of cracks as in FEM The lanthanide oxide precursors are synthesized via the Weak Acid Resin (WAR) process, which uses ion exchange resin beads to fix metal cations and act as an organic spherical template and, after heat treatment, produce the oxide microspheres. More details on the synthesis of oxide microspheres can be found in previous studies The density of the oxide microspheres increases as the gadolinium content increases while their diameters tend to decrease. The changes in apparent density of mixed microspheres as a function of their composition are presented in The internal microstructure of the microspheres was studied by X-ray adsorption tomography. Using the collected data, a digital image is calculated and reconstructed in gray-scale corresponding to the local attenuation factor. X-ray tomography was performed on the SIMaP laboratory nanotomograph (RX Solutions) equipped with a nanofocus transmission source (Hamamatsu) and a cooled QuadRO CDD (Princeton Instruments) using a CsI scintillator on a 1:1 taper. Two spheres have been imaged. For the first one, 1600 projections of 8 s at 60 kV beam voltage have been used for a 3D reconstruction on a 200 nm voxel size grid. For the second sphere, 800 projections of 6 s exposure time at 90 kV beam voltage have been used for a 3D reconstruction on a 300 nm voxel size grid. In both cases, a 0.25 mm thick aluminum filter has been used to reduce beam hardening. Source spot size, detector modulation transfer function and chosen magnification led to a submicron resolution. This resolution is sufficient to image a defect in detail. The mechanical properties of the microspheres were characterized by recording the crushing of a microsphere using a DEBEN micropress (Mini tensile tester 200 N) equipped with a 5 N or 200 N load cell. Crushing is achieved by controlling the movement of two compression modules moving at a constant and slow enough speed (0.1 mm/min) to avoid inertial phenomena. Crushing tests were performed in-situ into a Scanning Electron Microscope (Zeiss, SEM FEG Supra 55) to monitor the microsphere deformation and its evolution during crushing while recording the force value. These in-situ SEM observations allow local damage and cracks to be followed. The Discrete Element Method (DEM) is used to simulate the crushing of oxide microspheres. The porous microsphere is modeled as an assembly of discrete spherical particles (radius A fracture criterion completes the model. The maximum tensile and shear stresses that act at the periphery of the beam can be evaluated by approximating the bond to a cylindrical beam A defect was observed on mixed microspheres (Ce The presence of a central cavity is also observed on X-ray tomography images. Remy Control of porosity in oxide microspheres thanks to the gadolinium content (see Since microspheres exhibit different diameters depending on their content (see The DEM simulation of the crushing of microspheres with defect is performed using material parameters that characterize the mechanical properties of Gd In order to have a logical comparison between the various defects tested, we started from the exact same defect-free microsphere (diameter In accordance with earlier investigations on the crushing of brittle spheres Fig. The spread of damage in the microsphere is exemplified in At 3.5% strain (around the force maximum in In any case, This result shows that porous microspheres do not fall into the standard theoretical framework of elastic brittle dense spheres under static compression. In this theoretical framework, a local maximum tensile stress concentration, which triggers fracture, arises at approximately The DEM simulations (and the experiments as reported in The X-ray tomography grayscale image (  The three curves characterizing the microsphere with the X-ray tomograph show some dispersion but lead to a similar strength to the one given by ideal ellipsoid defects of the same relative size (defect depicted in More generally, In the preceding section, the effect of departing from a defect-free microsphere was studied. Another practical condition of importance is the case of a non-monomodal packing of microspheres. In that case, it is interesting to anticipate which microspheres are most likely to fracture first. We have thus simulated by DEM the mutual crushing of two spheres of different sizes. The size ratio was set to 1.4. We carried out simulations with two microspheres with elliptic defects (with their long axis aligned with the loading direction) that have the same relative size (i.e. the defects have the same volume fraction in the two microspheres). As reference, we also tested two defect-free microspheres. Fig. The breaking of the smallest sphere may be understood by considering Eq.  Granulated precursors have attracted a renewed interest for nuclear ceramic pellet fabrication as they allow for a drastic limitation of powder dissemination. More generally, in the ceramic industry, the handling of fines is often problematic in pressing operations. The use of larger granulated precursors may resolve some of the deleterious effects of fines, providing their behavior during compaction is well understood. Here, coupling DEM simulations and experimental characterizations, we have shown how internal defects or departure from monomodal size distribution affect the fracture behavior of porous microspheres that may act as granulated precursors. Although residual porosity is the best predictor for anticipating the approximate strength of a porous microsphere as described by the power law equation The force versus displacement curves that were obtained experimentally in This explains why the defects that expand closest to the surface of microspheres are the most detrimental for strength for a given volume fraction. It also calls for caution in categorizing this strength as tensile strength as it is mostly driven by shear and compressive stresses at the contact point. The stiff platens used here do not allow for a tensile strength to be measured for these very weak microspheres as discussed in Going beyond the idealized defects studied here (spherical or elliptic) was possible thanks to the coupling of DEM and of X-ray nanotomography. Provided the image resolution is sufficient, the defect can be accurately represented in DEM. The effect of such real defects can be properly anticipated with DEM simulations. Although representing less than 5% of the total microsphere volume, the defect accounts for an approximately 30% drop in strength. The next step consists in carrying DEM simulations with a sufficient number of microspheres to mimic a representative volume of powder during close-die compaction. As DEM is based on an explicit scheme, the discrete simulations conducted here on a single microsphere are already quite CPU intensive. Typically the CPU time necessary for the full crushing of a single microsphere is of the order of 12 days in sequential mode (or less than two days when parallel computing is used with 8 cores). Thus, even though parallel computing is available with our in-house dp3D code, a cautious strategy is needed to calculate large scale close-die compaction problems with millions of particles. In this context, the DEM test on two microspheres with different sizes will be useful for the upscaling of DEM simulations dealing with the compaction of microspheres with realistic size distribution. The authors declare that there is no conflict of interest. We would like to acknowledge the help of Pr. Luc Salvo from SIMaP laboratory for carrying out X-ray nanotomography experiments. The authors are also thankful to Emmanuelle Brackx and Renaud Domenger for their assistance during in-situ micro compression tests.