Cenospheres are defined as hollow spherical particles with density less than water. This definition is based on natural concentration of cenospheres from fly ashes in wet disposal sites, i.e. ponds or lagoons. On the other hand, the lowest-density oxide in fly ashes, crystalline silica, has a density of 2.6g/cm3. Therefore, hollow particles with densities of up to 2.6g/cm3 are also present in fly ashes depending on the wall thickness and the ratio of the hollow part. These heavier cenospheres could also have high-value applications in construction industry as fillers and reinforcements. In this study, recovery potentials of cenospheres from two bituminous coal fly ashes were examined as a function of density and size. Fly ash samples from Çatalağzı (CFA) and Sugözü (SFA) thermal power plants were first subjected to float–sink, wet sieving and air classification tests to separate them into various products. These products were then analyzed under optical microscope for their cenosphere contents on the basis of point counting and area estimations. Separation efficiency was evaluated in terms of yield, cenosphere content and recovery of the products. Overall results showed that CFA has much more cenospheres than SFA, and cenosphere contents decreased with decreasing size and increasing density for both samples. Despite similar variations in cenosphere contents through density and size, CFA exhibited much higher yields and recoveries compared to SFA for the respective product.Increasing energy demands of industry and features of coal like abundance, availability and cost effectiveness have brought about construction of many coal fired thermal power plants since 1920s. Vast amount of ash (mostly fly ash and low amount of bottom ash) and related by-products (gypsum and boiler slag) are generated in these plants. Total annual production of coal fly ash is currently around 500 million tones globally The name “cenosphere” comes from two Greek words, which are kenos (hollow) and sphaira (sphere). Cenosphere can be described as lightweight, thin-walled, inert and hollow ceramic microspheres, filled with air or gases, and cenospheres are obtained as by-products in fly ash. Cenosphere formation needs a special condition and depends on a number of factors related to coal characteristics and combustion type. Therefore only some fly ashes contain cenospheres and commonly the amount of cenospheres in coal fly ashes is very low, 0.3–1.5%. Their hollow spherical shape is due to the cooling and solidifying of ash particles around trapped gases, which are generally CO Cenospheres find a number of applications in various industries due to their superior properties such as hollow spherical shape, wide-range of particle size varying from sub-micron to millimeters, ultra-low density, high fusion temperatures, low thermal conductivity, protection against electromagnetic interference, high particle strength, resistance to chemicals and low water absorption. These application areas include ceramics, plastics, construction, recreation, automotive, energy and technology. Cenospheres are mostly used as light-weight fillers in these areas due to improved properties and reduced cost of the final product Hollow spherical fly ash particles with density less than water are called as cenospheres in considerable body of literature because of natural concentration of cenospheres from fly ashes in wet disposal sites, i.e. ponds or lagoons Although reported in literature as fly ash particles being lighter than water, cenospheres may have densities varying from that of crystalline silica, 2.6 In the present study, recovery potentials of cenospheres, defined as any spherical particles with hollow spaces, from two bituminous coal fly ashes were examined as a function of density and size. Cenospheric particles were first separated from Çatalağzı (CFA) and Sugözü (SFA) fly ash samples using wet and dry methods, namely float–sink, wet sieving and air classification. Cenosphere contents of these separated products were then determined on the basis of point and area calculations. Yield, cenosphere content and recovery of the products were used as measures of separation efficiency. Two bituminous coal fly ashes obtained from Çatalağzı and Sugözü thermal power plants of Turkey were used in this study. Pressed powder pellets of the fly ash samples were prepared and analyzed for their major chemical constituents using a Spectro IQ X-ray fluorescence (XRF) spectrometer. Loss on ignition (LOI) tests were performed in accordance with ASTM C 311  Mineralogical compositions and microstructural characterizations of the fly ash samples were determined with X-ray diffraction (XRD) and scanning electron microscopy (SEM) analyses. XRD patterns were recorded by a Rigaku MiniFlex X-ray diffractometer. According to the XRD results, quartz, mullite and hematite are the main crystalline phases for both samples. SEM investigations were done using JEOL JSM-6400 and Hitachi S-4800 devices. Based on SEM observations, both fly ashes mainly contain small and glass like particles with spherical shape and also larger irregularly shaped particles. Opaque spheres mostly consist of alumino-silicate and a smaller amount of iron-rich phases while irregularly shaped particles generally resulted from coal particles which were not subjected to complete combustion In this study, any spherical fly ash particle with hollow space was accepted as cenosphere regardless of its density and shell thickness. Bituminous coal fly ash samples from Çatalağzı (CFA) and Sugözü (SFA) thermal power plants were first subjected to some commonly used separating methods, namely float–sink, wet sieving and air classification. Separated products were then analyzed under optical microscope for their cenosphere contents on the basis of point and area calculations. Separation efficiency was evaluated in terms of yield, cenosphere content and recovery of the products. Float–sink tests were carried out to examine the relationships among particle density, float product yields and cenosphere contents. In these tests, zinc chloride (ZnCl Wet sieving was performed to determine the relationship between particle size and cenosphere content. Tyler sieve series from 300 Air classification tests were designed to observe combined effect of density and size on cenosphere recovery from the fly ash samples. Alpine air-cyclone was used to separate the samples into various fractions depending on particle settling rates. Air pressure and rotary speed were selected as the main processing parameters affecting the cyclone efficiency. According to the preliminary experiments, four air pressure levels (30, 40, 46 and 52 Effects of various wet and dry concentration techniques, namely heavy medium separation (HMS), wet sieving and air classification on cenosphere enrichment were analyzed under optical microscope on the basis of point counting and area estimations. In point-counting, thin sections of the as-received and processed fly ashes were prepared and then analyzed for their cenosphere contents through a transmitted optical light microscope equipped with a Swift automatic point counter. As indicated before, cenospheres were defined as any spherical particle containing hollow spaces. In other words, any spherical hollow particle regardless of its density and shell thickness was accepted as cenosphere. The method used to identify hollow particles is simple and quick. In this method, fly ash particles in the thin sections were examined with a transmitted optical light microscope, and the spherical particles possessing a central darkened area were identified as hollow particles Point-counting method is relatively simple and provides reliable data for the estimation of a material’s content. The point counter instrument used mainly has two units, namely counting part controlled by the observer and servo-operated traversing carriage unit which can be fitted to any conventional microscope. The traverse of the specimen is broken into a series of equally-spaced steps which are moved electrically in the horizontal direction by a series of buttons placed on the counting unit. In order to determine the exact point of location, eyepiece of the microscope is equipped with a fine cross-lined graticule. The operator uses the appropriate button when the particle of interest has been identified under the cross-wires In point-counting, in order to minimize sampling and experimental errors, two thin sections were prepared for each sample and two measurements were done for each thin section. A minimum of 500 particles were counted for each measurement, and cenosphere contents were then calculated by the point counter automatically as number percentages from the ratio of cenospheres over total counted particles. Four results were then obtained for each sample. Minimum and maximum values were discarded, and average value of the other two was taken as the final result. In area basis estimation, thin sections were not prepared. Instead, representative fly ash samples were just placed on a lamel as separated particles. Images of the particles in the frame were taken and processed by image analyzer software equipped with an optical microscope. The image analyzer gave areas of all particles in the frame. Cenosphere contents of the samples were then calculated as area percentages from total areas of cenospheres over total areas of all particles in the frame. Each image includes about 10–20 particles depending on the magnification. In order to characterize the samples precisely and to obtain reliable data, approximately 30 images were taken and analyzed for each measurement, and two measurements were done for each sample. If the difference between the results was less than 5%, the average value was taken as the final result. If the difference was more than 5%, a third measurement was done and the average value of any two data closer to each other was taken as the final result.    In a similar way to In addition to point-counting, cenosphere contents were also determined by area basis estimation. As seen in  Similarly,  In the air classification tests, coarser size cenospheres compared to solid fly ash particles were expected to concentrate in the underflow products because this process is mainly based on size rather than density Overall results pointed out that CFA had much higher cenosphere content than SFA, and cenosphere content decreased with decreasing size and increasing density for both samples. Despite similar variations in cenosphere contents through density and size, CFA exhibited much higher yields and recoveries compared to SFA for the respective product. These results comply with physical characterization data and clearly explain the much larger particle size and lower density and surface area values of CFA with respect to SFA. Recovery potentials of cenospheres, defined as any spherical particles containing hollow spaces, from Çatalağzı and Sugözü fly ashes were examined using various wet and dry separation processes, namely heavy medium separation (HMS), wet sieving and air classification. Separation efficiency in these processes was evaluated in terms of yield, cenosphere content and cenosphere recovery of the products. According to point-counting, as-received Çatalağzı and Sugözü fly ash samples originally contained 11.30% and 4.50% cenospheres, respectively, and these cenosphere contents decreased with increasing specific gravity and decreasing size for both samples. Based on float–sink tests, Çatalağzı fly ash had higher extent of floating products and more cenospheres than Sugözü fly ash for the same specific gravity interval. Wet sieving tests indicated that cenospheres mostly concentrated in coarse fractions of the samples. Although similar variations in cenosphere contents were observed through specific gravity and size, Çatalağzı fly ash provided relatively higher product yields and cenosphere recoveries as compared to Sugözü fly ash for the respective product. Unlike wet sieving, cenospheres concentrated in the underflow products in air classification because this process is mainly based on size rather than density. Cenosphere contents in the underflow products increased with increasing air pressure and decreasing rotary speed for both samples. All these tests suggested that the most efficient cenosphere separation process was wet sieving. Cenosphere contents of the as-received Çatalağzı and Sugözü fly ashes were increased to 21.65% and 11.83%, respectively in the overflow products by using only simple sieving through 38 The financial support by