The changes of aluminate ions in the Bayer seeded precipitation process were analyzed by the semi-quantitative FTIR analytical method and the ion structure of attached-liquid on the seed surface was determined using ATR-FTIR in order to investigate the gibbsite precipitation mechanism from sodium aluminate solution. The results show that the concentration of tetrahedral aluminate ions corresponding to the bands at 720cm−1 and 880cm−1 declines remarkably as the precipitation process proceeds, while the concentration of Al2O(OH)6
                     2− corresponding to the band at about 550cm−1 increases slightly, suggesting that the gibbsite precipitation from sodium aluminate solution was mainly caused by the tetrahedral aluminate ions. The concentration of tetrahedral aluminate ions in the spent liquor declines with time, resulting in a reduction of the driving force of cluster formation of Al(OH)4
                     −, which in turn leads to the reduction of the cluster size. Thus the clusters formed by Al(OH)4
                     − could not get to the critical size to transform into Al(OH)3 and consequently dissolve in the solution. So the rate of nucleation and growth is very slow in the late period of seeded precipitation and the content of Al(OH)4
                     − in the attached-liquid on the aluminum trihydroxide surface remains constant.The precipitation of gibbsite from caustic aluminate solution is the rate-limiting step in the Bayer process used for alumina production ( The focus of many spectroscopic studies has been the identification and sometimes quantification of aluminate ions in pure solutions at industrially relevant concentrations, and the existence of dominant monomeric tetrahydroxy aluminate ions (Al(OH) Mechanism of cationic polyacrylamide (PAM) enhancing seeded agglomeration of sodium aluminate liquors was studied by Furthermore, it was observed by cryo-TEM ( The gibbsite(boehmite)/solution interface in seeded aluminate solutions was also investigated ( Up to now, the interpretation of the transformation from dominant Al(OH) Distilled water was used to prepare all solutions. Aluminum trihydroxide, sodium hydroxide and sodium nitrate (all analytical grades) were supplied by Kermel Chemical Reagent Corporation of Tianjin, P.R. China. Supersaturated sodium aluminate solution was prepared by dissolving aluminum trihydroxide in hot NaOH solution, subsequently filtering twice and finally diluting to the required volume. 1 Samples were taken periodically from the crystallizer and subsequently centrifuged. Optical clean solutions were used for aluminum and alkali analyses. The liquor composition was determined by the titration method. Details of the analysis methods can be found in the work of Sodium nitrate was added to the sodium aluminate solution as the external standard substance with a mass fraction of 2%. The IR spectra of thin films of solution between KBr plates were collected on a FT-IR 6700 spectrometer with 4 Samples were taken periodically from the crystallizer and were characterized by infrared spectroscopy. Different temperature infrared measurements were performed using an attachment (HC-32 Heated/Cooled Transmission Cell), and the spectra of the samples showed no appreciable changes over the temperature range 25 Sodium nitrate was added to the sodium aluminate solution as the external standard substance. The infrared spectra of the sodium aluminate solution with and without external standard substance were shown in As shown in  In the present work, the aluminum concentration of aluminate solutions with different initial composition in this experiment varies from 184.1 (g/L) to 202.2 (g/L), the aluminate solutions have the same structure but varied concentration of various aluminate ions during this concentration range ( The peak heights of the FTIR absorption peaks at 550, 635, 720 and 880 According to the According to the   In the initial hours of the precipitation process, the concentration of the Al–O–Al vibration of the dimer Al  It is well known that gibbsite precipitation from supersaturated sodium aluminate solutions takes place on the gibbsite/solution interface. It is assumed that the structure properties of the gibbsite/solution interface and the bulk solution are different, as the attached-liquid on the seed surface is more close to the gibbsite/solution interface. So understanding of the aluminate ion structure of attached-liquid on the seed surface is beneficial to the study of structural properties of the gibbsite/solution interface and the mechanism of gibbsite precipitation ( ATR technology is one of the most effective ways to test the physical structure of the surface layer of the sample without interference. In the present work, ATR-FTIR spectroscopy was employed to semi-quantitatively investigate the ionic structure of the attached-liquid on the seed surface during the precipitation process. The ATR spectrum of the mixture of liquid and solid must be studied first to obtain the structural information of the attached-liquid on the seed surface by the method of subtraction. The spectra of pure aluminum trihydroxide and aluminum trihydroxide with attached-liquid were measured and then the spectrum of the aluminum trihydroxide was subtracted from the spectra of the aluminum trihydroxide with attached-liquid at different precipitation times, the resulting spectra are shown in The samples with attached-liquid after filtration at different precipitation times were further investigated with FTIR using the potassium bromide (KBr) pellet technique to verify the above conclusion obtained by subtractive spectroscopy. The tetrahedral aluminate species from the bulk solution diffuse to the seed surface, and then continue to diffuse to the boundary layer. In the boundary layer, the diffusion of the tetrahedral aluminate species is easier because of its strong electrical conductivity (  Al–OH tetrahedral aluminate ions centered at about 720 and 880 As the gibbsite precipitation process proceeds, the clusters formed by Al(OH) The authors gratefully acknowledge the financial support from the