Alkali metal ion intercalation into layered transition-metal dichalcogenide structures is a promising approach to make next generation rechargeable batteries for energy storage. It has been noted that the number of Na-ions which can be reversibly intercalated and extracted per MoS2 is limited, and the chemical and electrochemical processes/mechanisms remain largely unknown, especially for nano-sized materials. Here, sodiation of MoS2 nanosheets are studied by in-situ electron diffraction and the phase transformations in sodiation are identified with the aid of DFT calculations to reveal the reaction mechanism. Several thermodynamically stable/metastable structures are identified in the sodiation pathway of MoS2 nanosheets, previously unnoticed in bulk MoS2. The gradual reduction of Mo4+ upon Na-ion intercalation leads to a transition of the Mo-S polyhedron from a trigonal prism to an octahedron around 0.375 Na per MoS2 inserted (i.e. Na0.375MoS2). When the intercalated Na-content is larger than 1.75 per MoS2 structural unit (i.e. Na1.75MoS2), the MoS2 layered structure collapses and the intercalation reaction is replaced by an irreversible conversion reaction with the formation of Na2S and metal Mo nanoparticles. The calculated sodiation pathways reproduce the experimental sodiation voltages. The current observations provide useful insights in developing sodium-ion batteries with high cycling stability.To meet the demand of inexpensive and environmentally friendly energy storage technologies, sodium-ion batteries are promising especially for large-scale energy storage integrated with renewable energy sources such as solar and wind. Due to the scarcity of lithium, there are clear and compelling economic and practical drivers to explore alternatives to lithium ions in charge storage devices. Sodium-ion batteries have many advantages due to the intrinsic advantages of sodium, Transition-metal dichalcogenide materials such as molybdenum disulfide (MoS The phase transformations and reaction pathways involved in electrode materials during charge and discharge are often quite complex, and can involve both thermodynamically stable and metastable processes. Recent developments in All chemicals were purchased from Sigma Aldrich and used as received without any further purification. MoS The sodiation reaction was conducted inside TEM by the nanobattery setup on the Nanofactory holder ( First principles density functional theory (DFT) calculations were performed using the Vienna Ab-initio Simulation Package (VASP) To simulate the sodiation process of MoS The microstructure evolutions of MoS Supplementary material related to this article can be found online at The following is the Supplementary material related to this article By using a combination of electron diffraction and DFT calculations, we can identify the content of Na in the intermediate phases. The structural evolution was studied by a series of electron diffraction patterns, and the same phase transformation process was calculated by DFT. The simulated diffraction patterns were then calculated with the structural models generated by DFT and compared to the experimental ones, and the comparison allows us to identify possible intermediate phases. This method allows us to identify the intermediate phases, their compositions ( With DFT calculations as described in After sodiation for about 3-min, extra diffraction spots appeared in the pattern as shown in During further sodiation (from 3 Further sodiation (beyond 1.75 Na intercalated per formula unit of MoS There are several stable phases (as predicted to be on the Na-MoS We examine the Na-ion diffusion and intercalation into the MoS Supplementary material related to this article can be found online at The following is the Supplementary material related to this article In summary, several stable/metastable phases (Na Q.L. ( Supplementary data associated with this article can be found in the online version at 