During the solvent extraction fractionation of rare earth chloride obtained from monazite, a heavy rare earth fraction assaying 60% Y2O3 is produced. This is purified further to 93% Y2O3 by another solvent extraction cycle. During this step, most of the Dy and Tb are separated to yield a concentrate assaying >50% Dy2O3, 14% Tb4O7, 10% Gd2O3, 2.4% Ho2O3, and 21% Y2O3. An attempt has been made to process this Dy-rich concentrate to obtain a high grade Dy2O3 by solvent extraction using 2-ethyl hexyl phosphonic acid mono-2-ethyl hexyl ester (PC 88A) in paraffinic kerosene as an extractant. The distribution ratio (D) of Dy was determined as a function of initial concentration of HCl for different initial concentrations of Dy. The separation factors of Dy/Gd, Dy/Tb, Y/Dy, Ho/Dy, and Er/Dy were determined experimentally. Using the experimentally determined D values of Dy and the separation factors, the distribution data for Gd, Tb, Y, Ho, and Er were derived mathematically. Based on these data, empirical mathematical models have been made to predict the concentration of these metal ions in organic and aqueous phases at various initial acidities and metal concentrations. Using these models, a computer program was developed to calculate the concentration of the metal ions in organic and aqueous phases at various stages of extraction and scrubbing in a counter-current solvent extraction cascade. Using this program, the parameters of the process, such as the initial acidity of the feed, the acidities of scrubbing and stripping solutions, the phase ratio, the number of stages in extraction, and the scrubbing sections have been optimised to obtain >97% purity of Dy. Under these optimised conditions, counter-current extraction and scrubbing tests were carried out using mixer settlers of 50-ml mixer capacity. Mixer settler runs yielded four different products from its four exit points. The raffinate coming from the first exit was essentially Gd-rich solution containing other light rare earths (LRE). The fourth and final exit point was for the stripped solution that contained 85% Y2O3 with 95% recovery. The remaining two exit points, involving scrubbing stages, yielded an 83% pure Tb4O7 concentrate and a 97% pure Dy2O3 concentrate.In India, monazite is processed to produce rare earth chloride, a source of light rare earths (LRE). Fractionation of rare earths (RE) is done using 2-ethyl hexyl phosphonic acid mono-2-ethyl hexyl ester (PC 88A) in which an yttrium concentrate (60% Y Rare earth chloride solutions were prepared by dissolving their oxides in HCl. Excess acid was removed by evaporation to near dryness, and then the solution was diluted with water to a particular volume. Acid content in RE chloride solution was determined by precipitating RE with sodium oxalate and then by titration with the standard NaOH solution using phenolphthalein indicator. An atomic absorption spectrophotometer (Model GBC-920) was used for the determination of low concentration of RE. Batch and continuous solvent extraction processes were carried out in glass separatory funnels and mixer settler units (50-ml capacity of each mixer), respectively. PC 88A, which was obtained from Daihachi Chemical Industry, was diluted with kerosene to give a formal concentration of 1 M. In some cases, the extractant was partially saponified by contacting with the required amount of 50% NaOH solution. Saponified and unsaponified PC 88A were titrated with the standard NaOH solution using bromocresol purple as an indicator. From the difference in the volume of standard NaOH solution, the degree of saponification was evaluated. In some cases, “negative acidity” is shown. The “negative acidity” concept has been used earlier to account for the degree of saponification of the extractant The extraction of RE with organophosphoric acid has been extensively studied It is necessary to generate a large number of data points for each individual RE for developing a mathematical model. The data The These models, along with the material balance equations were incorporated in a computer program and were used for the optimisation of the process parameters for the purification of Dy from its concentrate. The following assumptions have been made to calculate the distribution of individual RE elements from a mixture of Gd, Tb, Dy, and Y. The Dy concentrate obtained in the Y recovery process contains several impurities such as Gd, Tb, Y, and other LRE The extract containing Dy and Y is also further scrubbed with 1.8 M HCl to obtain Dy in the scrubbed solution. The parameters in the scrubbing cascade were again optimised. However, it was realised that for the recovery of Y to a considerable extent and for the desired purity of Dy in scrubbed solution, it was essential to introduce the organic scrubbing. The parameters for organic scrubbing were optimised and are shown in the flow sheet. The extract after Dy scrubbing contained Y and residual Dy. The complete stripping of rare earths was carried out with 3.5 M HCl in the stripping cascade and barren solvent was recycled after 20% saponification. The results shown in this flow sheet have been experimentally obtained using the optimised parameters. The composition of the RE oxides (REO) obtained from different streams are given in