A systematic electrochemical study at controlled potential, using a rotating cylinder electrode reactor, was carried out on a synthetic solution with composition 0.2mol/L Na2S2O3, 0.05mol/L CuSO4, 0.025mol/L EDTA, 0.6 mo/L NH3, 1 × 10− 3mol/L AgNO3, which simulates actual leaching solution, to determine the conditions which permit the selective silver electroseparation with a minimum interference from the copper ions. The presence of 10 ppm of gold (5 × 10− 4M Au(I)) was found to enhance the gold–silver alloy deposition, with negligible effect on the copper ions. Those results were compared to that obtained with solutions originating from a previously characterized sulfide concentrate leach, in order to determine the influence of other impurities present in the pregnant solution, on the selective silver electrodeposition, obtaining averaging current efficiencies of 80%, with 90% of silver in the formed deposit and less than 5% of both, copper and lead, with only minor quantities of iron and zinc. Additionally, it was shown that the resulting solution could be recycled back to the leach stage, obtaining similar performances to those produced by the fresh solution, implying that it was not significantly altered in its composition, by the electroseparation process.The mining industry has focused mainly on the cyanidation process to extract precious metals, in which a zinc cementation or an activated carbon adsorption step is included to recover the values from solution. The success of this system is due to a very favorable cost–benefit ratio in the treatment of a variety of minerals. However, cyanide leaching presents several ever-increasing difficulties, such as its low efficiency for the treatment of some low grade materials and the co-dissolution of other metals in high concentrations. As an alternative system for some of these problematic minerals, the use of ammoniacal thiosulfate solutions has produced extractions of gold and silver that are economic and technologically competitive, with those obtained in cyanidation ( In order to minimize the negative effects mentioned above, the direct electrochemical separation of the precious metals from the pregnant leach solution could be considered a possible alternative to cementation. However, a major drawback is the low efficiency of these process since the precious metals are, generally, present in small concentrations. The problem is even more serious in these thiosulfate solutions because of the high copper concentrations, which could severely affect the selectivity of the metal deposit. In order to implement a direct electrochemical separation process coupled to the leach, an electrochemical reactor must be designed that minimizes energy consumption, while maximizing the current efficiency for the selective gold–silver deposit. One of the configurations that has displayed superior results in metal electrodeposition from dilute solutions uses the rotating cylinder electrode (RCE) (  On the other hand, the ammoniacal thiosulfate solutions, originating from the leach stage, typically contain 1 × 10 Based on the previously obtained results, in the present work, a systematic electrochemical study at controlled potential was performed on synthetic leach solutions in a RCE (ECOCELL type ( The synthetic solutions were prepared with the following composition: 0.2 mol/L Na The potentiostatic tests were performed with a PARC 263A potentiostat. The potential of the working electrode was controlled, or in some cases monitored, with a Hg The concentration change in silver, copper and gold was monitored through periodic sampling and analysis using atomic absorption spectrometry (Varian model SpectrAA 220FS). The deposits, previously digested in HNO In the RCE ( The reactor was placed in a recirculation system, which is schematized in Finally, the pregnant solution was produced by leaching a bulk sulfide concentrate (− 100 + 200 mesh fraction), provided by the Real de Monte y Pachuca, S.A. Company (Pachuca, Hidalgo, Mexico). The major metallic phases contained in the concentrate were pyrite (62%), sphalerite (3.7%), galena (2.7%), acanthite (1.1%) and a small amount of chalcopyrite (0.5%); the silver concentration in this mineral was 0.94%. 12g of the concentrate was placed in contact with 0.6L of a solution with the following composition: 0.2 mol/L Na Ammoniacal thiosulfate solutions are quite complex, since more than 50 chemical species of copper and silver can co-exist. For this reason, in a previous article ( Regarding the presence of the redox pair Cu(II)/Cu(I), the Cu(II) could oxidize (releach) the silver metal deposit already formed, according to Eq. It should be noted in Eq. The chemical nature of the ammoniacal thiosulfate solution ( The relation between the potential and the anodic charge is a straight line, whose slope is modified only when the nature of the deposit is altered ( As a result of these studies on different materials, titanium was selected since it presented the widest potential range for the selective deposit of silver. When the oxidation charge is associated with the applied reduction potential, three linear tendencies are obtained ( Throughout an electroseparation process, the bulk solution concentration of the reducible component notably diminishes, unlike in the microelectrolysis experiments, where the bulk concentrations are practically constant. Therefore, it is difficult to imagine that the energetic conditions would be the same. Additionally, the silver deposit could modify the titanium surface, changing the kinetics of the different associated processes as a function of the solution concentration, which does not allow the development of an accurate model. Because of these considerations, the electroseparation process was investigated in a RCE within a recirculation system ( Since one of the most important parameters in this type of reactor is the cylinder (working electrode) rotation velocity, tests were performed at different velocities to determine its effect on the kinetics and selectivity of the silver deposit. In The concentration profiles for silver concentration are similar for 100, 200 and 300 rpm ( To determine whether the redissolution process takes place directly on the electrode or, to the contrary, is because of a deficient adherence, several micro electrolysis tests were performed by forming a deposit at constant potential on a 0.19 cm On the other hand, it may be observed that the normalized copper concentration remains practically unchanged throughout the electrolysis for the four rotation speeds ( Upon analysis of the final deposits of each electrolysis, it was corroborated that the presence of copper in the deposits was minimal, increasing with rotation speed because of the enhancement of Cu(II) and Cu(I) mass transport to the metal–solution interface, as seen in On the other hand, the current efficiency calculations allow the evaluation of the performance of the electrochemical system, and permit comparisons with other systems. In the generalized form, the current efficiency ( Where In electrolytic processes on dilute solutions, it is common to achieve relatively low current efficiencies. The high values of efficiency achieved, principally at 100 rpm, where the redissolution of the deposit was minimized, may be attributed to the fact that the precise interval of selective silver deposition was pinpointed through thermodynamic and kinetic studies. Additionally, it is important to emphasize that, not only a selective deposit was obtained, but also these high efficiencies indicate that the electrolytic reduction of Cu(II) was minimized, a factor which is central to the recirculation of the solution to the leach stage. Because most mineral leach solutions that employ ammoniacal thiosulfate to extract silver also contain small quantities of gold, the electrodeposition process was performed at 100 rpm and an applied potential of − 285 mV for the solution, with and without 10 ppm of gold. Since the copper concentrations remained constant throughout the electrolyses in both cases, only the results for the logarithmic change in silver alone ( The enhancement in the silver deposition in the presence of gold, could be due to two factors depending on the nature of the electrolysis process: if the process is controlled by diffusion, the modification of the deposition rate would be due to the increase in silver diffusivity owing to the presence of gold, or if the process is kinetically controlled, the presence of gold would be increasing the rate of electron transfer by either a modification of the substrate characteristics or through the formation of an alloy. In order to distinguish between the two possible mechanisms, the simplified macroscopic balance of this type of recirculation RCE system, as derived by If the electrodeposition process is controlled by the transport of silver ions to the electrode surface, the reaction rate is equivalent to the mass transport flux of these ions and, therefore, ℜ As may be observed, the data plotted in However, it is possible that the gold may form an alloy with metallic silver (known as dorée), modifying the value of Δ Because of economic and environmental requirements, it is desirable that process streams be recycled back to the leaching stage, after the precious metals have been removed. In order to study the behavior of actual leaching solutions in the electroseparation process, a strategy, schematized in In the first stage (Leach 1), a fresh solution with the following composition, was employed: 0.2 mol/L Na During each leach, the changes in concentration of silver, copper iron, lead and zinc were determined and reported (in In The concentrations of silver and lead undergo the greatest change in all of the leaching stages. The lead concentration rises in a similar manner in each leaching stage. However lead does not electrodeposit to any appreciable extent in the electroseparations. This may be considered an advantage for the purity of the deposit; however, it also implies that lead must be purged from the leaching circuit. In In contrast, Leach 2 starts at a value of 90 ppm of silver ( In Chemical analyses of the deposits obtained from electroseparations 1 and 2 ( The compositions reported in Notwithstanding, the similarity between the deposition behaviors in synthetic and pregnant leaching solutions, the minor proportion of impurities in the silver deposit as well as the high values of current efficiency achieved, all confirm the fact that the presence of other metallic ions in solution do not significantly affect the selective separation of silver, as was predicted by the thermodynamic and kinetic studies previously published ( The need to find alternatives that can eventually compete with cyanide for gold and silver extraction and recovery, has motivated the research on various new systems. In particular, leaching with the ammoniacal thiosulfate has positioned itself as an interesting option. For this purpose, the development of procedures which allow the efficient separation of silver and gold from these solutions and their recycle back to the leaching stage, is necessary in order to diminish costs and the environmental impact that all mining operations entail. It is important to emphasize that the potential difference between the copper reduction and silver deposition are very small, which implies great difficultly in the selective silver separation. Once this is achieved, the gold separation does not represent a problem. In a previous investigation, titanium was selected as the electrocatalytic substrate adequate for the selective silver reduction directly from ammoniacal thiosulfate leaching solutions, which contain elevated concentrations of copper; in the same study, optimum energetic conditions, where the selective deposit occurs, were found. Using these results, in the present study, the behavior of the silver and gold electroseparation process from ammoniacal thiosulfate solutions was examined in a RCE within a recirculation system. It was found that a selective silver and gold deposit, with minimum interference from the copper ions, can be obtained with this reactor configuration in synthetic solutions at an applied potential of − 285 mV vs NHE; the current efficiencies achieved were superior to others reported for systems of similar silver concentrations, even in the absence of other metallic ions. It is important to emphasize that the control of the applied potential, as well as the solution pH, is essential to attain elevated efficiencies since, outside of the optimum conditions, the precipitation of solid Cu(I) and Cu(II) species, as well as the redissolution of the silver deposit, readily occur. A bulk sulfide concentrate was leached to produce pregnant solutions, in order to perform the electroseparations in the presence of other impurities and compare the results to those obtained with the synthetic solutions, in addition to evaluate the possibility of recycling the solution back to the leaching stage, after the silver was removed. It was found that both the synthetic and the pregnant leach solutions generated similar results, averaging efficiencies of 80%. The deposits formed were approximately 90% silver, with less than 5% of both copper and lead, and only minor quantities of iron and zinc. Finally, it was demonstrated that after the electroseparation of silver and gold, the resulting solution could be recycled back to the leach stage, obtaining performances similar to those produced by the fresh solution, implying that it was not significantly altered by the electroseparation process. This was possible because of the precise control of the applied potential and the rotation velocity, which limited the reduction processes only to gold and silver recovery. On the other hand, the membrane, employed to separate the anodic and cathodic compartments, prevented the oxidation of thiosulfate by the anode. Alejandro Alonso gratefully acknowledges CONACYT-Mexico for the PhD scholarship Num. 171482.