I read with interest the recent article “Cement-in-Cement Revision for Selected Vancouver Type B1 Femoral Periprosthetic Fractures: A Biomechanical Analysis” by Brew et al The authors conducted a biomechanical study of the cement-in-cement technique for treatment of periprosthetic hip fractures. As the incidence of periprosthetic fractures continues to increase, the optimal treatment of these difficult fractures is an important area for research. I, however, disagree with the classification of the fracture created for this biomechanical study being classified as a Vancouver B1. As referenced in the manuscript's introduction, Vancouver B1 fractures are fractures around the stem in which the stem remains stable. Additionally, the authors suggest that “traditional techniques for treatment of Type B1 fractures involve removal of all the original cement mantle, fixation of the fracture using circlage wires with supplemental fixation with a plate or strut graft if needed, followed by insertion of a long femoral cemented or uncemented stem.” The fracture created in this study appears to be a Vancouver B2 fracture, defined as a fracture around the stem in which “the stem is loose,” as the fracture depicted in the manuscript clearly shows a large disruption of the cement mantle which leads to loss of clinical stability of the stem. Additionally, the authors' description of the traditional treatment of Type B1 fractures appears to describe the traditional treatment of a Vancouver B2 fracture in which the stem is loose. Vancouver B1 fractures can often be treated with traditional fracture fixation techniques without revision of the stem. Nevertheless, this remains an interesting method to treat a small subset of Vancouver B2 fractures. However, it should be emphasized that this method is likely only appropriate for a small subset of fractures in which the vast majority of the cement mantle remains bonded to the bone and in which there is minimal comminution, which allows for anatomic reduction of the fracture fragments with cerclage wires alone. I believe that this is likely a useful technique for fractures meeting these strict treatment criteria, however, as the Vancouver Classification is the most commonly utilized periprosthetic fracture classification in the literature, it is important to have consistent application of this classification to avoid confusion in the literature as well as for the treating surgeon. Conflict of Interest Statement