In the production of iron ore concentrate pellets, binders are required to improve pellet green strength. The most popular binder for this purpose is bentonite clay, which is added at a rate of approximately 0.5–1.0% by weight of moist concentrate. Bentonite is a significant cost item in iron ore pelletization, and also contributes undesirable amounts of silica to the finished pellets. If the binding effectiveness of bentonite is increased, it will be possible to reduce the bentonite dosage, resulting in significant cost savings while producing higher quality, lower silica pellets. The authors have recently identified a new and important bentonite binding mechanism, which is development of bentonite fibers under compressive shear mixing. During this study, procedures were developed that took advantage of the ability of bentonite to form fibers, and resulted in a dramatic decrease in the necessary bentonite dosage. When mixing procedures were used that promoted fiber formation, the bentonite dosage needed to produce acceptable strength pellets was cut in half, from 14 (0.66%) to 7 (0.33%) lb/lt. In addition, bentonites that are currently considered poor quality can have their performance enhanced by using this fiber development method, and be used successfully as iron ore pellet binders.Iron ore pelletization plants in the United States used approximately 612,000 metric tons of bentonite as a binder to produce iron ore concentrate pellets in 2000 The bentonite fiber binding mechanism is quite different from that of the classical dispersion mechanism of bentonite binding. Classically, it is assumed that bentonite behaves in iron ore pellet bonding as if it were a slurry. In the slurry mechanism, bentonites disperse into individual platelets and coat the surfaces of the magnetite particles like a gel. In contrast, under proper conditions, the fiber mechanism forms a fibrous matrix that ties the iron ore particles together. These fibers form when a shearing action is applied, promoting the bentonite platelets to slip, like a deck of cards pushed across a table. It was hypothesized that the bentonite fiber mechanism would result in superior binding performance compared to the classical dispersion mechanism. Roll milling of the bentonite into the iron ore concentrate provides the type of shearing action necessary to develop the bentonite into fibers Magnetite concentrate in these experiments was obtained from an iron ore concentrator located in the Lake Superior district of the United States. The sample weighed 411 kg (907 lb); 112 samples weighing an average of 3.2 kg (7.1 lb) were divided by coning, quartering and incrementaal sampling (according to The bentonite binder was a Na–montmorillonite based clay that was mined from the Western United States. The bentonite, obtained from the American Colloid and designated SPV 200, had a plate water absorbance (PWA) of 706 Particle size analyses were performed with a Microtrac SRA (Leeds and Northrup Division, Allied Signal, USA). A Readco Type-A kneader-mixer was used to mix the concentrate with binder. A laboratory-scale balling drum was used to form the pellets. Pellets were dried in a Blue M (Illinois, USA) drying oven. An Instron 4206 was used with an 8896 N (2000 lbf) load cell at a constant cross-head speed of 40 mm/min (1.57) to crush the pellets and determine their ultimate compressive strength. Denver type-D laboratory crushing rolls were used to develop the bentonite into a fibrous structure. It should be noted that these rolls were operated with a roll spacing of 1.0 mm, which is considerably larger than the top size of the feed, and so they did not produce any additional size reduction of the magnette particles. They were acting as a mixer only. Bentonite was added to the moist magnetite concentrate in a kneader-mixer, and mixed at 350 rpm with a 150-rpm orbital motion for up to 5 min. Binder dosages are reported as percentages that are percent by weight of moist magnetite concentrate. In addition to the standard procedure, a laboratory sized rolling mill/press was used to provide the type of shear forces that were expected to promote formation. The mixed material was passed through the rolling mill up to 20 times at a normal feedrate of 24 kg/min. One test each with a high (120 kg/min) and a low (4 kg/min) feedrate was also performed. The procedure used for forming the pellets from the mixed material was developed by industry to closely reproduce the conditions that exist in the full-scale plant. The mixed material was delumped through a 2.4-mm (8 mesh) screen before pelletizing. A small amount of the material was then added to the pelletizing drum, rotating at 25 rpm, to create pellet “seeds”. The seeds were moistened with water mist to retain moisture content while adding additional material to enlarge them into pellets. The pellets were removed from the drum periodically, and screened to control the pellet diameter. This procedure was continued until 1–2 kg (2–5 lb) of finished pellets, screened between 12.7 and 11.2 mm (1/2×7/16 in.) in diameter, were produced for testing. The time required for pelletization was approximately 20 min. The finished pellets were then immediately dried at 105 °C (220 °F), and held at this temperature for 20–24 h to ensure that they were completely dried. The pellets were tested using the procedures given in For each value reported, the mean and standard deviation were determined for 20 pellets. The error bars shown on the graphs represent the 95% confidence intervals ( A factorially designed experiment was performed to investigate the strength of the magnetite pellets prepared from feeds with different mixing histories and bentonite contents. The strength of dry iron ore concentrate pellets is the most critical measurement of inorganic binder quality. Industrially acceptable pellets have dry crush strengths greater than 22.2 N (5.0 lbf) per pellet before firing. The results in Tests with the magnetite clearly show that use of the roll press to produce compressive-shear mixing leads to a substantial improvement in the pellet strength at a given bentonite dosage. It was believed that this strength improvement was due to formation of a bentonite fiber structure by the roll press. It was not possible to confirm this microscopically in the iron ore pellets, because the combination of low bentonite concentration and irregular magnetite surface morphology made it difficult to distinguish between magnetite and bentonite using scanning electron microscopy (SEM). To eliminate these problems, specimens were made from a fine glass shot mixed with 6% bentonite and 6% water. The glass-shot was obtained from Microbeads of Jackson, MS. This glass had a virtually spherical morphology. The particle size was 80% passing 121 μm, with a narrow size distribution of 95% of the material between 62 and 176 μm. Since the glass shot beads had smooth surfaces and were highly spherical, it was easy to tell microscopically when there was bentonite adhering to the surface of the beads. The glass bead/bentonite/water mixture was first mixed using the kneader-mixer for 30 s to produce material for the specimen shown in ⋅Roll pressing bentonite in magnetite resulted in superior strength pellets. Bentonite dosage was reduced by half to 0.33% by weight of magnetite concentrate, which is merely 7 lb bentonite/ton moist magnetite concentrate. ⋅The duration of conventional mixing was relatively unimportant to the strength of iron ore pellets. It required 300 s of conventional mixing to get the same improvement in strength as 10 passes (50 s) through the roll press. ⋅The type of mixing was important, and compressive mixing resulted in stronger pellets at a given bentonite dosage. ⋅Roll pressing promotes formation of a well-distributed, fibrous bentonite structure on the surface of the particles. This structure does not appear to be produced by conventional kneader-mixers and leads to considerably improved binding strength. We would like to thank the following sponsors for providing the generous financial support: EVTAC Mines, especially Bob Anderson, LLC; Hibbing Taconite, especially Steven G. Rogers; ISPAT Inland Mining; LTV Steel Mining; National Steel Pellet, especially Jim Wennen, Sarah Blust, and Dennis Murr; Northshore Mining; Svedala; The Minnesota DNR, in particular Peter Clevenstine; and most especially USX-MN Ore Operations, in particular Bob Strukel. We would also like to thank Dr. Tim Eisele and Henry Walqui of Michigan Tech and Dr. Ron Weigel, along with Dick Kiesel, Bob Thiebault, and Ted Seppanen from Cleveland-Cliffs, Chris Glenn and Franz Reisch of American Colloids, and John Engesser of the Coleraine Minerals Research Laboratory for their invaluable technical advice. Thanks also to the following undergraduate students: Katy Marten, Kari Buckmater, Karla Andrade, Gabriella Ramirez, Toby Lee, Frank Perras, Elise Anderson, and Jaime Krull.