Hydraulic characteristics are important fundamental properties of fractured rock masses and involve various geoscience and engineering disciplines. The determination of the permeability tensor is the basic input of the equivalent continuum (EC) model for hydraulic behavior analysis. An analytical method to determine the permeability tensor of fractured rock masses is developed based on the orientation and linear frequency of fractures along with a value of the permeability in any direction. The orientation and linear frequency of fractures can be easily sampled in practice, and the value of the permeability in some direction can be tested by a relatively cheap single-well pumping test. The key step of this method is to derive the theoretical relationship between the permeabilities in two different directions. In addition, an anisotropy index of permeability AIp
                      is defined to quantitatively describe the permeability anisotropy. Some numerical experiments were conducted with the universal distinct element code (UDEC) to validate the developed method. The results show that: (a) the predicted values are very close to the real ones; (b) for all cases of rock masses with equal-aperture fracture sets, the mean error rate of the permeabilities in 23 different directions is approximately 10%; (c) for rock masses with different-aperture fracture sets, the mean error rate increases from 8.6% to 28.9% as the aperture ratio increases from 1 to 4; and (d) therefore, the estimation method for directional permeability proposed in this study is valid, especially for those rock masses in which the aperture ratios of the fracture sets are small (e.g., less than 3).The hydraulic responses of fractured rock masses to pressure gradients are the focus of various geoscience and engineering disciplines ( Mathematical model methods are believed to be effective means to investigate the hydraulic behaviors of a rock mass incorporating its anisotropy. These mathematical models can be categorized into four main types ( Permeability is the key parameter of the EC model ( In essence, the (a) experimental methods are direct measurement method, and (b) analytical model methods and (c) numerical methods are indirect measurement method by establishing the relation between the hydraulic behaviors of a rock mass and the fracture geometric characteristics. The (a) experimental methods are quite costly and time consuming ( The main aim of this study is to propose an analytical method to determine the permeability tensor of fractured rock masses. The hydraulic aperture and 3-D size of fractures are not expected to be necessary input parameters of this new method. As a second aim of the paper, an anisotropic index of permeability is defined to describe the anisotropy of permeability for fractured rock masses. First, consider a square of rock mass as the analysis zone ( As stated above, in fractured tight rock masses, the fluid flows primarily within the fractures ( Eq. As shown in The number of fractures per unit length on the outflow boundary direction is another important variable for evaluating the directional permeability. The mean linear frequency (1-D density) is defined as the number of fractures per unit length in the mean normal direction of the fracture set, which can easily be obtained by sampling a line in practice. By considering the changes in the linear frequencies in different directions and the flow rate distribution of single fractures mentioned above, we can create an equation to predict the directional permeability for a rock mass. To be more specific, several situations are discussed in the following section. For simplicity, first consider a set of parallel fractures with infinite sizes and equal apertures, which is labeled as set It is not difficult to find that when In this section, the apertures of different fracture sets are the same, i.e., Then, a directional factor Then, Eq. As is well known, there is a very limited number of actual cases where a set of rock fractures are parallel, i.e., typically, they are nonparallel ( For simplicity, a single set (denoted as set Letting Note that In actual rock masses, fractures are not only nonparallel but also have limited sizes. The directional permeability of nonparallel fractures with finite sizes and equal apertures will be studied as follows. Similar to case 2, a single set (denoted as set As shown in Obviously, Substitution of Eq. If we select the scanline direction in the mean normal vector direction of the fracture set Letting Note that The directional permeability prediction of a fractured rock mass with equal apertures is studied in For infinite parallel fractures with different apertures, substitution of Eq. Similarly, for infinite nonparallel fractures with different apertures, Eq. With respect to finite nonparallel fractures with different apertures, Eq. Note that As described in Substitution of Eq. As stated previously, a directional factor To validate the method developed in this study, some experiments were conducted with the universal distinct element code (UDEC) ( Since the purpose is to evaluate the directional permeability, a 10 m × 10 m block in the 20 m × 20 m generated model rotates 15 degrees around the zone center in every rotation from 0 to 345 degrees (24 rotations) for each DFN model ( For five different analysis groups (  To further quantitatively compare the predicted and real values of directional permeability, the mean error rate of the twenty-three predicted values for each DFN model are computed, and the results are plotted in It should be noted that the aforementioned mean error rate is the mean error rate of the twenty-three predicted values for each DFN model. As described above, the 24 DFN models (10 m × 10 m blocks) were cut from the large block (20 m × 20 m) by the rotation around the zone center ( In addition, the predicted and real values of Case 1 of Group 5 is used as an example to illustrate the calculation procedure for the permeability tensor of the rock mass. Based on the values of directional permeability, the permeability ellipse can be fitted ( As introduced in For the six different analysis groups (  It should be noted that the aforementioned mean error rate is the mean error rate of the twenty-three predicted values for each DFN model. Similar to the rock mass with equal-aperture fracture sets, it can also be believed that the DFN model errors in UDEC are one of the reasons for the computed errors with respect to a rock mass with different-aperture fracture sets, and the real errors from the proposed methods are less than the computed errors above. Furthermore, as stated above, the proposed method does not consider flow interference effects at fracture intersections ( In addition, the predicted and real values of The predictive method of the permeability tensor is applicable only to a rock mass with a representative elementary volume (REV) because if the REV does not exist, the EC model cannot be used to analyze the hydraulic behaviors of the rock mass. Therefore, when using the proposed method, the size of the analyzed rock mass should be not less than its REV. The key step of the proposed determination method is to derive the theoretical relationship between the permeabilities in two different directions. The theoretical derivation incorporates the variance in the discontinuity orientations and sizes of the fracture sets. However, the size parameter does not exist in the final formula, which is one advantage over the classic Oda models. In addition, the values of hydraulic apertures of the fracture sets are not required as input in the proposed formula; only the aperture ratios of different fracture sets are required. It should be noted that the values of the hydraulic aperture are extremely difficult to directly measure, but their ratios can be estimated by their geometric apertures, which are more easily sampled in the field. This feature of the developed formula is another superiority over the classic Oda models. A value of the permeability in some direction is required in the proposed method. A single-well pumping test is suggested for determining the permeability in some direction. This test is relatively cheap and easy to implement. Moreover, the test result can reflect the comprehensive characteristics of a rock mass in some direction, which involves the influence of in situ stress and filling material, along with geometric parameters of fractures. Therefore, the predictive results are likely to be better than those from existing methods only considering the geometric parameters of fractures. Considering that it is not easy to perform validation for 3-D complicated DFNs, the current method is developed in 2-D space. However, actual rock masses are in 3-D space, and their hydraulic behaviors usually have obvious 3-D effects. Therefore, the proposed method will be expanded to 3-D space in future research. Last but not least, it should be noted that the proposed method is only validated by numerical modelling, and need to be tested in practices. An analytical method is developed to determine the permeability tensor of fractured rock masses based on the orientation and linear frequency (1-D density) of fractures along with a value of the permeability in any direction. The key step of this method is to derive the theoretical relationship between the permeabilities in two different directions. In contrast to the classic Oda model ( To validate the method developed in this study, some experiments were conducted with the UDEC. The results show that the predicted values are very close to the real ones, and the detailed results are as follows: (a) for all cases of rock masses with equal-aperture fracture sets, the mean error rate of permeabilities in 23 different directions is approximately 10% (7.1–13.4%), whereas (b) for rock masses with different-aperture fracture sets, the mean error rate increases from 8.6% to 28.9% as the aperture ratio increases from 1 to 4. Therefore, the estimation method for directional permeability proposed in this study is valid, especially for those rock masses in which the aperture ratios of the fracture sets are small (e.g., less than 3). Furthermore, when using the proposed method, the size of the analyzed rock mass should be not less than its REV. In addition, the current method is developed in 2-D space and will be expanded to 3-D space in future research.  The authors declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this paper. This study was funded by the