This paper presents a size-by-size kinetic characterization for copper-lead separation from a complex ore. Batch tests are run under extended flotation times to obtain approximately steady recoveries (unscreened samples) at the end of the tests. The size-by-size time-recovery curves are fitted to the Gamma model to obtain estimates for the maximum recovery R
                     ∞ and the flotation rate distribution f(k). From reverse J-shaped distributions to normal probability density functions are representable from a Gamma f(k). Four size classes are studied: −20 μm, +20/−38 μm, +38/−75 μm and +75/−150 μm. The concave relationship between recovery and particle size is obtained up to a limiting flotation time; thereafter, a decreasing trend is observed for Pb and Cu. The finest (−20 μm) and coarsest (+75/−150 μm) classes present slower average rate constants. However, the different f(k) shapes (reverse J-shaped versus mound-shaped distributions) indicate that the use of average rate constants leads to limited conclusions in terms of mineral losses. Therefore, better kinetic interpretations can be obtained from the overall analysis of: the R
                     ∞ estimates, a location parameter of f(k) and the metal losses in a low f(k) percentile (e.g., 5%). From the proposed methodology, the poor performance of any erratic component can then be characterized as slow-rate-limited, R
                     ∞-limited or both together.Flotation kinetics are typically studied to determine maximum achievable recoveries, compare flotation machines, study the effects of different operating conditions, scale-up metallurgical results, size flotation circuits, and simulate flotation processes, among other applications.   Although erratic flotation responses in fine and coarse size classes have been clearly established, the flotation rates should be interpreted based on the type of model structure under evaluation. On this subject, five different types of kinetic characterizations have been typically reported in literature in a size-by-size basis: (i) batch flotation kinetics assuming discrete rate constants and This paper illustrates the application of fitted  The exponential-based distributions have shown to have sufficiently high flexibility to describe  Samples of a complex massive sulphide Pb/Cu/Zn ore were used in the flotation tests. The valuable minerals include galena, chalcopyrite and sphalerite, with pyrite being the main gangue. The rougher separation of Cu/Pb was conducted in batch flotation tests. The samples were crushed in a laboratory jaw-crusher to obtain 100% passing 3.35 mm. The crushed samples were blended, riffled and split to obtain 500 g-batches for grinding and flotation tests. Minor adjustments were required to obtain the set feed mass. The grinding time was defined to obtain a product size of approximately 65% passing 38 µm. The solid was ground in a ball mill at 62.5% solids by weight. The flotation feed was analysed with Quantitative Evaluation of Minerals by Scanning Electron Microscopy (QEMSCAN). All QEMSCAN measurements were two-dimensional. The results include the calculation of the exposure of galena and chalcopyrite (Appendix A). The exposure was defined as the number of pixels of a specified mineral adjacent to background, expressed as a percentage of those pixels representing the mineral perimeter. The exposure for each mineral was grouped into 10% increments. However, the exposure classes were chosen to include at least 5% of the mineral mass.  In the flotation tests, the ground pulp was poured into a 1.3L Denver Cell and water was added to obtain 30% solids by mass. The impeller was set at 1200 rpm and pH was adjusted at 8.5 using a lime slurry. Sodium metabisulfite was added at 1500 g/ton to depress pyrite. After the depressant addition, an aeration stage of 20 min at 1 L/min (superficial gas rate, The parameters of Eq. Eq.  Significantly lower Pb and Cu recoveries were obtained in the +75/−150 μm class throughout the process. The steady recoveries observed in the coarser classes as  The shape parameter The contributions of the slow-floating fractions (  The size-by-size flotation rate characterization presented here showed that the use of an average rate constant may lead to limited conclusions, especially in size classes subject to high fractions of slow-floating minerals. The latter can be determined by some equivalent properties in the The analysis strategy is applicable to any low-grade batch flotation process sufficiently selective to obtain significant discrete enrichment ratios throughout the tests. Otherwise, the recovery of valuable minerals by entrainment might bias the conclusions. On this subject, the estimated From the A size-by-size kinetic characterization was conducted from semi-batch flotation tests. The rougher separation of copper-lead from a complex ore was carried out. The time-recovery curves were fitted by nonlinear regression, assuming a Gamma model for the flotation rate distribution  The authors declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this paper. The authors are grateful for the financial support from the Natural Sciences and Engineering Research Council of Canada (NSERC), Teck Resources Limited, COREM, SGS Canada Inc. and ChemIQA, under the Collaborative Research and Development Grants Program (CRDPJ-531957-18). The McGill Engineering Doctoral Award (MEDA) from the Faculty of Engineering at McGill University is also acknowledged for providing funding for L. Vinnett and C. Marion. C. Marion also acknowledges funding from the NSERC Alexander Graham Bell Canada Graduate Scholarships Program.  Galena exposure is lower than that of chalcopyrite, with a more abrupt decreasing content of fully exposed particles of PbS in the +20 μm size classes. Preliminary tests showed poor Pb recoveries (<75%) under shorter grinding times, which was attributed to fine grained galena in the ore body. Chalcopyrite exposure shows limited differences in the two finer classes. The level of exposure of chalcopyrite in the +38/−75 μm class [  