The reverse reactivation of pre-existing normal faults has been documented in many orogens. In other cases, the lack of sub-surface information has allowed the construction of both inversion and non-inversion structural models. We will analyze the possibility of fault inversion in one such case, in the Malargüe fold-and-thrust belt in the Andes of Argentina. In order to address this issue, we modeled fault inversion vs. new thrust generation using the ReActiva 2.4 software, and varying the physical parameters for the pre-existing fault and the host rock. The results of modeling are compared to the possible sub-surface characteristics of faults in the Malargüe fold-and-thrust belt. We show that the orientation of these structures in the Andean stress field makes them likely to reactivate if the pre-existing fault planes present a low coefficient of friction and/or fluid overpressure. Both are expectable in the geological setting in which the structures are found. We conclude that fault inversion cannot be dismissed, and should be taken into account for structural models of the Malargüe fold-and-thrust belt. Our results can be extended to other orogens with similar characteristics.Structural inversion has been defined as the reversion of the dip-slip component of the original movement of basin-controlling extensional faults during compressional tectonics ( The inversion of pre-existing normal faults has been proposed in many modern and ancient compressional settings ( In order to address this controversy, we will examine the potential inversion of the Mesozoic normal faults through numerical modeling using the ReActiva software ( In the seismogenic upper crust, deformation in fault zones occurs by frictional processes, corresponding to brittle fracture and frictional sliding ( The orientation of fault planes with respect to the stress field can be analyzed applying the Coulomb–Navier fracture and slip criteria. Its application is frequently carried out using the Mohr diagram (e.g. Regarding the physical properties of the fault plane and host rock, cohesion ( A compilation of fault plane dips for intracontinental reverse ruptures presents two distinct peaks: one corresponds to the optimal planes of 30° of dip, and the other is located around dips of 50° and would correspond to the inversion of normal faults ( All these processes may contribute to weaken fault zones with respect to wall rock, and would favor the reactivation of pre-existing faults over the generation of new structures. The ReActiva software ( In ReActiva, the results of the calculations are plotted as slip-rupture graphics, showing the poles of the reactivated planes on an equal area projection net. The advantages of the slip-rupture graphs technique were analyzed by The model of tectonic inversion in the Malargüe FTB proposes the reactivation of the normal faults which controlled the initial depocenters of the Neuquén basin, a retroarc basin developed during the Mesozoic ( During the Late Triassic and Early Jurassic, extensional conditions prevailed in the retroarc of the South American subduction system, related to the breakup of the Gondwana supercontinent ( The Malargüe FTB can be divided latitudinally in two sectors: in the northern sector, in the inner (western) part of the belt the basement is involved, whereas the outer (eastern) sector presents a thin-skinned deformation, a feature shared with the southern sector of the Aconcagua FTB ( The structural basement in this sector of the Andes is composed by Proterozoic low- to middle-grade metamorphics and Paleozoic low-grade schists and quartzites which crop out extensively to the north in the Cordillera Frontal ( As explained in In order to evaluate the inversion potential of the Mesozoic normal faults of the Malargüe FTB during the Andean orogeny, we carried out a set of calculations using ReActiva. Given the fact that physical conditions cannot be accurately determined for the case of study, we run several calculations varying the parameters in order to establish under which conditions a normal fault with a dip between 50° and 60° could be inverted. We calculated our models for a depth of 10 We proceeded to vary the parameters which can favor reactivation each at a time, and plotted the planes which were inverted ( Our results show that the main factor controlling fault inversion is the coefficient of friction on the fault plane ( Keeping the value of Cohesion seems to be the parameter with less influence for inversion. Variation of The Río del Cobre fault, located in the inner Malargüe FTB, has been interpreted as a Mesozoic normal fault which controlled deposition in the Río del Cobre depocenter ( At present, in the field, the Río del Cobre fault corresponds to a NNE trending, high angle (60°W) reverse fault zone with eastern vergence, whose trace extends for more than 10 The Atuel depocenter is one of the most important initial depocenters of the Neuquén basin in the sector corresponding to the present Malargüe FTB, with a Late Triassic–Early Jurassic syn-extensional succession of more than 1.500 Inversion of east-dipping Mesozoic listric normal faults in the Palauco area was proposed by The main purpose of this work is to address the following question: under which conditions can the major Mesozoic normal faults of the Malargüe FTB be inverted during compressional tectonics? In order to obtain an answer, we will analyze the results of numerical modeling in ReActiva and compare these results with the characteristics of the three structures described in the previous section. With the premises described in Section Following these lines of reasoning, we will discuss next what values of Fluid flow through many of the fault zones is evidenced at present by the existence of associated thermal springs, like in the Río del Cobre fault. If the fault zone was sealed in the past, fluid flow could have produced overpressure. This may have taken place for different causes: (i) shale and evaporitic units of the Neuquén basin fill may have acted as regional seals affecting the fault zones, as it happens at present in many oil traps in the area ( These facts suggest that re-use of the Mesozoic faults may have taken place if the conditions of low friction in the fault planes are met. A more detailed analysis is hindered in our case study by the limited exposure of the fault zones in the Malargüe FTB and the inherent heterogeneity of fault zones. Our results indicate that the Mesozoic normal faults of the initial depocenters of the Neuquén basin in the Malargüe FTB, specially those major structures representing the master faults of Triassic and Jurassic half-grabens, present characteristics which make them prone to reactivation in the Andean stress field, provided that: The fault planes present a low coefficient of friction, which implies the formation of clay gouges or some low-friction material in the fault zones or the activation of frictional-viscous mechanisms of fault weakening. The presence of fluids may also have contributed to fault inversion promoting the formation of low-friction minerals and creating overpressure conditions. The host rock presents typical physical characteristics: a “Byerlee” coefficient of friction, normal pore fluid pressure, and a standard value of cohesion. We have analyzed the possible inversion of three of these structures, showing that given their orientations, inversion was possible with a combination of reasonable values of Our models were carried out for a depth of 10 We conclude that the inversion of major Mesozoic normal faults during the Andean orogeny might have contributed significantly to uplift and deformation in the evolution of the Malargüe FTB. In the sectors of the fold-and-thrust belt where geological evidence shows the presence of important pre-existing faults related to the Mesozoic extensional episode, inversion must be taken into account in structural models of Andean deformation. As we have shown, given the orientation of these structures, the possible physical characteristics of fault planes and host rocks, and the Andean stress field, the Mesozoic normal faults are suitable for inversion. Features particular to each case will determine the mode of inversion, for example if only the re-use of the pre-existing fault takes place, or if shortcut or by-pass faults develop, or may locally inhibit inversion. But for the general cases, we have shown that inversion is expected to be the rule rather than the exception for the studied belt. Our results can be extended to other sectors of the Andes in which pre-existing crustal discontinuities with similar orientations are present and to other mountain belts with similar characteristics. We would like to thank Susana Alaniz-Álvarez (UNAM) for kindly providing the updated link to download ReActiva. Comments by the journal reviewers, Dr. J. Kley and Dr. F. Hongn allowed us to improve this paper. Our work benefited of discussions with Florencia Bechis (CONICET) and Víctor A. Ramos (UBA). We acknowledge funding from