Microwave irradiation initiates molecular motions of dipoles and electrolytes in a solution and directly generates heat from inside of the irradiated materials. The unique heating property of microwave irradiation is expected to boost hydrothermal fractionation of useful chemicals from biomass. This chapter summarizes the effects of the exploitation of microwave irradiation on biomass fractionation regarding the following three topics: (1) the fundamentals of the dielectric heating and microwave-assisted chemical reactions, (2) the effects of microwave irradiation on hydrothermal treatment of model compounds of biomass, and (3) the practical applications of microwave irradiation on fractionation processes of lignocellulose and food-waste biomass.Plant biomass stores a large amount of carbon as structural polysaccharides and lignin. These carbon sources are renewable feedstock to produce platform chemicals and fuel alternatives to petrochemical feedstock. A variety of biomass such as lignocellulose, food-wastes, and algae are regarded as potentially biorefinable carbon sources High recalcitrance in biomass structure is a major barrier for effective fractionation of their components Microwave irradiation is expected to boost hydrothermal fractionation of recalcitrant biomass by directly interacting with biomass substrate and reaction medium and reducing the severity of the reaction condition. This chapter, therefore, focuses on biomass fractionation by hydrothermal treatment induced by microwave irradiation. The first section summarizes fundamentals of microwave-assisted chemical reactions. The second section reviews microwave effects on hydrothermal treatment of model sugars. The third section reviews practical applications of microwave irradiation on fractionation of biomass by hydrothermal treatment. Finally, we will summarize advances and future perspectives of the microwave-induced biomass fractionation systems. Microwave is a kind of electromagnetic wave with frequencies between 300 The dielectric loss tangent of the material is generally used to indicate the dielectric property of irradiated materials to absorb microwave. Dielectric properties of materials are generally dependent upon the molecular dynamics of the dipole molecule. Joule heating due to the ionic conduction of electrolytes and induction current of magnetic materials are also important for microwave heating of materials. The microwave power required for the exothermic phenomenon can be obtained by the following equation: Penetration depth ( The high microwave absorbing material has low penetration depth, which limits the size of the reactor. For example, the penetration depth of microwave at 2.45 In the past three decades, microwave effects on organic and inorganic synthesis have been extensively studied since Gedye et al. found that microwave irradiation enhances the rate of chemical reactions Since microwave irradiation inputs massive energy at short duration, the temperature of the solution reaches above the boiling point of the solvent at the beginning of the reaction. Accurate measurements of reaction temperature and appropriate agitations are significantly important for an exact evaluation of the microwave effects. Microwave instruments are, therefore, important for precise control of reaction conditions. Single mode reactors can provide homogeneous distribution and high-power density of microwave with separation of maximum electric field ( The dielectric property of water is significantly dependent upon its temperature due to changes in molecular mobility of water molecules and the structure of water clusters. The dielectric loss of water decreases with increases in temperature due to its increased molecular mobility and decreased water structure, thus water becomes more transparent to microwave The stability of sugar under hydrothermal reaction is an essential point for the production of sugars from biomass. The effects of microwave irradiation on the hydrothermal reaction of sugars were, then, investigated under microwave and thermal conductive heating at the same thermal history Microwave oven was performed by multimode oven (START D, Milestone Inc.) and a high-pressure reactor made of a polytetrafluoroethylene vessel and polyetheretherketone (PEEK) shield (HPR-100). The microwave distribution was kept homogeneous by the mode stirrer. Induction heating experiments were conducted by the SSN-400 induction oven (Shikoku Rika, Co.) with a hastelloy-C lined iron autoclave. The reaction temperatures of both ovens were monitored by thermocouple thermometer, and the reaction temperature was strictly controlled by the proportional, integral, and derivative (PID) algorithm. Reaction media was agitated by the stirrer for microwave oven, while whole oven unit was rolled for induction heating. After the reaction, the microwave and induction reactors were immediately cooled in an ice bath and by fan, respectively. Thermal histories obtained from microwave and induction heating (180–220°C) were almost identical ( First, glucose and xylose were subjected to a hydrothermal reaction to investigate their stability under microwave and induction heating Subsequently, the hydrolysis of disaccharides was compared between two heating ovens In the case of polysaccharides, Khan et al. reported that the hydrothermal treatment of starch and xylan were effective for producing their malto- and xylo-oligosaccharides without the addition of any acid catalysts Electrolytes play an important role in the hydrothermal reaction of biomass under microwave irradiation. Electrolytes in aqueous solution act as microwave sensitizer and The hydrolysis of sugars easily generates secondary decomposed materials as a result of a sequential reaction, and the maximum saccharification rate is limited by the properties of catalysts. For instance, heteropoly acids are effective for hydrolyzing polysaccharides as super acids Heterogeneous catalyst is another technique to improve the dielectric property of the reaction system. The microwave-sensitizing heterogeneous catalysts, such as palladium-supported charcoal The microwave susceptibility of the reaction system is dependent on the dielectric parameter of the whole reaction system. We have, therefore, measured complex dielectric constants of aqueous hydrocolloid solutions, because polysaccharides are the predominant constituent of biomass. We have also analyzed the effects of functional groups on the ionic conduction of the hydrocolloid solution The counter cations of carrageenan and alginate were, then, exchanged from sodium and potassium ions to proton, respectively. The proton-form hydrocolloids exhibited a much higher ionic conduction than the sodium and potassium forms, probably due to fast proton conduction by the Grotthuss mechanism. These results demonstrated that polysaccharides substituted with a higher degree of acidic functional group show stronger ionic conduction. In addition, the conductivity of counter cation was found to be important for the strength of ionic conduction. Azuma and his coworkers conducted pioneering experiments on microwave-assisted pretreatment of lignocellulose before enzymatic hydrolysis and ethanol fermentation in the early 1980s The solubilization rate and carbohydrate yield after microwave and enzymatic saccharification of softwoods, hardwoods, and monocotyledonous lignified biomass were summarized in Hardwoods showed higher susceptibility to microwave treatment and enzymatic hydrolysis than softwoods. The microwave treatment of sapwoods of hardwoods (eg, Japanese beech, Eucalypt, and Japanese white birch, green and dried chips of poplar and Japanese beech) generated 15–20% of carbohydrates (weight basis) with a 30–38% solubilization rate ( Monocotyledonous plants (eg, bamboo, bagasse, rice hull, and straw, The advantages of microwave treatment were, then, compared with the conventional steam explosion ( The addition of oxidative catalysts further improves the solubilization of lignocellulose. Hydrogen peroxide is one of the environmentally friendly catalysts that generates only Food-waste biomass are by-products of the food industry, household garbage, and agricultural crop residues Soybean residue is a fibrous component of soybean, and it is mainly discarded from tofu production. Soybean residue predominantly contains arabinogalactan as well as protein and lipids. The fractionation of arabinogalactan was initiated by microwave treatment at 160°C. Subsequently, hemicellulose was fractioned at above 180°C; however, arabinogalactan started to degrade at this temperature. To prevent the degradation of arabinogalactan, arabinogalactan and hemicellulose were separately fractioned by a two-step microwave treatment. The first-step microwave treatment was conducted at a short duration of microwave irradiation (2 Tea residue is a by-product that results from the production of bottled tea drinks. Tea residues contain a low amount of polysaccharides; however, they are an attractive source of polyphenols such as epigallocatechin gallate. Tea residues from green, oolong, and black tea were highly recalcitrant to microwave treatments, and their solubilization rates were only 40–48%. The total polyphenol yield, including catechin derivatives, attained 10.4–12.4%, which was significantly higher than the other food-waste biomass. The extracted fraction showed strong antioxidant activity against hydroxyl radicals. Tea residues also contain a unique compound called cutin. Cutin is a polyester of hydroxylated C Pickled Japanese apricot is a common traditional food in Japan. The lignified stones of pickled Japanese apricot are a by-product of the pickling process. The microwave treatment of stones predominantly produced hemicellulosic neutral sugars constituted with xylose. The phenolic compounds, originated from syringyl units of hardwood lignin, were also extracted along with hemicellulose extraction, and the extracted liquors showed strong antioxidant activity. These phenolic compounds were found to be a product of splitting of β-O-4 linkage of syringyl lignin. Pickled stones showed a very high microwave absorption initiated by the ionic conduction of citric acid and sodium chloride in the pickling juice. The pickling process in acidic juice was also effective for hydrolyzing hemicellulose in the lignified stone. The pickled stone could be hydrolyzed at 30°C lower than that without the pickling process, and the molecular weight of the solubilized components became significantly smaller. In addition, the microwave energy required for hydrothermal treatment was also reduced by the ionic conduction of the electrolytes. The results indicated that the pickling process in weak acidic juice is a simple pretreatment before microwave irradiation to facilitate the hydrolysis of lignocellulose. Corn fiber is a by-product of corn starch production and is mainly constituted with a pericarp of corn. Arabinoxylan abundantly contained in corn fiber is one of the commercially important food hydrocolloids (corn fiber gum). Solubilization of corn fiber reached 75% by microwave treatment. The extracted carbohydrates consisted of arabinose, xylose, and glucose, indicating the effective extraction of arabinoxylan. The extraction yield attained more than 50% without the formation of browning. The extracted residue was predominantly composed of cellulose, showing that hemicellulose and cellulose were effectively separated from the corn fiber by the microwave treatment with less degradation of carbohydrates.  Cassava is widely cultivated in Southeast Asia, and it is important in producing tapioca. The cassava residue is produced after the extraction of tapioca starch. Cassava residue still contains abundant starch around 62–68%. Starch that remains in cassava residue is a potential feedstock to produce fermentable sugars and 5-hydroxymethyl furfural. Cassava residue was hydrolyzed by microwave treatment and produced glucose as a main product. The addition of activated carbon exhibited a higher saccharification rate, attaining 55.1% The microwave reactor with a continuous flow system is expected to improve productivity of the microwave process. Moseley and Kappe have reported that the greenness of the microwave process could be improved by the flow system in a view point of energy efficiency Increasing numbers of papers are exploring biomass treatments under microwave irradiation. The lab-scale microwave apparatus equipped with an accurate control of reaction temperature is now easily available. Many biomass conversion processes can be conducted under microwave irradiation as alternatives to conventional thermal conduction processes. For instance, microwave irradiation systems have been applied to alkali pretreatments to enhance enzymatic digestibility Since microwave heating is based on the molecular dynamics initiated under the electromagnetic field, it is important to control the interaction between microwave and irradiated materials. Utilizations of the dielectric properties specific to each catalyst, substrate, and reaction solvent are significant factors for efficient microwave energy transfer to the reaction system. For instance, a microwave-sensitizing catalyst can be designed by the fabrication of high dielectric loss materials. Analyses of temperature-dependent dielectric properties of each catalyst, biomass substrate, and reaction medium are, therefore, important for the development of noble microwave-induced chemical reactions. Microwave frequency is another factor for improving the penetration depth. Although the tight shielding of microwave is necessary, lower frequency ranges are attractive for the deeper penetration of microwave into the reaction medium and will permit scaling up of the microwave processes. The efficient utilization of microwave energy is expected to improve the product yield, process efficiency, and environmental friendliness of biomass fractionation processes.