The publication is a collection of 40, essentially review papers on select topics in the area of minerals engineering written by experts on each specific topic. The papers are well presented and should be useful technical reading for anyone interested in some of the current topics of scientific and industrial interest in the field of mineral engineering. Most papers are not exhaustive critical reviews for advanced research in the topics, but they present a broad picture of the current state of knowledge, principal applications and areas of research. The accompanying bibliographies in many of the papers should serve the readers to access further, more detailed information of interest in each topic. The papers thus serve very well to introduce the topics to university students including undergraduates to develop their knowledge of the vast scope of minerals engineering in industrial and economic growth and environmental issues connected with them. Many of the papers are also within the intellectual reach of science (chemistry) teachers in high schools to help them in explaining the subject to their students to stimulate their interest. While the publication has been compiled very well, some reorganization of the contents by the editors could have enhanced the quality of presentation. The following suggestions are made for a similar future publication. It would be useful for the readers to organize the papers under specific subject titles. For example, papers on mineral processing techniques (nos. 3, 4, 5, 10, 11, 12, 40) could be put together under a topical title “Processing by Physical and Physico-Chemical Methods”. Similarly, the editors should put together papers under “Chemical (or Hydrometallurgical) Processing” (nos. 13, 14, 15, 39), “Pyrometallurgical Processing” (nos.17, 18, 19, 38), “Waste Treatment and Recycling” (nos. 20, 24) and “Environmental Issues” (nos. 28–36). Even within a subject title, the papers can be arranged in such an order as to help the reader to better grasp possible relationship between the matter covered by different authors. For example, under Environmental Issues, it would be logical to put the paper on Acid Mine Drainage (no. 36) and Biological Waste Water Treatment (no. 29) consecutively as there are several cross references between them. Another suggestion, as this is a publication from an Indian institution, is to bring together papers describing the current status and advances in Indian industry. Under “Showcase of Indian Industry” may be included, paper nos. 1, 6, 7, 9, 16, 21, 22, 32. The publication is recommended as a useful source book, for libraries of post-secondary institutions and public libraries with science and engineering collection.