The study explores the enabling role of near-critical CO2 as a reversible plasticizer in the high pressure homogenization of polymer particles, aiming at their comminution as well as at the formation of drug–polymer composites. First, the effect of near-critical CO2 on the homogenization of aqueous suspensions of poly lactic-co-glycolic acid (PLGA) was investigated. Applying a pressure drop of 900bar and up to 150 passes across the homogenizer, it was found that particles processed in the presence of CO2 were generally of microspherical morphology and at all times significantly smaller than those obtained in the absence of a plasticizer. The smallest particles, exhibiting a median x
                     50 of 1.3μm, were obtained by adding a small quantity of ethyl acetate, which exerts on PLGA an additional plasticizing effect during the homogenization step. Further, the study concerns the possibility of forming drug–polymer composites through simultaneous high pressure homogenization of the two relevant solids, and particularly the effect of near-critical CO2 on this process. Therefore, PLGA was homogenized together with crystalline S-ketoprofen (S-KET), a non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drug, at a drug to polymer ratio of 1:10, a pressure drop of 900bar and up to 150 passes across the homogenizer. When the process was carried out in the presence of CO2, an impregnation efficiency of 91% has been reached, corresponding to 8.3wt.% of S-KET in PLGA; moreover, composite particles were of microspherical morphology and significantly smaller than those obtained in the absence of CO2. The formation of drug–polymer composites through simultaneous homogenization of the two materials is thus greatly enhanced by the presence of CO2, which increases the efficiency for both homogenization and impregnation.Biodegradable polymer microspheres represent a widely studied delivery system for active pharmaceutical ingredients (APIs) with possible applications in controlled drug release, targeted drug delivery and particularly the enhancement of bioavailability for sparingly soluble drugs ( In this context, a number of different solvent-free methods exploit supercritical CO It is worth mentioning here that for processes such as impregnation and melt extrusion where the product is first of all obtained as a bulky solid or a strand, a subsequent grinding or milling step is required for the preparation of fine polymeric particles. However, polymers are typically relatively difficult to comminute; some become soft and adhesive during the milling step, others are particularly tough and therefore difficult to break by mechanical impact. A possible strategy in this context is a process called cryogenic grinding, where a strong coolant such as liquid nitrogen causes embrittlement of the material to be milled, thus allowing for the comminution even of soft polymers ( High pressure homogenization (HPH) is a wet milling technique where the material to be comminuted is dispersed in a non-solvent, typically water, and the mixture is delivered to the homogenizer using a high pressure pump. Inside the homogenizer, which is essentially a bottleneck, the dispersion experiences a significant pressure drop along with a maximal flow velocity, turbulent flow conditions and cavitation. Breakage of the dispersed material into smaller fragments is achieved mainly through collisions with the homogenizer and through cavitation. HPH has been applied mostly in bio- and food technology, typically for the disruption of microorganisms ( In this context, it is the goal of the present study to demonstrate the potential of HPH as a solvent-free process for the manufacturing of polymeric microspheres and of drug–polymer composites, and to underline the enabling role that near-critical CO Poly( For each high pressure homogenization experiment, an amount of 1 The suspension was then sonicated in order to disintegrate larger PLGA aggregates into primary particles (Branson Sonifier 450, Skan AG, Basel, Switzerland). As both stirring and sonication were accompanied by foam formation, sufficient time was allowed for the foam to decay before proceeding to the next step. In experiments where PLGA was homogenized together with S-ketoprofen, and if not specified otherwise, an amount of 100 A scheme of the setup used for high pressure homogenization of the suspensions is shown in Prior to starting the homogenization experiment, the equipment was filled with pure water in order to remove gas bubbles from pump and piping. When degassing was complete, closing the homogenization valve during operation of the high pressure pump results in maximal pressure build-up while the water flow rate drops down to zero. The vessel was then filled with the suspension to be homogenized, and closed subsequently. If required, the vessel was pressurized with CO Homogenized product particles are obtained in the form of an aqueous suspension. The size distribution of particles in a dilute suspension sample was determined by static light scattering (Helos BR, Sympatec GmbH, Clausthal-Zellerfeld, Germany) using the SUCELL wet dispersing unit. For further analysis, particles were sedimented by centrifugation for 10 Dry powder samples were used to characterize particle size and morphology using the following methods and techniques. For analysis by scanning electron microscopy (SEM), samples were sputter coated with 5 For comparison with the homogenized products, physical mixtures of S-KET and PLGA were prepared at a weight ratio of 0.1 as follows. For XRD measurements, the two raw materials were simply mixed using mortar and pestle. For DSC measurements, raw PLGA was first conditioned by heating the polymer up to 150 To analyze the ketoprofen content of the homogenized product, a known amount of freeze-dried particles, equivalent to approx. 10 The role of carbon dioxide acting as plasticizing agent in high pressure homogenization has been studied for two different cases. On the one hand, this was the homogenization of pure PLGA in aqueous suspension, where plasticization is expected to lower the viscosity of the polymer, thus enhancing the comminution of particles during the process. On the other hand, the simultaneous high pressure homogenization of PLGA and of crystalline S-KET has been addressed, aiming at the formation of KET–PLGA composites through the concomitant impregnation of S-KET into the polymer. The feasibility of forming KET–PLGA composites through impregnation has been demonstrated previously using aqueous suspensions of PLGA nanoparticles prepared by SFEE ( In each case, three different experiments have been carried out, firstly a reference experiment with no plasticizer, secondly an experiment that was carried out in the presence of liquid CO Experimental results for the homogenization of PLGA without plasticizer in Run Comparable results were obtained in Run We conclude that in the absence of a plasticizer, high pressure homogenization of PLGA as well as the impregnation of S-KET into PLGA through simultaneous homogenization of the two materials is feasible but is not effective, since both homogenization and impregnation exhibit rather limited efficiencies. In this context it is enlightening to compare the behavior of PLGA to that of an undisclosed crystalline drug in a similar homogenization experiment carried out with a lower homogenization pressure of 500 The influence of CO Experimental results for Run In Run Concluding, the presence of CO Regarding the homogenization of pure PLGA, the third homogenization experiment, Run Concerning the simultaneous homogenization of PLGA and S-KET, the final experiment Run Samples of the composite products formed in Runs  The present results demonstrate first of all the feasibility of CO Another conclusion concerns the applicability of high pressure homogenization to materials such as PLGA. It has been observed that the HPH process had a very low efficiency in the case where PLGA was homogenized in the absence of a plasticizer, i.e., the comminution effect was rather limited even after a large number of passes across the homogenizer. In this context, the reversible plasticization of PLGA by CO Finally, an important conclusion concerns the formation of KET–PLGA composites. It is worth highlighting here that during CO Financial support by the