A systematic study of diasporic bauxite flotation using commercial oleic acids with different iodine values as collector was conducted in this paper. Bench scale flotation tests for diasporic bauxite ore and micro-flotation tests for relevant pure minerals (including diaspore, pyrophyllite and kaolinite) were carried out at different conditions using commercial oleic acids with iodine values of 65, 121 and 131. The results suggest that an increase in the iodine value of oleic acid would lead to improved flotation separation of diaspore from aluminosilicates. Use of the commercial oleic acid with iodine value of 131 in closed-circuit flotation tests allowed us to obtain a concentrate with alumina-to-silica (A/S) ratio of 5.33 and alumina recovery of 85.56% from the feed ore (A/S ratio=3.39). Chemical analyses of these commercial oleic acids found that an increase in the iodine value was associated with increased proportion of linoleic acid in the commercial oleic acids. To fundamentally understand the correlation between the iodine value of commercial oleic acids and the efficiency of flotation separation of diaspore from aluminosilicates, the computational studies of frontier molecular orbital energy of oleic and linoleic acid were done, and the results suggest that linoleic acid has higher chemical activity than oleic acid and its chemical adsorption on diaspore is more stable than that of oleic acid.There are approximately 3.8 Carboxylic acids, especially oleic acid, are widely used in the direct flotation of diasporic bauxite as collector. The common characteristics of them lie in the activated carboxylic acid group as the functional group, which can react with multivalent metal ions, such as Mg Bulk samples of diaspore, pyrophyllite and kaolinite were collected from XiaoGuan Mine located in Henan Province, China. These samples were hammered and hand-picked to remove a small proportion of impurity minerals, ground in a porcelain mill loaded with agate balls, and sieved with stainless steel screens in ultra-pure water to an appropriate particle size. The samples with the size fraction of − A diasporic bauxite sample was also gathered from the XiaoGuan Mine. The ore was crushed to 0–3 Hydrochloric acid and sodium carbonate of analytical grade were used as pH modifier, and analytical sodium hexametaphosphate (SHP) was used as dispersant and depressant for the silicate gangue ( Micro-flotation tests were performed in a XFG-type self-aeration flotation apparatus with 40 500 50 The computational software (Materials Studio 5.5) was used to study the geometric structure of the main chemical species present in the commercial oleic acids. The initial molecular models of the chemicals were optimized by using the MM2 and MP3 methods. The frontier molecular orbital energies of oleic acid and linoleic acid, both containing an 18-carbon chain in the molecule, were calculated using the density functional theory (DFT) at LDA/CA-PZ level. Here, LDA and CA-PZ are local density approximation and localization of functional, respectively ( Using HCl and Na The effects of SHP dosage on the flotation of three minerals were also investigated, and the results are shown in Subsequently, the influences of oleic acid 131 dosage on the flotation of minerals were investigated when SHP was used as depressant at pH Based on micro-flotation tests of pure minerals, the effects of commercial oleic acids with different iodine values on the flotation of diasporic bauxite were then investigated through bench scale flotation tests. Subsequently, closed-circuit flotation tests were carried out by using the commercial oleic acid with iodine value of 131 as collector. The test reagents and their dosage applied in the closed-circuit tests, and material balance data are shown in To understand the observed different flotation performance with using commercial oleic acids of different iodine values, the organic species in these commercial oleic acids were analyzed using the method described in Generally, the frontier molecular orbital energy difference ΔE In addition, the configurations of the adsorption of linoleic and oleic acids on diaspore surface were also optimized and determined by The varying number of broken bonds on the cleavage plane of mineral also plays an important role in determining mineral surface properties and floatability. The number of broken bonds of diaspore, pyrophyllite and kaolinite were calculated by The effects of commercial oleic acids of different iodine values on the flotation of diaspore, pyrophyllite, kaolinite and diasporic bauxite were investigated. It was found that flotation behaviors of diaspore, pyrophyllite and kaolinite were different with using commercial oleic acids with different iodine values as collector. The best collecting capacity and selectivity for the flotation of diaspore was achieved using a commercial oleic acid with iodine value of 131 at pH Chemical analyses of these commercial oleic acids found that an increase in the iodine value was associated with increased content of linoleic acid. A density function computational of linoleic acid and oleic acid was carried out. It was found that the frontier molecular orbital energies difference of linoleic acid was smaller than that of oleic acid, suggesting that the former has higher chemical activity, and the chemical adsorption of linoleic acid on diaspore is more stable than that of oleic acid. The authors wish to thank the support of “