Identifying crack stress thresholds of rocks under different loading conditions, e.g. long-term monotonic or cyclic loads, are crucial in the design of rock excavations and underground openings. The evaluation of the performance of damage thresholds, i.e. crack closure, crack initiation and crack damage stresses, for a variety of rocks, is crucial to assess the most suitable method to capture the stages of rock strength degradation for rock having different strengths subjected to different confining pressures expected to in the field. In this study, several uniaxial and triaxial tests on different rock specimens (Uniaxial compressive strengths from 5 to 278 MPa) were performed to investigate the application and performance of different criteria to determine damage threshold values, using their stress–strain response. It was found that the volumetric strain response of the rock is the most promising parameter to identify crack stress thresholds. For the rocks having different strength values and subjected to different confining pressures, on average, ratios of crack closure, crack initiation and crack damage to the peak strength are found to be 0.21, 0.33 and 0.80 respectively. Effect of rock strength on crack closure and crack initiation stress thresholds was found to be negligible. Crack damage threshold, however, increases with a rock strength increase. This was mainly attributed to the brittle failure behaviour of stronger rocks when compared to weaker rocks. In triaxial compressive testing, crack closure partially occurs during rock consolidation and therefore, crack closure stress decreases with confining pressure increase. Furthermore, a limiting effect on the generation and further growing of lateral cracks in the rocks did lead to an increase in the stress to induced crack damage with an increase in the confining pressure. On the other hand, the effect of confining pressure on the crack initiation stress was observed to be different in different rocks.Over the last 40 years, the detailed analysis of the uniaxial compression stress–strain response of rock is shown that uniaxial compressive strength (UCS) is not sufficient to evaluate strength characteristics of intact rock The crack damage (CD) stress threshold marks the yielding strength of rock and is a reliable estimate for the upper limit of true long-term strength for rock mass Different researchers used different methods to define crack stress threshold values (CC, CI, CD) of rock material In this study, a series of uniaxial and triaxial tests were conducted on different rocks. Based on the stress–strain relations in experimental results, the most reliable criteria to predict pre-peak crack stress thresholds were identified. Furthermore, the effects of rock strength and confining pressure on crack stress thresholds were investigated. In total 74 tests including 26 uniaxial tests and 48 triaxial tests under different confining pressures, are performed. As shown in A closed-loop servo-controlled testing machine with a loading capacity of 1000 kN and a loading rate capability in the range 0.001–10 mm/s were used to carry out uniaxial and triaxial compression tests. As shown in Uniaxial compression tests were performed under the constant axial displacement rate of 0.05 mm/min. To undertake triaxial compression tests, in the beginning, the axial and confining pressures were increased simultaneously at a rate of 0.1 MPa/s until the desired confining pressure was reached. After that, the axial pressure was increased to the first deviatoric stress level at a controlled axial displacement rate of 0.05 mm/min while keeping the confining pressure constant. By this arrangement, the samples in triaxial compression testing were preconsolidated before applying deviator stress.  The volumetric strain method (points 3 and 9) is practical because of its specific physical meaning. However, the measurement accuracy of axial strain and lateral strain of the rock sample is critical to this method. Analogously, both axial strain and lateral strain have a great influence on the volumetric stiffness method (points 6 and 10). The crack volumetric strain method (points 1, 2 and 11) is sensitive to the elastic modulus and Poisson's ratio. And this method is not appropriate to determine rock damage thresholds for the rock sample with a large number of cracks before testing. The axial stiffness method (points 5 and 8) only depends on axial stress–strain relations. However, it is difficult to precisely find out the onset and end points of the linear section of the axial stiffness curve, so this method has apparent subjectivity. The lateral stiffness method (point 7) could clearly define the crack closure stress and address the disturbance of axial strain. Nevertheless, this method is sensitive to the intense initial cracks in the rock sample. When the stress-lateral strain relation shows no visible linear behaviour, it is challenging to accurately identify the CC by the flat section in the lateral stiffness curve. As a result, the limitations of each method based on stress–strain relations are visible and a certain degree of subjectivity could be introduced by picking the critical crack stress threshold points. Which method can accurately identify the crack stress thresholds needs to be further verified by contrasting experimental data. The criteria presented in For crack closure stress threshold, the mean values for point 1, point 5 and point 7 of all the tests are determined to be equal to 0.205, 0.250 and 0.265, respectively. These results are consistent with the previous studies undertaken by Xue et al. For crack initiation stress threshold of all the tests, as shown in For the crack damage stress threshold of all the compressive tests, as shown in  Munoz et al. Effects of confining pressure on ten different rocks are examined in this study. As demonstrated in  To undertake triaxial compressive testing, axial and confining pressure are increased simultaneously until the prescribed confining pressure is reached. This consolidation procedure under hydrostatic pressure will result in the partial closure of the existing cracks. As a result of this, closure of existing cracks happens earlier in triaxial tests and, therefore, crack closure stress decreases with an increase in confining pressure. It has been generally recognised that the strength of rock increases with the confining pressure increasing due to the significant contribution of the frictional component in the conventional triaxial test. In triaxial compression testing, due to the effect of confining pressure, the crack opening in the lateral direction is suppressed. Therefore, the shear stress required for unstable cracks propagation increases. Although the mobilisation of friction improves the strength of the rock in the presence of confinement, we observed a different trend for crack initiation stress in different rocks. This needs to be further investigated in future works. To investigate the application of different criteria to determine damage threshold values, using stress–strain relations, uniaxial and triaxial compression tests on 13 different rocks with UCS values ranging from 5 to 278 MPa were conducted. The statistical analysis showed that the point where the horizontal section of the calculated crack volumetric strain-axial strain curve begins is the best method to define crack closure stress. Moreover, the maximum point of crack volumetric strain is the most suitable criteria to recognise crack initiation stress. To define crack damage stress, the reversal point in the volumetric strain curve when plotted against axial stress is recommended. It was found that for the rocks having different strengths and subjected to different confining pressures, the mean values of normalised crack closure, crack initiation and crack damage thresholds are 0.21, 0.33 and 0.80, respectively. For the UCS tests, it was found that rock strength has an almost negligible influence on the crack closure, and crack initiation stresses. The crack damage stress, however, increases with an increase in rock strength. This is because, stronger rocks demonstrate more brittle behaviour, and therefore, a crack damage stress closer to the peak point. In the triaxial compression tests, closure of existing cracks happens earlier during the consolidation stage and, therefore, crack closure stress decreases with an increase in confining pressure. Moreover, in triaxial compression test confinement restricts the crack opening in the lateral direction. Therefore, the axial stress required to create unstable cracks (i.e. crack damage stress) increases. Crack initial stress showed a different trend for different rocks when confining pressure increases.  The second author would like to acknowledge the financial support of the