Apacite (apatite-calcite) nanocomposites have been synthesized using an environmentally friendly, affordable, and one-step method relying on deep eutectic Calcoline (calcium chloride-choline chloride). The deep eutectic system plays as an all-in-one system providing all requirements for the one-step synthesis of Apacite nanocomposites including reactants, reaction medium, particle growth controller, and platform for carbon (atmospheric CO2) capture and conversion into calcite. The characterization results confirm the synthesis of nanoparticulate Apacite composites composed of apatite crystallites with an average size of 25 nm and calcite crystallites with a mean size of 35 nm in the phase ratio 53 wt% apatite: 47 wt% calcite. The biological results obtained on in vitro bioactivity and behavior of hMSCs emphasize on favored non-toxicity, bioactivity, and osteogenic properties of as-synthesized Apacite nanocomposites. It seems that the nanoscale structure, high aspect ratio, low crystallinity, improved dissolution and ion release of Apacite nanocomposites provide the optimum conditions for cellular growth and differentiation without signs of toxicity.Bone is a metabolically active tissue with hierarchical architecture constituted by soft organic and stiff inorganic materials Bone defects and functional disorders have become a global healthcare issue leading to the emergence of the orthopedic market valued at $4.3 billion in 2015, which it is expected to reach at $46.5 billion by 2024 Considering their biomedical importance, in recent years, several methods have developed for the synthesis of apatite-based nanostructures; chemical precipitation In recent years, the synthesis methods based on green solvents, especially deep eutectic solvents (DESs) have attracted much attention. DESs are a new generation of green solvents mainly obtained by complexation of quaternary ammonium salts (e.g., choline chloride) with hydrogen bond donors (e.g., urea) or metal chlorides. Owing to their outstanding properties, including high solubilizing ability, high ionic conductivity, good thermal stability, low vapor pressure, green entity, biocompatibility, and ease of preparation, the DESs are in the process of establishing themselves as one of the foremost candidates for developing one-pot and green methods toward synthesis nanomaterials The DES is prepared by mixing calcium chloride hexahydrate (CaCl Apatite-calcite nanocomposites are prepared using a novel and one-step method using atmospheric CO X-ray diffraction (XRD, Siemens D-500 diffractometer, angular range: 2θ = 20–70°, scan speed: 2° min Semi-quantitative phase analysis of as-synthesized Apacite nanocomposites is performed by X'Pert HighScore Plus software (version 2.2b) using Rietveld refinement. Field-emission scanning electron microscopy (FESEM, Tescan Mira 3 LMU) equipped with energy dispersive X-ray spectroscopy (EDS, Bruker, Quantax 200) is employed to study the morphology and elemental composition of as-synthesized Apacite nanocomposites. Transmission electron microscopy (Philips CM 30) operated at 200 kV is used to measure the particle size of Apacite nanocomposites. Fourier transform infrared spectroscopy (FTIR, PerkinElmer Spectrum 400) using KBr pellets in the wavenumber range between 400 and 1400 cm To study the To assess the cytotoxicity of the as-synthesized Apacite nanocomposites, colorimetric MTT (3-(4,5-dimethylthiazol-2-yl)-2,5-diphenyltetrazolium bromide) tetrazolium reduction assay is used. Firstly, the mesenchymal stem cells isolated from human bone marrow (hMSCs) are cultured in 75 ml flasks using 12 ml of culture medium (DMEM-h, Gibco, Germany) with 5 wt% fetal bovine serum (FBS, Gibco, Germany) and 1 wt% antibiotic (Penicillin-Streptomycin, Gibco, Germany). The flasks then are incubated at 37 °C, 90% RH, and 5% CO The hMSCs are seeded in a 96-well microplate (cell density of 1 × 10 The test is performed within culture days of 7 and 14. At the end of each time period, 200 μl of RIPA buffer is added to the cell culture, which then is vortexed for 4 times at time intervals of 20 min. The solutions are centrifuged at a rate of 15,000 RPM for 15 min at 4 °C to isolate the proteins from cells and nanocomposites. Then, 50 μl of the supernatant is transferred into a 96-wells plate and 150 μl of ALP kit (Sigma Aldrich, USA) is added (R1/R2 = 4/1). The ELISA reader is employed to measure the absorbance at λ = 450 nm. The alkaline phosphatase activity is normalized and expressed as the total protein content (U/μg protein). The test is performed in a similar protocol to the ALP test. Here, the samples are firstly rinsed with PBS followed by adding 200 μl of 6% HCl and pipetting for several times at the end of each time period. Afterwards, the samples are transferred into the vials which are vortexed at room temperature for 40 min. The amount of mineralized calcium is measured using calcium content kit (Sigma Aldrich, USA) by recording the light absorbance by means of the ELISA reader apparatus at λ = 570 nm. Alizarin red staining test is performed to confirm the presence of mineralized nodules in hMSC cell culture. The staining is done on differentiation days of 7 and 14. For this purpose, the differentiation culture medium is removed and the cells are rinsed with PBS. The cells then are introduced in 4% of formaldehyde solution (Merck, Germany) for 20 min. The cells are washed again using PBS and stained by 1% of Alizarin red (Merck, Germany) for 5 min. The additional dye is then drained and the stained cells are monitored under an optical microscope. All experiments are repeated three times and the obtained data are reported as the mean ± standard deviation (SD). ANOVA (one-way analysis of variance) statistical method is used to determine the significance of the results. Here, the differences are considered statistically significant at p < 0.05.  The average size of hydroxyapatite and calcite crystals is calculated to be 25 and 35 nm, respectively, showing the nanocrystalline structure of as-synthesized Apacite nanocomposites. The FTIR spectrum of as-synthesized Apacite nanocomposites is shown in   Distribution of compositional elements in as-synthesized Apacite nanocomposites assessed by SEM-EDS mapping is shown in   In bone tissue engineering, the ability of biomaterials to stimulate the differentiation of osteoblast-like cells is a fundamental parameter. ALP activity is recognized to be a marker for early differentiation of osteoblast cells. ALP enzyme is found in large quantities in the human organs including bone, intestine, and liver. The osteoblast cells secrete ALP enzymes and discharge blood because ALP is highly active in the bone and makes the bone marrow mesenchymal stem cells to be differentiated into osteoblasts. Additionally, ALP facilitates the formation of bioactive apatite via hydrolyzing phosphate substrates and subsequently the release of inorganic phosphate, which makes bonds with calcium ions to form hydroxyapatite Calcium biomineralization is known as the marker for the mature differentiation of osteoblasts and mineralization  Alizarin red staining test is a cross confirmation to the hMSC mineralization. It also provides a systematic qualitative tool to examine the hMSC differentiation. Calcium cation reacts with Alizarin to form a red chelation complex. In the design of biomaterials, the issue of bioactivity in combination with resorbability is crucial for decisions concerning their application in clinical practice. HA is a well scrutinized biocompatible mineral exemplifying the intrinsic bone, which exhibits excellent bioactivity supporting the bone in-growth. The main drawback of HA is its low bioresorption rate. Hence, HA-calcite composite (named as Apacite in the present study) can be a promising candidate for this purpose as calcite is biocompatible and highly resorbable. Additionally, the dissolved Ca Apacite nanocomposites were successfully synthesized in Calcoline working as a comprehensive system for both trapping the atmospheric CO At the same time, Calcoline can undertake a triple role in the synthesis of apatite nanoparticles. Firstly, as a solvent, the DES provides a suitable solution medium for precursors to react. Secondly, because of its reactive sites ( Cells isolated from bone marrow serve as an excellent source of proliferative osteoprogenitor cells with the ability to differentiate into the mature osteoblasts through several maturation stages in an ordered time sequence and finally into the full active osteoblast phenotype. Therefore, bone marrow cells are widely used as a reliable Thus, in the present study, the behavior of mesenchymal stem cells isolated from human bone marrow (hMSCs) on the as-synthesized Apacite nanocomposites was evaluated using MTT, ALP, calcium biomineralization, and Alizarin red staining tests. According to the obtained data, the nanocomposites show enhanced ALP activity and hMCSs proliferation, which can be attributed to: The nanoscale structure of Apacite nanocomposites, which increases the interfacial adhesion of cells to nanoparticles. In fact, owing to the high surface area and reactivity resulted from the nanostructured surface, the Apacite nanocomposites show desired capability to guide cell mitogenic behavior The low crystallinity of Apacite nanocomposites (deduced from unresolved and broad XRD diffractions especially for apatite phase) causes the improved ALP activity, cell attachment and differentiation due to the surface chemistry and topography of lower crystallinity Ca Due to hydration of Apacite nanocomposites in cell culture media, a continuous release of calcium, phosphate and carbonate ions and subsequently surface remineralization (as carbonated apatite) occurs. The as-formed carbonated apatite resembles the native bone structure and therefore, induces more rapid osteoblast differentiation and mineralization The results conflict with the findings of earlier studies showing the negative effect of carbonate on the differentiation of osteoblasts, which was attributed to the local pH changes resulted from carbonate ion release during cell culture The results on biomineralization as the very late and specific marker of osteogenic differentiation confirm the production of bone-like minerals by differentiated hMSCs, which is promoted by Apacite nanocomposites. In fact, the released ions from nanocomposites have a favorable effect on inducing the differentiation and mineralization of hMSCs as bioactive calcium minerals especially carbonated apatite that is the most stable form of calcium phosphate constituting 70% of the dynamic and highly vascularized bone tissue Based on the results of ion release study, the synthesized apatite-calcite nanocomposites show much more ion release rate rather than pure apatite nanostructures reported in the literature A green, facile, and one-step method based on deep eutectic Calcoline (calcium chloride-choline chloride) was developed for the synthesis of Apacite (apatite-calcite) nanocomposites. The results obtained on the characterization of as-synthesized nanocomposites endorse the formation of mixed apatite and calcite phases with weight percent ratio of 53:47 as well as spherical nanoparticles having a particle size ranged from 20 to 60 nm with high elemental purity. According to the proposed synthesis mechanism, Calcoline plays as a reactant to form apatite nanoparticles because of its reactive sites ( According to performed biological studies on hMSCs, the as-synthesized Apacite nanocomposites shows remarkable bioactivity, cellular behavior, and osteogenic properties assigning to their nanoscale structure, high aspect ratio, low crystallinity, and improved dissolution. We believe that the present study could be worthy of attention in view of developing an eco-friendly and inexpensive method to synthesize novel nanobiomaterials with desired biological capabilities for future biomedical applications. The authors declare no conflict of interest. The authors would like to gratefully acknowledge the support received from the Iran Nanotechnology Initiative Council and Maham Tajhizat Parla Company.