In this study, the effect of different packaging systems on physicochemical, microbiological, aroma, color and sensory characteristics of fresh raw pistachios during storage was evaluated. Fresh raw pistachios were stored at vacuum (VP), modified atmosphere (MAP) and conventional packaging (CP) at 4 °C for 30 days. Total mesophilic bacteria (TMAB) counts and free fatty acids (FFA) values were the most discriminating parameters. At the end of the storage, FFA level and TMAB population of the samples stored in the CP were the highest while VP and MAP enabled lower levels of FFA and TMAB, respectively. During the storage palmitic acid content increased whereas linoleic acid level decreased in the all types of packaging. No significant differences were found in other fatty acids during storage. Sensory analysis showed variable results among the three packaging systems. In conclusion, the use of MAP was generally recommended for the maintenance of quality of fresh raw pistachio for longer storage periods.According to the Turkish Statistical Institute, annual pistachio production at 2011 in Turkey was 112,000 metric tons which constitutes 12% of the world pistachio production ( In this study, Antep varieties of fresh raw pistachios were used for the experiments. The fresh raw pistachios were provided by the local commercial suppliers from Gaziantep in Turkey. Three packaging systems were used for product packaging. Packaging materials were: 1) vacuum packaging (VP); 2) modified atmosphere packaging (MAP) (30% CO Moisture contents of the pistachios were measured by conventional drying method as described in AOAC method 925.45 ( Ten grams of each sample were weighed in sterilized stomacher bag and homogenized in a stomacher (Masticator NR 1147, Spain) for 1 min after addition of 90 mL of maximum recovery diluent (Merck, Germany) solution. Serial decimal dilutions were prepared using the same solution up to 10 Sensorial properties of the fresh raw pistachio samples were tested by eight semi-trained panelists using hedonic sensory analysis form with rating scale of 1–9 points where 1 and 9 expressed the lowest and the highest acceptability, respectively. The panelists were trained in 1 h sessions twice a week for four weeks, resulting in a total of 8 h training. They were trained to evaluate fresh pistachios for perception of various taste and flavor characteristics as well as their intensities. Training involved meeting as a group to taste and describe the tastes/flavors of fresh raw pistachio. A panel leader worked with the panelists to create descriptors to define the fresh raw pistachio being tested and define each descriptor. Then, the panelists were provided with examples of each descriptor and given the opportunity to evaluate the fresh raw pistachio for those descriptors. Hull color and appearance, texture and juiciness, taste, flavor and odor, strange flavor and odor, and overall visual and flavor acceptance of the fresh raw pistachio samples were evaluated by the panelists during the storage. Analysis was performed according to the procedure described by The fatty acid composition of the samples was determined according to SAS statistical software (SAS Institute, Cary, North Carolina, USA) was used for data analysis. The comparative analyses between means were conducted using the Duncan multiple range test. Data were subjected to analysis of variance (ANOVA). A significance level of 5% was approved for all comparisons ( Moisture contents of fresh raw pistachios decreased with the extending storage time but no significant differences between the moisture contents of the samples were observed between CP, VP and MAP during the storage (P > 0.05) ( The moisture content of fresh pistachio is reported as 35 g/100 g and 3.11–46 g/100 g by Storage conditions affect the quality of nuts and prolonged storage may cause deterioration in both nut nutritional value and taste (  During the storage period, significant differences were observed in fatty acid values of fresh raw pistachios stored in the VP. In the CP, up to 20th day of the storage, significant differences in free fatty acid values of the samples packaged in the CP were observed but after 20th days, the differences were not significant ( During the storage, food deterioration may occur due to the physical or chemical changes in food and/or the activity of microorganisms. Eventually, the increasing deterioration makes the food undesirable for the consumers. Therefore, microbial spoilage limits the shelf life of foods. The use of microbial growth parameters can be helpful in describing microbial proliferation characteristics. The growth parameters used to assess spoilage microorganism overgrowth may themselves be affected by the intrinsic properties of the food and the extrinsic factors (temperature, gaseous atmosphere and relative humidity) ( The predominant fatty acid in pistachio nuts was oleic (71.7%) followed by linoleic (17.0%), palmitic (9.5%), stearic (2.1%), palmitoleic (0.59%), eicosenoic (0.48%), linolenic (0.32%) and myristic (0.09%) (  The sensory scores of the fresh raw pistachio samples stored in the different packaging types at 4 °C are illustrated in Major volatile compounds of the pistachios packaged in different types of packaging forms are presented in  The proportion of α-pinene tended to increase within the extending storage whereas an opposite trend was observed for terpinolene. Proper selection of packaging materials is necessary to prevent absorption of moisture, microbial growth, peroxide and free fatty acid formation which influence the overall product quality and safety. This research was undertaken to study the effect of different types of packaging on the moisture, peroxide, free fatty acid contents and microbial growth, fatty acid composition, sensory attributes of fresh raw pistachio samples during storage at 4 °C for 30 days. Three types of packaging materials, namely CP, VP and MAP were tested for their convenience for pistachio packaging. No significant differences were observed between moisture contents of the samples. All the packaging materials except for normal delayed the microbial growth, peroxide and free fatty acid formation of the product. In conclusion, the most favorable packaging material for maintaining the overall quality and safety of the fresh raw pistachio were found to be MAP, which was followed by VP and CP. In consequence, packaging type and storage conditions were taken into account for the nut quality. Unsuitable packaging and storage condition influences the quality and acts as an obstacle for the export. The results are important for producers who wants to export to other country. Consumers who like to consume fresh raw pistachio could store it for one month in MAP without quality loss.