Objective
                  To report the outcomes of surgical treatment of lower limb fractures in patients with chronic spinal cord injuries.
               
                  Material and method
                  A total of 37 lower limb fractures were treated from 2003 to 2010, of which 25 fractures were treated surgically and 12 orthopaedically.
               
                  Results
                  Patients of the surgical group had better clinical results, range of motion, bone consolidation, and less pressure ulcers and radiological misalignment. No differences were detected between groups in terms of pain, hospital stay, and medical complications.
               
                  Discussion
                  There is no currently consensus regarding the management of lower limb fractures in patients with chronic spinal cord injuries, but the trend has been conservative treatment due to the high rate of complications in surgical treatment.
               
                  Conclusions
                  Chronic spinal cord injuries patients with lower limb fractures who are treated surgically achieved a more reliable consolidation, practically a free range of motion, low rate of cutaneous complications, and pain associated with the fracture. This allows a quick return to the previous standard of living, and should be considered as an alternative to orthopaedic treatment in these patients.Bone density decreases in patients with chronic spinal cord injuries (cSCI) due to the absence of neurological and load stimuli. In our unit, a spinal cord injury reference centre in Spain, therapeutic decision making has been made difficult by a lack of scientific evidence, and is based on the experience of our surgical team. The aim of this article is to establish the outcomes of surgical treatment for lower limb fractures in cSCI. Our working hypothesis is that surgical treatment of LLI is better than nonsurgical treatment, and our null hypothesis is that both treatments achieve similar outcomes. A retrospective analysis between 2003 and 2012 that recorded 37 LLF in 25 patients with cSCI (6 tetraplegias and 19 paraplegias). The fractures included occurred at least two years after the spinal cord injury, based on the definition of cSCI by de Bruin et al. The fractures were classified by injury mechanism according to McMaster and Staufer's The fractures were divided into 2 groups, according to the therapeutic option for their treatment. The conservative group (C) comprised 12 fractures (4 femoral diaphyses, one femoral supracondylar, 2 proximal tibias, 2 tibial diaphyses and 3 tibial pylons) treated conservatively with plaster. The surgical group (Q) comprised 25 fractures treated surgically, because they presented displaced fractures ( The physiotherapy exercises prescribed for groups C and Q included daily exercises to preserve the functionality of the adjacent joints. Pressure ulcer prevention (PUP) and urinary and intestinal evacuation were ensured following our centre's cSCI protocols. The criteria of Mize et al. The statistical analysis of the articular and radiological balance was performed by 2  Twenty-one of the 25 patients had a full spinal cord injury. The majority presented muscular spasticity due to neuronal inhibition at spinal cord level. The initial spinal cord injury was caused by a road accident in 21 patients and an accident at work in 3 patients. The fractures were the result of minor trauma (during transfer manoeuvres) in 29 cases, wheelchair falls in 6 cases and road accidents in 2. Of the 37 fractures, 35 were classified as group II according to McMaster and Staufer's         No case of thrombosis was detected in the patients of group Q. In group C, one patient with a tibial plateau fracture and contralateral tibial diaphysis fracture suffered an acute pulmonary thromboemolism, requiring admission to the intensive care unit for 12 days with satisfactory postoperative outcome. The patients in group Q presented 4 pressure ulcers (16%), predominantly on the heel, type There is currently no consensus with regard to the management of LLF in patients with cSCI. Traditionally, surgical treatment is avoided due to the high rate of surgical complications, lack of union, osteoporosis and lack of active mobility in these patients.       Although not free from complications, our outcomes demonstrate that surgical stabilising is a valid strategy in patients with cSCI presenting a lower limb fracture. In fact, as we describe, the patients in group Q had better union and alignment, practically free range of motion and a low rate of complications. We believe that the most important factor in choosing treatment should be that it provides the patient with a better degree of Independence. Splints and casts make managing a wheelchair more laborious and delay patient recovery. By contrast, surgical treatment offers a rapid return to functionality. Despite our scant experience with external fixators, we prefer internal fixation for this population, because it facilitates management and care in hospital and at home. The study has limitations because it is retrospective with a limited number of patients, with a heterogeneous group in terms of fracture type and site and with different surgical options offered. Therefore, we believe that more studies are required to confirm, with methodological certainty, the advantages of surgical treatment, and the differences between the types of osteosynthesis. Level of evidence III. The authors declare that the procedures followed conform to the ethical standards of the committee for responsible human experimentation and in accordance with the World Medical Association and the Helsinki Declaration. The authors declare that no patient data appear in this article. The authors declare that no patient data appear in this article. The authors have received no funding of any type to undertake this study. The authors have no conflict of interests to declare.