Clavicle fractures are common injuries in children and adults, accounting for 4–15% of all fractures. The mechanism of injury involves a direct high-energy impact to the lateral shoulder that compresses the clavicle against the sternum resulting in fracture dislocation. Less commonly, these fractures can occur during a fall on an outstretched hand. Rarely, a direct blow to the medial clavicle can cause a similar fracture. These injuries are acutely diagnosed clinically and radiology is used to confirm the diagnosis. On occasions, diagnosis is not straightforward from a plain X-ray of the shoulder, especially in proximal clavicle fractures. Fractures of the proximal end of the clavicle involving the medial epiphysis (Allman type III subtype IV) have been reported, but the cases published have had symptomatic complications. We describe a case with an asymptomatic complication of this type of fracture; fibrous non-union of the medial clavicle. A 16-year-old male student presented to the South Warwickshire General Accident and Emergency department after suffering an injury to his dominant left shoulder. During a game of rugby the patient fell onto the lateral aspect of his shoulder with other players falling on top of him. He complained of pain over the left shoulder and clavicle. No other injuries were noted. On clinical examination, tenderness and swelling over the middle portion of the left clavicle was documented. There was no sensation or neurovascular deficit. All movements at the shoulder were reduced. Oblique AP radiographs centred on the left clavicle ( A left shoulder injury had been sustained and treated conservatively two years previously (2002). On analysis of the old radiographs a medial clavicle epiphyseal fracture dislocation was evident. The mid shaft fracture was managed conservatively, based on the recommendations described by Wick et al.; The fibrous non-union of the medial clavicle fracture required no treatment. Two years post-injury the patient was completely asymptomatic, there was no tenderness on compression, and, prior to his injury, he had a full range of motion of the shoulder. Clavicle fractures were originally classified by Allman. Sternoclavicular epiphyseal separation was highlighted later by Lemire and Rosman. In the case described, the diagnosis of medial clavicle fracture was missed on initial presentation. Late diagnosis is thought to have implications for the patient's treatment and prognosis, especially in children. Early treatment has been shown to reduce the complications associated with this injury. Recent evidence carried out on middle and lateral clavicle fractures has shown a higher prevalence of non-union than originally proposed, 5–7% of clavicle fractures. Contributing factors to non-union include severe trauma, fracture displacement and shortening, fracture comminution, open fracture, refracture, and inadequate initial immobilisation. Asymptomatic non-union of proximal third clavicle fractures through the epiphysis is considered extremely rare. Most medial clavicle epiphyseal non-unions present with symptoms and are thought to require surgical intervention. In view of the case presented here, such complications do not inevitably adversely affect shoulder function in the medium term. We propose that these fractures may be commoner than originally suspected and the patients may not be identified due to subclinical symptoms, or non-attendance to hospital after injuries.