A unique combination of oxidant, solvent, and catalyst is proposed for the allylic and benzylic oxidation of alkenes to enones with 100% selectivity and good conversion. The proposed catalyst, CrMCM-41, in combination with H2O2 is found to be highly active and selective for this purpose. The catalyst is also found to be very useful for selective oxidation of toluene and aniline. It is also proved that the catalyst can be reused several times while maintaining its structural integrity and activity.Selective oxidation of allylic compounds to corresponding ketones is of importance in many applications, ranging from agricultural products to pharmaceuticals The CrMCM-41 catalyst was prepared as described previously The oxidation of allylic and benzylic compounds (18 mmol) was carried out in the presence of 36 mmol hydrogen peroxide as an oxidant (50% H To check the leaching of chromium ions from the catalyst, several recycling and quenching experiments were carried out on both calcined and washed catalysts. The quenching experiments were performed by separating the catalyst from the reaction mixture under the reaction conditions, and the reaction was followed on the quenched solution. To check the recyclability of the catalyst, four reaction runs were carried out. For this purpose, after each reaction, the catalyst was separated from the reaction mixture by filtration and washed with acetone, followed by drying at 353 K. The catalyst was activated at 723 K for 6 h in air, to remove the adsorbed molecules, and then the reaction was then carried out on the recycled catalyst. Powder X-ray diffraction (XRD) patterns (  To check the reusability of the CrMCM-41 catalyst, three recycling experiments for the oxidation of ethyl benzene were carried out over CrMCM-41. The selectivity to enones was 100% even after three recyclings. The filtrate and quenched solution showed only 3–6% ethyl benzene conversion, implying that the homogeneous part of the catalyst makes only a small contribution to the total activity. This observation is well supported by ICP-AES analysis of the filtrates obtained from the reaction mixture, which detected no chromium. Furthermore, the XRD pattern of the recycled CrMCM-41 catalyst ( CrMCM-41 catalyst in combination with 50% H