The occurrence of stable decagonal quasicrystalline phase in Al–Co–Ni and Al–Cu–Co alloys through conventional solidification is well established. Earlier, we have studied the effect of Cu substitution in place of Co in the Al70Co15Ni15 alloy. Here we report the structural/micro-structural changes with substitution of Cu for Ni in rapidly solidified Al–Co–Ni alloys. The melt spun ribbons have been characterized using X-ray diffractometry, scanning and transmission electron microscopy. With an increase in Cu content in the melt spun Al70Co15Cu
                        x
                     Ni15−x
                      (x
                     =0–15at.%) alloys, the relative amount of the decagonal phase decreased up to 10at.% of Cu. At this composition, the quaternary alloy showed the co-existence of decagonal quasicrystal and superstructure of τ3 vacancy ordered crystalline phases. The decagonal phase containing Cu showed more disordering than Al–Co–Ni alloys. The implication of the structural and microstructural changes due to Cu substitution in stable decagonal quasicrystals will be discussed.Quasicrystals are intriguing because they require one to reconsideration of all the basic concepts that have been developed for periodic crystal. After the discovery of icosahedral quasicrystals (IQC) by Shechtman et al. The question concerning the stability of decagonal quasicrystal and the underlying stabilization mechanism are not yet fully understood. Grushko et al. The alloy with nominal composition of Al The surface morphology of the as-cast Al Powder X-ray diffraction patterns of the Al  The selected area electron diffraction (SAD) patterns of Al  After investigation of the Al The presence of Cu up to 5 The authors would like to thank Prof. S. Ranganathan, Prof. S. Lele, Prof. K. Chattopadhyay, Prof. D.H. Kim and Dr. M.A. Shaz for encouragement and interest in this work. The financial support from Ministry of Non-Conventional Energy Sources, New Delhi, India, is gratefully acknowledged. One of the authors (T.P.Y.) acknowledges to the CSIR for the financial support of the Senior Research Fellowship, during which period a part of the work has been completed.