A protocol based on peroxide fusion has been developed for the determination of Au in metallurgical samples and ores covering a wide range of concentrations and diverse mineralogies. The quantity of Na2O2 required was minimised, while maintaining lixiviant efficacy, by the use of mixed NaOH + Na2O2 fluxes. The method was shown to be particularly applicable to the determination of coarsely-particulate gold. Fusion cakes were dissolved in hydrochloric acid and then extracted using methylisobutylketone to provide concentrations appropriate for quantification by graphite furnace atomic absorption spectroscopy and to minimise interferences from dissolved salts. The protocol was tested on a variety of certified reference materials and produced results in excellent agreement (at Au concentrations ranging from 0.05 to 47μgg−1) with the traditional lead fire assay method, while avoiding the health and safety issues associated with that technique.In commercial mineral assaying the determination of gold in ores and industrial mineral processing streams is a significant practical challenge. The occurrence of gold as ductile macroparticles of > The standard analytical technique used by the minerals industry for geological resource definition and for operational purposes is fire assay using lead collection (PbFA) ( Two major alternatives to ensure complete sample decomposition for Au determinations in mineral and metallurgical samples have been developed. Acid digestions incorporating hydrofluoric acid (HF) ( This typically involves decomposing samples using 4 to 10 times their weight of sodium peroxide (Na Although the PF approach has been used to determine Au in geochemical research samples of up to 20 A second difficulty with PF is that it introduces large amounts of salts into the analyte solution. This creates problems for quantification when using graphite furnace atomic absorption spectroscopy (GF-AAS) and especially inductively coupled plasma mass spectrometry (ICP-MS), making additional sample clean-up procedures necessary in order to generate reliable data. No single approach to address this problem has proven to be fully satisfactory. For example, use of ion exchange (IX) resins resulted in erratic or low Au recoveries ( Given the positive benefits of PF for whole sample dissolution, and the significant OSH and waste difficulties associated with the current PbFA method, a PF-based protocol for commercial laboratory Au analysis is potentially attractive. The present work details the development and validation of a PF protocol that uses significantly less Na Analytical grade NaOH (Ajax, Australia > Specimens of metallic Au were flattened to 90 All solutions were prepared gravimetrically to avoid the uncertainties associated with volumetric procedures. A standard solution (7.746 Certified reference materials (CRMs, Mixtures (total mass 5 Flattened Au specimens (~ Mixtures of 0.25 GF-AAS was performed with a GBC XplorAA double beam instrument equipped with deuterium-lamp background correction, a GF3000 graphite furnace atomisation system and a PAL 3000 auto sampler. The graphite furnace program was adapted from Branch et al. ( The instrumental LOD for Au in the MIBK solution, calculated as three standard deviations of the Au concentration measured for MIBK blanks, was 0.1 Au in commercial mineral samples is often macroparticulate in nature ( Used alone, Na The success of the NaOH Reaction of the PF cake with water would be expected to produce NaOH and sparingly-soluble brown Au(OH) Accordingly, the leaching of Au from the PF cake was investigated by treating ~ Replacing the water leachant with 2 The general applicability of the PF/acid leach protocol was tested on a wide variety of finely divided (≤ The large DF required to ensure suitable solutions for analysis by GFAAS or ICP-MS necessitates a concentration/separation step to achieve a sufficiently low LOD and to minimise interferences from dissolved salts. Solvent extraction (SX) was considered to be the best approach for this purpose with methylisobutylketone (MIBK) ( Application of the optimised PF-AL-SX-GFAAS procedure to the CRMs gave Au concentrations within two standard deviations of the certified PbFA values ( Clearly, the proposed PF-AL-SX-GFAAS protocol is as effective as PbFA in releasing Au from various mineral matrices and quantifying it. The procedure described here does not, of course, address the issue of the heterogenous nature of gold distribution in some materials but should be scalable for application to samples of > This study has developed a cleaner, safer, alkaline peroxide fusion protocol that produces complete dissolution of samples over a wide range of Au concentration and for diverse mineralogies. As such it is a viable alternative to the current standard procedure of lead fire assay but significantly lowers waste disposal and OSH problems associated with that technique. Analysis of a range of certified reference materials gave excellent agreement with traditional PbFA determinations. The consumption of expensive Na The authors acknowledge Boyne Hohenstein of IMP Group for his kind encouragement, and Ken Seymour of Murdoch University for technical assistance. LD was supported by IMP Group Pty Ltd and DTX Design Pty Ltd.