Hypothesis
                  Reverse shoulder arthroplasty in complex shoulder fractures is now a common practice. Unfortunately, loss of rotation is observed when tuberosity excision is used, impairing function and patient satisfaction. The purpose of this study was to evaluate the advantage of tuberosity repair in terms of the functional result.
               
                  Materials and methods
                  We reviewed 41 patients, with a mean age at trauma of 76.9 years, at a mean follow-up of 24 months. Tuberosities were repaired in 27 patients and totally removed in the other 14 cases.
               
                  Results
                  Two-thirds of the repaired tuberosities consolidated in anatomic position. We compared a group with tuberosity healing in anatomic position versus a group without repair and with malunion or nonunion of the tuberosities. In the first group, all sectors of motion, especially external rotation (49° vs 10°), were improved and both Constant scores (65 vs 50) and Disabilities of the Arm, Shoulder and Hand scores (30 vs 40) were significantly better.
               
                  Conclusion
                  Management of complex fractures of the superior extremity of the humerus by reverse shoulder arthroplasty is an accepted approach, but such treatment is restricted to elderly patients. Shoulder rotational ability is improved by systematically repairing the tuberosities around the implant. However, their consolidation should be anatomic; otherwise, the result is impaired by the lack of rotation. Nonunion or malunion does not lead to a functional disaster, as is sometimes the case with hemiarthroplasty without tuberosity healing.As the population ages, the rate of fracture to the proximal extremity of the humerus in patients who are still active is observed to be rising. The first option, recommended by many authors, The second option, introduced by Neer In the meantime, the Grammont-type reversed shoulder prosthesis has gained ground, with a principle relying solely on the functional value of the deltoid. Therefore, this study analyzed the effect of tuberosity repair in complex fractures of the proximal humerus treated by reverse shoulder arthroplasty, to restore rotation and thus improve functional outcome. Between 2002 and 2009, 53 patients underwent reverse shoulder arthroplasty for 3- or 4-part displaced fractures of the proximal humerus. Over the follow-up period, 8 patients died, 2 were lost to follow-up, and the general health status of 2 did not allow radiologic/clinical examination. Finally, 41 patients (38 women and 3 men), with a mean age at trauma of 76.9 years (range, 68-93 years), were reviewed at a mean follow-up of 24 months (range, 13-61 months). The mean time to surgery was 12 days (range, 2-70 days). After preoperative assessment by use of plain radiographs and computed tomography scans, reverse shoulder arthroplasty was indicated based on our team's decision. A senior upper-limb specialist operated on all patients. The surgical technique was always the same: We used a superolateral transdeltoid approach. After humeral head ablation, the tuberosities were resected and the reverse shoulder arthroplasty was implanted. Deltoid tension was set according to the surgeon's judgment by adjusting the thickness of the humeral polyethylene. In case of repair, the tuberosities were located and the supraspinatus alone was resected. The subscapularis attached to the lesser tuberosity and the posterior cuff attached to the greater tuberosity were held on nonresorbable high-resistance suture wires. The reverse shoulder arthroplasty was positioned according to tuberosity reduction quality (particularly tension), and the stem was cemented. Tuberosity repair was systematically performed by the technique described by Boileau et al. Three types of implant were used: 24 Delta CTA reverse prostheses (DePuy Orthopaedics, Warsaw, IN, USA), 20 Aequalis reversed prostheses (Tornier SAS, Montbonnot, France), and 9 Anatomical Shoulder reversed prostheses (Zimmer, Warsaw, IN, USA). There were 2 consecutive periods in terms of surgical technique: first without tuberosity repair (the first 3 years) and then with tuberosity repair. Follow-up was performed after each period, and the results were then compared. All patients underwent clinical examination by an independent evaluator (who was a surgeon), which comprised the following: joint active range of motion in anterior elevation, abduction, elbow-to-body external rotation, external rotation in 90° of abduction, hand-in-back internal rotation, and internal rotation in 90° of abduction and the. Constant-Murley score. All patients underwent radiologic assessment with anteroposterior shoulder views in 3 rotations, as well as Lamy lateral and axillary views, to analyze tuberosity healing (evaluated by the independent evaluator and 2 senior shoulder surgeons). There is as yet no consensus criterion for anatomic tuberosity consolidation in reversed arthroplasty in the shoulder traumatology literature. We therefore set the following arbitrary criteria for anatomic consolidation: visualization of the greater tuberosity on the anteroposterior view in neutral rotation, in union with the humeral shaft visualization of the greater and lesser tuberosities on the lateral views according to the hemiarthroplasty criteria of Boileau et al. Notching of the scapular neck was graded according to the classification of Sirveaux et al. Independent quantitative variables were compared using a 2-tailed nonparametric Wilcoxon test, with a significance threshold of .05. For analysis, we used the Statistics Online Computational Resource interface of the University of California, Los Angeles. The mean postoperative hospital stay was 8 days (range, 3-26 days). Patients' shoulders were immobilized for 1 month with either a simple sling (33) or an elbow-to-body sling (8). Twenty-five patients were discharged home and 16 to a rehabilitation center. The following postoperative complications occurred (among the 53 cases): 2 infections (without tuberosity repair) managed by 2-step implant replacement; 1 of these patients died before the clinical review 1 anterior dislocation of the implant (without tuberosity repair) in a patient with chronic alcoholism who died before the clinical review 1 spontaneously resolving lymphedema in the ipsilateral upper limb in a patient with a history of lymph node dissection The tuberosities were repaired around the prosthesis in 27 cases. Consolidation was anatomic in 18 cases (66%) for the greater tuberosity and in 27 (100%) for the lesser tuberosity. There were 7 cases of malunion (29%), caused not by secondary displacement but by a perioperative tuberosity reduction defect. There were 2 cases of nonunion (7%). There was scapular notching in 30 patients (73%). On the basis of the Sirveaux classification, they were grade 1 in 31%, grade 2 in 24%, grade 3 in 7%, and grade 4 in 10%. Ninety percent of patients were satisfied or very satisfied. The remaining 10% had the previously mentioned complications. The series was first divided into 2 groups based on tuberosity repair: patients in whom the tuberosities were repaired (n = 28) and patients in whom they were not (n = 14). The series was then divided into 2 other groups, according to tuberosity consolidation: patients in whom the tuberosities showed anatomic consolidation (n = 18) and patients either without tuberosity repair or with nonunion or malunion of the tuberosities (n = 24). No significant differences were found according to the type of implant or presence or grade of scapular notching. In complex fractures of the proximal humerus in elderly patients, screwed plate osteosynthesis Treatment by reverse shoulder arthroplasty, depending solely on good deltoid muscle function, should thus avoid the problem of the tuberosities, providing a reliable and reproducible procedure for patients who are elderly or have a poor health status. Initial reports have been encouraging. At this time, reversed prostheses are reserved for patients aged over 70 years, because of 2 major problems with such prostheses. The first problem is the high rate of scapular notching, The second problem is the systematic absence of rotation. The design of a reverse shoulder arthroplasty recruits supplementary deltoid muscle fibers for anterior elevation but never restores rotation. In cuff tear arthropathy, the preoperative presence of the teres minor muscle improves the final result by conserving external rotation. Comparing results of hemiarthroplasty and reverse shoulder arthroplasty implantation shows that ranges of motion (except for rotation) and Constant scores are significantly better with the reverse shoulder arthroplasty whereas DASH scores are comparable, that is, in their daily lives, patients fail to find the objective clinical benefit observed with reversed prostheses, because of the functional impact of rotation loss. The rate of anatomic tuberosity consolidation in our series was 66% for the greater tuberosity and 100% for the lesser. We believe that this could be improved because the humeral medialization induced by the design of the reverse shoulder arthroplasty, as well as the supraspinatus resection, should protect the tuberosity repair. It might seem reasonable to transpose the hemiarthroplasty criteria to reversed prostheses, Management of complex fractures of the superior extremity of the humerus by reverse shoulder arthroplasty is now an accepted approach, but such treatment is restricted to elderly patients because of the frequency of scapular notching. The expected clinical result is much more reliable and reproducible than with hemiarthroplasty, especially as patient age and comorbidities increase. Shoulder rotational ability is improved by systematically repairing the tuberosities around the implant. When consolidation is anatomic, the functional result is better. Otherwise, the result is impaired by the lack of rotation but still does not lead to a functional disaster, as is sometimes the case with hemiarthroplasty. To increase the rate of anatomic tuberosity consolidation, account should be taken of the anatomic and biomechanical impact of the implant, setting radiologic criteria for tuberosity reduction, implant height and version, and postoperative immobilization and rehabilitation. The authors, their immediate families, and any research foundations with which they are affiliated have not received any financial payments or other benefits from any commercial entity related to the subject of this article.