Data reconciliation is extensively applied to improve the accuracy and reliability of plant measurements. It relies on process models ranging from simple mass and energy conservation equations to complete causal models. The precision of reconciled data mainly depends on the complexity and quality of plant models used to develop data reconciliation observers. In practice, the difficulty of obtaining detailed models prevents the application of powerful observers like the Kalman filter. The objective of this study is to propose a methodology to build a model for a flotation circuit to support the implementation of a Kalman filter for dynamic data reconciliation. This modeling approach extracts essential information from the plant topology, nominal operating conditions, and historical data. Simulation results illustrate that applying a Kalman filter based on a rough empirical model that has been correctly tuned gives better estimates than those obtained with sub-model based observers.Data reconciliation is widely employed in the mineral processing industry. The method was introduced by Depending on the target use of reconciled data, different algorithms could be selected. Steady-state data reconciliation is well suited for the estimation of underlying steady-state operating conditions. It generally relies on static mass and energy conservation constraints that could be extracted from plant flow diagrams. For slow dynamic regimes, stationary observers ( The Kalman filter being the general representation of most observers based on sub-models of a plant ( The objective of this paper is to propose a simple method to build a model of a flotation circuit to support the implementation of a Kalman filter for dynamic data reconciliation. The necessary information is extracted from the plant topology, nominal operating conditions and historical data. Simulation results support that assumptions introduced during the model elaboration does not impair the reconciliation performances while greatly simplifying the development. Section This section describes the plant model used for designing the Kalman filter. For this purpose, a flotation unit is modeled using few low order transfer functions. For the Kalman filter implementation, this model adds deterministic aspects (i.e. gains and time constants) which create additional information increasing the observer efficiency while it decreases the role of the stochastic elements which, in the sub-model observers, embeds the missing deterministic information of causal models. Although it may seem ambitious to properly model a complex flotation plant using such transfer functions, this approach will lead to better estimates than other sub-model based observers for data reconciliation, as illustrated later. The plant is assumed to operate in stationary regime implying that, over a long period of time, the process stream properties, as well as inventories, randomly fluctuate around a constant value. In practice, this is a representative description of a wide range of industrial processes. To seek simplicity and bring the problem to a linear case, only the valuable mineral flowrates are here considered as process variables. This assumption does not compromise the generality of the proposed technique, since literature has already introduced some innovative methods to transform the bilinear data reconciliation problem to a linear one ( The flow sheet of the separation unit, involving three streams (feed, concentrate and reject), is presented in The parametric representation of transfer functions in discrete time form and their corresponding poles are shown in Since first-order transfer functions cannot perfectly describe the complex behavior of the valuable mineral flow inside the flotation cell, uncertainty is introduced to represent the model imperfection. This uncertainty is characterized using a covariance matrix. The separation unit model can be presented in the following state-space format: In the present case, it is assumed that any variation in the feed (either in terms of flowrate or composition) under a stationary operating regime leads to normally distributed variations in the states and parameters. Therefore, In a plant, the variation of feed, process states, and parameters are dependent, i.e. changing one of them affects the others. For instance, increasing the valuable mineral feed can change the material residence time inside the cell. Moreover, these variables and parameters are time correlated. In the current study, as mentioned before, the objective is to facilitate the development of the plant model used for data reconciliation purposes. Therefore, several assumptions are made that might not perfectly reflect all observed phenomena. Here, it is assumed that the model parameters, where the subscript In expanded format, As the uncertainty, Considering the autocorrelation of For the transfer function of the input filter Using the first relation in Eq. The following measurement equation is coupled with Eq. The vector of white noises In the present study, it is assumed that all process variables This section proposes a procedure to estimate the parameters of the model presented in Eq. To find a suitable value for the nominal separation coefficient Regarding the discrete time representation of the process, poles To estimate the parameters of the feed transfer function, the autocovariance of measurement Moreover, the input transfer function implies that: An iterative estimation approach, that minimizes the least square criterion, is applied (see The proposed approach provides an estimation of To apply the Kalman filter, the measurement error variance A phenomenological simulator of a flotation circuit is used as the case study. The simulator is developed based on mass conservation equations, and a first-order kinetic is assumed to model the flotation process. For the collection zone, a perfect mixing model is considered while the froth zone is simulated using a plug flow model. The simulator takes into account the particle size/volume distributions while bubble size distribution is neglected, i.e. it only employs the air volume inside the tank. Entrainment that brings water and non-floatable particles into the concentrate is also considered. In order to simulate the particle drainage, it is assumed that the flotation rate constant is inversely affected by froth depth. The effect of several manipulated variables, including collector and frother concentrations, air flow, and interface level, are modeled. Complete details of the simulator are available in As already mentioned, only flowrates of one valuable mineral have been considered as the process variables, but the approach can be extended to multi-mineral systems. In the above sections, it has been assumed that In this section, the proposed estimation approach is applied to the flotation circuit simulator, and results are presented. The procedure has been performed when feed rate and grade vary with standard deviations of 10% and 15% of their nominal values respectively, i.e. 100 Model parameters and their corresponding uncertainties are estimated using the procedure described in Section To simplify the calculation of the residence time in the froth zone, it is assumed that gas hold-up inside the froth is constant. In practice, gas hold-up is measurable using conductivity or ultrasonic sensors ( For comparing the performance of data reconciliation, three observers are considered: Standard stationary observer (ST) proposed by Autocovariance based stationary observer (ABS) presented by Kalman filter (KF) with the approximate model as previously described. All of these observers estimate the instantaneous value of the variables rather than their steady-state underlying value. As a brief recall, the ABS observer uses sub-model taken from mass conservation law and plant flow sheet. It applies the autocovariance function of node imbalances to estimate the dynamic value of the process states. The ST observer is a particular case of the ABS observer where only the node imbalances variance is utilized. The process model used in ABS and ST observers is expressed as: Two indices are selected to evaluate the performance of the observers in terms of noise reduction. The first one quantifies the total estimation error variance reduction. The covariance of the estimation error is expressed by: A value of 1 means that all noises have been filtered while smaller index shows less noise reduction. To present the noise reduction for each valuable mineral flowrate, the second performance index is defined as: For simulation purposes, a stationary variation with a standard deviation of 16% of the nominal value has been applied to the valuable mineral feed rate. Simulation results are given in For testing the robustness of the KF observer, i.e. its sensitivity to the tuning of covariance matrices that corresponds to the uncertainties of model parameters, multiple stationary disturbances with different variances are applied to the mineral feed rate. Observers are tuned for a specific disturbance while they are facing disturbances having different characteristics. Four test cases involving amplitude variation of the valuable mineral feed rate have been considered. To quantify the robustness, the following index is proposed: Precise measurement of process variables is vital for efficient and safe process operation. In industrial plants, data reconciliation is widely applied to provide a precise estimation of measured or unmeasured variables. Successful implementation of data reconciliation relies on a compromise between modeling effort and estimate precision. Although many powerful observers have been developed in the literature, they have not been frequently applied in the mineral processing industry. As a main reason, these observers need complex and detailed models that are not available or difficult to build in practice. Therefore, besides developing any observer, a procedure for obtaining the corresponding model should also be established. In that sense, this paper has proposed a procedure to get a simple model for a flotation circuit to support the implementation of a Kalman filter for dynamic data reconciliation purposes. Useful assumptions have been formulated to simplify and facilitate the model elaboration. Empirical first-order transfer functions obtained from the plant topology, nominal operating conditions, and historical data were used to build the model. A phenomenological flotation circuit simulator operating in a stationary regime has been used as case-study. To simplify and linearize the data reconciliation problem, only the valuable mineral flowrates have been considered as process variables. To obtain the parameters and uncertainties of the causal model, the paper has provided practical guidelines. For instance, the mean residence time of the valuable mineral inside the different units has been selected as the time constant of the transfer functions, while the gains have been estimated using separation coefficients calculated from historical data. To model the feed fluctuations, the autocovariance function has been used. The performance of the Kalman filter has been compared with two sub-model based observers: the standard and autocovariance based stationary observers. To assess the performances, indices based on estimation error variance reduction and robustness tests have been used. The Kalman filter with the empirical model has provided more precise estimates than standard and autocovariance based stationary observers in all scenarios. Regarding the robustness tests, the sub-model based observers have been slightly better than the Kalman filter. The high sensitivity of the Kalman filter to the plant operational conditions can be explained by the fact that the Kalman filter relies on a more detailed model than the two other observers which use a simple description of the process. Despite its slightly higher sensitivity, the Kalman filter has produced better estimates even in the presence of important feed disturbances. Although many assumptions have been used in the modeling stage, simulation results have revealed that these assumptions do not degrade reconciliation performances while greatly simplifying the model development. As a general conclusion, although all dynamic behaviors of a complex plant like flotation circuits cannot completely be captured by few first-order empirical transfer functions, such models are beneficial for data reconciliation purposes if the model uncertainties are correctly represented. Therefore, a dynamic causal model with well-tuned uncertainties can be considered as an alternative for sub-models in the data reconciliation context. Doing some limited modeling efforts can facilitate the application of advanced observers like the Kalman filter in the mineral processing industry.