Amongst the several options for CO2 storage, mineral carbonation presents the highest capacity for CO2 fixation. Besides providing for a permanent (CO2 leakage free) storage option, it is also directly applied to flue gases avoiding the expensive CO2 capture processes. This paper focuses on the Åbo Akademi (ÅA) University route where suitable Mg rich silicate rocks are reacted with recoverable/recyclable ammonium salts (at ∼400–450°C) to produce mainly MgSO4. This is converted to Mg(OH)2 which reacts with a flue gas in a pressurised fluidized bed, at 20bar CO2 partial pressure and 500°C to produce MgCO3. At some extent, a lot of the metals that compose the rock (Fe, Ni, Cr, Cu, etc.) will be co-extracted along with the Mg. Being so, this work aims to recover those (valuable) metals through a combination of selective precipitation and ion-exchange technology. It was found that 1ton of the Portuguese serpentinite used in this work has the potential of capturing 270kg of CO2 while producing 517kg of MgCO3, 75kg of Fe(OH)3, 24kg of Ca(OH)2 and 1.6kg of Ni. This is equivalent to 1/3 of the nickel production per ton of nickel ore at the Hitura nickel mine in Finland.Since 1940, measurements showed a continued rise of CO At Åbo Akademi University (ÅA), in Finland, a process route for carbon storage by mineralisation (CSM) is being developed towards industrial application ( Ultramafic and basaltic rocks are identified as the most suitable silicate mineral source due to their high content of Mg/Ca. Typical compositions of serpentinites (the most investigated minerals for mineral carbonation) are presented in This work focuses on the possibility of recovering those valuable metals that are already available in aqueous solution. Difficulties arise from the fact that the amount of water used to dissolve the solids must be minimised, otherwise the energy penalty for the downstream AS recovery through a crystallisation process will make the ÅA route economically unviable. This results in a solution with a complex mixture of metals and a wide range of concentrations (45 The use of resins to concentrate/recover metal ions from aqueous solutions is a common method that has been widely used and proven to selectively recover metals even in lower concentration solutions and with low energy requirements ( The serpentinite rock samples were collected at the Donai quarry, Portugal, and were crushed and ground to obtain a size fraction A stock solution with 1500 Amberlite IR-120 (Na Following the experimental procedure optimised by The amount of Fe The pH of the leachate typically lies in the range of 1.5–2.5 depending on the A 1M solution of NaOH was then added to increase the pH to ∼8.0–8.2 in order to convert all the metals in solution to insoluble hydroxides. These were separated by vacuum filtration and the solution containing Ca and Mg (‘Mg rich solution’) was put aside. The solid product was then washed and re-dissolved in water. Nitric acid solution was used to lower the pH until complete dissolution of the solid fraction was achieved (typically when pH This was followed by a staged precipitation of Fe The equilibrium isotherms for the synthetic Ni The equilibrium isotherms for the ‘rock derived solution’ were determined also in batch operation with 30 The uptake of Ni The experimental data was treated following the same methodology used by Considering that the activity coefficients for both phases are equal to unity (assuming ideality), the equilibrium constant can be written as: Also, the equivalent fractions for each species in solid phase, The starting conditions for each experiment (pH and metal concentration), the temperature (kept constant during the experiment) and the equilibrium parameters ( Ion exchange reactions are known to be endothermic ( The separation factor On the other hand, higher metal concentration does seem to play a role on the metal uptake by the resin. Yet, what stands out from As expected, the sorption density increases with the resin amount ( The effect of initial pH on the adsorption of nickel was studied in batch experiments with a fixed amount of resin. Although Amberlite IR-120 is a strong cationic resin, which means that it can operate in wide pH range, from The serpentinite material was reacted with a mixture of 50/50-w% of ammonium sulphate/bisulphate and the solid product was dissolved in water. After separating the unreacted solid fraction, by vacuum filtration, a “leaching solution” remains, containing all the soluble elements (Mg As it can be seen from The pH of the leaching solution was then raised by addition of NaOH. The aim was to convert all the metals in solution into hydroxides. After this the Mg/Ca rich solution is separated from the metal hydroxides by vacuum filtration. ICP analyses on the rich Mg/Ca solution confirm that at a pH of 8.2 all the metals will be in the form of insoluble hydroxides (Fe rich product) but at the cost of losing ∼10% of the extracted Mg. The iron was completely converted to Fe(OH) The results in Section  The solid/solid reaction: Ni not extracted from the rock is considered here a loss. The first precipitation step (pH The ion exchange process: Ni that is not adsorbed by the resin and thus remains in the final “lean” solution. The losses of Mg occur during: The first precipitation step (pH The washing of the iron-rich product which is quite viscous and retains a lot of moisture. The ion exchange equilibrium studies include three different solutions, derived from the Portuguese serpentinite rock material, with concentrations listed in The Solutions A, B and C have different concentrations because the amount of water used in the dissolution of the iron product was different. This was done on purpose in order to infer the influence of the elements concentration on the uptake of metals by the resin. This study does not include any kinetic evaluation of the adsorption process. It is however observed that the adsorption equilibrium is reaching a plateau after 100 From The regeneration of resin was not considered in the work. In general, there are two options for recovery of the metals: regeneration with a concentrated solution of HCl (the most common method) or, in case the metals are strongly fixed, incineration of the resin. Based on the experimental results reported, from 1t of powdered serpentinite rock material it is possible to produce ∼360 The first step of the ÅA mineral carbonation process successfully co-extracts valuable metals (especially Ni, besides Cr and Cu) usually present in the Mg rich silicate rocks suitable for the process. The co-precipitation of metals due to the wide range of concentrations and pH sensitivity is the main cause for Ni losses. As it seems to be intangible to prepare a Mg/Ca free solution for the ion exchange step, it would be wise to choose a chelant resin selective for Ni. Still the experimental results here presented show that the recovery of Ni, as a by-product of the ÅA mineral carbonation route has substantial potential for partially replacing nickel ore mining activities. We acknowledge Qing Zhao, visiting the Thermal and Flow Lab at Åbo Akademi University (Finland) from Northeastern University (Shenyang, China), for valuable comments.