In the present study, the biotreatment of synthetic acidic wastewater containing Cr(VI) (35–200mgL−1), Fe(III) (100mgL−1) and sulfate (3500mgL−1), was studied in an ethanol supplemented (2730mgL−1 COD) anaerobic baffled reactor (ABR) at constant hydraulic retention time (HRT) of 1.0day. Reactor performance was very high even at low pH (2.5–3.5) and high Cr(VI) concentration (200mgL−1). Sulfate reduction and COD oxidation degrees exceeded 80% and 90%, respectively, in all cases. The alkalinity generated due to the sulfidogenic oxidation of ethanol increased wastewater pH to neutral values (7.3–8.0) and facilitated precipitation of Cr(III) compounds. Electron flow from ethanol oxidation to sulfate reduction averaged 85.4±13%.
                  The produced precipitates were retained in the ABR as a result of its compartmentalized structure and the presence of a sludge blanket acting as filter. XRD, XRF and SEM studies were carried out to identify the type and morphology of the precipitates formed and further elucidate Cr(VI) removal mechanisms. Cr(VI) precipitates as CrO(OH) as well as chromium sulfide. Part of chromium may be also adsorbed in amorphous precipitated phases.
                  The experimental results prove the high efficiency of the process and its potential application to tackle environmental issues related with acidic wastewaters/leachates generated in the mining and metallurgical industry as well as in chromium containing waste disposal sites.Contamination of soil, surface- and groundwater with chromium is a worldwide problem as a result of its extensive use in numerous industrial applications such as production of alloys and mainly stainless steel, metal plating, leather tanning and wood treatment ( Although chromium can be found in oxidation states between −2 and In order to remove chromium from aqueous solutions, several different processes have been investigated ( Sulfate reducing bacteria (SRB) have the ability to reduce sulfate to hydrogen sulfide (Reaction Cr(VI) reduction by SRB may occur enzymatically or chemically with the dissolved sulfide produced during dissimilatory sulfate reduction (Reaction Anaerobic baffled reactors (ABR) have been used for the treatment of acid mine drainage ( A 20 The performance of the ethanol-fed ABR was evaluated for a period of 200 In the first period (Period I, days 0–65), the reactor was fed with Cr(VI) free alkaline solution (pH 7.0–7.5) containing 3500 Reactor feed and solution from each ABR compartment were sampled three times a week to determine pH, alkalinity, COD, sulfate, Cr(VI) and dissolved sulfide (not measured in the feed) concentrations. The reactor effluent was sampled weekly to determine total chromium and iron concentration. Feed was kept refrigerated at 4 Liquid samples were centrifuged using a Hettich Rotofix 32 centrifuge at 3000 Electron flow from ethanol oxidation to sulfate reduction was calculated under the assumption that 0.67 X-ray diffraction (XRD), X-ray fluorescence (XRF), Scanning Electron Microscopy (SEM) and Energy Dispersive X-ray Spectroscopy (EDS) studies were carried out to determine the precipitates formed and evaluate their morphology and composition. XRD analyses were performed with a Bruker D8 Advance diffractometer using a Cu tube and a scanning range from 3° to 70° 2 Variations of influent and effluent sulfate and COD concentrations versus time are presented in In the second period wastewater was amended with 35 In the third and fourth period Cr(VI) concentration in wastewater increased to 75 and 140 In the last period the treatment of a very acidic wastewater, simulating AMD was investigated. Cr(VI) concentration increased to 200 The highest sulfate reduction rate reported so far in the literature in an ABR treating simulated AMD was 4.6 No methane production was noticed in the present study probably due to the continuous operation of the ABR under sulfidogenic conditions for a period of two years ( Sulfate reduction coupled with organic carbon oxidation generated alkalinity according to Reaction A variation of dissolved sulfide concentration versus time is presented in The produced dissolved sulfide may be also used to partially immobilize soluble Cr(VI) according to Reaction Although Cr(VI) concentration in the reactor effluent was as low as 0.1 The present study confirms that the major advantage of an ABR is its compartmentalized structure, which allows removal of contaminants before they are transferred from one compartment to the next one. This is well justified if the evolution of the total chromium concentration is considered which decreased from 200 XRD analyses of the precipitates formed in the first compartment of the ABR were carried out in order to identify new mineral phases, assess potential co-precipitation effects and elucidate reaction mechanisms. Mineralogical analyses (data not shown) indicate that the target contaminant of this study, Cr(VI), precipitated as guyanaite CrO(OH) as well as chromium copper sulfide Cr The quantitative analysis of the precipitate using XRF and the Rietvelt method is given in  Finally, Reaction The present study demonstrates that an ethanol-fed sulfidogenic ABR with a HRT of 1.0 XRD, XRF and SEM studies indicate that Cr(VI) precipitates mainly as CrO(OH) and/or as chromium sulfide under the conditions used in the present study. Some Cr(VI) may be also adsorbed/trapped on amorphous precipitated iron sulfides and removed from wastewaters. The experimental results show clearly that bioreduction can be considered as a feasible and cost effective alternative to conventional chemical treatment for the cleanup of acidic wastewaters generated by mining, metallurgical and other industrial processes as well as in chromium containing waste disposal sites. Bioreduction seems to be very effective even in cases when wastewaters have low pH and elevated concentrations of Cr(VI), Fe(III) and sulfate. An additional advantage of the process is that all contaminants are removed and precipitate as stable phases eliminating thus environmental problems associated with their disposal. This study was funded by the Scientific & Technological Research Council of Turkey (TUBITAK Projects No. 108Y036 and 109Y374). We would like to thank Adem Kilic for his assistance in the laboratory. Prof. K. Komnitsas would like to thank the Greek Ministry of Education for the financial support of the project GSRT 10 TUR/1-38-1.