The environmental profile of gold production with regards to embodied energy, greenhouse gas emissions, embodied water and solid waste burden has been assessed using life cycle assessment methodology. Both refractory and non-refractory ores were considered, with cyanidation extraction followed by carbon in pulp (CIP) recovery assumed for non-refractory ore processing. Flotation and pressure oxidation were included prior to cyanidation for processing refractory ores. For a base case ore grade of 3.5 g Au/t ore, the life cycle-based environmental footprint of gold production was estimated to be approximately 200,000 GJ/t Au, 18,000 t CO2e/t Au, 260,000 t water/t Au and 1,270,000 t waste solids/t Au for non-refractory ore. The embodied energy and greenhouse gas footprints were approximately 50% higher with refractory ore due to the additional material and energy inputs and gold and silver losses associated with the additional processing steps required with this ore. The solid waste burden was based on an assumed strip ratio of 3 t waste rock/t ore, but this ratio varies considerably between mines, significantly influencing the estimated value of this impact. The environmental footprint of gold production (per tonne of gold produced) was shown to be several orders of magnitude greater than that for a number of other metals, largely due to the low grades of ore used for the production of gold compared to other metals.
                  The mining and comminution stages made the greatest contribution to the greenhouse gas footprint of gold production, with electricity being the major factor, and being responsible for just over half of the greenhouse gas footprint. This result emphasises the need to focus on these stages in any endeavours to reduce the embodied energy and greenhouse gas footprints of gold production. However, the significance of the contribution of the mining and comminution stages to the environmental footprint also means that falling gold ore grades will have a major impact on the environmental profile, and this issue is examined in the paper. Some technological developments in gold ore processing that have the potential to reduce the environmental footprint of gold production are also discussed.From ancient times to present day, gold has been highly valued by society and has been the most highly sought after precious metal, often having been used for a variety of different purposes such as money, to back currency, in jewellery-making, and in dentistry. More recently, gold has been used in a wide range of electronic applications due to its high conductivity. Some of the special attributes of gold that make it highly prized by society include: it is one of only a few common metals which are coloured, with its bright yellow colour and shiny lustre giving it a perception of beauty; it is one of only a handful of metals that are so unreactive they do not tarnish; it is malleable and easily worked (e.g. jewellery); it is a good conductor of heat and electricity; it is comparatively rare. Gold differs from most other metals in that the majority of the metal that has ever been mined is still in use. It has been estimated that about 15% of all gold ever mined was used in dissipative industrial applications or is unaccounted for or unrecoverable, leaving about 85% (i.e. between 133,000 and 153,000 t – see later) still in use and available for recycling ( Sustainability concerns have seen the gold industry, like other metal production industries and industrial sectors, come under increased pressure to reduce its environmental footprint over the various processing stages in its supply chain from gold ore mining through to gold refining. To this end, this paper describes a life cycle assessment study carried out to provide indicative estimates of the environmental profile of gold production in terms of energy, greenhouse gases, water and solid wastes, some of the issues affecting the profile, and some technological developments that have the potential to reduce it. The environmental profile considered was not meant to be comprehensive, but rather a selected number of environmental impacts were chosen for detailed investigation. Cyanide toxicity is a significant environmental issue in gold ore processing and the International Cyanide Management Code ( Gold is found in two major types of deposits. Lode (or vein) deposits are deposits where gold is found embedded in cracks and veins in rocks. The second type of gold deposit is placer (or alluvial) deposits which are formed by moving water that has eroded gold out of lode deposits and deposited it in sand, crevices and stream beds. Copper and iron are the most common impurities in gold ores. Native gold is by far the most common form of gold in ores, with a gold content of 90% or more and frequently accompanied by silver. After native gold, the gold–silver tellurides are the most common gold minerals. Apart from the discrete gold minerals, gold occurs as a trace element in several common sulphides and sulpharsenide minerals ( World gold reserves are estimated currently to be in the order of 51,000 t ( The various processing routes for gold extraction from ores have been reviewed by Gold production mainly comes from hard rock ore deposits, where the gold is encased in rock, rather than as particles in loose sediment. A general processing flowsheet for the recovery of gold from its ores is shown in Cyanide leaching is the standard method used for recovering most of the gold throughout the world today (approximately 83% according to Gravity concentration works when gold is in a free elemental state in particles large enough to allow mechanical concentration to occur. Placer mining is generally where gravity concentration has been most widely applied. Sometimes the gravity gold concentrates are cleaned up by amalgamation, whereby free gold particles are wetted by mercury and form a gold–mercury amalgam and can thus be separated from most impurities. Mercury is subsequently separated from the gold by distillation. This method was once widely used in gold processing but has gone out of favour due to the health and environmental hazards associated with mercury and the inferior performance compared with alternative processes. However, it is still used in small-scale mines, particularly in third world countries ( Gold is usually recovered or extracted from the cyanide solution by one of two methods: carbon adsorption or Merrill-Crowe recovery. In the more commonly used carbon in pulp (CIP) adsorption process, pellets of activated carbon are added to the leach slurry, with the gold-cyanide complex being adsorbed on the carbon. The loaded carbon is then separated from the pulp by screening, with the stripped solution being recycled. The carbon pellets are then transferred to a stripping or elution circuit where the carbon is washed by a hot caustic cyanide solution to reverse the adsorption process (desorption) and strip the carbon of gold. Gold is then removed from the solution by electrowinning onto steel wool. The steel wool is either dissolved away by hydrochloric acid, leaving a residue which is smelted into gold doré There are a number of gold refining processes. In the chlorination (Miller) process, chlorine is introduced to melted bullion in a crucible furnace. The gas reacts with silver and any remaining base metals to form chlorides. At the operating temperature of the Miller process, any zinc and lead chlorides are volatile, while silver and copper chlorides accumulate on the surface of the molten bullion as a slag which is removed. The molten, refined gold is cast into bars. The electrolytic (Wohlwill) process involves dissolving gold from the bullion (anode) in a chloride solution and redepositing the gold on a pure gold or titanium cathode. The cathodes are melted and cast. The anodes for the electrolytic process are commonly made from gold that has already been through the chlorination process. The chlorination process produces gold of about 99.9% purity (which is suitable for monetary bullion), whilst the electrolytic process produces gold of 99.99% purity. Although refined gold from the chlorination process is in a marketable form, according to When gold is finely disseminated in a sulphide host mineral, the ore often cannot be ground down fine enough to expose the gold particles for direct contact with cyanide solution. In this case the ore is pretreated, the objective of which is to remove enough of the sulphide by oxidation (thereby converting the ore to oxide) so that at least a small portion of all gold particles are directly exposed. Processes used for pretreatment all involve oxidation of sulphur and include bio-oxidation, pressure oxidation (autoclaving) and roasting. Due to environmental problems and limited efficiency, roasting is becoming less attractive, with hydrometallurgical oxidation being the preferred method. Pressure oxidation is widely applied, using sulphuric acid at elevated temperatures. The amount of refractory ore to be pretreated is greatly reduced by first producing a finely ground concentrate. The degree of oxidation required depends on the ore mineralogy and the type of oxidation process used. Systems that treat low sulphur materials (i.e. approximately <2% S) and/or materials that consume acid may require large addition of fresh acid to maintain the desired acid concentration. On the other hand, high sulphur materials (i.e. >3% S) generate sufficient acid by their decomposition and the need for supplemental acid is usually limited to any feed preparation requirements ( As noted earlier, the mining, mineral processing and metal production sector is coming under increased pressure to reduce its energy and water consumption along with its greenhouse gas emissions and improve the overall sustainability of its operations. Life cycle assessment (LCA) is an internationally standardised methodology that has been developed to account for the environmental impacts over a product’s life cycle from raw material acquisition to the production, use and disposal of the material or product. LCA methodology is increasingly being used to assess the environmental sustainability of metal production processes ( Like many metals, there is a range of processing routes for gold ores depending on ore mineralogy, grade, etc., as outlined above. For this study the selected main processing routes are cyanide leaching, followed by CIP recovery, electrowinning and refining (chlorination and electrorefining) for non-refractory ores. In the case of refractory ores the additional steps of flotation and pressure oxidation leaching are included prior to cyanide leaching. These two processing routes are emphasised by bold arrows in The following assumptions were made in carrying out the LCA study: open-pit mining strip ratio 3 t waste rock/t ore ( gold is main metal product, not a by-product from recovery of other metals two ores – refractory and non-refractory ore grade 3.5 g Au/t (base case) – range 0.5–5 g/t considered 0.6 g Ag/t (base case) – Ag/Au ratio maintained when gold grade varied extraction processes cyanidation (tank and heap) – non-refractory ore flotation/pressure oxidation recovery processes carbon in pulp (CIP) leaching process electrowinning smelting refining chlorination and electrorefining gold recoveries flotation 91% (refractory) pressure oxidation 90% (refractory) cyanidation 95% CIP 95% EW and refining 99.9% silver recovery to doré 60% refining 99.9% doré (bullion) contains 90% gold and 10% silver. The LCA was carried out using the SimaPro (version 7.3) software program. As it has been assumed that the gold ore also contains silver, a large proportion of which is recovered into the doré, it is necessary to allocate some of the environmental impacts of processing this ore to the silver co-product produced as well as the main gold product. The two most common methods used in LCA for co-product allocation are based on mass and economic value of the various co-products. As the price of gold is typically 40–50 times that of silver, allocation on the latter basis will attribute most of the environmental impacts to the gold. In an LCA of gold production,  The embodied energy and greenhouse gas results from the LCA study are given in The mining and comminution stages made the greatest contribution to the greenhouse gas footprint of gold production as shown in The LCA results for gold production obtained in this study are compared with those reported for a number of other metals ( The results of any LCA study are particularly dependent on the inventory data used and the assumptions made in the study. In this study the best available inventory data were collected from various sources as mentioned earlier, and assumptions deemed appropriate for typical gold processing operations were made, also outlined earlier. However, in order to assess the effect of these data and assumptions on the LCA results, in particular embodied energy, a sensitivity analysis was carried out by varying selected parameters by ±25% about their base case value. The grade of metallic ores has been falling over time globally, and It is often difficult to compare the results of different LCA studies, even for the same metal and processing route, as issues such as ore grade and fuel mix for electricity generation are often not reported. Furthermore, it is often not clear if energy consumption and associated greenhouse gas data given in company sustainability reports are life cycle-based, i.e. whether the inefficiencies associated with electricity generation have been accounted for by converting electrical energy to primary (fuel) energy – this tends not to be the case. In addition, there appears to be a paucity of LCA studies of gold production reported in the literature. Nevertheless, some reported greenhouse gas emission data for gold production are compared with the study results in Water consumption for gold production for the base case ore grade of 3.5 g Au/t ore based on data reported by As noted earlier, the greatest opportunities to reduce the environmental footprint of gold production lie in the mining and mineral processing stages. There are a number of technological developments occurring in these gold processing stages ( According to High pressure grinding rolls (HPGR) technology has been widely utilised in the cement and diamond industries. More recently it has been considered for metalliferous minerals, predominantly iron, copper and gold ( While flotation has been used as the main pre-concentration process for gold ores for many years, new technologies have been developed to improve its efficiency. Magnetic aggregation has been shown to improve the efficiency of separation by improving gold recovery in the fine fraction of a low grade ore ( Although gravity concentration is not new (see Biological oxidation is used to treat refractory sulphide ores (see Most metal dissolution processes are controlled by diffusion of the lixiviant from the bulk of the solution to the reaction site on the mineral of interest. Ore pretreatment by microwave heating has been shown to result in micro-crack formation which can enhance cyanide amenability as well as grindability ( It is widely accepted that the gold cyanidation process can be represented by the following equation ( Thus air (assumed in the base case above) or oxygen is injected into the cyanidation vessel to improve gold recovery. Increases in gold recovery rates of 1% or greater have been reported for direct injection of oxygen rather than air ( There has been considerable debate in the literature in recent years about the sustainability of mining in general (e.g. Recycling and reuse are critical components of a sustainable society, and as noted earlier, about 85% of all the gold that has ever been mined is estimated to still be in use. Thus gold can be considered as a strong contributor to the sustainable use of metals, largely as a result of the high value put on gold by society due to its special attributes outlined earlier. Gold is one of the most highly valued metals by society, however, sustainability concerns have seen the gold industry, like other metal production industries and industrial sectors, come under increased pressure to reduce its environmental footprint. In response to these pressures, the industry is endeavouring to identify opportunities to develop solutions and technologies to achieve these sustainability goals. Life cycle assessment is a useful tool that can assist in this task, and has been used in the study described here to provide indicative estimates of the environmental profile (energy, greenhouse gases, water and solid waste) of gold production from both refractory and non-refractory ores. Cyanidation extraction followed by carbon in pulp (CIP) recovery was assumed as the processing route for non-refractory ore, while flotation and pressure oxidation was included prior to cyanidation for refractory ore. Not surprisingly, the embodied energy and greenhouse gas footprints were approximately 50% higher with refractory ore due to the additional material and energy inputs and gold and silver losses associated with the additional processing steps required with this ore. The environmental footprint of gold production (per tonne of gold produced) was shown to be several orders of magnitude greater than that for a number of other metals, largely due to the low grade of ores used for the production of gold compared to other metals. However, when global metal production tonnages are accounted for, the global energy and greenhouse gas footprint of gold production is significantly less than for steel and aluminium, less than copper but greater than for zinc, lead and nickel. The mining and comminution stages made the greatest contribution to the greenhouse gas footprint of gold production, with electricity being the major factor, and being responsible for just over half of the greenhouse gas footprint. This result emphasises the need to focus on these stages in any endeavours to reduce the embodied energy and greenhouse gas footprints of gold production. However, the significance of the contribution of the mining and comminution stages to the environmental footprint also means that falling gold ore grades will have a major impact on the environmental profile. Technological developments in gold ore processing such as HPGR, in-place leaching, innovative flotation techniques, pre-concentration using gravity concentration, oxygen injection, biological oxidation and microwave heating have the potential to reduce the environmental footprint of gold production, but any environmental benefits from these technologies will be strongly dependent on the characteristics of the ore concerned, in particular mineralogy and grade.