A novel method for measuring water overflow rate from a laboratory column in the air–water system is presented. The method is based on accumulating overflow in a tube and measuring the rate of increase in pressure. The development is a further step towards automating frother testing.Frothers have two main functions, to reduce bubble size and increase froth stability. To characterize frothers, e.g. to aid in selection for a given duty, both these functions need to be considered ( Froth stabilization can be described by measurements such as equilibrium froth height and water overflow rate. Water overflow rate is important as it controls particle recovery by entrainment and has been the subject of recent modeling efforts, both empirical ( The setup ( Measurement of liquid (water) overflow rate is through the installation of a receiving tube with a valve in the discharge line and a pressure transducer near the bottom. Water accumulates in the tube and the associated hydrostatic head is acquired by the pressure transducer. When the pressure reaches a pre-determined value the valve is opened to drain the tube contents. The resulting signal from these cycles forms a series of pressure–time curves. The overflow water is collected in a tank and recycled forming a closed loop. The pressure (expressed in units of height of water) multiplied by the tube cross-sectional area converts the signal to volume over time, the slope being the water overflow rate. The slope can be the average over the whole cycle (discrete method) or from a series of slopes (continuous).  The technique was validated by collecting a known quantity of water overflow in a weighed container over a known period of time. The water overflow rate was varied by running the column with different frothers at different concentrations at a fixed froth depth (5 The discrete method gives a signal every 90  A goal of our frother characterization work is to automate the measurements. This both limits manual intervention (stop watches, etc.) and provides electronic recording for future inspection. The automated water overflow rate measurement demonstrated here complements automated gas holdup measurement to characterize the two prime frother functions. The extension to approach on-line overflow rate measurement opens up possible control applications. One example is testing blends of two frothers where control of bubble size (gas holdup) using one frother in the blend independent of froth stability (overflow rate) controlled by the second has been suggested ( Automated measurement of water overflow rate in the air–water system has been demonstrated and extended to continuous operation. This represents a new tool for use in frother characterization. Funding for this work is under the Chair in Mineral Processing co-sponsored by Vale, Teck Resources, Xstrata Process Support, Agnico-Eagle, Shell Canada, Barrick Gold, SGS Lakefield Research, COREM and Flottec under the Collaborative Research and Development (CRD) program of NSERC (Natural Sciences and Engineering Research Council of Canada) and through AMIRA International P9O project also under the NSERC-CRD program.