The hydrothermal evolution of the chemically highly evolved topaz granite Kymi stock in southeastern Finland was reconstructed from fluid inclusion petrography, microthermometry, and LA-ICP-MS analysis. The Kymi stock shows a clear zonation and intrusion sequence consisting of an early porphyritic granite, a subsequent equigranular granite, and a late marginal stockscheider pegmatite. Miarolitic cavities from different hydrothermal stages occur within all rock types of the stock, but they are more abundant near the contact between the porphyritic and equigranular granites. Three successive generations of miarolitic cavities and quartz from the stockscheider pegmatite provide the paragenetic and chronological framework for establishing the fluid evolution history. Based on petrographically established time relations, the microthermometric, and LA-ICP-MS data, fluids with different compositional trends were identified and linked to distinct fluid saturation events. The magmatic fluids from the Kymi stock contain high concentrations of elements that are characteristic of highly evolved granites and related pegmatites such as K, Li, B, Be, Rb, Tl, and Cs. Barium and Sr concentrations in fluid inclusions systematically decrease from the intermediately evolved miarolitic cavity to the stockscheider pegmatite and more evolved miarolitic cavities. Additionally, high As, Nb, and Ta concentrations were detected in fluid inclusions from the miarolitic cavities and stockscheider pegmatite. The fluids from the Kymi stock are significantly depleted in zinc, having low Zn/Pb ratios when compared to other magmatic fluids worldwide. This is interpreted to be caused by lower Zn availability in the melt resulting from the crystallization of Zn-enriched biotites in the early porphyritic granite. The most important fluid exsolution event between the crystallization of the porphyritic and the equigranular granite was key to generating the residual, highly evolved and strongly fluorine-enriched melt from which the later rocks including the stockscheider pegmatite crystallized.Magmatic fluids exsolved from crystallizing granites are important or dominant constituents of various ore-fluids in different geological settings. Prominent examples include porphyry Cu-Au-Mo deposits, intrusion-related Sn and Au deposits, skarn deposits, epithermal Au Topaz granites do often form late-stage intrusion phases in A-type rapakivi granite batholiths. These are closely associated with world-class Sn ore deposits such as in the Amazon Craton of Brazil ( The Kymi stock is located in the southern part of Finland, about 5 km to the north of the city of Kotka. Previously published studies include early geological descriptions and mapping ( The aim of this study is to chemically characterize the hydrothermal fluids which exsolved from the Kymi stock and were responsible for the formation of the gemstone bearing miarolitic cavities and rare-metal bearing greisen-quartz veins. We used samples from intermediate to highly evolved miarolitic cavities as defined in previous mineral chemistry studies, and quartz crystals from the stockscheider pegmatite ( The Wiborg rapakivi batholith in southern Finland ( The Kymi stock intrudes into wiborgite (mantled alkali feldspar ovoids), pyterlite (unmantled ovoids) and other rapakivi granites ( The porphyritic granite is a topaz-bearing monzogranite, with quartz and alkali feldspar phenocrysts up to 5 cm in size within a fine-grained oligoclase-albite plagioclase, quartz and alkali feldspar matrix ( The origin of the zoned structure of the Kymi Stock is discussed in detail by While the chemical evolution of the Kymi stock is relatively well understood from petrography, whole-rock geochemistry, and melt inclusions ( Following the initial screening of 14 doubly polished fluid inclusion sections, six representative samples were selected for detailed fluid inclusion petrography, microthermometry, and LA-ICP-MS analysis ( The hydrothermal phase of the Kymi stock is represented by the miarolitic cavities within the different rocks of the stock and the mineralized hydrothermal greisen-quartz veins hosted by the rapakivi granites surrounding the Kymi stock ( Samples with a sufficient number of adequately sized (30–80 μm) individual fluid inclusions within well-defined FIA were studied by detailed petrography to establish their relative chronology. FIA were defined as groups of fluid inclusions present on temporally well-constrained petrographic features such as growth zones or healed fractures ( The selected fluid inclusion assemblages were studied by microthermometry to determine their apparent salinity (from ice-melting temperatures) and homogenization temperatures. We used a Linkam THMSG-600 heating-freezing stage attached to a Leica DM2500P optical microscope for the microthermometry measurements. The stage was calibrated daily using synthetic fluid inclusions, using the Q3 quintuple point (−56.6 °C) of H Cooling experiments were performed for all fluid inclusions of a given FIA, whereas heating experiments were only carried out on a subset of them after the LA-ICP-MS analysis. This was done in order to prevent the larger fluid inclusions from being affected by leaking or decrepitation prior to the LA-ICP-MS measurements. The major, minor and trace element concentrations were determined in individual fluid inclusions using a Coherent GeoLas MV 193 nm laser ablation system coupled to an Agilent 7900 s ICP mass spectrometer at the University of Helsinki. The ablation cell used has a small total volume of 1 cm Analytical and standardization procedures were performed according to Initial fluid inclusion petrography was done on 14 fluid inclusion sections, resulting in the characterization of the fluid inclusion types present and their petrographic features. This was followed by detailed petrography of 6 representative fluid inclusion sections, in preparation for the subsequent microthermometry and LA-ICP-MS analysis. Detailed petrography included defining FIA and establishing their relative time in respect to the growth features of the quartz crystals. Petrographic work did also include the selection of FIA and individual fluid inclusions for LA-ICP-MS analysis, based on inclusion size, depth below the sample surface, and relative distance to adjacent inclusions of the same FIA. Three quartz-rich samples from the stockscheider pegmatite were investigated in detail by fluid inclusion petrography. Quartz is milky to semi-transparent, and in grain contact or intergrown with K-feldspar, topaz, and biotite crystals ( Three miarolitic cavities were selected for detailed fluid inclusion studies, which included one of the intermediately evolved type 1 miarolitic cavity (sample GBK-16.1), and two of the chemically highly evolved type 2 and type 3 miarolitic cavities (samples GBK-39.1 and GBK-34.1), as defined based on previous biotite and K-feldspar mineral chemistry studies ( The quartz crystal from the intermediately evolved miarolitic cavity (type 1) did not show well-preserved growth zones or other clear petrographic features that would allow defining the time relationships between the different FIA. All fluid inclusion assemblages are arranged on multiple healed fractures ( One of the highly evolved miarolitic cavities (type 2) contains euhedral quartz with mineral inclusions of topaz, tourmaline, K-feldspar and biotite ( The other highly evolved miarolitic cavity (type 3) contains euhedral quartz exhibiting a well-developed growth zoning, which is lined by tourmaline crystals ( The determination of microthermometric data was essential to define different fluid types within the miarolitic cavities and stockscheider pegmatite of the Kymi stock. The data are reported as averages of FIA and summarized in The two main fluid types recorded in the stockscheider pegmatite homogenize to the liquid phase and at distinctly different temperatures ( Fluids from the miarolitic cavities homogenize at temperatures from 150 to 232 °C and all FIA within each cavity have consistent final ice melting temperatures. The three studied miarolitic cavities show an increase in average salinity from the intermediately evolved miarolitic cavity (type 1) up to one of the more evolved miarolitic cavity samples (type 2), and then to the stockscheider pegmatite. Fluid inclusions from the other more evolved miarolitic cavity (type 3) have the lowest average salinity among all studied fluids from the Kymi stock ( The intermediately evolved miarolitic cavity (type 1) hosted by the porphyritic granite close to the contact to the equigranular granite contains FIA which show final ice melting temperatures between −9.5 and −11.7 °C, corresponding to a salinity range from 13.4 to 15.7 wt% eqv. NaCl. tFinal ice melting temperatures of the FIA from the gemstone-bearing miarolitic cavity (type 2) hosted by the stockscheider pegmatite vary from −13.9 to −15.0 °C, corresponding to a salinity of 17.7 to 18.9 wt% eqv. NaCl. Two FIA with lower salinities were identified, with final ice melting temperatures of −5.5 to −5.6, equivalent to a salinity of 8.5 to 9.9 wt% eqv. NaCl. Based on their petrographic features and the microthermometric data, they were classified as being of secondary origin. All pseudosecondary and secondary FIA of the more evolved miarolitic cavity (type 3) have distinctly lower salinities (11.9 to 13.2 wt% eqv. NaCl). Reliable fluid inclusion ablation is essential to ensure complete sampling of the fluid inclusion contents and avoid a biased estimation of its element concentration. We used criteria described in By contrast, fluid leakage (due to fracturing at the bottom of the inclusion pit) will lead to drawn-out and low-intensity signals with significantly elevated limits of detection for trace elements ( Due to their location close to the sample surface, their size, and distance to other ablations, only 30 out of the 65 fluid inclusion assemblages studied by microthermometry were successfully ablated and the data would meet the above-described criteria. Approximately 400 individual fluid inclusions were ablated and yielded a total of 79 good individual signals. The complete dataset with all individual fluid inclusion analyses is provided as Electronic Supplementary Material. All fluid inclusion assemblages from the miarolitic cavities and the stockscheider pegmatite at the Kymi Stock contain high concentrations of elements that are typical of highly evolved granites and related pegmatites such as K, Li, B, Be, Rb, Tl, and Cs. The major components of all analyzed FIA from the miarolitic cavities and the stockscheider pegmatite are clearly sodium dominated and their proportions are characterized by Na >> K >> Ca ≥ Mg. Potassium concentrations do not show any systematic variation within the different fluid types of the Kymi stock, and vary between 1400 and 13,000 μg/g. Calcium varies between about 17 to a maximum of 1810 μg/g, while Mg concentrations vary from 0.1 to 400 μg/g ( The minor components are mostly lithium, boron, rubidium, and cesium, which range from 170 to 2970 μg/g in all fluid types ( Barium and Sr concentrations decrease continuously by two orders of magnitude from the intermediately evolved miarolitic cavity (type 1) to the more evolved miarolitic cavity (type 2), the stockscheider pegmatite, and the type 3 miarolitic cavity ( The molar Cl/Br ratios are variable within the intermediately evolved miarolitic cavity and are somewhat more consistent within FIA from the stockscheider pegmatite and the more evolved miarolitic cavities (type 2 and type 3) ( Sulfur was detected in most of the analyzed FIA in concentrations that range from 90 μg/g up to 2000 μg/g without any systematic variation within all samples ( Fluid inclusion assemblages of the intermediately evolved type 1 cavity, the stockscheider pegmatite and one of the evolved miarolitic cavity (type 2) contain relatively high concentrations of Pb and Zn, which are in the range of 40–2150 μg/g and 70–5650 μg/g, respectively. The FIA from the highly evolved type 3 miarolitic cavity have lower Pb and Zn values, up to a maximum of 82 μg/g Zn and 590 μg/g Pb ( Manganese and Fe contents are approximately in the same range within all analyzed FIA of the Kymi stock. Manganese concentrations range from 9 up to 90 μg/g ( The widely accepted formation model of magmatic-hydrothermal systems suggests that metals are removed from felsic melts by a chlorine-rich aqueous fluid that exsolves under specific pressure-temperature conditions. If the crystallizing granite reaches fluid saturation at deeper levels of the crust (>2 kbar), a large amount of fluid can exsolve (because water solubility in granitic melts is high at these pressures). Due to the strong partitioning of chlorine and metals into the hydrothermal fluid, this process will deplete the melt of most chlorine and chlorine-complexed metals ( The magmatic-hydrothermal fluids of the Kymi stock do not show a continuous increase in salinity as would be predicted from experimental data. The salinity increases only slightly from about 15 wt% eqv. NaCl in pseudosecondary FIA from the early, intermediately evolved miarolitic cavity (type 1), to 18–22 wt% eqv. NaCl in FIA from the stockscheider pegmatite and one of the more evolved miarolitic cavities (type 2). On the other hand, the salinity of pseudosecondary FIA of the most evolved miarolitic cavity (type 3) is the lowest out of all FIA of the Kymi stock. These variations in salinity imply that fluid exsolution did not occur continuously and from a progressively crystallizing melt, but during several discrete and probably short-lived events. This resulted in rather unsystematic variations of the partitioning behavior of chlorine and ore metals along the magmatic-hydrothermal evolution of the Kymi system rather than continuous trends from the onset of fluid exsolution up to the very late stage. We, therefore, propose a fluid evolution model for the Kymi stock where fluid exsolution occurred during several rather short-lived episodes. This model is not only in good agreement with the fluid inclusion salinity data, but is also supported by the geologic, and petrographic observations and data of biotite and fluorite mineral chemistry ( Barium and Sr are two of the best igneous fractionation indicators that track the progressive magmatic evolution of the Kymi stock. The concentrations of these elements decrease by about two orders of magnitude in the whole-rocks ( Contrasting with the behavior shown by Ba and Sr, the elements Rb, Cs, and Tl, which are commonly suitable fractionation indicators in granitic systems, do not show clear differences between the FIA of the Kymi stock. This probably reflects that their concentrations in whole-rocks are generally rather low in this A-type granitic suite and that they do show much variation between the more evolved igneous rocks (equigranular granite and stockscheider pegmatite) ( The observed chemical trends of magmatic-hydrothermal fluids, coupled with the proposed evolution sequence of the Kymi stock based on the mineral chemistry data, supports the interpretation that three fluid exsolution events have occurred during the evolution of the Kymi stock, out of which two events were significant and are well-preserved as FIA. The first event was very local and is recorded by the few least evolved miarolitic cavities ( The concentrations of Pb and Zn are among the best-constrained chemical features of crustal hydrothermal fluids, and it has been demonstrated that both metals increase with both salinity and temperature ( The magmatic-hydrothermal history of the Kymi stock can be reconstructed based on several datasets including field geology, petrography, whole-rock geochemistry ( Petrogenetic models for the formation of the zoned structure of the Kymi stock have been initially proposed by Based on the field observations and geochemical data, there is consensus that the porphyritic granite crystallized prior to, and from a less evolved melt than the equigranular granite and the stockscheider pegmatite. Biotite mineral chemistry data and REE distribution patterns in fluorite both suggest three fluid exsolution events during the hydrothermal evolution of the Kymi stock: (1) a minor event before the complete crystallization of the porphyritic granite (not further addressed in this study); (2) a major fluid saturation event immediately after the crystallization of the porphyritic granite; (3) a third fluid saturation event after the crystallization of the stockscheider pegmatite and equigranular granite (  Fluid composition trends define at least two fluid exsolution events during the hydrothermal evolution of the fluorine-rich Kymi topaz granite stock. A major fluid saturation event occurred between the crystallization of the porphyritic granite and the equigranular granite and stockscheider pegmatite, and another event after and/or synchronous with the crystallization of the stockscheider pegmatite. A third minor fluid saturation event is interpreted to have occurred early during the crystallization of the porphyritic granite based on compositionally distinct biotite mineral chemistry data. The major fluid saturation event was responsible for the generation of the highly evolved melt from which the equigranular granite and stockscheider pegmatite have subsequently crystallized. This conclusion supports a petrogenetic model for the formation of the Kymi stock where the magma chamber evolved over time and residual melt then accumulated at its carapace. Magmatic fluids from the Kymi stock are strongly depleted in Zn when compared to other magmatic fluids worldwide. This was likely caused by strong partitioning and sequestering of Zn into biotite that crystallized prior to the melt reaching fluid saturation. Once the fluid phase exsolved, it equilibrated with a Zn-depleted melt, resulting in low Zn/Pb ratios in the fluid. This study was made possible by funding from the The authors declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this paper.