Passage, comminution and digestion rates of large and small particles were estimated using a rumen evacuation technique and total faecal collection with five lactating dairy cows in a 5×5 Latin square experiment. Two grass and two red clover silages harvested at early and late primary growth stages and a 1:1 mixture of late harvest grass and early harvest red clover were the dietary treatments. Cows received 9.0kg supplementary concentrate per day. Ruminal contents and faeces were divided into large (>1.25mm) and small (1.25–0.038mm) particles by wet sieving. Indigestible neutral detergent fibre (iNDF) was determined by 12 days ruminal in situ incubation followed by neutral detergent extraction. Plant species did not affect ruminal particle size distribution, whereas advancing forage maturity decreased the proportion of large particles for both grass and red clover silage diets. Ruminal pool size of iNDF was higher (P<0.001) with red clover compared to grass silage diets. Ruminal passage rates of iNDF and potentially digestible NDF (pdNDF) increased with decreasing particle size (P<0.01). Passage rate of iNDF for small particles was slower (P<0.01) when red clover compared to grass silage diets were fed. Particle comminution rate in the rumen was slower (P<0.001) with red clover compared to grass silage diets and it increased (P<0.01) with advancing forage maturity. The contribution of particle comminution to ruminal mean retention time of iNDF in the ruminal large particle pool was smaller (P<0.01) in red clover compared to grass silage diets and it increased (P<0.05) with the mixed silage compared to the separate silages. Passage rate of pdNDF for both large and small particles was not affected by dietary treatments. Digestion rate of pdNDF for large particles was faster (P<0.001) with red clover compared to grass silage diets. Differences in ruminal passage and digestion rates of the large and small particles, in addition to differences in the passage and digestion rates of red clover compared to grass silage diets, emphasize the need to consider particle size and forage type in metabolic models predicting feed intake and fibre digestibility in ruminants.The ruminant digestive system has developed to selectively retain undigested fibrous material in order to maximize ruminal fibre digestion ( Rates of digestion and passage are important determinants of fibre digestibility ( Neutral detergent fibre (NDF) is not a homogenous entity, because indigestible NDF (iNDF) and potentially digestible NDF (pdNDF) have different digestion and passage rates ( Grasses and legumes have different digestion, passage and comminution kinetics due to different histological characteristics ( Conduct of the experiment, animals and experimental diets were described in detail by Ruminal contents were evacuated before the morning feeding at 0600 The particle size distribution of dietary concentrate, ruminal digesta (separately for the two sampling times) and faeces was determined by a Retsch AS200 Digit wet sieving apparatus (Retsch GmbH, Haan, Germany). The samples were divided into seven particle size fractions by wet sieving using sieves with pore sizes of 2.5, 1.25, 0.63, 0.315, 0.16, 0.08 and 0.038 To avoid errors in mixing of the two ruminal samples, each sample was sieved separately, but the average particle size distribution of them was used in further calculations. Ten, five and ten replicates of 5.0, 30.0 and 30.0 Particle size distribution of chewed silages is derived from a study carried out in the same laboratory with the same cows ( Calculations of ruminal pool sizes, kinetics of iNDF and pdNDF, MRT and median retaining aperture are described by The chemical composition of the experimental silages and dietary concentrate is in Rumen evacuations did not affect daily DM intake (20.5 and 20.6 Data of ruminal and faecal particle size distribution, and aNDFom, iNDF and CP concentrations in large (LP, >1.25 The proportion of faecal LP in particulate DM was lower than SP ( Based on the model with seven particle size pools, half of the ruminal particles were larger than 2.5 Data on ruminal pools and daily faecal excretion of DM, iNDF, pdNDF and CP in addition to MRT of iNDF and pdNDF in LP and SP are in Faecal DM excretion of SP with grass silage diets was higher than that with red clover silage diets ( The median retaining aperture of chewed material was higher for grass compared to red clover silage diets ( The The The MRT of iNDF was longer with red clover compared to grass silage diets in LP ( Use of rumen evacuations relies on assumptions that normal rumen function must not be disturbed, and a steady-state rumen pool size must be estimated. In meal-fed animals, rumen pool size is not in a steady state, and therefore rumen evacuation times should be chosen to estimate the average pool size. The study of Rumen evacuation may further disturb normal rumen functions by destroying (at least temporarily) the normal stratification of particles within the rumen. The proportion of LP (>1.25  The lower aNDFom concentration in ruminal SP compared to LP was associated with higher CP concentration in SP. The higher CP concentration in the SP fraction may be attributed to a more microbial attachment to them. Higher iNDF concentration in ruminal particulate DM with red clover compared to grass silage diets is consistent with the concentration of the truly undegradable fraction reported by Lignin in grasses is distributed at low concentrations in most cell types whereas in legumes it is not distributed equally among the different tissues ( The lack of a maturity effect on aNDFom and iNDF concentrations in ruminal particles with grass silage diets is contrary to the results of Changes in aNDFom and iNDF concentrations in ruminal digesta particles based on the seven pool model are in agreement with The higher ruminal particulate DM pool with grass compared to red clover silage diets was mainly due to higher NDF intake. Smaller rumen pool size of NDF with red clover compared to grass silage diets suggests that rumen fill was not the major factor limiting intake of red clover silages ( Increasing total ruminal particulate DM pool with advancing maturity was a result of the increase in ruminal iNDF pool rather than ruminal pdNDF pool, especially with red clover silage diets. The faster Particle comminution depends on the histological structure of the forages ( Increasing Lack of effects of plant species, forage maturity and mixing of silages on Legumes usually have a faster Longer MRT of iNDF with red clover silage diets compared to grass silage diets was due to both slower Larger ruminal iNDF and smaller aNDFom pool sizes in both large and small particle size fractions with red clover compared to grass silage based diets indicate differences in digestion and passage characteristic of aNDFom in red clover and grasses. The high proportion of particles smaller than 1.25 The project was partly funded by the Finnish Ministry of Agriculture and Forestry. The grant of Dr. Bayat from the Academy of Finland is greatly acknowledged.