The current article investigates the effect of bioactive cellulose/wool blend on calcium phosphate biomimetic mineralization. Regenerated cellulose/wool blend was prepared by dissolution-regeneration of neat cellulose and natural wool in 1-butyl-3-methyl imidazolium chloride [Bmim][Cl], as a solvent for the two polymers. Crystalline hydroxyapatite nanofibers with a uniform size, shape and dimension were formed after immersing the bioactive blend in simulated body fluid. The cytotoxicity of cellulose/wool/hydroxyapatite was studied using animal fibroblast baby hamster kidney cells (BHK-21) and the result displayed good cytocompatability. This research work presents a green processing method for the development of novel cellulose/wool/hydroxyapatite hybrid materials for tissue engineering applications.Polymers are important growth modifier for biomimetic calcium phosphate mineralization process Cellulose, a renewable and sustainable raw material with fascinating structure and properties, has received tremendous interest in the field of biomaterials The synthesis of cellulose-based hybrid materials is, however, not straightforward. This is due to the fact that cellulose exhibits low solubility in aqueous media typically used for calcium phosphate mineralization Wool is an abundant natural material that contains about 20 amino acids linked in ladder-like polypeptide chains. Considering the chemical structure of the natural protein additives used for calcium phosphate growth so far, mimicking the biominerlization process in human body using biopolymers like silk fibroin It is reported that polymer blending is an appropriate strategy for the evolution of new materials with required features. Moreover, blending with other functionalized and reactive materials was emerging recently as an important straightforward strategy towards real, nanostructured and hierarchical cellulose/inorganic composites The current study, therefore, evaluates regenerated cellulose/wool blend from [Bmim][Cl] as bioactive blend to enhance the mineralization of crystalline hydroxyapatite nanofiber. Cellulose/wool/calcium phosphate hybrids was evaluated with respect to its thermal stability, morphology, calcium phosphate crystal size and cytotoxicity. This research work presents a green processing method for the development of novel cellulose/wool/calcium phosphate hybrid materials for bone tissue engineering applications. Natural raw wool, shorn from Egyptian sheep, was cleaned and defatted in a soxhlet extractor for two days using acetone/ethanol 1:1 Regenerated cellulose/wool blend was prepared in the following way. 1 Mineralization was done as described previously Animal fibroblast baby hamster kidney cells (BHK-21) prepared in R&D sector, VACSERA, Egypt was cultured in Minimum essential medium with Earls salt (MEM-E), supplemented with 10% fetal bovine serum (FBS), 2  Attenuated total reflection-Fourier transform infrared spectroscopy (ATR-FTIR) was done on a Thermo Nicolet FT-IR Nexus 470 with a diamond crystal. Spectra were recorded from 500 to 4000 Scanning electron microscopy was done on Model Quanta 250 FEG (Field Emission Gun) attached with EDX Unit (Energy Dispersive X-ray Analyses), with accelerating voltage 30 Transmission electron microscope (TEM) images were taken with a JEOL JEM-2100 electron microscopy at 100k Thermogravimetric analysis was done on a NETZSCH STA 409 PC instrument. Samples were burned under oxygen atmosphere until 900 As mentioned above, ILs are interesting solvent and reaction media for some natural polymers. [Bmim][Cl] can dissolve cellulose The surface morphology of the regenerated cellulose/wool blend before and after calcium phosphate mineralization were investigated using SEM as shown in Transmission electron microscopy (TEM) was utilized to illustrate the internal shape of biomimetic formed calcium phosphate.  The thermal decomposition of cellulose/wool blend before and after biomimetic mineralization as well as the actual inorganic content and thermal stability of the hybrid were estimated by thermogravimetric analysis (TGA). It has been reported that the regenerated wool has higher thermal stability than the raw fiber Cytotoxicity study was carried out to investigate the effect of cellulose/wool/hydroxyapatite dosages on proliferation of BHK21 cell line. The effect of hybrid dosage in vitro was investigated to assess the potential of materials for application in tissue engineering The current article showed that cellulose/wool homogenous bioactive blend direct the biomimetic mineralization of calcium phosphate nanofiber under physiological condition. The results reported that the mineralized calcium phosphate is mainly composed of crystalline hydroxyapatite with hierarchical nanofiber-like hydroxyapatite. The length of these nano fibers is less than 100 The authors acknowledge the financial support of