Type II odontoid fractures account for over 2/3ds of odontoid fractures, which overall account for approximately 20% of cervical spine fractures. Their specific site at the odontoid base is confounded firstly by instability, and secondly by a poor blood supply, which predisposes these injuries not only to secondary neurological deterioration but importantly to non-union. In young to middle aged patients non-displaced fractures can be managed conservatively with cervical immobilization and serial imaging. Displaced fractures in younger patients comprise a specific subgroup with their own inherent corner-stone surgical considerations. In this group closed fracture reduction and alignment, and a subsequent anterior odontoid screw/s, should be the standard of care where-ever possible. As a second line the posterior C1/C2 Harms stabilisation with subsequent hardware removal, or if not possible a posterior C1/C2 Harms arthrodesis, should be the 2nd and 3rd choices entertained. As a bail out procedure there is still place for the older wiring techniques, such as the modified Gallie fusion augmented by external immobilization or trans-articular screws. We present a case series of four young to middle aged patients who presented to our unit with displaced type II odontoid fractures and underwent different surgical stabilization procedures. Our case series serves to illustrate several of the common surgical considerations encountered by spinal surgeons who manage this problem.Fractures of the odontoid process account for between 15% and 20% of cervical spine fractures, and of these 65–75% are odontoid Type II fractures occurring specifically at the junction between the odontoid process and the C2 body, at the level of the transverse ligament We present a case series of four young adults with significantly displaced type II odontoid fractures that presented to our unit over a 3-year period. The significant displacement seen meant that each patient met the standard indications for reduction and operative stabilization. Our case series illustrates four different operative techniques that we employed, and we discuss what we found to be the operative nuances, advantages, and disadvantages, of each. A 43-year old male patient was referred to our out-patient spinal clinical from a peripheral hospital 11-days after having been involved in a high-velocity motor vehicle accident that was a head-end collision resulting in a hyper-flexion cervical spine injury. He presented to our unit fully conscious, on a spinal immobilization board with head blocks in place, complaining of significant upper posterior cervical pain. Examination of his cervical spine showed upper midline spinal tenderness and a high cervical palpable step. The neurological examinations of his upper and lower limbs were normal. The X-ray of his cervical spine showed a >5 mm displaced type II odontoid fracture with anterior atlantoaxial subluxation and widening of the C1/C2 interspinous space highly suggestive of an interspinous ligament rupture [ He was taken to the operating room where he was placed in a Mayfield head-clamp and, post fiber-optic intubation in a Philadelphia collar, was placed prone. Under anesthesia, utilizing manipulation of the Mayfield head clamp under fluoroscopic imaging, we were able to reduce the anterior atlanto-axial subluxation and correct the anterior displacement of the odontoid process. A high cervical midline skin incision from the inion to the midpoint of the cervical spine was performed with dissection carried out in the avascular midline raphe down to the level of the C1 and C2 laminae. While we intended performing a cervical stabilization utilizing the gold standard namely the Harms technique, with later removal of the instrumentation once the odontoid fracture had healed, excessive bleeding from the venous plexii on attempting to place the C1 lateral mass screws resulted in us being forced to abandon this stabilization method. While in experienced centers C1 posterior arch screws and C2 laminar screws, connected by rods, are described, in our center we have no experience with the placement of C1 posterior arch screws and hence this was not attempted. As a bail-out procedure, taking advantage of the good bone quality in this middle-aged patient, we opted to perform a modified Gallie fusion [ A 46-year old male patient presented to our unit having been involved in a pedestrian vehicle accident. He was fully conscious, on a spinal board, complaining only of severe high posterior cervical pain. General examination demonstrated his cervical spine to have a rotational deformity of 15 degrees to the right which he could not actively correct. No passive correction was attempted. His cervical spine examination revealed posterior midline cervical spine tenderness and a palpable step in the interspinous space between C1 and C2. The neurological examinations of his upper and lower limbs were normal. A CT scan of his cervical spine revealed a significantly displaced type II odontoid fracture with anterior atlantoaxial subluxation and widening of the C1/C2 interspinous space highly suggestive of an interspinous ligament rupture. On the coronal view a complete dislocation of the left C1/C2 facet was visualized [ He was placed in Cones calipers and a closed reduction was successfully performed. Due to the rotatory subluxation we deferred an odontoid screw and opted to go posterior for a C1/C2 arthrodesis utilizing the gold standard namely the Harms technique. He was taken to the operating room where the cones calipers were removed, and he was placed in a Mayfield head clamp and a Philadelphia collar. Post induction of anesthesia using fiber-optic intubation he was placed prone and the Philadelphia collar removed. Then, utilizing the Mayfield head clamp, the pre-operative fracture reduction was re-confirmed, and maintained [ For this purpose, we first performed a limited decortication of the postero-inferior part of the posterior neural arch of C1, and the postero-superior part of the laminae of C2, with a high-speed diamond burr. We then placed a 5 mm tape supero- inferiorly behind the posterior neural arch of C1 [ A 34-year old male patient presented to our unit having been involved in a high-speed motor vehicle accident whereby he was rear-ended incurring a hyper-extension cervical spine injury. He arrived at our unit on a spinal immobilization board with head blocks in place, fully conscious, complaining of high posterior cervical spine pain. General examination revealed high mid-line posterior cervical tenderness and a palpable step between C1 and C2. The neurological examinations of his upper and lower limbs were normal. A CT scan showed a type II odontoid fracture with posterior atlantoaxial subluxation and widening of the C1/C2 interspinous space [ Once the posterior atlantoaxial subluxation was reduced, he was taken to theatre for a planned stabilization utilizing the Harms technique. The cones calipers were changed to a Mayfield head clamp and he was placed in a Philadelphia collar. Once intubated he was turned prone and the Mayfield head-clamp was attached to the operating table holding his cervical spine in a reduced position, where-after the Philadelphia collar was removed. A midline posterior cervical incision was performed, from the inion to the mid-point of the cervical spine, with dissection carried down to the C1 and C2 laminae. Upon exposure of the laminae a MacDonald was used to palpate the medial and lateral edges of each C1/C2 facet joint on either lateral side of the posterior neural arch of C1, as well as to retract the C2 nerve root inferiorly to expose the C1 entry point for the lateral mass screws. Utilizing lateral fluoroscopic imaging a drill guide was used to direct the oscillating 3 mm drill bit supero-medially, with 10 degrees of medial angulation, within the lateral mass of C1. Self-tapping 3.5 mm partially threaded C1 lateral mass screws were then placed bilaterally, to the measured depth, ensuring only the smooth part of the shaft was left exposed and in contact with the C2 nerve root to prevent irritation. Once these screws were placed lateral fluoroscopic imaging was used to place additional 3.5 mm C2 pedicle screws, with the drill guide directed 15–20 degrees medially. Once all four poly-axial screws were placed, a straight 3.5 mm cobalt chrome rod was reduced into the screw heads which simultaneously reduced, and stabilized, the small degree of remaining posterior subluxation. The screw caps were placed, and the reduction devices removed. Intra-operative fluoroscopic imaging confirmed the reduction [ A 32-year old male patient presented to our unit having been involved in a high-speed pedestrian vehicle accident where he was hit from behind, likely incurring a hyper-extension cervical spine injury. He was fully conscious, on a spinal immobilization board with head blocks in place, complaining of high posterior cervical spine pain. General examination revealed high posterior midline cervical tenderness and a palpable step between C1 and C2. The neurological examinations of his upper and lower limbs were normal. A CT scan of his cervical spine revealed an oblique type II odontoid fracture with a mild degree of anterior atlantoaxial subluxation and widening of the C1/C2 inter-spinous space indicating an interspinous ligament rupture [ Once reduced he was taken to the operating room for a planned anterior odontoid screw. The Cones calipers were exchanged for a Mayfield head clamp and he underwent fiber-optic intubation. Once intubated he was placed supine on the operating table, the Mayfield head-clamp was attached to the operating table, and a planned trajectory was visualized with biplanar fluoroscopy. The antero-inferior edge of the C2 body was the entry point and the odontoid tip was the exit point for planned bi-cortical purchase to ensure fracture compression over a cannulated screw. Once visualized a transverse incision was made at the C5/C6 level and blunt dissection was carried out down to the pre-vertebral space. The dissection was then extended superiorly to the C2/C3 disc space. A guide wire was then advanced under biplanar fluoroscopy, within a drill-guide, from the antero-inferior edge of the C2 body through the odontoid process [ In our unit, as reflected by our case series, we almost always consider an anterior odontoid screw as our first-choice fixation method in reliable young patients with type II odontoid fractures meeting requirements for surgery. In patients that have contra-indications to an anterior odontoid screw, we consider the Harms technique as our second choice, reserving the wiring and taping methods as bail-out procedures. One paper that compared the modified Gallie fusion to the Harms technique, in 53 patients with type II odontoid fractures, noted that by post-operatively maintaining all patients in a Philadelphia collar for 6–8 weeks, there was no significant difference in the Visual Analogue Pain Score Scale, degree of neck stiffness, fusion rate, nor neurological status at final follow-up. What this study did find was a significantly increased degree of patient satisfaction in the Harms group One problem that we have encountered with the Harms technique is excessive venous bleeding upon dissection laterally, below the posterior neural arch of C1, to find the entry point on the C1 facet joint for the C1 lateral mass screw. One recent paper, that evaluated the Harms technique in 12 patients, does mention this problem but trivializes it and states that bleeding from this peri-vertebral plexus should be controlled by hemostatic agents and bipolar diathermy. This same paper does not list excessive bleeding from this venous plexus as a complication of the Harms technique Several papers note that in younger patients one, or two, anterior odontoid screws are the treatment of choice in type II odontoid fractures that meet specific requirements. The benefits of this technique include a fusion rate of over 90% and preservation of motion at the C1/C2 joint A limitation of our case series is firstly the small number of patients which makes comparison of the complications of the various options of limited value. A further limitation is the lack of long-term follow-up which makes the comparison of motion preservation, between the various techniques, insufficient to be objectively reliable. Despite these limitations the case series is of value as it provides four illustrative real-life examples of different surgical techniques to manage unstable type 2 odontoid fractures, in young patients. Surgical type II odontoid fractures in younger patients demand a different set of surgical considerations be borne in mind as compared to those in the elderly. In this specific patient subset one/two anterior odontoid screws, and if not possible a temporary posterior Harms stabilization, and not an arthrodesis, should be primarily entertained and specifically excluded. In our unit the C1/C2 Harms arthrodesis is our 3rd choice surgical procedure, and if this fails the modified Gallie fusion augmented by a Philadelphia collar for 6–8 weeks is our bail-out procedure. We have found this approach to be both safe and effective for displaced type II odontoid fractures in younger patients and recommend its use to spinal surgeons who manage this specific patient subset. This research did not receive any specific grant from funding agencies in the public, commercial, or not-for-profit sectors. The authors declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this paper. Supplementary data to this article can be found online at The following are the Supplementary data to this article: