Extruded bone segments are rare complication of high energy open fractures. Routinely these fractures are treated by debridement followed by bone loss management in the form of either bone transport or free fibula transfer. There are very few reports in the literature about reimplantation of extruded segments of bone and there are no clear guidelines regarding timing of reimplantation, bone stabilisation and sterilisation techniques. Reimplantation of extruded bone is a risky procedure due to high chances of infection which determines the final outcome and can result in secondary amputations. We present two cases of successful reimplantation of extruded diaphyseal segment of femur and one case of reimplantation of extruded segment of tibia.Bone loss occurs in open fractures of lower limb due to high energy violence in the diaphyseo-metaphyseal junctions and they are usually difficult to treat and they pose a huge reconstructive challenge In a situation where the extruded segment of bone is available for reimplantation, many benefits include maintenance of skeletal and soft tissue length, averting the morbidity associated with autograft harvest and obviating the need for allograft bone or prolonged bone transport procedures A 30-year-old gentleman presented 3 The open wound was debrided and fracture femur ends were nibbled and irrigated with normal saline up to 6 Post operative period was uneventful. He was followed up at monthly intervals and weight bearing started after 12 weeks and complete union was achieved at end of 10 months. At the final follow-up after 24 months, patient had knee flexion from 0° to 130°. There was no limb length discrepancy and patient could do all his normal activities. No secondary procedures were required and extruded bone was reimplanted during the index procedure itself ( A 62-year-old man presented 8 Limb vascularity was good. No head injury or other systemic injuries were found. Patient was taken up for emergency debridement and loose bone fragment was thoroughly debrided and irrigated with normal saline up to 6 An 18-year-old boy had a fall from a motor cycle and presented within 2 High-energy injuries produce open fractures of long bones with large bone defects. Bone loss can occur due to extrusion of fragments, due to direct impact over the knee joint with knee in flexion, and axial force in the line of femur. Traditional methods such as bone transport and vascularised fibula graft are usual options available to treat bone defects. Bone re-implantation is not described well and there are very few reports in the literature. The earliest report of such a case was in 1965 when Kirkup described successful replacement of a nine-inch meta-diaphyseal femoral segment after boiling and autoclaving In an animal study, 20 samples of femur of rats, contaminated with Incorporation of large sized cortical grafts is an interesting clinical phenomenon. The fresh bone reimplantation is an attempt to transplant cortical bone that can survive and add to the bone volume, and eventually adds to bone strength. They are mostly osteoconductive, and incorporation of the graft depends upon the recipient site cells and the remaining viable cells within the graft itself and intact periosteum Revascularisation causes reduction in the biomechanical strength of the graft in the first few weeks when it is best to restrict patients’ activities. However, normal strength is regained by six to 12 months; hence unrestricted activities are recommended from 12 months after surgery All three cases were initially started on Inj.Cefuroxime 750 In our series, follow-up period ranges between 24 months in two cases and 36 months in one case. In all three cases, there was no evidence of any chronic low grade infection. In two patients with reimplantation of femur with average bone loss of 10 Recently modified Capanna's technique for reconstruction of open supracondylar femur bone defects using segmental allograft with vascularized fibula inlay is reported with good results Early aggressive management of these debilitating injuries within the first 6 When faced with the extruded fragments of bone in open fractures of lower limb, they can be successfully reimplanted to aid in restoration of limb length and alignment, and preservation of optimum function. The degree of soft-tissue injury, anatomical location, muscles around the fracture and age of patient will have a substantial influence on the subsequent rate of healing. Femur is preferable for successful reimplantation of extruded bone when compared with tibia. However each case has to be individualised before considering re-implantation to prevent infection which determines the final outcome. Washing extruded bone with 10% Povidone-iodine and followed by soakage in 1 The authors declare that they have no conflict of interest.