The main objective of this study is to examine the effects of temperature and residence time on oil shale size fragments in terms of the fractal dimension. A series of tests consisting of the pyrolysis and combustion of oil shale particles followed by mechanical impact shattering was carried out to evaluate the fractal dimension of the fragmented particle distribution. The effects of oil shale parent size fragmentation after aging at different oxidation times on the fractal dimension and fragments size distribution were investigated quantitatively. A mass based fragmentation approach rather than a number fraction method was used. Any set of n fragments obtained during oil shale break has its own fractal dimension. A decrease of fractal dimension in the range of 20%–30% was observed after shale particle gasification. The results show that increases of the oxidation time and temperature of the pretreatment increase the number of fragments for a fixed impacting energy. Dimensions of 2.7–2.9 were related to a lower temperature pretreatment and reduced oxidation times, while dimensions of 2.2–2.4 were attributed to a high temperature pretreatment and longer oxidation times.
                  The fractal dimension nature was conserved despite the fact that different values were obtained for different retorting/combustion conditions. It was found that multi-fractal dimensions of fragmented oil shale particles retorted at fixed temperature with corresponding mass extent can be fitted with functions that characterised mass and size of particle progeny.
                  The fractal dimensions and energy density for fracturing demonstrate a good linear relationship showing that the energy of fragmentation is affected by the scale effect.In combustors dealing with pyrolysis and combustion of fuel particles, the evolution of surface and size of particles is directly related to the operating conditions. The high mixing process and particles impacting inside of reactors are mainly due to the turbulence inside fluidized bed and drum systems which are largely used in power production. Particle fragmentation plays an important role in controlling fluidized bed hydrodynamics. The fragmentation of solid particles produces small particles with different shapes and morphologies. Numerous studies on particle size distribution have been reported, but emphasis has essentially been on geometrical sizes. Three dimensional ( This method has been extensively used to assess soot morphology in different combustion conditions and flame structure A fractal analysis of the fragmented parent oil shale particle and formed progeny particles are conducted to assess the thermal treatment effect on shale particles subjected to mechanical impact. In terms of the relation between single oil shale particle fragmentation and pyrolysis conditions, very few studies exist in dealing with the fractal concept to quantify the particle size distribution. A bridge between the extent of oil shale reaction and fractal dimension is proposed in this paper. The oil shale Tarfaya (Morocco) deposit is constituted by several kerogenous chalk mineral layers. The collected samples from the R2A2 Tarfaya oil shale seams were crushed manually to prepare various initial particle size fractions. The ultimate analyses (wt.) give 17.41 for carbon, 2.74 for hydrogen, 0.06 for nitrogen, and 1.39 for sulphur. The heat of combustion is 3386 Spherical oil shale particles that allow the reduction of impacted surface between falling mass and oil shale particle were used during the breakage tests. The impacting crater surface did not exceed 0.5 A furnace (Nabertherm) was used for oxidation (pyrolysis and combustion) at different temperatures ranging from 300 The size of each fragment was expressed by the average nominal diameter which denoted the diameter a fragment would assume if its volume was expressed as a sphere. Fractal studies can be performed in different ways depending on the parameters or variables to be measured. These parameters do not coincide with one another. A clear definition of the fractal dimension is an important aspect of studying the concerned process and must be the best one that applies to the case under study. It is important to note that several different fractal dimensions can be used to characterise the property of interest. A survey of the literature shows that all of the established relations obey a power law, and if experimentally explored, permits the determination of the fractal dimension. Different techniques are used to estimate the dimensions of fractal surfaces and volume. The method of a repeated pattern All of these methods are based on the use of well-established power laws called In the case where In the present study, the weights of oil shale fragments particles are measured and reported for parent particles with diameter When the oil shale particle with mass If the retorted particle is fragmented by impacting energy, there is a number of fragments The mass of shale fragments with a radius smaller than From the power-law dependence of cumulative mass The plot of If rearranged to isolate the fractal dimension, the result is: Eq. Eqs. The mass of fragments with size between With these steps, the set of equations is complete and can be used to fit the experimental data.  The results corresponding to isothermal weight loss are given in The conversion profiles of During thermal conversion, the oil shale particle undergoes many structural changes which continue during the decomposition of the residual char itself. Small blocks of oil shale < The pore opening process is accompanied by softening deformation ( Inter granular pores with size ranging from 10 Due to their specific microstructure, organic and mineral components reveal anisotropic thermo-mechanical behaviours that affect oil shale brittleness. Organic matter occupies submicron-scale inter granular pore and mineral space. Organic matter transformation and expulsion out of shale particle enhance creation of porosity. At temperature T The experimental results show that all of the formed fragments are different in size and shape and show a complex geometry and morphology. For each parent broken particle, there is a pattern of thermal treatment on the number of fragments and fragment particle size. The number of formed fragments depends on the oxidation time in the furnace, the impacting energy and the initial particle size. The fragmentation process will promote the oil shale conversion by generating small particles and exposing regions located inside the parent particle to the severe conditions of pyrolysis and combustion. The measured ‘minimal energy The pyrolysis temperature has an obvious effect on the minimal energy of fragmentation. It can also be seen that fragmentation is influenced by the impacting energy. Fragmentation varies considerably with thermal decomposition duration as displayed in The amount of strain energy stored in a single retorted oil shale particle once primary fragmentation occurs at 25 Coarse particles are resistant to breakage than small particles by comparing normalized impacting energy with respect to the particle size. Small particles are more friable due to the significant amount of volatiles that escapes from the total volume of the small particles which consequently reduce their strength.  For all of the tests conducted at minimal impacting energies and at 25 The fractal dimensions The experimental data points show an appropriate pattern of linearity (the correlation coefficients of the fitted curves are larger than 0.92), and we can say that the fractal theory is approved. Good linearity is assessed in terms of the higher values obtained for the square of the correlation coefficients Oil shale fragmentation during pyrolysis and combustion processes is described by a multi fractal model. Fractal character is present at any stage of thermal degradation of oil shale particle and its fragmentation.  In The evolution of the fractal dimension with oxidation can be roughly determined by balancing the oxidation process which tends to decrease the fractal dimension and the increase of particle size which tends to increase this dimension. According to information of weight loss during oil shale conversion presented in  Following This stipulates that a correlation between particle size distribution and the energy of fragmentation exists. An identical equation was reported in This relation between energy density and fractal dimension is linear on semi-log plots. The present experimental results confirm that in the case of gasified oil shale particles,  Isothermal reactivity Tarfaya (Morocco) of oil shale particles in air was investigated through experiments at temperatures ranging from 300 Kerogen, oil shale organic matter, controls particle ability to fragment. Higher organic matter content, higher energy of fragmentation is. Oil shale particle fragmentation was related to the thermal history of the individual shale particles. Kerogen thermal degradation enhances micro pores formation in inter granular spaces of minerals and in the residual char. It was found that the particle size distribution during the oil shale fragmentation process can be explained by a mass fractal framework due to the complex structural variation that is affected by the thermal decomposition of the particles but more importantly temperature time history. The fractal method partially overcame this problem and was investigated to assess the effects of the temperature and organic and mineral decomposition on fragmentation, which can fortunately be characterised as a mass fractal. Sorting fragments by mass led to fractal dimensions ranging between the limits of 2.1 and 2.9. Any set of The above discussion depicts a scenario of what would happen to an oil shale particle if it fragmented during pyrolysis and combustion in a combustor installation. The fractal dimension was revealed to be a useful parameter that can complete our knowledge of oil shale fragmentation during pyrolysis as well as the combustion conditions in industrial combustors. This work was supported by the  preexponential factor fractal dimension particle diameter (m) impacting energy (J) energy density (J·Kg activation energy (J) gravitational acceleration (m·s height (m) cumulative mass (Kg) mass (Kg) number of fragments gas constant (J·mol radius (m) fragment radius (m) temperature (°C)  weight loss (%) Stefan-Boltzmann constant (kJ·K  initial moment upper minimal at 25 minimal at temperature T time total   