Carbon nanotubes are the most promising reinforcement for high performance composites. Multiwall carbon nanotubes were directly grown onto the carbon fiber surface by catalytic thermal chemical vapor deposition technique. Multi-scale hybrid composites were fabricated using the carbon nanotubes grown fibers with epoxy matrix. Morphology of the grown carbon nanotubes was investigated using field emission scanning electron microscopy and transmission electron microscopy. The fabricated composites were subjected to impact tests which showed 48.7% and 42.2% higher energy absorption in Charpy and Izod impact tests respectively. Fractographic analysis of the impact tested specimens revealed the presence of carbon nanotubes both at the fiber surface and within the matrix which explained the reason for improved energy absorption capability of these composites. Carbon nanotubes presence at various cracks formed during loading provided a direct evidence of micro crack bridging. Thus the enhanced fracture strength of these composites is attributed to stronger fiber–matrix interfacial bonding and simultaneous matrix strengthening due to the grown carbon nanotubes.Carbon fiber reinforced polymer matrix composites form an especial class of high performance materials which has received huge research attention during last several decades. There has been an ever increasing demand of these composites in a wide variety of fields due to their unique combination of properties such as light weight, higher specific strength, stiffness, rigidity, corrosion and environmental resistance. These composites have found potential applications in sports, automotive and aerospace industries Low density, exceptionally high aspect ratio combined with high strength and stiffness of CNTs T-300 (6 Unidirectional (1D) composites were fabricated with CNTs grafted carbon fiber and araldite LY-556 epoxy resin using a compressed die molding technique. Fabrication of composite specimens is a challenging process therefore a simple geometry was adopted for test specimens and their size was maintained within acceptable dimensional tolerance. The epoxy resin was used in combination with hardener HT-972, an aromatic amine with melting temperature of 85–90 The composite specimens fabricated using carbon fiber with and without CNTs grafting were tested for their impact behavior using both Charpy and Izod tests conducted on MK 05 and FRANK machines respectively. Their dimensions were prepared according to the ASTM standard D256 (64 The morphology of as grown CNTs was examined using scanning electron microscopy (SEM), a JEOL JSM-7001F field emission gun scanning electron microscope (FEGSEM) operated at 15      The energy absorption in fracture process is an important consideration for fiber-reinforced composites used for structural applications. In spite of their superior mechanical properties compared to conventional metallic materials polymer matrix composites do not show significant plastic deformation. Once the crack is originated it propagates abruptly in an uncontrolled way leading to brittle fracture of the composite structure. In fiber-reinforced polymer matrix composites failure occurs mainly due to matrix cracking, fiber–matrix interfacial debonding and fiber fracture. Application of CNTs grafted fibers forms a multi-scale hybrid composite system which offers both improved fiber–matrix interfacial bonding and matrix strengthening simultaneously. The grafted CNTs are directly attached to the fibers thereby significantly modify their surface characteristics. In addition their direct attachment to the fiber provides an excellent way of achieving uniform dispersion in the matrix, preferred radial orientation and allows loading higher CNTs fraction. Initially, the CNTs grow normal to the fiber surface and subsequently form random interwoven network acting as mechanical anchoring which results in the improved tensile and interfacial shear strengths. Improved tensile and flexural strengths reported previously infer an improved interfacial bonding The influence of addition of nano-sized reinforcements on the energy absorption capability of composites has been studied by various researchers. Lingyu et al. presented a review how various parameters such as the type of matrix, nano-reinforcement shape, dimensions, volume fraction, distribution, stiffness etc. affect the energy absorption capability of the resulted nano-composites MWCNTs have been grown directly on the carbon fiber by catalytic thermal chemical vapor deposition technique and multi-scale hybrid composites were fabricated using the CNTs grown fiber. CNTs grafted carbon fiber composites showed 48.7% and 42.2% higher impact strength as compared to reference HT composites in Charpy and Izod impact tests respectively. A detailed fractographic analysis of ST composites revealed mainly three types of pullout namely; the fiber pullout, individual CNT pullout and CNTs fiber pullout in addition to usual debonding and fiber fracture. The presence of intact CNTs at the fiber–matrix interface even after fracture proved enhanced interfacial bonding while CNTs present in the epoxy around the fibers provided evidence for matrix strengthening. CNTs bridging the micro cracks generated especially in the close proximity of fiber–matrix interface demonstrated that micro crack bridging is one of the important mechanisms efficiently contributing to enhanced energy absorption capability. Thus the present study helped in understanding the possible reasons for improved impact strength of ST composites which include the enhanced surface area of CNTs grafted fiber, improved fiber–matrix bonding and matrix strengthening by CNTs. S.P. Sharma is grateful to