Compañía Minera Doña Inés de Collahuasi SCM initiated the development of a new geometallurgical model to characterize its Rosario deposit in terms of its comminution circuit capacity and flotation performance. The comminution component of the model is now complete and is described in detail in this article.
                  The model uses a combination of simulation and power-based approaches to relate ore hardness and flotation feed size to grinding circuit throughput. Ore hardness values are provided by Collahuasi’s block model which has been populated with ore characterisation data derived from Bond ball work index tests, JK drop-weight tests and SMC Tests® on diamond drill cores. The influences of planned and unplanned maintenance downtime are taken into account both in terms of frequency and duration.
                  The accuracy of the model is demonstrated using weekly production data taken from the period January–December 2008, showing an average relative error of 5.2% and an R2
                      value of 0.95.
                  The model is now in successful routine use at the mine for planning purposes and is currently in the process of being further developed to incorporate the response of the flotation circuit.As In practice, from a comminution perspective, an effective geometallurgical model should be able to forecast accurately the throughput of the grinding circuit from information provided by the mine plan on the nature and quantity of ores that are to be delivered to the processing plant. To do so, there are at least five important requirements for the model. These are as follows: Sufficient and relevant samples have been identified, extracted and tested to ensure the required definition and resolution on a block-by-block basis in the mine plan; appropriate breakage tests have been chosen to describe comminution properties of the different rock types (units) in the ore body; the model(s) chosen to describe the comminution equipment in the circuit respond realistically to changes in breakage properties as described by the chosen breakage tests; all of the above are integrated into an overall description of the on-line operational response of the grinding circuit that takes into account non-ore related influences and which can be easily integrated into the existing block model; the final model can convincingly demonstrate its accuracy through validation using real operational data. Each of these aspects has been comprehensively tackled at Compañía Minera Doña Inés de Collahuasi SCM (Collahuasi) in its development of a geometallurgical model for its “Rosario” deposit and these will be described in the following sections. The Rosario mineral deposit is a copper and molybdenum porphyry with ore reserves of approximately 2.2 billion tonnes with an average copper grade of 0.82%. The Rosario pit is located 120 The definition of the geometallurgical units was made in two stages, important components of which were based on previous work developed by the Xstrata Process Support Group, Canada ( The final result of this process was the development of six units that were considered to be representative of the deposit. These were labelled UGM1–6 (initials from the Spanish “Unidad GeoMetalurgica”). The proportions of each, which are due to be mined over the period 2008–2012, are presented in A total of 3000 In average, this implied three PQ drill holes and three HQ drill holes per UGM. After that, the following procedure was followed by the Collahuasi geologists and technicians: Normal geological core description was performed every 2 Considering the total metres (500 approx.) into the same geometallurgical unit, uncut core pieces for grinding tests were removed. These pieces were selected by a project geologist from each 2 Following this procedure, the hardness distribution and the spatial distribution it is considered well represented. The comminution tests selected to characterize the different units were the JK Tech drop-weight test (  From  The Concentrator operating facilities start with the primary crusher at the Rosario pit. Crushed ore is transported by overland conveyor to the 100,000 The initial circuit included two grinding lines and achieved full production in October 1998. A third grinding line was installed during a subsequent expansion, with full production being achieved in April 2004. The first two identical grinding lines (Lines 1 and 2) consist of one 32 The current daily average throughput of Collahuasi’s grinding circuit is 130,000 To represent the performance of the SAG mill circuit it was decided to use JK Tech’s comminution simulator – JKSimMet, whilst the power-based equations of Bond were chosen for the ball mill circuit ( Collahuasi’s SAG feed particle size distribution is maintained under control. Different blasting mesh (distance between blasting holes) and explosive charge are used for different UGM in order to ensure a controlled particle size distribution. JKSimMet is proprietary software and could not be easily integrated with the Collahuasi block model software. To overcome this problem a series of simulations of the SAG mill circuit were run in which the throughput was incrementally varied and the power draw and SAG mill circuit product size (so-called transfer size A schematic illustrating this process is given in Having related SAG mill throughput to SAG mill power and the ball mill circuit A simple power model (see Eq. The parameters Eq. The In order to incorporate all of these influences, the production model shown as Eq.    That is:           From January to December 2008 weekly data was collected from the production records. Information included throughput, SAG mill power draw, both the programmed and unprogrammed shutdown hours per grinding line, plus the ball mill circuit The proportions of each unit fed to the plant were obtained from the mining planning report for the period. In the case of Collahuasi, the shortest period over which the model is expected to be accurate is a week. The reason for this is the fact that there are two stockpiles between the open pit and the SAG mills. The blend produced in the stockpile makes difficult to calculate the exact proportions of each unit fed to the plant on a daily basis. Using this information plus the “ In Eq. Subsequently Eq. The production model is now programmed in such a way that planning engineers at Collahuasi are able to estimate the grinding circuits’ treatment capacity for each mining plan that may be created. One advantage of this approach is that it allows the planning engineers to maximise treatment capacities on the basis of appropriate blending of UGM units and also on the basis of the concentrator’s maintenance program. Another advantage of this approach is that it also allows the use of the An example of this application is presented in As can be seen from  As mentioned in the previous section, one application of Eq. The effect of adding a transient period in the model when the pebbles crusher is back in service in the model was analysed. In this case, this input contributes less than 1% of the model accuracy. The aim of developing a robust and accurate production forecasting model for the grinding circuit at Collahuasi has been satisfactorily achieved through the use of a combination of simulation and power-based modelling. This resulted in a model with an average relative error of 5.2% as inferred from the statistical analyses using production data from the period January to December, 2008. It is believed that the accuracy of the model was due to: Identification and selection of sufficient and relevant samples for characterisation purposes; Use of appropriate breakage tests for characterisation; Development of a robust model for describing comminution circuit performance; Incorporation of non-ore related operational influences into the final throughput forecast model. The model allows planning engineers to maximise grinding circuit treatment capacities on the basis of appropriate blending of UGM units and also on the basis of the concentrator’s maintenance program. Ultimately the model will be extended to incorporate the flotation circuit’s response and therefore enable optimisation on the basis of metal recovery and hence profit. The authors would like to thank Compañía Minera Doña Inés de Collahuasi for its support and the opportunity to write this article.