A soil slope instability occurred at the surface facility area of a mine site, which was successfully managed from occupational health and safety point of view, and no human or material loss was encountered. Three different excavation stages and consecutively occurring slope failures were investigated by back analysis. Limit equilibrium and finite element methods were employed for back analysis. The multiple failures enabled researchers to verify the parameters investigated by back analysis to be obtained from each failure. Extensive field and laboratory testing were available which constitutes a baseline for comparison. The performance of tests and several correlations proposed by other researchers were compared to the back analysis findings. The correlations that used the advantage of plasticity index and depth were found to be superior compared to the other test methods for this study. Moisture sensitivity, high groundwater level, and sampling are found to be some of the main reasons leading to soil slope failure.Rock and soil slope stability draw the attention of researchers since it has significant practical importance, The task of slope stability analysis can be handled by employing several approaches. The most commonly applied methods are limit equilibrium and numerical methods. For strong rock conditions, discontinuities play a dominant role in the stability of the slope. Discontinuum approaches in numerical modelling are other commonly used analysis types Back analysis of a slope failure provides precious data since it can be considered as a field scale test, For soil material, a wide range of criteria can represent failure state while the commonly employed one is the Mohr-Coulomb failure criterion. As cohesion and internal friction angle parameters, a combination of these parameters can be found by employing back analysis. This case is true for effective stress analysis for long-term or drained parameters of cohesive soil In this study, slope failures occurred in three stages are investigated by employing SSR technique incorporated in finite element analysis and limit equilibrium methods. A wide range of field exploration and the test results were available together with several deformation measurement techniques. Comparison of back analysis and soil testing provided significant findings. Failures were very well managed from occupational health and safety point of view under the strict regulations and management perspectives of the company causing no human or equipment loss. The study area is located in western part of Turkey, Soma coal basin. An open cast mine and several underground coal mines are under operation in Soma. The mines in the basin are major coal producers with relatively high calorific value coal for Turkey The slope failures occurred in a surface facility zone of an underground coal mine. An intention to utilize land on a naturally inclined area led to the excavation of slopes for surface facilities. Different slopes were failed in different stages of the excavation in the same geological formation. The study area, location of investigation boreholes, is presented in Considering the cross-section, the evolution of the slope excavation and consecutive slope failures in three different stages are presented in Mainly, slope excavation took place in talus or slope wash lithological unit. Another talus layer is distinctive with its stronger character and represented by “TALUS S” in Considering RQD parameter, the distinction between weathered bedrock and bedrock is clarified. For talus unit, it is not possible to identify RQD quality since the zone exhibits soil character Laboratory test results reveal that a majority of the samples were classified as clay with high plasticity. Atterberg (consistency) limits are used for the classification of fine-grained soils. Natural water content (w Menard type pressiometer test was also applied in the vicinity of the area for the same geological unit, ( Menard modulus is corrected by E Additionally, 55 standard penetration tests (SPT), as defined in ASTM D-1586 standard The samples obtained from the SPT were only subjected to the soil classification tests since they are considered as disturbed samples. The strength tests were carried out on undisturbed samples. The undisturbed samples were obtained by using double tube soil core barrels. The samples were insulated against a moisture change immediately after taking the photographs. According to the contracts for drilling work, payments were made for recovered sample length which motivates the drill operator to conduct the work cautiously. In this study, slope failures that occurred in short term and long term enabled numerous back-analysis investigations to be carried out. It is important that verification of undrained and drained shear strength parameters namely, undrained shear strength, effective cohesion, and friction angle were undertaken by analysing several failures. Failures that occur during or immediately after the excavation provide undrained shear strength data while long term failures are governed by effective stress parameters. Back-analyses were carried out by utilizing limit equilibrium (LE) methods and finite element (FE) analysis. For LE analysis Rocscience Slide software was utilized 3 main failures were back analysed. In the second and third failures, both short term and long term stages were present. Details of the conducted analyses are given in the following sections and finally, a comparison between the field and laboratory testing is presented. The groundwater table was not fixed during the failure stages since the slope geometry was altered by the excavation progress. For the long term analyses, groundwater table was constructed by considering the borehole data for each failure stage. In Section 4, it is verified that the soil mass where the failure occurred was not homogenous. Due to the non-homogeneity, the soil mass represents a wide range of strength character and the same behaviour can be observed for water permeability. Hence, the groundwater table can be expected to be fluctuating or alter within a close distance. The permeability of the failed soil material is another concern which can affect groundwater table and related measurements. Those concerns add uncertainty to the groundwater condition in the field. Another practically known fact is the bored pile groups which were installed in the late stages of the excavation progress do not provide groundwater permeation, especially in fine grained soil. In accordance with the allocation plan of the surface facilities, the initial topography was excavated in a single bench having a height of 14 Examination of FE output by the SSR method should be done cautiously. The displacements and strains in the model may not necessarily represent the actual failed state. The SSR approach reduces shear strength dividing by a particular factor and corresponding modelling result is recorded. The decrements in shear strength are sustained until reaching a non-convergent modelling result. When the model is unable to converge to a stable solution, this state is considered as unstable. At this point, the factor of safety is equal to unity. Typically for a failure condition, the displacements and strains can be calculated as exceptionally high due to the inability of the model to reach equilibrium. Hence, during the interpretation of shear strain contours obtained from the SSR approach, the failure surface should be examined. The shear strain values are greater along the failed surface and the contours of shear strain provide important information about the mechanism and geometry of the failure. The slip circle is approximated to circle shape and back analyses by LE and FE methods were performed. Deformed mesh geometry is given for FE analysis and c After the first slope failure, overall slope angle is reduced and during this process failed material was removed. After slope excavation, several groundwater leaks were observed at the face and it was considered that these leaks initiated the failure permitting water flow through the slip surface ( FE analysis revealed that governing c In long term, the natural topography behind the slope excavation (uphill side) failed. This behaviour can be explained by progressive failure, however, due to the time interval, failure behaviour was governed by effective strength parameters. Then, a series of back analyses were carried out by both LE and FE methods in order to acquire c′ and φ′ combination. Slope failure in long term is shown in Different combinations of c′ and φ′ were tried in the back analyses seeking the factor of safety Reinforced concrete bored piles in three different rows were placed in order to stabilize the area in order to reshape the slope ( Sliding mass was investigated for short term by employing LE and FE methods, again. FE analyses resulted in a back analysed c The displacement profile of the middle pile group was recorded for 16 Observation of the displacement trend is essential in order to understand whether the slope and the structure would continue to deform or stay stable. In fact, excessive deformation indicates that the pile group is in yielded state and the load carrying capacity is completely mobilized before the failure. Integrity and solidity of the piles are strongly questionable considering the excessive deformation. The buried section of the piles could not be inspected in the study. However, the problem converged to an equilibrium, ( Obvious deformation is visible in Long term pile deformation is investigated by FE analysis and governing modulus of elasticity (E) value was also analysed. In fact, for soft soil different constitutive laws could be used, however, back analysis of such a problem will be too complicated which can involve a series of combinations of numerous parameters. Thus, the elastic-perfectly plastic behaviour is assumed to govern behaviour as a common choice. As a result, E was found to be 85 In fact, pile group deformation analysis involves many variables, such as pile properties and previously failed soil mass in short-term. However, the successful back analysis was carried out with previously obtained parameters for the failed slope section. Three slope failures provided multiple back analysis and cross-check opportunities of the findings. In order to inspect failure geometries and slip surfaces, several methods were adopted like inclinometers, visual state of the failure, total station measurements, and geophysics methods. However, in this study, the main focus is on the estimation of undrained and drained shear strength parameters and their comparison with testing results. Starting from undrained shear strength, in failure 1, c A comparison can be made between laboratory tests results. Additional parameters were generated for this study, in order to expand the comparison range. SPT-N value can be used for the estimation of the c Another c And according to Skempton In Undrained shear strength values obtained from unconfined compression test results gave considerably high values. Average c For effective stress or long-term parameters, the comparison was performed on a plot. It is explained that in the back-analysis of long term behaviour, c′ and φ′ parameters together with pore pressure were used. Again for comparison, some correlations were used for comparison purposes. Sorensen and Okkels Based on Danish code of practice for the foundation, the use of the following equation is suggested In this study, c′ is calculated from the c Consolidated-undrained lab findings were also plotted in order to visualise the difference between back analysed parameters. One of the CU results was close to the back calculated combination. Parameters obtained from the correlations gave reasonable estimates. Two of the consolidated-drained direct shear and triaxial compression tests were also found to be sufficiently close while one of them strongly overestimated strength or might be conducted on a rare and stronger portion of the soil mass. Comparing the FE and LE lines, almost all of the findings were higher than the back analysis results. This behaviour can be attributed to the water sensitivity of the material and high pore pressure. In fact, the soil mass does not exhibit a permeable character due to its clayey nature and could not be dewatered easily. A long time is required in order to correctly measure groundwater level. Since the back analysed parameters are very low, low shear strength was a fact for the slope due to high pore pressure. It is possible to mention that slope failures occurred during the construction phase deteriorated the slope leading to a permeability increase. Along the deformed zone, water flow or accumulation was allowed due to failures which in turn led to the strength decrement. For moist sensitive conditions, it is a strong motive for failure. Another important point is states of peak and residual strength. All laboratory tests for the drained condition were carried out aiming to measure peak strength. However, residual strength plays an important role in the stability of the slopes and in several cases In this research, the investigation of the slopes was carried out by employing two-dimensional techniques. The LE approach does not consider in-situ horizontal stress opposing to the FE method. In two dimensional FE modelling, horizontal stress must be imposed to the model by a decision made by the researcher. Three-dimensional modelling can offer accuracy since the all rock engineering problems are three dimensional. The topography, geometrical properties of the geological structures can be used as inputs. Spatial variation of the soil parameters can also be imposed to the models. Three-dimensional modelling is also beneficial where the slope faces are concave or convex. Back analysed 3 failures in a single project provided an accurate estimation of soil mechanics parameters. The presence of the field and laboratory testing data were compared to the back-analysis results. Undrained shear strength obtained from SPT and pressuremeter tests were overestimated strength. Laboratory tests were also overestimated which can be due to the consideration of the peak strength parameters. Another reason can be related to sampling. During sample recovery, intact samples were sent to laboratory since they are appropriate for proper testing. However, weak zones were possibly recovered in disintegrated form hence testing was not possible. In such cases, estimation of undrained shear strength can be undertaken by the correlations utilizing Atterberg limits and depth. Very low shear strength values compared to the literature is an indicator of high pore pressure for drained shear strength parameters. Keeping the maximum bench and overall slope angles at design values is also important from the practical point of view. When the slope is excavated with a greater angle than the design value, peak strength of the soil material mobilizes and becomes deteriorated. Even the slope angles can be reduced to the design values; valid strength parameters are smaller than the design parameters due to the deterioration. If such practice is unavoidable, then during the design stage a greater factor of safety can be considered. The factor of safety value is generally chosen considering the type and the importance of the structure which are also described in several design codes. It is also important to decide on the factor of safety to be used in the design work, depending on the test type. A higher factor of safety can be selected if peak parameters are available. During and after the construction stage it is essential to inspect the geological structures, cracks, and water leakages. Monitoring with several instruments provides important data for updating the design during the construction. The author thanks to Polyak Eynez Energy Mining A.Ş. and Fina Energy and its management personnel for granting permission to use necessary data. The necessary data was acquired by detailed field work with strict safety standards of the company. The author presents his gratitude to Geological Engineers of Polyak Eynez, Feridun Emre Yağımlı, Ali Türkoğlu, Mehmet Kılıç for providing extensive data on the geology of the area and the required field data and to Survey Engineer Mehmet Sarıtaş, his team members Onur Salgın and İbrahim Sizer for deformation measurements which took a very long time.