Collector performance in the base metal sulphide (BMS) and platinum group mineral (PGM) flotation industry depends on both the polar head group and the non-polar hydrocarbon chain length of the collector. These affect the strength of the collector-mineral bond, as well as the extent of hydrophobicity imparted. This study investigated the effect of alkyl chain length and ligand type on both the heat of adsorption of thiol collectors onto sulphide minerals and the hydrophobicity which these imparted. Isothermal titration calorimetry (ITC) and microflotation techniques were employed to measure the heat of adsorption and recoveries, respectively. Sulphide minerals investigated were chalcopyrite, pyrite and pyrrhotite. Thiol collectors investigated were xanthates of varying chain length (ethyl, isobutyl, n-butyl and amyl xanthate); dithiocarbamates (diethyl DTC and n-butyl DTC) as well as diethyl dithiophosphate.
                  Both the heat of adsorption and microflotation recoveries increased with increasing collector chain length for xanthate homologues on all mineral types. There was a positive linear correlation between the heats of adsorption and microflotation recoveries. However, this relationship was not sustained for collectors with different ligand types. The heat of adsorption of diethyl-DTC was always higher than that of diethyl-DTP for all the minerals. In fact, diethyl-DTP barely interacted with any of the sulphide minerals although it produced unexpectedly high chalcopyrite recoveries. It was found that the heat of adsorption is not a robust indicator of hydrophobicity for collectors of different ligand types. However, for collectors of the same ligand type, but differing alkyl chain lengths, it is a strong predictor of hydrophobicity.The capture of particles by bubbles in the pulp zone is central to the process of froth flotation. In order for a stable bubble-particle agglomerate to be formed, hydrophobic particle surfaces are required and this requires the use of a collector. Base metal sulfides (BMS) and platinum group mineral (PGM) collectors consist of a polar head group and a hydrocarbon chain. The effectiveness of a collector is a function of both the hydrocarbon chain length and the polar group ( Collector chemistry depends on the hydrocarbon chain length and the chemistry of the head group. Some of the most common collectors for BMS flotation, and those that were used in this study, are xanthates, dithiocarbamates and dithiophosphates ( The electron donating or withdrawing effects of the substituent groups in a collector molecule affects the p The greater the electron-releasing inductive effect, the greater is the electron density around the reactive head group. This implies a stronger HX bond, which results in less dissociation of the proton and a smaller Ka. The p The hydrophobicity of the mineral surface is known to be influenced by the length of the collector carbon chain. An increase in the hydrocarbon chain length of the collector results in an increase in contact angle ( The heat of adsorption measures the strength of the bond formation between collector and mineral surface. Little work has been conducted in this area in mineral processing. The galena-xanthate system has been the most widely studied using calorimetry ( Microcalorimetry is an extremely sensitive thermodynamic and kinetic tool that can be used to accurately follow and monitor all types of reactions as they happen in real time ( Chalcopyrite, pyrite and pyrrhotite were received from the Ward’s Natural Science Establishment NY as chunks of up to 150 Thiol collectors used in this study were supplied by Senmin (Pty) Limited. Different xanthate homologues were supplied in powder form while diethyl-DTP and dithiocarbamates were supplied in solution form at basic pH to stabilise them. The collectors used in this study are shown in It must be emphasised that all collector dosages were calculated based on active content and the total molar dosage was maintained constant at 2.88 A TAM III isothermal titration microcalorimeter manufactured by TA instruments was used in the heat flow mode to measure heats of adsorption at 25 0.2 In order to calculate the molar enthalpy of adsorption, the heat of interaction was divided by the number of moles of collector that were added. This assumes that all of the collector interacts with the mineral surface. This has been shown to be the case in a number of experiments performed in our laboratories and this data has been added as Due to the fact that each experiment took around 25 A UCT microflotation rig was used to measure the relative hydrophobicity of different mineral surfaces ( The initial set of experiments investigated the effect of chain length on the heats of adsorption using different xanthate homologues. In the first instance the mineral used was chalcopyrite. The xanthates used, in order of decreasing alkyl chain length, were PAX (5C), PNBX (4C), SIBX (4C) and SEX (2C). This investigation of the heat of adsorption for PNBX and SIBX also provided an opportunity to investigate the effect of branching of the alkyl chain for equivalent carbon numbers, viz. 4, with the PNBX being a straight chain and the SIBX a branched alkyl group. The effect of chain length of xanthate on the heat of adsorption on pyrite and pyrrhotite was also investigated in order to determine to what extent the results were mineral specific. SEX and PAX were chosen since they represent the two extreme examples in terms of alkyl chain length of those investigated in this work. The heats of adsorption corresponding to ∼50% monolayer collector coverages are shown in  This study also investigated the effect of ligand type on the performance of thiol collectors by measuring the heats of adsorption for different sulphide minerals. The alkyl chain length of the collectors was the same, viz. diethyl, in all cases and only the ligand type was varied. For the latter purpose, the dithiophosphates and dithiocarbamates were used. The heats of adsorption for the interaction of diethyl-DTP and diethyl-DTC with different sulphide minerals (chalcopyrite, pyrite and pyrrhotite) are shown in The results show clearly that there was relatively very low heat of adsorption when diethyl-DTP was used for all three sulphide minerals, the value being approximately 5 Since diethyl-DTP showed low heats of adsorption with all the sulphide minerals, the interaction of PNBX and n-butyl DTC with chalcopyrite was tested in order to further investigate the effect of ligand type on the heat of adsorption. The two n-butyl collectors have the same hydrocarbon chain length, viz. 4, but have different ligand types. The heats of adsorption for the interaction of the two collectors with chalcopyrite are shown in The results show that the heat of adsorption for the interaction of n-butyl DTC with chalcopyrite was more exothermic than that of PNBX despite the fact that the two collectors have equal hydrocarbon chain length. This shows that the ligand type of the collector, e.g. xanthate, dithiocarbamate or dithiophosphate, has a significant effect on the heat of adsorption. The second set of experiments investigated the effect of the alkyl chain length of the collectors on the floatability of the sulphide minerals. Chalcopyrite was floated with xanthates of different alkyl chain length, from SEX through to PAX. This investigation also provided an opportunity to investigate the effect of the nature of the alkyl chain (straight or branched chain) of the xanthates, PNBX and SIBX, on the recovery of chalcopyrite, as it did for the heats of adsorption. The effect of xanthate chain length on the recovery of pyrite and pyrrhotite was further investigated to determine whether the results are mineral specific. The results of the microflotation tests conducted are presented graphically in The results in For pyrite, the recovery when using SEX was equal to that of the recovery of the collectorless flotation of pyrite. However, the addition of SEX improved pyrrhotite recovery significantly. The results showed that PAX produced the highest relative recoveries in all cases. This is as expected since it is known to be a strong collector of sulphides. The effect of collector ligand type on the recovery of sulphide minerals was investigated. The microflotation results are shown in  The relatively lower pyrrhotite recoveries obtained in this work were probably a result of the fact that pyrrhotite was only about 60% pure as shown by XRD results highlighted in Section Similarly, to the calorimetry experiments, chalcopyrite was floated using PNBX and n-butyl DTC to further investigate the effect of ligand type on recovery. The microflotation results are shown in The results of the effect of chain length of xanthates on the heats of adsorption on chalcopyrite, pyrite and pyrrhotite ( The heats of adsorption are also consistent with decreasing trends of the p The results of the effect of chain length of xanthates on the recoveries of chalcopyrite, pyrite and pyrrhotite ( The microcalorimetric results in The effect of the type of ligand on the heat of adsorption was also investigated and results were shown in Diethyl-DTC produced a higher heat of adsorption compared to the diethyl-DTP with all the sulphide minerals. In fact, diethyl-DTP showed essentially no interaction with any sulphide mineral as evidenced by the extremely low heats of adsorption. From The main difference in the heat of adsorption of the collectors on a sulphide mineral for a given alkyl group is probably due to the differences in the electronegativity of the O, C, P and N atoms in the polar head group ( These propositions are consistent with the fact that the p In comparing the heats of adsorption for the interaction of PNBX and n-butyl DTC with chalcopyrite, The outcome of the microflotation results are dependent on mineral type ( A comparison of the microflotation recovery of n-butyl-DTC and PNBX, which have the same alkyl chain lengths but different ligand types, showed that the n-butyl-DTC had a greater recovery of chalcopyrite than PNBX. This was in conjunction with the higher heat of adsorption exhibited by the n-butyl DTC. In this case, similarly to the xanthates of increasing chain length, the stronger mineral-collector interaction translated into a greater resultant hydrophobicity.  In the case of pyrrhotite, there was a near linear relationship between the heat of adsorption and recovery for all the collectors investigated. However this was not sustained for pyrite. For example, the heat of adsorption of PAX and diethyl-DTC with pyrite were similar, viz. 59 In summary, it appears that the relationship between the heat of adsorption and hydrophobicity is dependent on the type of product produced by the interaction between collector and mineral. In certain cases there appears to be a linear relationship between the heat of adsorption and the resultant recovery, showing a relationship between the strength of the mineral-collector interaction and the resultant hydrophobicity. In other cases, the strength of the mineral-collector interaction is not sufficient to overcome the weak floatability of the mineral particle. Fundamentally, therefore, this study has shown that the heat of adsorption cannot be used to predict hydrophobicity in sulphide mineral flotation. A positive correlation was observed between the heat of adsorption and the hydrophobicity for xanthates of different chain lengths on sulphide minerals. The increased heat of adsorption is ascribed to the greater inductive effect as the alkyl chain length increases, while increased hydrophobicity is ascribed to the increased non-ideality of the alkyl group in the aqueous medium. When comparing different ligand types with the same alkyl chain length, the heat of adsorption of diethyl-DTC was greater than that of diethyl-DTP for all the sulphide minerals. In fact, diethyl-DTP showed barely any interaction with the sulphide minerals. However, diethyl-DTP showed an unexpectedly high recovery for chalcopyrite despite the low heat of adsorption. It was speculated that this was the result of a different reaction mechanism, such as adsorption of the diethyl-DTP at the air-water interface rather than the solid-water interface. On the other hand, xanthates and DTC of similar alkyl chain length, viz. n-butyl, had a positive correlation between the extent of the mineral-collector interaction and recovery. The results indicate that the heat of adsorption is not a robust indicator of hydrophobicity for collectors of different ligand types. However, for collectors of the same ligand type, but differing alkyl chain lengths, it is a strong predictor of hydrophobicity. The authors wish to acknowledge the funding of the Supplementary data associated with this article can be found, in the online version, at 