Objective
                  This study aimed to analyze how the physical consistency of the diet affects the bone quality at the mandibular condyle.
               
                  Design
                  Sixty-three Wistar rats were randomly assigned to three groups. Twenty-two animals composed each group and they were fed with either a liquid, soft or hard diet. Seven animals were sacrificed from each group at days 7, 20, and 40 respectively. Their mandibles were removed and scanned at the postero-superior area of the condyle with a micro-CT scan.
               
                  Results
                  showed a statistically significant difference for the bone mineral density (p<0.01) and total mineral density (p<0.01), when comparing the hard against the liquid group after seven days. After 20days both, the soft and the liquid diet groups, computed a statistically significant difference demonstrating a significant decrease in the measured values for bone mineral density, bone mineral content, total mineral density, and total mineral content. At day 40, the values stayed lower for the soft and liquid diets, even though they did not reach a significant difference.
               
                  Conclusions
                  This study supports the idea that a soft or liquid diet has a negative impact on the bone quality of the mandible, particularly during the periods of more active growing.Mastication is the process of chewing, which involves a group of muscles capable of moving the mandible through the temporomandibular joint in order to grind and break up food between the occlusal surfaces of the maxillary and mandibular teeth. ( The mandibular condyle is considered today an important growth center in the mandible, depositing bone through endochondral ossification ( Current knowledge supports the idea that an increase in muscular activity at the masticatory muscles caused by harder consistency of the diet leads to better bone quality ( This study was approved by the Bannatyne Campus Protocol Management and Review Committee at the University of Manitoba, Canada (Ref 10-021; July 2, 2010). Sixty-three male Wistar rats, 20 The animals were randomly divided into 3 groups of 21 animals each. Thus, one group was placed into a hard diet (HD group), and fed with regular rat food pellets. Another group of animals were placed into a soft diet (SD group), which was fed with a slurry of pellets softened in water with a ratio of 1:1. The last group was fed with a blended mixture of pellets and water with a ratio of 1:4, and composed the liquid diet group (LD group). In that way, the physical consistency of the diet was modified without affecting its nutritional value. As stated above, all animals entered the study at the age of weaning (20 After removing the mandibles from the animals, they were split in half and stored in 2% paraformaldehyde solution for 24 The methodology used in this study permitted to measure the bone quality of the mandibular tissues at three different intervals during the growing period. So, a third of the animals from each experimental group were sacrificed at day 40, at the age of maturity (60 The hemi-mandibles were scanned using an Explore Locus micro-computarized tomogram (mCT, GE systems, London, ON) with a voxel size of 14 The area of interest, postero-superior area of the mandibular condyle ( The bone quality was analyzed by looking at the micro CT scan values of the bone mineral density (BMD), Bone mineral content (BMC), Total mineral density (TMD), and, Total mineral content (TMC) at the mandibular condyle. BMD reports the strength of the bone based on the amount of calcium, expressed as mg/cc; BMC measures the amount of calcium and other minerals in the volumetric area of the bone, expressed as mg; TMD reports the amount of bone tissue in the volumetric measured area, expressed in mg/cc; and, TMC reports the total amount of minerals in the measured area, expressed in mg. All measurements were performed 3 times by the same operator. A final average from the three different measurements was statistically analyzed by one-way ANOVA, using a statistical computer package (Graph-Prism 4.0, GraphPad Software Inc., San Diego CA, USA). A Dunn’s post-test was performed when a significant difference at the 95 percent level of confidence was observed. P All animals grew within normal limits and there were no significant differences in weights between the three experimental groups. ( The tissues from those animals sacrificed at day seven during the experimental period showed a significant reduction of the BMD and TMD when comparing the hard vs. liquid diets. ( After 40 The results from this study showed that the physical consistency of the diet did not interfere with the normal growth and development of the mandible in the studied animals. Also, their weights did not report any statistically significant difference when comparing the various groups at the various experimental periods designed for this study. Each diet group requires a different amount of force delivered by the muscles in order to destroy and make the food consumable. So, the different muscular activities associated with the physical consistency of the diet load the bones differently ( Considering that a reduction in the force exerted during mastication results in reduced bone density ( The bone density at the mandibular condyle showed the greatest variation during the rapidly growing phase in the rats (7 and 20 These findings are similar to those reported by other investigators. Tanaka and coworkers found that trabecular bone of the mandibular condyle in the hard diet group expresses a higher degree of mineralization when comparing with a soft diet group ( Based on the results from other studies on bone remodelling ( Another report found opposite results. Grunheid and co-workers found that there were no significant changes in the degree of mineralized tissue between the animals fed with different diet consistencies ( A limitation in this study is the numbers of animals per group. Further research should include higher numbers, as well as other species of animals to fully elucidate this issue. Also, these results are limited when applied to humans. Although it may infer what may occur in humans as bone biology is similar in both species, there are different forces and movements in humans as compared with rats. Rats have no lateral movements with their mandibles, which may affect differently, regarding the quality of the bone, at the mandibular condyle when the physical consistency of the diet is modified in humans. The results from this study demonstrated that rats fed with a soft diet significantly decrease the bone mineral density and content in the postero-superior area of the mandibular condyle. Such an effect is highly observed during the growing periods of the mandible. Therefore, this study supports the idea that softening the diet negatively impact on the bone quality of the mandible. Authors declare that there is no conflict of interest. This study was partially funded by the