Upper extremity fractures of the hand, wrist, and elbow have been successfully treated with traditional plates and screws. Two key principles for surgery include restoration of native anatomy and providing adequate mechanical support to promote bone healing. 3D-printed orthopedic hardware offer a novel way to restore patient-specific anatomy and strong biomechanical bony stability. 3D-printed models can aid in preoperative planning for fracture fixation. Failure of anatomic fracture reduction and bony stabilization can result in deformity with malunion. Severe malunions are treated surgically with osteotomies to restores alignment. 3D-printed osteotomy guides offer a way to provide precise malunion correction in all three anatomic planes. Finally, 3D printing technology has been used to create specific surgical tools and hand prothesis.Three-dimensional (3D) printing technology is increasingly becoming a popular topic in medicine due to its versatility in creating custom components. Displaced scaphoid fractures are treated surgically with screw fixation because they have a high rate of avascular necrosis if treated nonoperatively. Surgical technique can include percutaneous screw fixation for minimally displaced fractures or open reduction and internal fixation (ORIF) with screws for displaced fractures. A challenge to ORIF is achieving anatomic reduction of the fragments, whereas a challenge to percutaneous fixation is orienting the screw along the central axis of the scaphoid to provide the highest construct stiffness. A case-control study with 22 patients out of Switzerland compared outcomes of scaphoid fixation for nonunion with and without patient-specific guides for fracture reduction. A separate technique article out of Shanghai in 2017 examined using a 3D-printed surgical guide for a “one-shot” percutaneous scaphoid screw fixation. Distal radius fractures are commonly treated with volar locking plates for their ability to provide strong fracture fixation and their limited rate of tendon complications. There are several volar distal radius plate designs including fixed angled, proximal fit, distal fit, and fragment specific, all with the goal of obtaining rigid fracture fragment fixation. A 2017 biomechanical study out of Korea compared the strength of 3D-printed volar plates using titanium alloy powder and conventional volar plates ( Intraarticular distal humerus fractures can have a very complex fracture pattern, especially when there is comminution. Surgical treatment of these fractures is open reduction, internal fixation (ORIF) with plates and screws. O'Driscoll outlines several principles for successful plate and screw fixation including maximizing distal fragment fixation with as many screws as possible. A small randomized control trial with 13 patients out of Nanchang China in 2016 compared operative time, functional outcome, and Mayo elbow Upper extremity bony deformities and malunions after trauma can be surgically corrected with precise osteotomies to restore normal anatomical alignment. These surgeries can be complex. 3D-printed osteotomy guides offer a way to create customized cuts for each patient's unique malunion pattern. The literature offers examples of using 3D-printed guides to perform Supracondylar fractures are a common pediatric orthopedic fracture. The most common deformity complication in supracondylar fractures is cubitus varus and is believed to be due to uncorrected or recurrent medial tilting of the distal fracture fragment. A small case series from Osaka Japan in 2013 with several cases of cubitus varus, cubitus valgus, and forearm shaft malunion examined the use of plate fixation for 3D-printed correction osteotomy for these malunited upper extremity fractures. The authors in this Osaka study measured clinical outcome and accuracy of correction for their cubitus valgus, cubitus varus, and forearm shaft malunion. At 22-month follow-up they showed improvement in forearm rotation range of motion, grip strength, and pain secondary to deformity. They also found the osteotomies to be accurate within 3 A second 2013 small case series with 33 patients from Osaka Japan examined the use of 3D-printed surgical cutting guides to perform correctional osteotomies in cubital varus deformity after supracondylar malunion ( A possible issue with using 3D osteotomy guides for distal humerus correctional osteotomy is the accuracy of guide placement onto the bone to create the predicted outcome. This was investigated by Omori et al. in 2014 by 3D-printed osteotomy for artificially created distal humerus and distal radius fractures in cadavers. Both-bone forearm fractures are common in the pediatric population and often treated through closed reduction and casting. However, malunion and deformity can occur resulting in pain, decreased range of motion, and distal radial ulnar joint (DRUJ) instability. A case series published in 2015 out of Shriners hospital examined seven patients with forearm malunion treated with osteotomy with 3D-printed correctional guides. Their results showed an average increase in forearm supination and pronation by 25 A case report by Oka et al. examined two patients with malunion and chronic radial head dislocation after a both-bone fracture treated nonoperatively initially Surgeons are implementing 3D custom guides for distal radius malunion correction on a more widespread basis. A 2017 systematic review article and metaanalysis out of the Netherlands looked at studies examining 3D planning for corrective osteotomies of distal radius malunions. The accuracy of 3D-printed osteotomy guides for distal radius malunions was examined by a small retrospective case series out of Belgium in 2013. 3D printing of fractures has also been used to generate physical models used for preoperative planning. These physical fracture models can be used to prebend plates, whereas the computer models can aid greatly in visualizing the fracture pattern and for preoperative planning. Treatment of displaced midshaft clavicle fractures has recently become a popular topic for debate. Classical literature by Neer found good clinical results with nonoperative treatment, whereas newer data from the Canadian Orthopedic Trauma Society have found support for surgery in some patients, citing improved functional outcomes within 1 A 2014 article out of Chunbgbuk South Korea discusses a technique for using 3D-printed models of fractures to allow for prebending plates for clavicle fractures. You et al. studied the effect of using 3D-printed proximal humerus fracture models in preoperative planning on operative time, time to union, blood loss, and intraoperative fluoroscopy use for 66 isolated proximal humerus fracture cases. Yang et al. examined the use of 3D-printed models in preoperative planning for 40 patients with complex elbow fractures. Radial head fractures can be classified by the Mason classification with Broberg modification. This classification is useful as it can help guide treatment of patients with Mason I treated nonoperatively, mason II ORIF, and mason III with radial head arthroplasty. Guttion et al. published a prospective study examining the use of 3D-printed models to classify radial head fractures with the Mason classification with Broberg Morrey modification. 3D printing has not only allowed surgeons to better characterize fracture patterns and conceptualize proper anatomic reduction and fixation but also been used successfully to create instruments for more efficient intraoperative usage. Fuller et al. used 3D printing to create reduction clamps for hand fractures. A 2016 review article in the Journal of Hand Surgery by Burn et al. examines the use of 3D printing for prosthetic hands in children. Contraindications specific to 3D prosthesis are lack of wrist motion, a small residual carpal segment, and the presence of partial or complete fingers which existing designs cannot accommodate. Measurement for 3D templating is achieved by simple measurements of the recipient's bilateral limbs. After a hand design is selected, the design file can be downloaded, and the appropriate measurements are adjusted. The 3D printer can then print the pieces for the prosthesis, which are then assembled together. Some challenges to these 3D-printed prostheses are obtaining a good first layer fit or failure at load-bearing areas. Overall the authors concluded that these 3D-printed hand prostheses offer a low-cost lightweight, and easily replaced prosthesis for pediatric patients. There are a variety of applications for 3D printing in upper extremity orthopedic trauma and deformity including but not limited to 3D guides for primary fracture fixation, 3D osteotomy guides for malunion correction, 3D-printed models for preoperative planning, and 3D-printed surgical tools, and prosthesis. They offer new avenues for innovation in creating patient-specific treatments. Preliminary studies looking at 3D printing technology for primary fracture fixation of scaphoid, distal humerus, and distal radius fractures have shown promise. However, these studies often involve small sample sizes and fail to signify superior functional outcome to traditional fracture treatment methods. The malunion studies with 3D-printed correctional osteotomy guides also show accurate postoperative anatomic alignment as demonstrated by radiographs. Again, there are few case control studies comparing 3D-printed osteotomy guides to osteotomies done by hand. Several advantages of 3D printing technology for upper extremity orthopedic trauma and deformity include making technically challenging preoperative plans more concrete, improving visualization in the OR, reducing OR time, having superior biomechanical constructs, and making technology for instruments, plates, and prosthesis available to anyone across the world with a 3D printer. It offers an exciting new frontier for bottom-up orthopedic surgical equipment development and will certainly challenge the existing treatment paradigm of upper extremity trauma treatment in the years to come.