Metal flow pattern analysis in extrusion process is very important. The knowledge of how circular initial section of billet changes to final section will determine more details of extrusion process and have an important role in extrusion energy. In this research material, flow in extrusion of “L” section has been investigated by upper bound method. The results show that material in its plastic flow selects the path which needs minimum energy, so an optimum Limason shape intermediate section appears between initial and exit section.Extrusion process is a deformation process used in metal sections fabrication. Analysis of this process with different methods has been done by previous researchers Flat face die with L final section was designed and manufactured. Straight layout of metal was of top concern in die design. Al 99.5 extruded in flat face die in hot condition. Graphite was used as lubricant in deformation process. After partial extrusion of billets, the residual part of billets pounced out of container and then mounted for metallography test. This part of billets consists of dead metal zone and deformation zone. Then, step-by-step decreasing of specimen height followed by macroetching of metal surface paved the way for determining of metal flow pattern. Results of macroscopic examination of extruded billets in different level show interesting phenomena. As can be seen from For better observation of flow pattern, a special billet was used which was compounded from two types of pure aluminum and alloy aluminum layers. In this method, dead zone along with deformation zone flow pattern is observable. Results of macroscopic examination, which consist initial section to intermediate section and also intermediate section to exit section, can be seen in Considering intermediate section will divide the whole process into two parts. The first division is from initial section to intermediate section and the second division from intermediate section to exit section. Analyzing these two parts with upper bound method necessitates defining of deformation zone shape. For this purpose initial, intermediate and exit sections will define as a mathematical function. These functions must be defined from a single point, which we call it from now as reference point. Sections which are presented by these functions must be completely comparable with macroscopic observations. Since in extrusion process initial round shape changes to final shape gradually, this deformation from initial section to final section must be analyzed. Three-dimensional analysis by upper bound method needs admissible velocity field. Based on this admissible velocity field upper bound theorem will be made. For defining velocity field, we need to define plastic deformation zone shape as a mathematical function ( For suitable mathematical definition of plastic deformation zone from initial to final section, determination of a reference point is necessary. This point must be determined in such a way that all sections of plastic deformation zone in every level can be defined and condition of straight coming out of the product provided. For defining a function to present the deformation zone shape, we need to optimize this reference point. With assuming the coordinate of reference point as ( After defining reference point, it is necessary to define a function to present deformation zone shape. In order to define exit section shape, since this shape has symmetric axes, one half of it has been divided into three parts. So exit section has been defined as follows as a three parts function: Now with functions that present initial and exit section shape, we can have a function to present deformation zone shape from initial to final section as follows: Similar to exit section, intermediate section is defined as a three parts function. A shape factor ( Now based on optimizing energy of the whole process, optimum intermediate section will be determined. After defining functions that present initial, intermediate and exit section functions, the whole deformation zone shape can be defined in two parts. Since intermediate section and exit section are defined as three parts function, so deformation zone function also was defined as three parts function. So we will have Upper bound calculation with using a computer program of Matlab software has been done. For these calculations, defined functions and upper bound equation were used. Main equations that are used in upper bound method are: Without optimum intermediate section, simulation of metal flow pattern is impossible. Because there are infinite intermediate sections that can be considered as an intermediate section, but one of them can optimize whole process energy. So different intermediate sections are considered and with using upper bound method total energy of process for each intermediate section is calculated. Results are shown in In other words, when intermediate section does not consider, energy of the whole process is more than twice the case with considering it. This shows the importance of intermediate section in decreasing whole process energy. Result of upper bound method for deformation zone length determining is shown in In this stage, we can simulate metal flow pattern from initial section to exit section. Simulated pattern is shown in Experimental relative pressure of extrusion has been found as 2.35 and upper bound theory presented as 2.76 for this parameter. Difference between these values is about 14.7% that is reasonable in upper bound method. Minimum relative length for deformation zone that is found by upper bound theory is It is obviously shown that optimum relative length of deformation zone that is found by upper bound approach has a small difference of about 7% with experimental value. This difference can be referred to the upper bound assumption. Simulated metal flow pattern and experimental flow pattern are completely comparable. As can be seen from figures, intermediate section which is found from upper bound theory is similar to experimental intermediate shape. On the other hand, the model that is used for intermediate section presents shape of intermediate section very well. Since the function that is considered for deformation zone shape is a linear function of “ From It can be seen that this parameter has 5% difference in experimental and theoretical result. In flat face die extrusion process of non-axisymmetrical “L” section, intermediate section appears between initial round section and final “L” section. This interesting phenomenon, which has been observed in experimental results of metal flow pattern, has very important role in determining the energy of the whole process. Optimum intermediate Limason shape will minimize that energy, without which the energy will be double. Simulated metal flow pattern is completely comparable with experimental results.