Pseudotachylytes generally possess stable remanent magnetizations but the processes by which pseudotachylytes are magnetized remain poorly understood. Magnetic hysteresis and scanning electron microscope studies reveal that experimental frictional melting of granites produces dispersed submicron inclusions of weakly interacting pseudo-single-domain (PSD) magnetite, in artificial pseudotachylyte. The magnetite inclusions are absent in the undeformed granite protolith and result from oxidation of Fe in melt-susceptible mafic minerals during the melt-quenched event. The pseudotachylytes acquired a stable thermal remanence in fine-grained PSD magnetites during the rapid cooling of the melt, implying that fine-grained magnetite has the potential for paleointensity determinations of contemporaneous magnetic fields with co-seismic faulting in granitoids.Frictional melting of rocks can generate pseudotachylytes due to quenching of melts during high-speed co-seismic faulting The friction experiment was performed on a pair of precision-machined hollow-cylindrical specimens of granite (length 25 mm with outer and inner diameters of 25 and 16 mm) at one atmosphere under dry conditions Some chips were used for both magnetic hysteresis (MicroMag 2900 alternating field (AF) magnetometer) and scanning electron microscope (SEM) analysis. The remainder (0.34 g) of the chips were dispersed in non-magnetic epoxy resin in a plastic cube for plotting isothermal remanence (IRM) acquisition vs. AF demagnetization using a Sapphire Instruments SI-6 pulse magnetizer and SI-4 non-tumbling AF demagnetizer. These chips were first immersed in a sonic bath to remove extraneous crushed fragments and powdered residues. The magnetic hysteresis of the chips exhibits SD or small PSD behavior, with ratios of maximum remanence at zero field (  Back-scattered electron imagery by SEM shows that frictional melt products contain submicron-sized bright inclusions, surrounded by a silicate glass matrix with angular or sub-angular to rounded quartz-feldspar fragments and spherical vesicles ( Enomoto and Zheng A previous study found that natural tektites from Australia, Indochina and Guatemala possess homogeneous high-field susceptibilities in a narrow range of 50–100×10 Magnetic hysteresis data may permit discrimination of pseudotachylytes from non-melted comminuted gouges in fault zones. However, its success may depend on the magnetic petrology of a wall rock. The shock-induced melt pockets of the Tenham L6-chondrite showed that the FeO content of the melt is high compared to the FeO contents of the chondritic host (unmelted silicates) Our results also suggest that pseudotachylytes can be suitable for paleointensity studies, because they can contain submicron-sized PSD magnetites in a silicate glass, which are capable of carrying stable thermal remanence. Natural pseudotachylyte veins (i.e. black veins) in the Nojima active fault also contain PSD magnetites and show more intense remanent magnetization than their protoliths. Therefore, such frictionally melt-quenched material may be a promising source of information about ancient magnetic field intensities in the quest to determine whether a current-induced magnetic field is generated during seismic faulting or impact cratering events. This work was originally stimulated by discussions with T. Shimamoto. We thank A. Hammond and A. MacKenzie for specimen preparation and assistance with SEM with energy dispersive X-ray analysis. N.N. was supported by the JSPS postdoctoral fellowships for research abroad during his stay in Canada. Reviews by P. Wasilewski and an anonymous reviewer are gratefully acknowledged.