The paper presents a new type of eddy-current separator designed for the particles separation from a mixture with dielectric particles or of the metallic particles with different physical characteristics. Both the physical processes of the separation and the functioning and design of the devices are described. The efficiency of the new separator is examined on the basis of R=f(G) (R – recovery, G – grade) diagrams for the Cu–Pb, Al–rubber and Cu–Al mixtures.Eddy-current separation represents a category of magnetic separation methods used for the recycling of non-ferrous metals (Cu, Al, Pb, Zn) from solid wastes and also for recycling of various non-ferrous metals one from each other. These methods rely on the fact that eddy currents are induced in the conductive non-ferrous particles due to the changing of the magnetic field in such a separator. Interaction between eddy currents and the magnetic field results in electrodynamic forces upon the conductive particles. Therefore the trajectories of these particles are different from the trajectories of the non-conductive ones. Eddy-current dynamic separators with permanent magnets represent a class of separators substantially improved in the last ten years. In these separators the magnetic field is generated by machinery with moving permanent magnets. Modern eddy-current separators used at present for recovery of non-ferrous metals ( A conveyor belt takes the particles over the drum and the conductive particles are accelerated so following the motion of the drum ( This paper describes a new type of eddy-current separator with permanent magnets, namely the single disc eddy-current separator (SDECS). The purpose for designing and constructing this separator was to separate electrotechnical wastes, consisting of mixtures of conductive non-ferrous–non-conductive particles or strongly conducting – poorly conducting non-ferrous particles, smaller than 5 mm. The main component of the SDECS is a single weak steel radial disc, inclined versus the horizontal plane, directly fixed on the axis of an electric engine. The disc is radially covered, peripheral on its upper side, with NdFeB permanent magnets, alternatively N–S and S–N orientated versus the disc surface. The disc inclination depends on the physical properties of the particles composing the waste to be separated, i.e. electric conductivity, shape, dimensions and their proportions in the waste. The functioning of the SDECS is based on the interaction between the induced electrical currents (due to the magnetic field variation) and the magnetic field. The separator becomes more efficient if the distance between the metallic particles and the moving permanent magnets is very small and if the revolution of the magnetic disc is very high. At the eddy-current separator with inclined disc here presented the distance between the metallic particles and the permanent magnets is 3 mm, the magnetic disc having a controllable revolution of (0–6000) rev/min. The type of separator is based on the “jumping” effect described in next paragraph. It is known ( The rotation moment, together with the tangential and friction force, has a dominant effect on the non-ferrous metallic particles (as can be seen in what follows). In Because At the same time taking into account that The particles in rotation which are falling on the support will leave suddenly – due to the rotation momentum and friction force – in other words they will jump from it. When compared with the particles which fall on the support when they are not in a rotation movement and the collision is not elastic, the particles remaining on the support the particles which are in a rotation movement, in the moment of the impact with the support, due to the friction force between them and the support, when they will jump when the condition ( Noteworthy is that for small particles for which A basic scheme of the eddy-current separator with inclined magnetic disc is presented in The magnets are alternatively set according to their polarity, the magnetization direction being normal to the disc surface. The remanent magnetic induction is 1.08 T and the dimensions are The DC engine, the tahogenerator, and the magnetic disc are set on a metallic frame (background) 5 which is equipped with the device 6 used for the inclination of the separator with respect to the horizontal. The mixture of the particles is introduced in a feeder 7 from where the particles enter the separation chamber 8. This is independently sustained and it is set as near as possible above the magnetic disc (in our case the distance is 1 mm). The separation chamber consists in two surfaces, one of them has a circular shape and it is placed right above the magnets from the disc, being fed with particles. The other has a circular shape there being a distance of 5 mm between the two surfaces in axial direction. In the separation chamber the particles move gravitationally (due to the inclination) towards the two collectors 9I and 9II where the separated fractions are obtained. Through the falling of the particles from the feeder into the circular corona surface due to the “jumping effect” the light particles, respectively, those with high electrical conductivity will jump in all directions finally arriving on the circular surface. The heavy metallic particles, respectively, the dielectric ones, will remain on the circular corona surface before being finally gathered in the collector 9I. The particles from the circular shaped surface will finally arrive in the collector 9II. We have used three types of mixtures namely: (1) Cu–Pb; (2) Cu–Al, in the following proportions: (1) As can be seen from The decreasing of the