Background
                  Delayed diagnoses of unstable thoracolumbar spine (TL-spine) fractures can result in neurologic deficits and avoidable pain, so it is important for clinicians to reach prompt diagnostic decisions. There are no validated decision aids for determining which trauma patients warrant TL-spine imaging.
               
                  Objective
                  Our aim was to quantify the diagnostic accuracy of the injury mechanism, physical examination, associated injuries, clinical decision aids, and imaging for evaluating blunt TL-spine trauma patients.
               
                  Methods
                  A search strategy for studies including adult blunt TL-spine trauma using PubMed, Embase, Scopus, CENTRAL, Cochrane Database of Systematic Reviews, and ClinicalTrials.gov was performed. Excluded studies lacked data to construct 2 × 2 tables, were duplicates, were not primary research, did not focus on blunt trauma, examined associated injuries without any utility in identifying TL-spine injuries, only studied cervical-spine fractures, were non-English, had a pediatric setting, or were cadaver/autopsy reports. Risk of bias was assessed using the Quality Assessment Tool for Diagnostic Accuracy Studies. Diagnostic predictors were analyzed with a meta-analysis of sensitivity, specificity, and likelihood ratios.
               
                  Results
                  In blunt trauma patients in the emergency department, the weighted pretest probability of a TL-spine fracture was 15%. The estimates for detection of TL-spine fractures with plain film were: positive likelihood ratio (+LR) = 25.0 (95% confidence interval [CI] 4.1–152.2; I2 = 94%; p < 0.001) and negative likelihood ratio (−LR) = 0.43 (95% CI 0.32–0.59; I2 = 84%; p < 0.001), and for computed tomography (CT) were: +LR = 81.1 (95% CI 14.1–467.9; I2 = 87%; p < 0.001) and −LR = 0.04 (95% CI 0.02–0.08; I2 = 23%; p = 0.26).
               
                  Conclusions
                  CT is more accurate than plain films for detecting TL-spine fractures. Injury mechanism, physical examination, and associated injuries alone are not accurate to rule-in or rule-out TL-spine fractures.Thoracolumbar-spine (TL-spine) injuries occur in approximately 7% of blunt trauma injuries, accounting for approximately half of vertebral injuries Unlike imaging of the cervical spine (C-spine), there are no validated decision aids for determining which trauma patients warrant TL-spine imaging. This lack of evidence may explain why diagnostic guidelines vary. The Eastern Association for the Surgery of Trauma and the American College of Radiology recommend CT as the modality of choice, whereas Advanced Trauma Life Support and the National Institute for Health and Care Excellence recommend plain films initially CT is increasingly used to screen the torso for visceral trauma, raising the issue of whether dedicated TL-spine reformations are required to accurately identify clinically significant TL-spine injuries. Furthermore, it is unclear whether patients with minor trauma (who do not require initial CT screening) may have their TL-spine cleared by physical examination alone. The disadvantages of CT imaging include increased radiation exposure, incidental findings prompting consideration, or obtaining, of further testing, prolonged emergency department (ED) lengths of stay, and higher costs The primary objective of this systematic review was to quantify parameters of diagnostic accuracy of commonly used imaging modalities for blunt TL spine trauma in patients aged 14 years or older, with a focus on the mechanism of injury, physical examination findings, and commonly employed imaging modalities. This article adhered to the Preferred Reporting Items for Systematic Reviews and Meta-Analyses (PRISMA) and the Meta-Analysis of Observational Studies in Epidemiology (MOOSE) reporting guidelines A medical librarian created the electronic search strategy, which was completed on January 30, 2017, limited to English, and exported to EndNote. Full search strategies are available in Two authors independently evaluated a study's risk of bias and applicability using the revised Quality Assessment Tool for Diagnostic Accuracy Studies (QUADAS-2) Increased risk of inappropriate exclusions occurred when studies excluded patients with difficult to diagnose TL-injuries; those who were not admitted or underwent spine surgery; or when certain patients did not receive the index/criterion test, but should have. A Level I or II trauma center represented the most relevant, least biased setting. Acute blunt trauma patients represented the patients of direct relevance. Studies in other settings or different populations were “low applicability.” If there was no mention of blinding index test interpreters to the criterion standard or vice versa, then prospective studies were “uncertain” and retrospective studies were “high risk.” If plain film radiography lacked anteroposterior (AP) and lateral views, or if CT test protocols used < 64 slices, the index test conduct or interpretation were “low applicability.” Studies in which all patients received CT, magnetic resonance imaging (MRI), surgical confirmation, or clinical follow-up were low risk of bias. An appropriate interval between the index test and the criterion standard was when both tests occurred during the patient's ED visit or initial hospitalization. Two authors independently abstracted study data: clinical setting, location, age, inclusion criteria, criterion standard, diagnostic modality specifications, TL-spine injury prevalence, study design, index tests, sensitivity (SN), specificity (SP), positive likelihood ratio (+LR), and negative likelihood ratio (−LR). Index tests or data included injury mechanism, history or physical examination findings of presence or absence of “associated injuries,” results of plain film studies, and results of CT for diagnosing TL-spine fractures. CT studies had two groups: routine chest-abdomen-pelvis (CAP) CT scans, and reformatted CT images of the TL-spine, which required a specified axial magnification and bone algorithm reconstruction. We referred to these as “CAP CT” and “reformatted TL-spine CT,” respectively. We also evaluated the accuracy of ultrasound (US) and MRI to detect injuries to the TL-spine posterior ligamentous complex (PLC). When possible, we distinguished all fractures from clinically significant fractures, as the latter required surgical stabilization, orthotics, or were deemed “unstable.” Abstracted data were used to recreate 2 × 2 tables and calculate SN, SP, +LR, and −LR. If studies used 3 × 2 tables, including a third “equivocal” result, 2 × 2 tables were created by conservatively adding the equivocal results with a true injury to the FN cell and those without injury into the FP cell The primary search yielded 6420 articles, with 224 selected for review and 14 abstracts identified via hand search ( The QUADAS-2 assessment inter-rater κ ranged from 0.49 to 1.00. Ten studies examined injury mechanisms as predictors of TL-spine fractures Eighteen studies examined the diagnostic accuracy of history or physical examination, including complaints of or findings of spine pain or tenderness upon palpation, lateral spine pain upon palpation, distracting injury, abnormal neurologic examination, altered consciousness, intoxication, palpable spine deformity, back bruising, skin abrasion/laceration, physician gestalt, and the whole physical examination One study examined the diagnostic accuracy of history and physical examination for thoracic-spine fractures In studies assessing clinician's gestalt for TL-spine fractures, a physician estimate of “greater than low pretest probability” (from a scale of very low, low, intermediate, high, and very high) had a +LR = 1.8 (95% CI 1.4–2.3) and −LR = 0.50 (95% CI 0.29–0.84). In comparison, a “greater than high pretest probability” had +LR = 12.6 (95% CI 4.2–37.3) and −LR = 0.80 (95% CI 0.67–0.96) One study involved a diagnostic pathway requiring imaging (plain film, CT, or MRI) if patients had complaints of spine pain, tenderness upon palpation (of midline), local signs of TL-spine injury, neurologic deficits, or a C-spine fracture. In the absence of these, patients were imaged if Glasgow Coma Scale was <15. If it equaled 15, they received imaging in the presence of distracting injury or alcohol/drug intoxication. With this algorithm, 92% of patients would have received imaging, with a reported SN = 100% (95% CI 88–100%) and SP = 11% (95% CI 5–21%) for TL-spine fractures Nine studies examined the accuracy of associated injuries for diagnosing TL-spine fractures One study evaluated the accuracy of rib fractures to diagnose thoracic-spine fractures, and showed +LR = 1.6 (95% CI 1.2–2.0) and −LR = 0.76 (95% CI 0.63–0.93) Eight studies investigated the accuracy of plain films, all diagnostic accuracy results for TL-spine, thoracic-spine, and lumbar-spine studies are detailed in Barrios et al. evaluated the accuracy of chest x-ray study for thoracic-spine fractures in blunt trauma patients Eight studies investigated the accuracy of CT, and all diagnostic accuracy results are detailed in Smith et al. examined thoracic-spine fractures among individual patients, showing +LR = 77.3 (95% CI 4.8–1241.2) and −LR = 0.23 (95% CI 0.08–0.68) Three studies investigated the diagnostic accuracy of CAP CT for diagnosing lumbar-spine fractures Rozenberg et al. investigated the diagnostic accuracy of reformatted TL-spine CT with +LR = 40.2 (95% CI 16.8–95.8) and −LR = 0.05 (95% CI 0.01–0.21) Sroka et al. demonstrated that the scout AP and lateral CT images of the TL-spine from a four-slice scanner had +LR and −LR of 187.5 (95% CI 11.7–2999.5) and 0.12 (95% CI 0.03–0.52), respectively The summary data for clinically significant fractures are shown in Plain films missed 66.7% clinically significant fractures Mancini et al. showed +LR = 138.9 (95% CI 8.8–2200.8) and −LR = 0.02 (95% CI 0.00–0.34) for CAP CT, while Wintermark et al. demonstrated +LR = 166.6 (95% CI 10.5–2651.8) and −LR = 0.06 (95% CI 0.01–0.51) Rozenberg et al. was the only included study that compared both reformatted TL-spine CT and CAP CT, showing that neither missed any clinically significant TL-spine fractures Three studies used US to examine injuries to the PLC Haba et al. used MRI to detect supraspinous or interspinous ligament injury History and physical examination findings are generally inaccurate to rule-in or rule-out TL-spine fractures. The data source for these findings were based mostly on retrospective studies, which are inherently prone to diagnostic bias +LR > 10 and −LR < 0.1 are regarded as diagnostic tests with sufficient accuracy to rule-in or rule-out disease, respectively For clinically significant fractures, plain film had a wide SN range: 33–100% ( Reformatted TL-spine CT is not associated with improvements in management when compared to CAP CT The current data are sparse, and observational studies providing quantitative estimates of SN and SP represent the lowest tier of diagnostic evidence, evidence that does not equate to patient-centric benefit Accelerating patterns of CT utilization over the past 2 decades, and overlying controversies of the management for neurologically intact TL-spine injury patients shape the contemporary research landscape for blunt trauma victims. This meta-analysis includes CT studies from 2002 to 2017, a period when advancing CT technology fueled the role of advanced imaging in the first-line ED evaluation of trauma patients The overall quantity and quality of the available evidence is imperfect and far from ideal for deriving a clinical decision rule. The applicability of our findings to older populations is limited, because the majority of our studies had a mean age between 30 and 50 years, and advanced age may have an influence upon the accuracy of combined physical examination data. Incorporating advanced age (60 years and older) has been shown to improve the accuracy of TL-spine fracture decision aids Temporal bias exists in radiology, as advancing technology improves image quality and accuracy Numerous studies were excluded, usually because of an inability to create 2 × 2 tables. We contacted authors when appropriate to clarify reported data, but some did not respond or could not supply the required data. Adherence to the Standards for Reporting Diagnostic Accuracy (STARD) reporting guidelines improves the quality of reported data, and would improve the pool of available evidence for future meta-analyses High-quality research to guide evidence-based diagnostic decision making for TL-spine fractures in blunt trauma victims is lacking. In acute blunt trauma patients with suspected TL-spine injuries, the prevalence of a TL-spine fracture is approximately 15%. No injury mechanism, physical examination, or associated injury accurately ruled in the presence of a TL-spine fracture. CT is superior to plain film in both the detection of all TL-spine fractures and clinically significant fractures. While reformatted TL-spine CT is more accurate than CAP CT, it is unknown whether these differences impact management or patient-centric outcomes. Of course, individual clinicians may occasionally obtain plain films when they have a low but non-0% suspicion of significant injury, or when an injury that could be clearly demonstrated with a plain film series is anticipated. This review does not advocate that plain films be abandoned or that CT is the new “standard of care” for blunt spine trauma. However, this article has delineated certain advantages and disadvantages of various diagnostic techniques, as applied to patients with blunt trauma and possible TL-spine injury.  No validated decision aids for determining which blunt trauma patients warrant thoracolumbar-spine (TL-spine) imaging exists. Therefore, a high practice variability and the presence of inconsistent clinical practice guidelines or recommendations are associated with this topic. Because delayed recognition of significant spine injuries risks preventable neurologic complications, while overutilization of diagnostic imaging increases cost, waiting times, and radiation exposure, a quantitative understanding of the diagnostic accuracy of history, physical examination, and commonly ordered imaging tests may improve diagnostic efficiency. This systematic review and meta-analysis quantifies the diagnostic accuracy of history, physical examination, and diagnostic imaging modalities for blunt trauma–related TL-spine injuries, and to identify any knowledge gaps in the existing research literature. No injury mechanism, physical examination, or associated injury accurately ruled in the presence of a TL-spine fracture. Computed tomography (CT) is superior to plain film both in the detection of all TL-spine fractures and clinically significant fractures. While reformatted TL-spine CT is more accurate than chest-abdomen-pelvis (CAP) CT, the impact of these differences on management decisions or patient-centric outcomes is unknown. CT is currently the most accurate imaging test to diagnose TL-spine fractures in blunt trauma patients. As compared with other imaging choices, CT misses fewer TL-spine fractures and reformatted TL-spine CT can be done without any additional cost or radiation to the patient, with added accuracy compared to CAP CT. Whether the additional fractures identified yield improved patient outcomes is uncertain, as are the potential harms of overdiagnosis that might be associated with more widespread CT imaging. The authors would like to acknowledge Laura E. Simon, MLIS for her contribution towards creating and completing our extensive literature search. In addition, we would like to acknowledge the responses and data from all of the following diagnostic spine trauma investigators: Mary Aaland, MD, and Micah Smith, MD (Fort Wayne, IN), Brent Griffith MD (Detroit, MI), Carl J. Hauser, MD, FACS (Boston, MA), Christopher Herzog, MD, MBA (Munich, Germany), James Holmes, MD, MPH (Sacramento, CA), Aleksander Rozenberg MD (Philadelphia, PA), Louis Samuels, MD, FACS (Philadelphia, PA), Jack Sava, MD, FACS (Washington, DC), Clay Smith MD (Nashville, TN), and Max Wintermark, MD, MAS, MBA (Stanford, CA). This work was supported by the  Supplementary Data can be found at