The H2SO4 roasting for the lithium extraction from β-spodumene concentrate has been the traditional process since the middle of the twentieth century (Ellestad and Leute, 1950) and is the preferred one for new producers due to its economic viability and high purity product to supply the growing lithium-ion batteries market. Unfortunately, very few studies have tried to determine the fundamental causes why lithium extraction is limited to 90% and the need for more than 30% stoichiometric excess of H2SO4. Acid roasting of β-spodumene was carried out in a rotary tube furnace followed by lithium leaching to complete a factorial design of experiments studying H2SO4 stoichiometric excess (30% vs 20%), roasting temperature (250 °C vs 225 °C), roasting duration (30 min vs 5 min) and mechanical stirring amplified by the use of 35 alumina beads of 6.35 mm diameter. An analysis of variance was made on lithium and impurity leaching and a principal component analysis on impurity leaching. These statistical analyses showed the dependence and independence respectively of lithium and impurity extraction on operating parameters. The extraction percentages of impurities (Al, Na, Fe, Ca, Mn and K) were quite low with a total of 0.5 at% of the spodumene concentrate being leached. H2SO4 excess, temperature, duration and mechanical stirring respectively improve the lithium recovery by 0.8%, 0.0%, 1.0% and 0.3%. Residual H2SO4 excess was estimated to be 7–13%. These observations point to negate, at least for low impurity concentrates, the hypothesis of sulfuric acid consumption by impurities as a reason for the need of stoichiometric excess as high as 30%. Nonetheless, it was demonstrated that lithium extraction decreases with the impurity content in the feed material. This suggests that lithium recovery may be limited by the impurity coating of some β-spodumene particles.Computers and mobile phones have an increasing significance in the lives of many people and workers in industrialized countries and they will continue to do so for many years to come. Vehicles of all kinds as well have an important place and there is a growing desire to replace them by hybrids and even fully electric ones. This has led to a compound annual growth rate (CAGR) of 22.8% for lithium batteries (LiBs) for the 10-year period of 2003–2013 and an overall CAGR of 7.8% for lithium compounds for the same period ( Brines have been the main source of material for the production of lithium for these last two decades due to lower production costs compared to other resources. However, the growing lithium demand has led hard rock mineral sources to regain market share for the past few years, so that they account for half of the world’s lithium supply ( The spodumene is the most common lithium rich mineral and has been commercially mined for lithium extraction content since the middle of the twentieth century ( Nevertheless, even though there have been considerable studies on alternative processes to extract lithium from spodumene, there have been very few attempts to improve the traditional process or to understand the causes behind its limitations. Approximate favoured conditions of 40% stoichiometric excess of H One suspected cause for an incomplete recovery of lithium or for a need of H Acid roasting and leaching of lithium sulfate from the roasted concentrate were carried out on a sample of β-spodumene, typical of commercial concentrates, with the elemental composition shown in Approximately 30 g (25 g when alumina beads are used) of concentrate (C Depending on the assay, the reaction mixture was then heated in a rotary tube furnace (2.5 cm diameter), a Thermo Scientific Lindberg Blue M Tube Furnace in Approximately 250 mg of the leached residue was weighted with a Mettler Toledo XA204 Delta Range balance to which 3 mL HCl, 4 mL HF and 1 mL HNO The elemental lithium contained in the digested residue solution was analyzed by atomic absorption spectroscopy (AAS) using a PerkinElmer AAnalyst 200 AA spectrometer. Lithium absorption ray is known to have a wavelength of 670.8 nm. The usual known spectral interferences ( For better accuracy, when evaluating the efficiency of the process, lithium content was measured in the leached residue instead of the leached solution. That way, small differences in extraction would not be lost into the instrumental uncertainty of the spectrometer. The undesired species leached from the concentrate were analysed by inductively coupled plasma mass spectrometry (ICP-MS) with both a PerkinElmer Elan DRC II and a Thermo Scientific Fischer Xseries II spectrometers. There was good reproducibility of the results for most elements between one spectrometer and the other. Nonetheless, results of Al, Fe, Na, Mn and K reported here are from the PerkinElmer Elan DRC II and results of Ca are from the Thermo Scientific Fischer Xseries II. The reason for this is that due to mass interferences of Ar The residual H XRD characterization was completed with a PANalytical X’Pert PRO MPD diffractometer. The data were collected with a PIXcel The influence of four operating parameters on the lithium extraction was investigated by means of a factorial design of experiments (FDE) with two levels for each parameters. The first parameter was stoichiometric excess of sulfuric acid at 20% and 30% and controlled by the experimenter by use of the scale. The second parameter was temperature at 225 °C and 250 °C controlled by the oven and measured by a thermocouple inserted into the concentrate. The third parameter was roast duration at 5 min and 30 min with the starting time set on the moment the concentrate was at the desired temperature. The fourth parameter was the mechanical stirring that was always present due to the use of a rotary tube furnace but was amplified by adding 35 alumina beads of Ø 6.35 mm. The ideal number of beads added was determined from preliminary experiments where no aggregation was observed at the end of the acid roasting. The entire FDE is shown in The analysis of variance (ANOVA) was performed on Li extractions, which are calculated with Eq. The experimental error is defined by the measurement method and not the repeatability of the tests. Previous tests showed that it was not possible to statistically discriminate different measure results from results between a test and its duplicate. That is because digestion of a 0.250 g sample of residue has a bigger error than roasting approximately 30 g of concentrate. A principal component analysis (PCA) was performed on the extraction results of the impurities. The idea was to see if results of impurity leaching could be interpreted in terms of varying concentrations of impurities or varying diversity of impurities. The concentrate studied has lower lithium content and higher impurity content depending on particle size due to heat treatment (a prior step necessary to make β-spodumene from α-spodumene) which causes the breaking of β-spodumene particles. The concentrate and leached residue were separated in five different particle size fractions (d < 63 μm, 63 μm < d < 150 μm, 150 μm < d < 212 μm, 212 μm < d < 425 μm and 425 μm < d) and lithium content was determined for each fraction by AAS. The lithium extraction for each fraction was then calculated. XRD analyses were performed on the concentrate to confirm the impact of impurities and digital microscope imagery with a Keyence VHX 5000 to understand how β-spodumene and impurities could interact. As specified in Tests aBCd and abCD with lithium extraction of respectively 96.6% and 96.4% are obviously more efficient than the other tests with 20% H The ANOVA truth table ( The values of the operating parameters coefficient indicate that H Impurity extraction was investigated by analyzing the leach solutions. As it can be seen in To further confirm that none of the impurities react the same way as lithium, an ANOVA was done as can be seen in The PCA of the impurity leaching is shown in With so many elements (Al, Fe, Ca, Mn and K) correlated and Na completely independent, it is obvious that the principal axis will represent Al, Fe, Ca, Mn and K as the second axis will represent Na. An easier way to see this is to imagine the X-axis as the amount of impurities and the Y-axis as the diversity between them. If every test results hold to the X-axis then the tests would distinguish themselves by how much impurity were extracted. If they hold to the Y-axis, this would mean the tests distinguish themselves by which impurities are major and which are minor. A look at There is variability in the impurity extractions of the order of 0.06 at% though. The only explanation would be that these impurities could come from minor minerals mixed with the β-spodumene concentrate. Considering solids cannot be ideally mixed, it is likely that the amount of impurities for 25 g or 30 g of concentrate may vary from test to test. This variability could possibly be as important than the variability caused by operating parameters. The residual amount of H The data do not permit to establish how H As mentioned in the The correlation coefficient of lithium concentration with β-spodumene, α-spodumene and virgilite contents is 0.994. The lithium residual content of the five particle size fractions of the leached residue was measured and used to calculate the lithium extraction with the lithium concentrations in It is important to note that these five particle size fractions were all mixed together during the acid roasting and leaching. It confirms the impurities interact strongly and permanently with β-spodumene because small particles of β-spodumene are not affected by the presence of bigger particles of impurities during roasting. The only interaction mechanism that follows this behavior would be an inclusion of β-spodumene particles into impurities preventing H Also, with this mechanism where quartz particles contain smaller β-spodumene particles, the fifth point (x = 59.4%; y = 94.3%) in How much the Li extraction is reduced by this inclusion of β-spodumene particles into impurities will depend on the studied concentrate. In this case, the Li extraction on the whole concentrate is reduced by 2.0%. An analysis of variance of a factorial design of experiments studying H However, these observations concern a concentrate with an amount of impurities typical of a commercial concentrate. For lower grade concentrate, the use of a higher H The authors are grateful to the employees of the ‘‘Centre de Caractérisation des Matériaux’’ for their help with the various characterization devices and to the chemists Olivier Savary and Phillipe Venne for their ICP-MS analyses. The authors also thank Martin Brassard and Jean-René Landry for manuscript revision and correction. This work is financed and supported by "