N,N-dimethyl-3-oxa-glutaramic acid (DMOGA), as a new salt-free complexant was studied for its ability to separate traces Pu(IV) and Np(IV) from U(VI) in nitric acid solution. The extraction performance of Np(IV), Pu(IV), and U(VI) in nitric acid containing DMOGA and 30% TBP-OK was investigated to examine the effect of DMOGA and the nitric acid concentration for stripping Np(IV) and Pu(IV). DMOGA, as a complexant has a strong complexing ability with Np(IV) and Pu(IV) and can strip Np(IV) and Pu(IV) from 30% tri-n-butyl phosphate/odorless kerosene (30% TBP-OK) into nitric acid. The extractability of U(VI) has been shown to not be affected by the presence of DMOGA. DMOGA has the potential application in the advanced PUREX process for separating Pu(IV) and Np(IV) from U(VI) because of the stronger complexing ability of DMOGA for Pu(IV) and Np(IV) than for U(VI).The quality of the U product from the PUREX process, especially the content of Np and Pu is strictly controlled for the easily reproduction of nuclear fuel ( DMOGA: synthesized as in Ref. ( DMOGA has the following properties: DMOGA is composed of C, H, N, and O atoms, therefore it can be decomposed into gas and the volumes of the second waste is less. DMOGA has good solubility in water, its solubility is approximately 96.6 The dissociation constant (pK) of DMOGA is 3.21 at a temperature of 25 30% TBP-OK: scrubbed by 5% Na Np(IV) stock solutions were obtained by reducing Np in a 2 Pu(IV) stock solutions: first, Pu(III) in a 2 The U(VI) stock solution was prepared by dissolving uranium nitrate in a nitric acid solution. Np and Pu were determined by a liquid scintillation analyzer (Packard, 2500 TR, CA, USA). U was measured by a spectrophotometer: the spectrophotometer type was 721, and was produced by the third analytical instrument plant, PR China. This spectrophotometer was equipped with a 1-cm path length quartz cell, which was used for the acquisition of visible spectra (wavelength range: 360 Prior to measuring distributions, the extractant (30% TBP-OK) was pre-equilibrated with different concentration of HNO In another extraction experimental, the aqueous solution containing Np, Pu or U and DMOGA was placed in contact with the pre-equilibrium organic phase to reach equilibrium. The two phases were centrifuged and separated for analysis. The distribution ratio was calculated using the expression D In the stripping experiments, the organic phase loaded with Np and Pu, which was prepared by placing the organic phase (30% TBP-OK) in contact with the same volume of the aqueous phase (HNO The separation factor is one distribution ratio divided by another and it is a measure of the ability of the system to separate two solutes. The separation factors of U from Np and Pu are calculated by the followed method: S.F. Separation between Pu(IV) and U or Np(IV) and U is one of the main tasks of the PUREX process. Some methods separate Pu(IV) or Np(IV) from U. As an example, the separation of Pu from U is described as follows: Pu(IV) and U extracted in the organic phase can be separated by using reductants to transform Pu(IV) into Pu(III) or by using complexants to form Pu(IV)/complexant complex. Thus Pu is stripped into the aqueous phase, but U remains in the organic phase to achieve the separation between Pu(IV) and U. DMOGA as a complexant that can be used to separate Pu or Np from U will be discussed in the following text. To determine the equilibrium time between 30% TBP-OK and the aqueous phase containing DMOGA, the experiment was carried out according to the following steps. The organic phase was 30% TBP-OK, and the aqueous phase was Np or Pu solution containing a certain concentration of HNO The separating Pu and U is an important task of the PUREX process. Two main methods can be used to separate Pu from U. One method is to use reductants to transform Pu(IV) into Pu(III) which is not extracted by TBP, and the other method is to use some stronger complexants to form a Pu(IV)/complexant complex that is also not extracted by TBP. However, the extraction of U by TBP is not affected by reductants and complexants. DMOGA, as a complexant, was investigated for its complexing ability for Pu(IV). The results are shown in The efficiency of stripping Pu(IV) loaded in the organic phase was studied bringing the organic phase(30% TBP-Ok) loaded with Pu(IV) in contact with the aqueous phase containing different concentrations of DMOGA and HNO Np and Pu are key elements in the purification cycle of U in the PUREX process. The separation of Np from U is of greater concerns in the product of U because of the higher toxicity of Np. The distribution ratios of Np(IV) were investigated at different concentrations of HNO To understand the stripping ability of DMOGA for Np(IV) stripping experiments were studied by equilibrating an organic phase loaded with Np(IV) with an aqueous phase contained 0.1 DMOGA has strong complexation ability and can collect Np(IV) and Pu(IV) according to the above results. Np(IV) and Pu(IV) loaded in 30% TBP-OK can be stripped back into the aqueous phase effectively. To ensure that U(VI) loaded in 30% TBP-OK was not stripped with Np(IV) and Pu(IV) back into the aqueous phase, U(VI) distribution experiments were performed and the results are shown in The values of S.F. The results for S.F. The performance of DMOGA as a complexant with Np(IV) and Pu(IV) was investigated. The experiments demonstrated that the complexation abilities of Np(IV) and Pu(IV) with DMOGA are stronger than the complexation ability of U(VI) with DMOGA. Np(IV) and Pu(IV) loaded in 30% TBP-OK can be stripped back into the aqueous phase by DMOGA. However, U(VI) loaded in 30% TBP-OK was unaffected by DMOGA, thus ensuring that U(VI) is not stripped back into the aqueous phase by DMOGA. Compared with AHA, DMOGA has a stronger complexing ability at higher concentrations of HNO Further work is currently in progress for the countercurrent cascade extraction test to verify the performance of DMOGA. This work was supported by the This work was also supported by the Chinese National 863 Program for its studies on separating material from HLLW and the Technology of Transmutation by Thermal Nuclear Reactor Project under Contract 2013AA051401.