For the past 120years, hydrocyclones have been used a wide variety of industrial applications, with their main use in mineral processing being as a classifier. Hydrocyclone characterization relies heavily on empirical and phenomenological models. There is a need to develop a method by which the flow patterns can be quantified under industrial conditions. Positron emission particle tracking (PEPT), developed by the University of Birmingham in the late 1980s, has proven to be a powerful in situ visualization tool for engineering applications. This paper presents data on the motion of quartz particles in a two-inch hydrocyclone using the PEPT technique. Quartz tracer particles were labeled using the direct activation technique. The particle size range was between −2000 and +150μm which illustrates the flow pattern of particles reporting to the underflow.Hydrocyclones are widely used in industrial processes with their main use in mineral processing being as a classifier. They are deceptively simple processing units as they have no moving parts, however, their performance is complex and difficult to predict. The feed enters tangential to the hydrocyclone body under pressure which establishes the primary outer spiral which flows downwards towards the apex forming the underflow. A secondary spiral is set up simultaneously rotating upwards to the vortex finder forming the overflow. These two spiral flows make up the main flow pattern. The classical theory considers that orbiting particles within the flow pattern are subjected to two opposing forces – an outward centrifugal force and an inward drag force. Faster settling particles will move towards the outer wall of the hydrocyclone where the primary spiral flow takes them to the apex while slower settling particles move towards the secondary spiral which takes them to the vortex finder. The centrifugal field of the hydrocyclone flow is superimposed by an intensive and rapid mixing effect, mainly caused by the macroturbulence of the flow ( The internal flow of the hydrocyclone is complex and remains a challenge to visualize under practical, i.e., opaque, conditions. Positron emission particle tracking (PEPT), developed at University of Birmingham in the 1980s, has been successfully used to visualize flow in a number of unit operations. These include: mixing vessels ( Recently, This paper tracks a quartz particle in a slurry system under a closed loop system. The tracer particle is of the same type of material as the rest of the system and enters the feed inlet without any preferential orientation. Running the system on a 100% recycle allowed multiple passes of the tracer through the PEPT camera. The test rig was a two-inch diameter Mozley standard hydrocyclone with quartz. The total height of the hydrocyclone was 376.5 The tracer particles were two size classes of quartz activated using the direct labeling technique ( One kilogram of quartz was added to 25 The University of Birmingham ADAC Forte positron camera was used to track the trajectory of the tracer particles ( Throughout the experiment, the coarse quartz tracer particles passed through the detector field of view. This allowed the camera to capture the fast moving particle in the primary vortex. The results of a run consist of a set of single particle locations in 3D with time. A typical pass for the coarse quartz tracer particle is shown in From In A typical pass for the fine quartz tracer particle is shown in  PEPT has been shown to be a powerful tool in tracking the position of a relatively large quartz particle in a hydrocyclone. This work on a slurried feed extends upon previous work on hydrocyclones, which was limited to resin beads in water. In addition, it has been shown to be possible to obtain the position of finer particles in the hydrocyclone. This is the first time that a particle of the bulk material has been tracked in a hydrocyclone using PEPT. The current work was unable to accurately develop the trajectory of the fine particles, and future work will extend upon this. It is envisaged that with improved labeling and a higher resolution tracking this will be possible. The improvements to the resolution of the PEPT technique will come through the use of a more sensitive camera, such as that at the University of Cape Town, or through setting PEPT modules to a specific geometry as per the modular camera that the University of Birmingham. The work was funded through the