The research has focused on the dealkalization of red mud after active roasting and water leaching, which is obtained from bauxite during alumina production. The main factors such as roasting temperature, roasting time, water leaching stage, leaching temperature, leaching reaction time and liquid to solid ratio were investigated. The mechanism of dealkalization was in-depth studied by using ICP–AES, XRD, TG-DSC, SEM–EDS and leaching kinetic. The results show that the dealkalization rate reached 82% under the condition of roasting temperature of 700°C, roasting time of 30min, four stage water leaching, liquid to solid ratio of 7mL/g, leaching temperature of 90°C and reaction time of 60min. The diffraction peak of Na6CaAl6Si6(CO3)O24·2H2O in red mud was decreased during the active roasting process, whereas the mineral phases of NaOH·H2O and Na2Ca(CO3)2 were appeared. The content of alkali obviously decreased and the grade of other elements increased during the process of active roasting and water leaching, which was in favor of next application process of red mud. The water leaching was controlled by internal diffusion of SCM and the apparent activation energy was 22.63kJ/mol.Red mud is a kind of alkaline solid waste generated from alumina production of bauxite Recently, the methods of dealkalization from red mud mainly include water leaching, acid leaching, replacement of calcium oxide and pressure leaching of carbon dioxide The present research work is to investigate the active method of dealkalization with roasting and water leaching in order to obtain efficient dealkalization of red mud. Based on the above dealkalization method, the main influence factors and action mechanism are in-depth studied. The sample of red mud was collected from Henan province, China. The sample was analyzed by using ICP–AES (inductively coupled plasma – atomic emission spectrometry), and the result is given in It is shown from It is indicated that the main minerals in the red mud were of perovskite, brookite, hematite, calcite, cancrinite and quartz. Above all, it is found that alkali existed in cancrinite, where the alkali was difficultly removable with water leaching. The analytical purity chemical reagent including hydrochloric acid from Dengke Chemical Reagent Technology Co., Ltd. was used. The water used in this study was distilled water. The red mud sample was roasted with using SXZ-10-B muffle furnace (China) at different temperature for a time, which was taken out of the muffle furnace and then cooled further to room temperature outside the muffle furnace. Then 20 The effect of roasting temperature and time on dealkalization rate is illustrated in It is indicated from The effect of water leaching stage on dealkalization rate is shown in It is seen from The effect of leaching temperature and reaction time on dealkalization rate is indicated in It is shown from The effect of liquid to solid ratio on dealkalization rate is indicated in  It is important to establish a qualitative measurement of mechanism to confirm the dealkalization process. The mineral composition of red mud at different roasting temperature was analyzed by using XRD and the result is shown in It is indicated that the mineral composition of red mud at 200 It is shown from To sum up, it can be inferred that the evaporation of all kinds of water was occurred and chemical and phase reaction would be appeared with increasing roasting temperature. The main chemical and phase reaction might occur at roasting temperature of 700 The alkali in Na According to the theory of pyrometallurgy, the Ca The main chemical composition of red mud with different roasting temperature is shown in It can be seen that the content of chemical composition increased with increasing roasting temperature, which was consistent with the TG curve of red mud. The increase of alkali in red mud was in favour of dealkalization with water leaching, and then the increase of valuable metals in red mud was beneficial for recovery. The increase of calcium and aluminum oxide was favorable to application in building materials. The alkali could be obviously removed from red mud with active roasting at 700 It can be seen from The main chemical composition of residue with different water leaching temperature is listed in It can be observed that the content of sodium and potassium decreased with increasing water leaching temperature, whereas the content of other elements increased with increasing water leaching temperature. Therefore, the dealkalization reaction could occur during water leaching process, where other reaction such as dissolution of valuable metals could not take place, which would be favorable to next process of application in building materials and recovery of valuable metals. The SEM–EDS analysis of red mud with different roasting temperatures and water leaching residue is indicated in It is important to establish a quantitative measurement of the water leaching kinetic to confirm the dealkalization process. The experimental data can be analyzed using the SCM (shrinking core model). According to the SCM, assuming the leaching process is controlled by the internal diffusion, the following expression of leaching kinetics can be used: However, assuming the leaching process is controlled by the chemical reaction, the following expression can be applied for the leaching kinetic: Two controlling steps of the SCM were investigated at different temperatures during water leaching. The results are shown in According to It can be observed that the correlation coefficient ( The results obtained in the present work showed that the alkali could be obviously removed with active roasting and water leaching from red mud. The dealkalization rate reached 82% under the condition of roasting temperature of 700 The authors are thankful for financial support from the