Objective
                  To compare the efficacy of a new dentifrice containing 1.5% arginine and 1450ppm fluoride to a positive control dentifrice containing 1450ppm fluoride alone in arresting and reversing primary root caries lesions in adults.
               
                  Study design
                  A total of 3779 subjects from Piracicaba, Säo Paulo, Brazil were screened; 284 had at least one leathery primary root caries lesion and were eligible for the study. The new dentifrice contained 1.5% arginine, an insoluble calcium compound, and 1450ppm fluoride, as sodium monofluorophosphate; the matched positive control dentifrice contained 1450ppm fluoride. One lesion for each subject was selected for inclusion in the study and was examined at baseline, 3 and 6 months.
               
                  Results
                  A total of 253 subjects completed the study with 129 of 144 subjects included in the final statistical analysis for the test dentifrice and 124 of 140 for the positive control. The mean age of subjects was 45.7 (±9.19) years and 56.5% were female. After 6 months product use, 70.5% of root caries lesions improved for subjects using the arginine-containing dentifrice compared to 58.1% for subjects using the positive control. The difference in the number of root caries lesions becoming hard in the two groups was statistically significant (p
                     =0.038).
               
                  Conclusion
                  A new dentifrice containing 1.5% arginine, an insoluble calcium compound, and 1450ppm fluoride, as sodium monofluorophosphate, provided statistically significantly superior efficacy in arresting and reversing active root caries lesions in adults compared to a matched positive control dentifrice containing fluoride alone.Despite the highly successful introduction of fluoride, dental caries remains a prevalent oral disease, and cavities remain a global public health problem. Historically, epidemiology research has emphasized dental caries in young people. Nonetheless, research shows that dental caries is important throughout life because caries prevalence and severity increases with age as secondary, or recurrent, caries begins to dominate over new primary lesions. There is undisputed evidence that fluoride has a beneficial effect on de- and re-mineralization of both enamel and root dentin. The extensive use of fluoridated dentifrice has led to a decrease in dental caries prevalence worldwide, including rapidly developing countries, such as Brazil. Among the new technologies recently identified for their potential oral health benefits is a novel combination of arginine and an insoluble calcium compound. Arginine is a semi-essential amino acid found in many foods, including milk and its byproducts, meat, poultry, seafood, cereals and nuts, which is considered safe for use in toothpaste. The insoluble calcium may be in the form of calcium carbonate or dicalcium phosphate dihydrate. By utilising the arginine deiminase pathway in non-pathogenic, arginolytic organisms, such as In a 2-year caries clinical trial, a fluoride-free calcium-based toothpaste containing arginine bicarbonate was evaluated as an alternative to regular fluoride toothpaste. The results of the study show that the fluoride-free arginine/bicarbonate toothpaste reduced the formation of cavities as effectively as 1100 Based upon the mechanism of action of arginine, which is complementary to the well-known mechanism of action of fluoride, arginine has the potential to significantly enhance the caries preventive benefits of traditional fluoride dentifrices. For this reason, a next generation dentifrice technology based upon 1.5% arginine and 1450 The aim of this study was to test the hypothesis that the new dentifrice containing 1.5% arginine, an insoluble calcium compound, and 1450 This 6-month randomized controlled clinical study was conducted in groups of adults residing in Piracicaba, Sao Paulo, Brazil. The drinking water at the study site contains approximately 0.7 In order to participate in this study, male and female subjects had to be at least 30 years of age, have at least eight natural uncrowned teeth and at least one leathery root caries lesion. Subjects were excluded if they had advanced periodontal disease, had participated in another dental study during the previous 3 months, had a history of allergy to oral care or personal care consumer products or their ingredients, or were pregnant or nursing. A total of 3779 subjects were screened and of these 284 were found to meet the eligibility criteria, entered into the study and allocated to one of the two study products ( Participants were allocated to one of two groups using a sequence of codes randomly generated by the study administrator. The two groups comprised a positive control group using a matched product containing 1450 Participants were instructed to brush at least twice daily with their assigned dentifrice and a Colgate plus Sensitive, compact head, soft toothbrush (Colgate-Palmolive, New York, NY) for 1 One leathery lesion for each subject was selected for inclusion in the study and examined at baseline, 3 and 6 months. When possible, lesions were chosen with clearly demarcated borders on the buccal surfaces of teeth. In cases where multiple suitable lesions were available, the most anterior lesion was selected. Examinations were performed at baseline and after 3 and 6 months of product use by a single examiner. The clinical assessment commenced with an examination of the soft and hard tissues of the mouth. The methods described by Baysan et al. were used to perform a detailed assessment of the selected root caries lesion. The amount of plaque overlying each lesion was measured using the Plaque Index of Silness and Loe and scored as follows 0 1 2 3 Dental plaque scores were recorded at the baseline examination to ensure that the groups were similar at baseline with respect to this variable. The maximum height and width of the lesions was measured to the nearest 0.5 The hardness of each lesion was defined as follows: a soft lesion is one which permitted a sharp probe (No. 5 Sharp Explorer) to penetrate the lesion with ease, and there was no resistance to its withdrawal; a leathery lesion permitted a sharp probe to penetrate the surface, but there was some resistance to its withdrawal; a hard lesion is comparable in hardness to the surrounding sound root dentine. The number of lesions becoming hard was compared for the two study groups using a Chi A total of 129 of 144 subjects were included in the final statistical analysis for the experimental group and 124 of 140 in the positive control group. Reasons for loss from the study are tabulated in The baseline characteristics of plaque, lesion area, distance of the lesion from the gingival margin and number of lesions per subjects are shown in Lesion hardness scores are shown in At the 6-month examination, 70.5% of lesions had become hard in the arginine-containing dentifrice group compared to 58.1% in the positive control group. During the 6 months of the study, three lesions were restored and one was extracted in the arginine-containing dentifrice group. In the positive control group, two lesions were restored, one was extracted and two became soft. The difference in the number of lesions becoming hard in the arginine-containing dentifrice and positive control groups was statistically significant ( The unadjusted odds ratio for lesions becoming in the experimental group compared to the control was 1.73 (95% CI 1.03–2.91) . The baseline characteristics of subjects with lesions becoming hard at 6 months were compared to those that did not improve or became worse ( The highly successful introduction of fluoride has led to a decrease in dental caries prevalence worldwide. Nonetheless, there is abundant caries prevalence and severity data that demonstrate that dental caries remains a global oral health problem. For this reason, a new dentifrice containing 1.5% arginine, an insoluble calcium compound, and 1450 Three coronal caries studies, using quantitative light-induced fluorescence (QLF) to measure changes in early caries lesions in children, have each shown that a new dentifrice containing 1.5% arginine, and insoluble calcium compound and 1450 Two root caries studies in adults have each shown that the new dentifrice containing 1.5% arginine and 1450 The clinical study reported in this paper is the second of the root caries studies and compared the new dentifrice to a matched positive control containing 1450 Together, these five studies show that a new dentifrice containing 1.5% arginine, an insoluble calcium compound, and 1450 Finally, a 2-year conventional caries clinical study has proven that two dentifrices containing 1.5% arginine and 1450 This study demonstrates that use of a new dentifrice containing 1.5% arginine, an insoluble calcium compound, and 1450 Drs Zhang, Cummins and Ellwood are employees of the Colgate-Palmolive Company. Drs Souza, Tenuta and Cury have no conflict of interest. Mr Mateo provided independent statistical review of the data for the Colgate-Palmolive Company on a consultancy basis. This study was sponsored by the Colgate-Palmolive Company.