The mineralization of a synthetic wastewater containing apple juice using a homogeneous solar photo-Fenton oxidation process assisted with ferrioxalate was evaluated as an alternative to or a rapid pretreatment step for conventional anaerobic digestion and can also be used if the water to be treated contains a recalcitrant pollutant. Experimental kinetic constants were fitted using neural networks (NNs) with an 86% confidence level. The effect of the different variables was explained on the basis of the kinetic mechanism. At the selected operating conditions ([H2O2]=6000ppm, [Fe(II)]=40ppm, pH=2.7 and [(COOH)2]=40ppm), 97% mineralization was achieved in 67min when treating a synthetic wastewater with 700ppm of total organic carbon (TOC). In total, 6.5mol of H2O2 were consumed per each mole of total organic carbon removed from solution. The contributions of molecular, radical and photolytic pathways were also studied. The operational costs due to the consumption of electrical energy, reagents and catalysts were calculated. The results showed that the solar photo-Fenton system was economically feasible, able to achieve up to 97% mineralization with a total cost of 1.6cents €/g TOC removed (10.9€/m3 of treated water) at a pilot plant scale.Anaerobic digestion technology has usually been applied to treat food processing industrial wastewater with a high organic matter content Solar photocatalytic degradation reactions are usually performed using direct solar illumination Finally, the use of solar energy is an environmentally friendly process that might be competitive on an industrial scale. However, the implementation of new technologies in certain industries is often a complex process because of skepticism regarding innovations and the lack of economic data. In this paper, the operating cost for treating a synthetic effluent using a photo-Fenton process in a CPC pilot plant has been studied. The operating costs considered in the economic study are related to electrical energy consumption and chemical (reagents and catalysts) consumption. Because stand-alone treatment of industrial wastewater with chemical oxidation technologies is not economically feasible in most cases, the combination of advanced oxidation processes AOPs with several more affordable biological processes should be preferred for end-of-pipe treatment. Our investigation was also aimed at determining whether the combination of chemical and biochemical treatment of industrial pollutants, requiring a pollutant-specific optimization procedure, should be preferred to a long-term acclimation period for biotreatment only. A simulated industrial wastewater, resulting from the processing of apples for juice, was used in these experiments. For this purpose, appropriate dilutions of industrial apple juice were made. An initial concentration of 700 Analytical grade ferrous sulfate (FeSO The CPC consisted of a continuously stirred tank solar reactor (50 Evolution of the H Total Organic Carbon concentration was determined using a TOC analyzer (TOC-5000 Chemical Oxygen Demand (COD, mg O The ferrous, ferric and total iron concentrations were obtained via photometric measurement with 1,10-phenanthroline (according to ISO 6332) using a UV–vis spectrophotometer (Zuzi 4418PC). BOD A central composite experimental design was applied to investigate the effects of four variables (pH and initial concentrations of H The complete experimental design including ranges of variables is shown in In all of the experiments, the disappearance of TOC followed pseudo-first order kinetics, as follows: The Neural Network (NN) applied in this work was solved with two neurons, using a simple exponential activation function with a strategy based on a back-propagation calculation. Further details can be found in the literature A measure of the saliency of the input variables was made based upon the connection weights of the neural networks. This study analyzed the relevance of each variable with respect to the others (expressed as a percentage). Experimental results and NN fitting are shown in Eq. The results of a saliency analysis on the input variables for each neural network (%) are also shown in The values of the optimal mineralization constant for different operating conditions were calculated from simulations using Eq. The increased mineralization efficiency for higher solar power could be due to the continuous regeneration of Fe(II) via photoreduction of Fe(III) up to 580 Low mineralization constants were obtained when a low initial concentration of H  The addition of oxalic acid to the system produces intermediate oxidative species such as superoxide radical anion, O The concentration of oxalic acid required to reach the highest mineralization constant depends on both the solar power and the initial H A concentration of 40  The initial concentration of Fe(II) slightly improves the mineralization rate constant in the studied range due to its photocatalytic effect. From these results, we deduced that the optimum conditions for the mineralization processes under the range of variables for a typical test under medium solar power conditions are as follows: pH=2.7, [Fe(II)]=40 Two stages can be observed clearly during mineralization: in a first step (up to 30% of TOC removal), simple molecules are degraded in a short amount of time, and later, intermediates and complex molecules are mineralized in longer processes. H The duration of the oxidative pre-treatment is a key parameter for the integration of photocatalysis and a biological process. This wastewater after photocatalytic treatment (67 A previous work showed that 91% mineralization can be reached in 40 It is also remarkable that iron is not considered by the Water Framework Directive (Directive 2000/60/EC) or the Decision 2455/2001/EC which implements Directive 2008/105/EC regarding environmental quality standards so that treated water could be poured.  Experiments in scavenger-loaded conditions To determine the main active species responsible for the apple juice wastewater mineralization, comparison experiments in scavenger-loaded conditions were performed ( The addition of NaN Relative distribution of molecular, photolytic and radical pathways To determine the relative importance of each process (i.e., the molecular, radical and photolytic pathways) in the mineralization of the wastewater, two additional tests were performed. The first test studied the photolytic degradation of water (using only the solar energy but without adding H  The economic analysis was performed by analyzing the mineralization process (degradation of TOC present in water) under optimal conditions. The prices of materials (reagents and catalyst) and the electrical consumption of the different devices used for calculating the costs are shown in  The maintenance expenses and depreciation have been calculated. Depreciation was calculated using a simple financial accounting depreciation computation, the straight-line method, which calculates depreciation expense by deducting the salvage value from the cost of the installation and dividing the result by the estimated useful life of the plant. The formula is the following: (Cost−salvage value)/Estimated useful life=Depreciation expense for the year For small-volume plants, the total maintenance cost can reasonably be estimated as a function of the capital of the plant. A value of 2% had been selected previously The use of a homogeneous process with solar light offers an economical and practical alternative for the mineralization of wastewater containing apple juice and can also be used if the water to be treated contains a recalcitrant pollutant. The increased mineralization efficiency for higher solar power could be due to the continuous regeneration of Fe(II) via photo-reduction of Fe(III) up to 580 Financial support from the