During chewing, a meat sample is mashed under compression and shear bite forces whilst saliva is incorporated. The resulting mixture is shaped into a cohesive bolus by agglomeration of small particles to trigger a swallow. This study aims to investigate the relationship between meat structure before chewing and texture after various chewing durations, according to the subject's chewing behavior. Twenty-five young adults participated. Electromyography activity (EMG) was recorded from surface electrodes on the elevator muscles during mastication of cold beef (5 g). Two different meat textures were obtained by varying aging and cooking temperature. Subjects were asked to chew and then to spit out the bolus either after a constant chewing duration (7 s) or when the bolus was ready to be swallowed. Boluses were then weighed to determine saliva incorporation. Cutting tests were applied to measure maximum shear force and to assess bolus structure homogeneity. From EMG recordings, temporal and amplitude parameters were analyzed. The mechanical shear force was maximal for meat before chewing and decreased for the bolus with the lengthening of the chewing duration. Significant texture differences were found for samples before chewing and for two types of bolus but differences were larger for the bolus after 7 s chewing than for the bolus when ready to be swallowed. The amount of saliva incorporated into the bolus increased with both chewing muscular activity and chewing duration. Finally, the more chewing cycles before swallowing, the more comminuted the meat bolus (lower shear force) and the more saliva was incorporated in it. These results fit with one of the major roles of the saliva, that is, to provide cohesion between particles [Nature 391 (1998) 329] and with the intra-oral management of meat during chewing as analyzed by videofluorography [Arch. Oral Biol. 47 (2002) 267].Mastication is a complex sensory-motor activity whereby the ingested food is first transported to the post-canine teeth by the tongue and then processed into a bolus suitable for swallowing. This involves the breakdown of a solid food into smaller particles, the incorporation of saliva, the agglomeration and shaping of the resulting mixture into a cohesive bolus, and finally the transport of the bolus to the pharynx. Organization of the food before chewing refers to its structure even though food properties after intra-oral transformation correspond to its texture ( The effect of texture on salivary flow has also been identified ( This study aims to investigate 1) the relationship among various initial structures of meat and the corresponding swallowable textures after chewing, and 2) the relationship between individual chewing behavior and meat texture when ready to swallow. Twenty-five healthy human subjects (11 female, 14 male) participated in this study. A full dental examination was performed and all had at least eight pairs of natural post-canines teeth. All subjects gave informed consent and the protocol was approved by the Regional Ethic Committee. Two different textures of beef meat were obtained from the same muscle ( Subjects were asked to chew normally cold meat samples (4.7±0.5 g) without swallowing, and then to spit out the bolus when swallowing would normally be triggered. In some experiments subjects were told to stop after 7 s without prior warning. This produced a bolus formed during a standard chewing period which provided shear stress measurements of progressive change. Deglutition was monitored with a necklace strain gauge and trials presenting unexpected swallows were discarded. Boluses with decreases in weight after chewing were also discarded. Texture order and chewing conditions were randomised among subjects and two replicates were performed for each condition giving eight boluses per subject. The left and right superficial masseter and anterior temporalis muscles were located by palpation when subjects clenched their teeth. After careful cleaning of the overlying skin, two surface electrodes (Bionic, France) coated with conductive paste were fixed with an adhesive, 2 cm apart, length wise along each muscle. An additional earth electrode was attached to the ear lobe. The EMG signals were filtered (0–10 kHz) and amplified (×500) using a digital amplifier (Grass Link 15, Grass Instruments, USA). An A/D conversion was performed at 1000 Hz using a CED 1401 (Cambridge Electronic Design, Cambridge, UK). Data were collected using Spike2 software from CED. After rectification of EMG signals, five variables were analysed for the two chewing sequences:      These values were collected from each of the four muscles recorded and then pooled. The meat samples were weighed before and after chewing to appreciate saliva impregnation. Weight variation did not allow identification of the meat juice lost under bite force and the saliva incorporation during chewing. Food boluses were then frozen until use. The mechanical properties of the food boluses were measured by applying a cutting test ( Statistical analysis was performed using the SAS package (version 6.07). Variance analysis was undertaken to study the effect of the different rheological factors on EMG variables by using GLM procedure. Model included subjects, texture, and interaction subjects*texture. Samples were designed to have the same weight, but they showed slight differences in weight (4.7±0.5 g). To avoid any bias due to sample weight, this variable was introduced as a co-variable in the model. When the Between-subjects variability was significant for all variables for all the chewing conditions. When calculated from bolus ready to be swallowed, the Meat texture was progressively transformed during mastication ( Shear stress was determined for meat samples before chewing and for meat bolus after different chewing durations. In addition, the overall juice loss corresponding to cooking and frozen loss was determined on meat before chewing. Texture 1 was tough (max shear force=124 N) and dry (35% juice loss); Texture 2 was tender (83 N) and juicy (25% juice loss). Mechanical shear stress, maximal for meat before chewing, decreased with mastication duration. The difference between the two textures was highly significant from samples before chewing and after 7 s chewing. When the boluses were ready to swallow, shear stress was still significantly different between the meat preparations ( From each bolus, the minimal and maximal stress values obtained from the three to five measurements performed on each bolus were compared. Lower shear stress values were usually obtained from parts of boluses where fibers were already transformed by biting forces. Conversely, high values were usually obtained from fibers still intact, or only slightly comminuted. The differences between these extreme values were calculated and averaged for all boluses. For Texture 1, the differences between maximal and minimal shear stress values per bolus varied from 39.15±2.9 N/cm Although the change in bolus-weight includes juice loss under bite force, it is used as a measure of salivary flow. Not surprisingly, these measurements displayed high between-subject variability. When ready to be swallowed, bolus weight increase varied, depending on subjects, from 9.8 to 85% (mean: 36%) for the tough meat and from 3.8 to 76% (mean: 30%) for the tender meat. Relationships between salivation and chewing activity were examined. The best correlation was found between salivation (bolus-weight increase) and total muscle work ( A weak but significant negative correlation was found between shear stress and weight increase for tough meat ( After a 7 s chewing period, no significant difference on bolus-weight increase was found between the two types of texture ( These results bring new information to the understanding of the chewing process during mastication of meat and consequently to texture perception. Texture of meat, and more specifically tenderness and juiciness, are determinants of its acceptability. Meat tenderness is not usually assessed from the first bite but depends on sensations experienced by the consumer while it is being transformed in the oral cavity ( Some methodological questions are raised, however. During non experimental or “natural” chewing, swallows are basically triggered under reflex control and most of the time solid food chewing induces multiple swallows ( One of the most marked results of this study is that texture differences, identified from intact meat, are evident to the last swallow. The toughest meat gives the toughest bolus, despite being chewed with more strokes, more net work done, and more salivary uptake. In other words, swallowable texture depends on initial food structure properties. Within this group of subjects, homogenous in age and dental status, between-subjects variability was lowest for the mechanical properties of the bolus. Large between-subject variability found from chewing pattern analysis probably contributes to the reduction of individual differences in chewing efficiency. This study was performed with two textures differing in hardness and juiciness. The hardest was also the driest and our protocol did not allow separate analyses of variations in juice release and saliva incorporation. The actual saliva incorporated in the bolus is thus under-reported. The specific role played by juice and saliva in bolus formation is not clear. Juice is thought to interfere with viscous properties of saliva by lengthening bolus formation. This can explain the weakness of the relationship between food hardness and saliva flow found in this study. Indirect evidence suggests a stronger one. Indeed, during chewing, parotid saliva flow increases with EMG activity of the ipsilateral muscles ( The more chewed a piece of meat is, the lower is its mechanical strength and the greater quantity of saliva that is incorporated. These results perfectly fit with one of the major roles of saliva to provide cohesion between particles ( Two thresholds have been described to trigger a swallow: a food particle size and a lubrication threshold ( A cohesive bolus allows safe swallows and mouth clearance. The dynamics of fragmentation and bolus properties in terms of particles size and cohesiveness have been analyzed with brittle products ( The authors thank Robin Heath for his kind and helpful scientific and stylistic advice. This work was part of the Healthsense Project supported by the European Commission Quality of Life and Management of Resources Fifth Framework Program QLK1-CT-1999-00010.