The creation and restoration of new wetlands to mitigate wetland losses is a newly developing science whose success still needs to be assessed. This study focuses on the ecological restoration of a gravel-pit in the low valley of the Seine estuary (France). Restoration consisted in filling the gravel-pit using a hydraulic technique with dredged sediments from the Seine river and covering it with alkaline peat from adjacent wet meadows. Our objectives were to survey the functions of recreated soil 3 years after the gravel-pit was filled and assess whether it regained typical wetland functionality and to determine which soil functioning parameters are the most efficient for assessing restoration success. To address these questions, an approach combining analyses of in situ and ex situ soil functioning was used. The survey was conducted on recreated soil as compared to a control soil (i.e. soil before gravel extraction). Four topographic zones were sampled corresponding to 4 types of recreated soil functioning in terms of waterlogging conditions: Hemic Histosol without waterlogged periods, Hemic Histosol with temporary waterlogged periods, Hemic Histosol with the longest waterlogged periods and Interstratified Histosol without waterlogged periods. Soil respiration and SIR results showed that large stocks of organic matter are maintained after 3 years of restoration and proved able to sequester C in recreated soils. 3 years after restoration, nitrogen removal function measured through denitrification technique was restored in the Hemic Histosol with the longest waterlogged periods. These results demonstrate that waterlogging regime maintain the C stock and accelerate the restoration of denitrification process.Wetlands are among the most important ecosystems on earth. They are broadly defined by However, owing to human activities, more than half of the wetland ecosystems that existed in the early 20th century have been lost ( This study focuses on the ecological restoration of a gravel-pit in the low valley of the Seine estuary (France). Restoration consisted in filling the gravel-pit with dredged sediments from the Seine valley and covering it with alkaline peat coming from soils of adjacent wet meadows (Histosols). More than 5 million tonnes of materials are dredged annually to maintain and improve navigation within the Seine estuary. Consequently, dredging and disposal of these materials has become an important issue in the Seine Valley ( In this context, this paper aims to (i) survey the functioning of recreated soil during 3 years after the gravel-pit was filled with dredged sediments and (ii) assess whether it regained typical wetland functions (C storage, nitrogen transformations and nitrate removal) in order to determine which soil functioning parameters are the most efficient for assessing restoration success. To address these questions, an approach combining analyses of The study was carried out in the gravel-pit of Yville sur Seine, North-West France (49°29′05″ The hydraulic filling of gravel-pits leads to a spatial distribution of sediments that results in the formation of 3 types of recreated soils (RS) according to the “Référentiel Pédologique” ( An “ANTHROPOSOL RECONSTITUE/HISTOSOL mésique reconstitué sur sédiments de dragage” (Hemic Histosol reconstituted on dredged sediments) occupied 77% of the recreated area: “HISTOSOL mésique”, mainly composed of organic soil material but the soil profile is composed of a histic H horizon on its surface (H horizon with 30% organic carbon in weight within a 55-cm depth), a thin layer of mineral Mca1 horizon in its middle (with ∼12% organic carbon, 83% sand content within a 25-cm depth) and a deep mineral Mca2 horizon (with 20% organic carbon, 31% silt content) ( An “ANTHROPOSOL RECONSTITUE/HISTOSOL mésique interstratifié reconstitué sur sédiments de dragage” (Interstratified Histosol reconstituted on dredged sediment) occupied 19% of the recreated area: “HISTOSOL interstratifié”, characterized by a mineral Mca horizon in the top 10 An “ANTHROPOSOL RECONSTITUE/FLUVIOSOL sableux reconstitué sur sédiments de dragage” (Fluvisol reconstitued on dredged sediments) occupied 4% of the recreated area: “FLUVIOSOL reconstitute”, characterized by a mineral Mca horizon in the top 10 Our study was conducted on recreated soil (RS) as compared to control soil (CS). The CS was characterized by a deep organic horizon (histic horizon Hm) covered by 30 For the RS, only the 2 spatially representative soil types are considered in this study: Hemic Histosol (HH) and Interstratified Histosol (IH). Four sampling zones were distinguished to take into account the topographic gradient and, as such, to take into account the waterlogging conditions ( In December 2008, soil was sampled to characterize physico-chemical parameters in the RS and CS. Soil samples were air dried and 2 All soil measurements were conducted on the topsoil layer (0–10 Once a month, soil respiration rates were measured in 3 randomly selected locations in each plot ( Once a month, 3 soil replicates were sampled randomly from each zone to measure inorganic N (NH Net N mineralization is the soil capacity to transform organic N from soil organic matter into inorganic N. Soil net N mineralization was measured Denitrification is the reduction of nitrogen oxides, For The flasks were sealed with rubber stoppers using crimp tops and incubated at 25 Soil was sampled from the top layer (0–10 In aerobic conditions, the amounts of mineralized C & N were determined according to the method proposed by In anaerobic conditions, mineralized N was estimated from NH DEA provides information about the maximum activity of the biomass of enzymes present in the soil at the time of sampling. DEA was measured using the acetylene-inhibition technique described by All statistical analyses were performed using Statistica 6.1 (Statsoft, with 95% confidence intervals). All the results are the means of three replicates ( The normal distribution of the model residues (Shapiro–Wilk test) and the homoscedasticity of variance (Bartlett test) were checked and, in case of unconformity, data were transformed by Soil respiration varied significantly among RS and CS plots and between sampling dates (MANOVA, RS soils (IH and HH) displayed a seasonal pattern similar to CS. However, soil respiration was highest in CS. The highest rates were observed in July when soil temperatures were high, while the lowest rates were observed in January when soil temperatures were minimal. In July 2010 and February 2011, soil respiration in HH Available soil NH Conversely, soil NH Net N mineralization displayed a significant temporal pattern ( Denitrification rates varied widely between sampling zones and dates (MANOVA, SIR varied between RSs ( The SIR/Total respiration ratio varied widely between sampling zones and dates (ANOVA Tukey's test, In RSs, potential C and N mineralization changed between April 2008 and 2011 ( In RSs, the N mineralization rates in aerobic conditions ranged from 0.008 to 0.013% total N DEA varied widely across soils (ANOVA Tukey's test, The highest soil respiration rates were observed in July when soil temperatures were high, while the lowest rates were observed in January when soil temperatures were minimal. Increased temperature and decreased soil moisture content simulated the decomposition of plant debris and soil organic matter. Moreover, Among RSs, the IH soil did not behave in quite the same way as the HH soils regarding soil respiration, SIR and potential C mineralization. This result was due to the way that the gravel-pit was filled. It was filled hydraulically, hence the formation of 4 zones with different topographic levels corresponding to four different restored soils ( Seasonal patterns of nitrate content were similar in RSs and in CS. Soil nitrate contents were significantly higher in the dry seasons (spring and summer) than in the wet seasons (autumn and winter). Rainfall and high water table levels in the wet seasons can impact the activity of nitrifying bacteria, as reported by As expected,  One of the ecosystem services provided by wet meadows is the supply of NO  The combination of our This study revealed that the hydraulic filling of gravel-pits for restored soils leads to (i) a variability of sediments distribution that results in the formation of 3 types of recreated soils and (ii) a topographic gradient which is a controlling factor of the waterlogging regime in these recreated soils and, correlatively, their capacities to store organic C and to remove nitrates. Practically, the combination of We would like to thank the Platform for Chemical Analysis in Ecology of the “SFR 119 Montpellier Environnement Biodiversité”, at the “Centre d’Écologie Fonctionnelle et Évolutive” (CNRS, Montpellier, France). We are also grateful to Philippe Delporte, Jordan Guiz, Lucie Michel and Benjamine Faucon for help with field sampling and laboratory analyses and Ludovic Henneron for statistical analyses. The main financial support for this research was provided by the “Grand Port Maritime de Rouen (GPMR)” via the Yville project. The authors also wish to thank the “Région Haute Normandie” for its subsidies through the research network “SCALE” via the RESSOLV project. We would also like to thank to Ghazi Abu Rumman and Mounia Ahmed for their language corrections of the manuscript.