The purpose of the study was to evaluate the midterm clinical and radiological results in patients with comminuted midsaft clavicle fractures treated with anatomical locking plates and assisted suture loop reduction. Comminuted high-energy clavicle fractures are difficult to treat; during conventional plate fixation, wedge-shaped fragments often need to be fixed with lag screws but sometimes this is not feasible due to high comminution and severe fragmentation. Assisted open reduction with double suture loop can bind the fragments together thus facilitating the application of a bridging anatomic locking plate. Between 2015-2017, 16 patients with high-comminuted midshaft clavicle fractures after high-energy trauma underwent assisted suture loop reduction and internal fixation with anatomical locking plates. All patients were males with a mean age of 34 years-old (range, 16-60 years) and sustained the injury after fall from height (4 patients) or road traffic accidents (12 patients). According to Robinson classification there were 7 patients with 2Β1 fractures and 9 with 2Β2 fractures. In all patients open reduction was facilitated with the use of double loop suture (Ethibond 2-0) around the clavicle for approximation of the fragments; the fractures were stabilized thereafter with anatomical locking plates (7-hole or more). The plate was applied in the superior aspect of the clavicle except for 3 cases that was applied anteriorly. The patients were followed up radiologically at 1, 3, 6, 12 and 24 months. Last clinical evaluation was performed with the Constant score. Mean follow up time was 32 months (range, 24-43 months). Union was achieved in all fractures in a mean period of 3.3 months (2.5 to 4.3 months). The mean Constant score at the last follow up was 88 (75-100) and 92% in comparison with the non-affected shoulder. Two patients developed hypertrophic scars and in one patient the plate had to be removed for cosmetic reasons as it was palpable under the skin. Comminuted fractures of the midshaft of the clavicle, especially after high-energy injuries, require open reduction and internal fixation because of their high rate of nonunion and delayed union. Anatomical bridging plate fixation assisted by suture loop reduction of the fragments, can lead to high rates of union and excellent clinical outcome.