In this study five types of herbal teas were used to quantify the effect of comminution of the leaves on resulting PA exposure. Results show that PA levels extracted from intact leaves were consistently lower than from comminuted tea leaves. The Margin of Exposure (MOE) approach was applied to evaluate the consequences of this difference for the associated risks in the scenario of lifetime exposure. Furthermore, we considered medicinal use of these teas for shorter-than-lifetime exposure scenarios, and also analysed the risks of shorter-than-lifetime use of eight herbal medicines and 19 previously analysed plant food supplements. This analysis revealed that shorter-than-lifetime use resulted in MOE values < 10,000 upon use for 40–3450 weeks during a lifetime, with for only a limited number of herbal teas and medicines use of two weeks a year (150 weeks during a 75 year lifetime) would still raise a concern. It is concluded that taking more realistic conditions into account markedly reduces the concerns raised for these herbal preparations. These results also illustrate the need for development of a generally accepted method for taking short term exposure into account in risk assessment of compounds that are genotoxic and carcinogenic.Botanicals and botanical preparations, such as herbal teas and herbal medicines, have been marketed for several decades. Due to (misleading) advertisement and/or overstatement of the benefits arising from consumption of these products and also because many customers equate ‘natural’ with ‘safe’, botanical preparations are widely used around the world ( In light of the health relevance of PAs derived from herbal teas, recently a number of studies have performed a risk assessment for PAs in herbal teas ( Formic acid (analytical grade) and ammonium carbonate (analytical grade) were obtained from Sigma-Aldrich, Zwijndrecht, the Netherlands). Acetonitrile (LC-MS grade) and methanol (LC-MS grade) were obtained from Actu-all, Oss, the Netherlands). Fifty-four PA analytical standards were sourced from Phytoplan (Heidelberg, Germany), except for: heliotrine and trichodesmine from Latoxan (Valence, France); usaramine from BOC Sciences (Shirley, NY, USA), florosenine from PRISNA (Leiden, the Netherlands), echimidine, indicine, indicine N-oxide, intermedine, intermedine N-oxide, lycopsamine, lycopsamine N-oxide, monocrotaline, monocrotaline N-oxide and otosenine from Phytolab (Vestenbergsgreuth, Germany). Usaramine N-oxide, trichodesmine N-oxide were in-house synthesized by the method of ( Stock solutions of the 54 available PAs were prepared in methanol (100 μg/mL). A mixed solution (1 μg/mL in methanol) containing all PA standards was prepared from the stock solutions. This mixed standard solution was used to spike the herbal teas and medicine samples as described below. Five types of herbal teas derived from PA-producing plants were used to investigate the difference of PAs extraction efficiency between intact leaves and comminuted leaves, including coltsfoot ( The intact leaves of each tea were randomly selected and ground to produce the comminuted leaves using a grinder (HR2056, Philips, the Netherlands). The intact leaves as well as the comminuted leaves of these teas were used for hot water extraction and subsequent PA analysis. For PA extraction, 2 g of the sample were positioned in a 250 mL glass beaker and 150 mL of boiling water was poured onto the tea. The infusion was stirred 3 times in 10 min. This procedure was selected as a worst case scenario for extraction of bioactive ingredients upon hot water extraction based on literature ( From each of the filtered infusions four aliquots were taken and transferred to autosampler vials. Of tea 1 (coltsfoot) aliquots of 400 μL; of tea 3 (borage) aliquots of 20 μL; of tea 2 (comfrey) and tea 4 (climbing groundsel) aliquots of 100 μL and of tea 5 (sunn hemp) aliquots of 200 μL were taken. For each infusion one of the aliquots was spiked with 25 ng/mL (25 μl of 1 μg/mL PA mix) and one was spiked with 100 ng/mL (100 μL of 1 μg/mL PA mix). The total volumes were made up to 1 mL with water. A total of eight herbal medicines were purchased from the Chinese market. The products were in the form of capsules, pills or tablets, four of them containing PA-producing plants and four containing non-PA-producing plants. For PA analysis from each sample three test portions of 1.0 g were extracted with 20 mL of 1.0% formic acid solution by agitation for 30 min. Before extraction one of the test portions was fortified with the mixed PA standard solution at 500 μg/kg (500 μL of 1 μg/mL PA mix). After centrifugation 5 mL of supernatant was transferred to a new tube and brought to pH 6–7 with 1 M ammonium carbonate solution, pH 9. The extracts were further purified by SPE over a StrataX 200 mg, 6 cc cartridge. Cartridges were conditioned with 6 mL methanol, followed by 6 mL water. After the extract was passed through the cartridge, this was washed with 6 mL 1% formic acid, followed by 6 mL water and dried under vacuum using a vacuum manifold for 10 min. PAs were eluted with 6 mL of methanol and the eluates were dried under a stream of nitrogen at 50 °C using a TurboVap. The extracts were reconstituted in 500 μL of 10% methanol and filtered using 0.45 μm PTFE filtervials (UniPrep, Whatman, Maidstone, UK). Medicines 5 and 8 contained senkirkine at concentrations exceeding the spiked concentration of 500 μg/kg. Senkirkine was quantified in these samples by spiking aliquots (1 mL) of the herbal extracts with senkirkine at 50 μg/mL (5 μL of a 10 μg/mL solution of senkirkine in methanol and at 250 ng/mL (25 μL of a 10 μg/mL solution of senkirkine). The fortifications correspond to 1000 and 5000 μg/kg in the herbal medicine, respectively. In-house validated methods for 54 PAs in herbal tea infusions and in PFS were used. For PAs in herbal infusions the LOQs obtained were at 0.05 μg/L and in herbal supplements at 4–5 μg/kg. LODs were estimated at 0.01–0.02 μg/L in herbal infusions and at 1–2 μg/kg in PFS. For PFS recoveries (level: 100 μg/kg) varied from 73 to 107%. Repeatability (n = 5) ranged between 8.1 and 24% at 10 μg/kg, between 3.1 and 8.5% at 100 μg/kg and between 3.1 and 10.9% at 250 μg/kg. Linearity of the LC-MS/MS system was checked by analysis of 8-point calibration curves prepared in blank tea extract and in blank PFS extract over the range of 0–250 ng/mL. Analysis of PAs was performed in positive electrospray mode on an LC-MS/MS system consisting of a Waters Acquity UPLC coupled to a Xevo TQ-S tandem mass spectrometer (Waters, Milford, MA, USA). At least two MRM transitions were measured per analyte. Besides the 54 PAs for which an analytical standard was available, the samples were screened for another 35 1,2-unsaturated PAs for which no standards were available. These PAs could be included in the analytical method because mass spectrometric data were available from the analysis of extracts of authentic Quantification of the PAs in the herbal infusions was based on one-point standard addition of PAs to the infusion. Depending on the concentration found in the extract, either the standard addition at 25 ng/mL was used or the one at 100 ng/mL. The PAs in the herbal medicines were quantified based on one-point standard addition of 500 μg/kg to the herbal product. Medicines 5 and 8 contained senkirkine at higher concentrations and these were quantified by spiking the herbal extracts with senkirkine at 50 and 250 ng/mL (corresponding to 1000 and 5000 μg/kg in the herbal medicine, respectively). PAs for which no PA reference standard was available were semi-quantified by taking a structurally related PA reference standard, as indicated in the Supplementary Data 1. To perform a risk assessment, the daily PA intake resulting from use of the herbal teas was estimated assuming daily consumption of the amount of PAs extracted by hot water extraction from 2 g tea, corresponding to one cup of tea, as described before ( Risk assessment was performed using the MOE approach. EFSA has recently set a reference point of 237 μg/kg bw/day for riddelliine as the point of departure (PoD) to assess the carcinogenicity risk of PAs ( MOE values for the chronic lifetime exposure to herbal teas and herbal medicines were calculated based on daily exposure during a lifetime. We applied Haber's rule to correct the EDI values for this short term exposure ( The possibility was considered that herbal teas or herbal medicines may be used for longer periods than 2 weeks or 6 weeks a year during a lifetime. For those herbal products, assuming a 75-year lifetime, the maximum number of weeks was calculated during which the product could be consumed to result in an MOE value of 10,000 given a BMDL This calculation was also applied for the 34 types of herbal teas and 19 PFS, based on the data that have been previously reported by Five types of herbal teas were used to compare the total amount of PAs that were extracted either from the intact or the comminuted leaves. The amounts of PAs extracted from the intact leaves of each tea were consistently lower compared to the levels extracted from the comminuted leaves ( We were interested whether the PAs present in the teas could be correlated with the botanical plant name listed on the label. Coltsfoot ( In several preparations trace levels PAs were found that could not be directly attributed to the botanical species reported on the label. These PAs can come from impurities present in the herbal teas, due to co-harvesting or processing of unrelated PA-containing plants. The MOE values based on the total PA levels that were extracted from either comminuted leaves or intact leaves of the five types of herbal teas assuming daily use during a whole lifetime are depicted in Fig. 2B shows the MOE values for herbal teas in the form of comminuted leaves and intact leaves assuming consumption for two or six weeks/year during a lifetime. In particular consumption of borage tea still resulted in MOE values below 10,000, independent of the form of the leaves. Short term two weeks exposure to the extracts of comminuted leaves of comfrey and climbing groundsel teas resulted in MOE values just below 10,000, but for the intact leaves above 10,000. For coltsfoot and sunn hemp teas MOE values above 10,000 were obtained, irrespective of the form of the leaves. Assuming six weeks exposure/year during a lifetime, to mimic the definition of short term exposure in existing regulations, reduces the MOE values 3-fold resulting in a value < 10,000 for borage, comfrey and sunn hemp teas, independent of the form of the leaves. These results show that the size of the leaves and the duration of the short term exposure may influence the corresponding risk assessment.  The MOE values for the eight types of medicines were evaluated according to three exposure scenario's including consumption at the recommended daily intake of that medicine daily throughout the whole lifespan ( In addition to the herbal teas and herbal medicines analysed in the present study also a risk assessment for shorter-than-lifetime exposure was made for the 34 types of (herbal) teas and 19 PFS for which PA levels were previously reported by  Consumption of herbal medicines that contain a PA-producing plant as ingredient, would not raise a concern for medicines 5, 6 and 8 when consumption is less than approximately 40, 150 and 200 weeks during a lifetime (0.5, 2.0 and 2.7 weeks/year). The other herbal medicines could be consumed on a daily basis, provided the medicine is the only source of PA exposure ( For the herbal teas for which PA levels were reported by With respect to the PFS, 17 of 19 PFS showed that a daily use of 200 mg during a lifetime would not raise a concern, and only for two samples, a plant extract formula reported by In the present study, we investigated the extraction of PAs in hot water from intact leaves and the corresponding finely ground leaves of five herbal PA containing teas and also examined the presence of PAs in eight samples of commercially available herbal medicines. For preparation of the infusion, the tea sample was steeped in the water for 10 min and the infusion was stirred 3 times. This procedure was selected as a worst case scenario for extraction of bioactive ingredients upon hot water extraction. For instance, In order to minimize the risk to miss relevant PAs, the samples were analysed for a comprehensive set of 89 1,2-unsaturated PAs. The previous studies on exposure and risk assessment for herbal teas and supplements were based on a set of 28 PAs ( The herbal teas selected in this study are available for the consumer in the form of intact leaves. Comparing total PA levels in hot water extracts of the intact and comminuted leaves from five PA-plant containing herbal teas, we found that, overall, the PA concentrations extracted from the comminuted leaves were 1.1–4.1 times higher compared to concentrations extracted from the intact leaves. It is of interest that, not only higher levels of PAs were extracted from the comminuted leaves but sometimes also different PAs were found in the hot water extracts from the comminuted leaves. This indicates that PA extraction efficiency can be influenced by the particle size of the botanical sample. In line with this, previous studies have demonstrated that using comminuted fruits increased the extraction efficiency of alkenylbenzenes as compared to the whole fruits ( It is of interest to note that the form of the leaves also may have an effect on the type of PAs extracted. For example trichodesmine N-oxide was the PA present at the highest concentrations in sunn hemp teas extracted from the intact leaves, whereas monocrotaline N-oxide was the most abundant PA in the extract from the comminuted leaves. In hot water extracts from intact and comminuted leaves the amount of PA N-oxides dominated over that of PA free bases, which is in line with other studies However, in the herbal medicines the PAs were present solely in the free-base form. In line with this, Using the total PA levels, we performed a risk assessment for these herbal products taking the use of intact tea leaves as well as shorter-than-lifetime exposure scenario's into account. In addition, we analysed the consequences of shorter-than-lifetime use for the risk assessment of herbal teas and PFS reported by We previously found that whole lifetime exposure to PA-plant containing herbal teas, including borage and coltsfoot teas with consumption of one cup of those teas per day would result in the MOE values below 10,000 ( We also estimated the number of weeks one could consume the different types of teas and PFS that have been analysed before by It is of interest to note that the values from 2.1 to 9.2 weeks a year obtained for safe consumption of PA containing PFS, are all covered by the limit of two weeks established by EMA for the short term use of such herbal products in self-medication ( In the current study we focused primarily on the individual MOEs for a set of herbal teas and medicines, assuming that there is no additional exposure to PAs from any other source. One could argue that our approach for herbal teas and PFS could be prone to underestimate the risks in terms of the amounts of PAs consumed, since individuals may drink different types of herbal teas at the same time with addition of honey, a product which contains PAs ( Taken together the results of the present study illustrate the need for development of a generally accepted method for taking shorter-than-lifetime exposure into account when analysing the risks of botanicals and botanical preparations containing compounds that can be genotoxic and carcinogenic. Using Haber's rule to correct for shorter periods of use may prevent from an overestimation of the actual risk to human health. The application of Haber's rule is based on the assumption that the tumour incidence and carcinogenic processes induced by carcinogens have a linear relationship with the cumulative dose ( The authors declare that they have no conflict of interest. The authors declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this paper. This work was funded by a grant from the The following are the Supplementary data to this article: Supplementary data to this article can be found online at