Cumulative sum (CUSUM) and exponentially weighted moving average (EWMA) schemes are widely used in monitoring small and persistent shifts in specific process characteristics. Nonparametric (Distribution-free) CUSUM and EWMA schemes are useful in detecting such changes when the underlying process distribution is unknown or complicated. The CUSUM-Wilcoxon rank-sum (CUSUM-WRS), CUSUM-Precedence, EWMA-WRS, and EWMA-Precedence are well-known distribution-free CUSUM and EWMA schemes for Phase-II monitoring of a shift in the unknown location parameter of a process. In this article, we compare their performances with two robust CUSUM and EWMA schemes based on the Hogg-Fisher-Randle (HFR) type statistic. We investigate the accomplishments of these CUSUM and EWMA schemes in detecting shifts of different sizes for various process distributions and show that the proposed CUSUM and EWMA HFR schemes perform favourably for highly skewed distributions. In this article, we also discuss the efficacy of these nonparametric CUSUM and EWMA schemes when the test sample size is small. We also outline the implementation strategies various plans with an illustration using a dataset from the iron ore mining plant. We offer some concluding remarks and future research problems.From traditional quality monitoring in the manufacturing industry to monitoring the efficacy of health care system (see To this end, distribution-free control charts provide a robust alternative as their In the process control literature, the Shewhart-type schemes are the most popular and widely used. These schemes are particularly suitable for a substantial shift in the process parameters and are often less useful for detecting small and persistent changes. To overcome such limitations of the Shewhart-type schemes, In addition to the CUSUM schemes, the EWMA schemes first introduced by In this context, we investigate the performance of the CUSUM and EWMA schemes for Phase-II monitoring based on three nonparametric statistics, namely, the WRS statistic, the Hogg, Fisher, and Randle (HFR) and Precedence statistics. In statistical literature, the WRS statistic is the most popular rank statistic for two-sample location problems. It is based on the sum of the ranks of one sample in the combined samples. We have articulated the rest of the article as follows: In Let us consider any univariate continuous random process that is not necessarily normally distributed. When the process appears to be Suppose that Then, we may define The Suppose that we consider a two-sample location shift detection problem using the reference sample and the  Clearly,  Finally, we consider the Precedence type statistic (abbreviated as PR). The Precedence statistic has a long history. From In this section, we construct CUSUM and EWMA control schemes based on the three above mentioned nonparametric monitoring statistics. In this article, we are chiefly interested in monitoring the right shift of the location parameter. Therefore, we consider only the upper one-sided control scheme. If the location shift in either direction is of interest, then one has to design a two-sided control scheme which we briefly mention later in Remark 3.1. In this context, we standardize all four test statistics before using them to construct the CUSUM and EWMA schemes. The charting procedure for different statistics is described below.    Now, we standardize the statistic from       Similarly, to construct the EWMA scheme, we have to replace Step 4 onwards as follows:  Here,  Note that the pivot In this section, we compare the six nonparametric schemes, namely, the CUSUM-WRS, CUSUM-HFR, CUSUM-Precedence, EWMA-WRS, EWMA-HFR, and EWMA-Precedence, covering various aspects of We have provided the detailed derivations to obtain the closed form expressions of the conditional and unconditional run-length distributions of all the CUSUM and EWMA schemes in the From the distribution-free characteristics of the WRS, HFR and Precedence types schemes, we know that their In this section, we discuss the For brevity, we only provide the comparisons of We see from For the exponential distribution, in general, we see from For the case of gamma distribution (scale = 1, shape = 3) in The results for the log-logistic distribution in For the lognormal For the case of Laplace In summary, especially for right-skewed models, a natural choice could be the EWMA-HFR scheme for a tiny shift, i.e., In recent year, various authors have demonstrated the importance of their proposed designs in real-life applications. Due to the depletion of high-grade iron ores around the globe, it is crucial to use froth flotation approach to enhance the iron concentration of low-grade iron ores. Note that low-grade iron ores contain high concentration of impurities, such as silica (quartz or sand), phosphorus and alumina containing minerals. Froth flotation process is an effective approach to remove the main impurity, i.e. silica from iron ores. Therefore, in this section, we illustrate all the six nonparametric CUSUM and EWMA schemes by using real-world data from iron ore mining plant. The quality characteristic of interest in this data is the percentage of silica concentrate that remains as an impurity at the end of the froth flotation process. A high level of silica concentrate in the iron ore is undesirable as it is not usable, for example, not suitable to be further processed into steel. Note that this dataset is available in the public domain. Before the implementation of the nonparametric schemes to monitor the percentage of silica concentrate, we need to choose a reference sample and determine whether it is After omitting samples 36, 41 and 59 from the reference sample, we obtained the first revised reference sample. Then, for the remaining 58 Phase-I samples, For Phase-II process monitoring, we consider a Phase-II sample which consists of 35 test samples, each of size We see from In this article, we review three Phase-II CUSUM and three Phase-II EWMA schemes, including the new CUSUM and EWMA schemes based on rank-based HFR statistic. The rank-based schemes are exactly distribution-free, and therefore, these schemes are This work was supported by the Let us first consider the conditional run-length distribution. For upper one-sided CUSUM, Note that Observe that if Note that, Thus, Consequently, for Let us first consider the conditional run-length distribution. For upper one-sided EWMA, Note that Observe that if Note that, Thus, Consequently, for