The adsorption of some textile dyes by diatomite was investigated using Sıf Blau BRF (SB), Everzol Brill Red 3BS (EBR), and Int Yellow 5GF (IY). Adsorption of these textile dyes onto diatomite earth samples was studied by batch adsorption techniques at 30 °C. The adsorption behavior of textile dyes on diatomite samples was investigated using a UV–vis spectrophotometric technique. The effect of particle size of diatomite, diatomite concentration, the effect of initial dye concentrations, and shaking time on adsorption was investigated. Adsorption coverage over the surface of diatomite was studied using two well-known isotherm models: Langmuir's and Freundlich's. These results suggest that the dye uptake process mediated by diatomite has a potential for large-scale treatment of textile mill discharges. According to the equilibrium studies, the selectivity sequence can be given as IY > SB > EBR. Values of the removal efficiency of the dyes ranged from 28.60 to 99.23%. These results show that natural diatomite holds great potential to remove textile dyes from wastewater.The presence of color in many industrial effluent streams is aesthetically undesirable. Colored organic effluent is produced in the textile, paper, plastic, leather, food, and mineral processing industries One of the powerful treatment processes for the removal of dyes from water at low cost is adsorption. Adsorption techniques have proven successful in removing colored organics Cationic dye molecules also have a very high affinity for clay surfaces and are readily adsorbed when added to clay suspensions. Because of their high molar absorptivity, dye molecules and their aggregates are easily detected by spectrophotometric and photophysical techniques, even at relatively low concentrations Biosorption is defined as the accumulation and concentration of pollutants from aqueous solutions by the use of biological materials, thus allowing the recovery and/or environmentally acceptable disposal of the pollutants. Biosorption of various organic pollutants in wastewaters has been investigated by various workers Diatomite is a siliceous rock made up largely from the skeletons of aquatic plants called diatoms. Apart from being made of fossil skeletons, diatomite is essentially opaline hydrous silica. It is used as an absorber of hazardous chemicals in handling and storage and refining various acids The aim of this study is to produce a satisfactory effluent for discharge into receiving waters or for reuse as a water supply from different concentrated textile dye solutions (SB, EBR, and IY), using diatomite earth samples. The adsorption properties and adsorption isotherms of natural diatomite for some textile dyes in solution were investigated. Three commercial dyes were chosen for this study. SB, EBR, and IY dyes were provided as gift samples by CEPA Textile Fabrics (Denizli, Turkey). The molecular structure diagrams and formulae of SB, EBR, and IY were not provided for commercial reasons. IY represents an indanthrene dye, while EBR and SB are examples of the reactive type, which is characterized by the presence of nitrogen–nitrogen azo bonds. Diatomite earth was supplied as a natural resource from the Sarayköy basin, Denizli. Sample of 1 kg was washed several times with deionized water until neutralization of the decantant was achieved. Finally, the sample was filtered, dried in an oven at 100 °C, sieved, and stored in closed containers for further tests. Major oxide analysis by XRF can be carried out on as little as 0.5 g of diatomite. The sample material analyzed as a pressed powder was fused into a glass disk using a suitable flux, such as lithium tetraborate. Using fused samples produces an evenly dispersed solid solution, which enables a wide range of matrix compositions to be accurately determined through the normalization of both particle size and interelement (matrix) effects. All the chemicals were analytical grades obtained from Merck. A standard stock solution of the dyes was prepared by appropriate dilution with deionized water to a final concentration of 1000 mg/L. Dyes were hydrolyzed by Na Aqueous solutions of SB was prepared at a final concentration of 10–90 mg/L with 10 mg/L intervals. Adsorption isotherm experiments were carried out in 100-ml Erlenmeyer flasks to which 5 g of diatomite (63 μm) and 50 ml of the appropriate concentration of the test dye solution were added. The samples were subsequently capped and shaken at 125 rpm in a GFL Type 1083 shaker for 3 min at 30 °C. After phase separation by centrifugation (2 min at 2000 rpm), the residual dyes in aqueous solutions were determined using a UV–vis spectrophotometer (Shimadzu 1100). The final dye concentrations were determined using SB, EBR, and IY textile dyes solutions showed maximum absorbance at wavelengths of 612, 544, and 441 nm. The concentrations were calculated using the Beer–Lambert equation, The amount of adsorbed dye was calculated from the difference between initial and final concentrations. Adsorption of these textile dyes on natural diatomite was determined in terms of distribution coefficients, The pH was adjusted to pH 11 by adding sodium carbonate. The flasks were then removed from the shaker and the final concentration of textile dyes in the solution was measured using the spectrophotometer. Similar procedures were performed at a solution temperature of 30 °C. Equilibrium isotherms are very important in designing adsorption systems. To estimate the adsorption characteristics of an adsorbent, the adsorption isotherms with a specific adsorbate are carried out. The concentration variation method is used to calculate the adsorption characteristic of the adsorbent and the process. Adsorption coverage over the surface of diatomite was studied using the two well-known isotherm models: Langmuir's and Freundlich's. The experimental results have been fitted to the Langmuir model and to the Freundlich model. The equilibrium data for textile dyes over the concentration range from 10 to 90 mg/L at 30 °C has been correlated with the Langmuir isotherm, The Freundlich sorption isotherm, one of the most widely used mathematical descriptions, usually fits the experimental data over a wide range of concentrations. This isotherm gives an expression encompassing the surface heterogeneity and the exponential distribution of active sites and their energies. The Freundlich adsorption isotherms were also applied for the removal of textile dyes on diatomite, The Freundlich constants of The chemical composition of diatomite determined by X-ray fluorescence (XRF) is shown in The dependence of SB dye adsorption on diatomite (300 μm) concentration was studied at 30 °C by varying the adsorbent amount from 1 to 9 g while keeping the volume, 50 ml, of the dye solution constant (100 mg/L). The results, shown in  As generally expected, a change in the inlet dye concentration of the feed affects the adsorption. The adsorption of SB was studied as a function of dye concentration. Dye concentration was varied from 10 to 100 mg/ml. The effect of shaking contact time was studied using a constant concentration (10 mg/ml) of dye solution at 30 °C. The adsorption of SB dye onto composite adsorber has been investigated as a function of time in the range of 1–30 min. The adsorption of textile dyes on natural diatomite as a function of their concentration was studied at 30 °C by varying SB and EBR concentrations from 10 to 90 mg/L and IY concentrations from 70 to 630 mg/L while keeping all other parameters constant. The adsorption and The pH of the aqueous solution is an important variable for the adsorption of dyes on the adsorbents. The effect of the pH on dye adsorption by diatomite was studied at pH 11. The equilibrium isotherm at 30 °C was fitted using a Langmuir model and compared with the proposed correlation. It appears that Langmuir and Freundlich models were fitted these data at the solute concentrations in The Diatomite was used as an adsorbent for removal of textile dyes from water. Diatomite is a locally available, low-cost adsorbent in Turkey. Diatomite is approximately 500 times cheaper than commercial activated carbon, CAC. The results show that SB, EBR, and IY adsorption on diatomite is very fast compared to that on CAC. Therefore diatomite can be used as a highly effective low-cost adsorbent for the removal of indanthrene and reactive dyes. Crystal structure of diatomite contains some ion-exchangeable cations such as Na The maximum of recovery dye was obtained at 3 min and the value rapidly decreased with increasing shaking time. The filtration is an important property of the adsorbents to be used in water treatment, since most adsorption purification processes depend on filtration. The filtration process based on this diatomite represent a possible alternative to the conventional textile dyes separation processes. We can suggest that plunging process of the packed or pelleted diatomite in textile wastewater for three min. Superplasticizers are used to increase the workability of cement mixes formulated at low water-to cement ratios and to produce concretes of high strength Although real textile effluents contain a mix of more than one dye, it is essential initially to consider single-dye systems to reduce the complexity of using real textile effluent. This being said, future work will include studies of multicomponent systems as well as real textile effluent.