Bone marrow-derived mesenchymal stem cells (BM-MSCs) hold great promise for tissue regeneration. With increasing numbers of clinical trials, the safety of BM-MSCs attracts great interest. Previously, we determined that rat BM-MSCs possessed spontaneous calcification without osteogenic induction after continuous culture. However, it is unclear whether BM-MSCs from other species share this characteristic. In this study, spontaneous calcification of BM-MSCs from rat, goat, and human specimens was investigated in vitro. BM-MSCs were cultured in complete medium, and calcification was determined by morphologic observation and alizarin red staining. It was demonstrated that rat BM-MSCs possessed a typically spontaneous calcification, whereas goat and human BM-MSCs under the same system proliferated significantly but did not calcify spontaneously. The significant species variation in spontaneous calcification of BM-MSCs described in this study provides useful information regarding evaluation of numerous BM-MSC-based approaches for bone regeneration and the safety of BM-MSCs.Mesenchymal stem cells (MSCs) can be isolated from various tissues To date, it is shown that the MSC-based regenerative approach is safe; however, two drawbacks should be considered: one is tumorigenesis, and the other is spontaneous calcification or ossification. The former issue is still controversial, but spontaneous calcification of rodent BM-MSCs has been clearly confirmed. In our previous study, it was demonstrated that rat BM-MSCs calcified spontaneously without any osteogenic induction after continuous culture, and the calcified nodules were positive for collagen type I, osteocalcin and alkaline phosphatase Isolation and expansion of BM-MSCs from different species have become routine procedures in the laboratory, but properties and functions of BM-MSCs vary. These discrepancies could result from the donor age, gender, isolation method, culture condition and number of passages, but the most key element may be inter-species variation. It is well known that there is still no definitive marker to identify BM-MSCs, although the International Society of Cell Therapy provided the minimal criteria All animal experiments were approved by the Laboratory Animal Management Committee of Sichuan Province (Permit No. SYXK-2008-119). Nine Sprague-Dawley rats and three goats were obtained from the Laboratorial Animal Center of Sichuan University. Human bone marrow samples were collected from one healthy donor and three patients with scoliosis with informed consent. The experimental procedures were approved by the local ethics committee. Rat BM-MSCs were isolated as previously described To analyze the cell surface antigens of human BM-MSCs, cells were detached with trypsin and ethylenediamine tetraacetic acid, washed, re-suspended in PBS and stained for 30 min on ice with saturating amounts of fluorescein isothiocyanate (FITC)-conjugated or phycoerythrin (PE)-conjugated anti-human antibodies: CD34-FITC, CD14-FITC, HLA-DR-FITC, CD45-FITC, CD19-FITC, CD90-PE, CD29-PE, CD73-PE and CD166-PE (all from BioLegend, San Diego, CA, USA). The appropriate FITC-conjugated or PE-conjugated isotypic controls were also purchased from BioLegend. All analysis was done on a Becton Dickinson FACSAria flow cytometer (BD Biosciences, San Jose, CA, USA) running BD FACSDiva Software version 6.1.1. The multiple differentiation potency of goat and human BM-MSCs was investigated after induction. To induce osteogenic differentiation, cells were treated with the osteogenic medium (complete medium with 0.1 μmol/L dexamethasone, 10 mmol/L β-glycerol phosphate and 50 μg/mL ascorbate-2-phosphate) for 18 days. The medium was changed every 3 days. After induction, cells were washed with PBS, fixed with 75% ethanol for 20 min and stained with 1% alizarin red solution (Sigma-Aldrich, St Louis, MO, USA) for 30 min at 37°C to examine the mineralized matrix deposition. For adipogenic differentiation, cells were cultured in complete medium with 0.5 μmol/L isobutyl-methylxanthine, 0.25 μmol/L dexamethasone, 10 μmol/L insulin and 50 μmol/L indomethacin for 10 days. After that, cells were fixed with 10% formalin for 30 min and stained with oil red O solution (Sigma-Aldrich) for 45 min to examine lipid droplets in cytoplasm. For chondrogenic differentiation, cells were cultured in complete medium supplemented with 100 μg/mL sodium pyruvate, 10 ng/mL transforming growth factor-β1, 100 nmol/L dexamethasone, 1% insulin-transferrin-selenium and 100 μg/mL ascorbate-2-phosphate. To evaluate deposition of glycosaminoglycans, 14 days later, cells were fixed with 10% formalin for 20 min and stained with Alcian Blue 8GX (Cyagen Biosciences, Guangzhou, China) for 30 min. All the staining results were viewed using an Olympus microscope (Olympus Optical, Tokyo, Japan) and then photographed. The spontaneous calcification model of BM-MSCs was established as previously described The morphology of rat, goat and human BM-MSCs was observed under a light microscope on days 3, 7, 14 and 21. For alizarin red staining, the complete medium was decanted; the cells were washed with PBS twice and fixed for 20 min at room temperature with 75% alcohol. Cells were then stained with 1% alizarin red solution as described earlier. The mineralized nodules were photographed. As the positive control, human BM-MSCs were seeded at a density of 2000 cells/cm The phenotype and differentiation ability of rat BM-MSCs were investigated in our previous study Cultured in complete medium for 3 days, rat BM-MSCs exhibited a typical fibroblast-like morphology ( This calcification process was not observed in goat and human BM-MSCs cultured in the same system. They both displayed a fibroblast-like cell shape and proliferated well over 3 days ( Because spontaneous calcification is an intrinsic property of rat BM-MSCs that has been determined by Despite many similarities, species variation affects not only the spontaneous calcification but also other behaviors of BM-MSCs Why was spontaneous calcification observed only in the rat BM-MSCs but not other BM-MSCs? The detailed mechanism was not well elucidated, which is the major limitation of this qualitative study we should acknowledge. The following explanations may be helpful. The intrinsic high osteogenic potency of BM-MSCs may be due to tissue-specific environmental cues “imprinted” on them In conclusion, our results showed that goat and human BM-MSCs did not behave the same way as rat BM-MSCs in regard to spontaneous calcification. More calcification potency of rat BM-MSCs compared with goat and human BM-MSCs would give a cue to different outcomes in bone regeneration among species. Species variation in biologic behaviors of BM-MSCs should be taken fully into consideration when extending the results from animal model to clinical application. We suggest that human BM-MSCs should always be used as a tool to evaluate the bone regeneration potential of newly developed materials or instruments. When BM-MSCs are used for other non-osseous tissue regeneration, the possible calcification or ossification should be verified and excluded before extensive clinical application. This work was financially supported by the  Supplementary data related to this article can be found online at 