Recently, diamond grinding has gained increasing attention as pavement preservation treatment to restore desired surface characteristics, particularly friction. Compared to other pavement preservation treatments such as surface overlays and high friction surface treatments, diamond grinding may cost less, save construction time, or require minimum maintenance. Diamond grinding produces longitudinal, continuous, and line-type texture that contains corrugations with evenly spaced ridges. The improved surface texture will immediately enhance pavement surface friction and reduce the possibility of hydroplaning in rainy weather. However, little information has been documented on the texture characteristics and long-term friction performance of diamond-ground pavements. A field evaluation was conducted to examine the surface texture and friction characteristics in diamond-ground concrete and asphalt pavements by the authors. Five pavement test sections, including two diamond-ground concrete pavements, one diamond-ground concrete bridge deck, one diamond-ground asphalt pavement, and one transversely tined concrete pavement, were selected for evaluation. Laser scanner testing was performed to capture both macro and microtexture profiles. Locked wheel testing was performed to measure the friction numbers. The test results were examined and compared so as to evaluate two performances, after construction and long-term friction performance of diamond-ground pavements. It was found that longitudinal diamond grinding can provide durable, satisfactory surface friction performance for both concrete and asphalt pavements.Diamond grinding is a widely accepted practice to remove bumps and rectify surface defects on concrete pavements. It has been effectively used as part of concrete pavement restoration (CPR) since 1965 ( Consequently, diamond grinding has gained increasing attention as pavement preservation treatment to restore desired surface characteristics such as ride, noise, friction, and drainage on existing pavements. The International Grooving and Grinding Association (IGGA) has developed guide specifications for use of diamond grinding in three different operations, city streets, asphalt pavements, and pavement preservation ( However, little information has been documented on the texture characteristics and long-term friction performance of diamond-ground pavements. Wet pavement friction is dominated by both surface macrotexture and microtexture ( In order to examine the texture and friction characteristics of longitudinally diamond-ground hot mix asphalt (HMA) and Portland cement concrete (PCC) pavements, a total of five pavement test sections, four diamond-ground test sections and one transversely tined test section, as shown in Although IGGA has developed specifications for conventional diamond grinding of city streets, diamond grinding asphalts, and diamond grinding for pavement preservation, respectively. These three specifications are aimed at providing the same final surface finish, i.e., longitudinal, corduroy-type texture with ridge peaks approximately 1.5–4.8 mm above the grooves. In the FHWA diamond grinding checklist for concrete pavement preservation, the texture requirements cover three design parameters such as depth, groove, and land area. The texture for hard aggregate is 1.5 mm deep with 2.5–4.0 mm wide grooves and 2.0 mm wide lane area. In general, the texture depth does not vary from project to project. The land area, however, should be adjusted in terms of the hardness of aggregate. A larger land area is commonly utilized in pavements with softer aggregate. The texture depth required by FHWA is much less than that required by IGGA and is currently in general agreement with the texture depth requirements used by state DOTs ( Two types of field testing, laser scanner test and locked wheel test, were conducted to evaluate the surface frictional properties of the diamond-ground pavements. The laser scanner test was conducted to measure the surface texture of diamond-ground pavements. After an extensive comparison ( The locked wheel test was conducted to measure the wet pavement skid resistance in accordance with ASTM E-274 using the standard smooth tire ( In the analysis of macrotexture profiles, the measured profile was filtered to generate the macrotexture profile using a high pass of 50 mm and a low pass of 0.5 mm, i.e., the cutoff wavelengths for macrotexture. The data sample spacing was set to one third of the low pass, i.e., 0.167 mm. In the analysis of microtexture, however, the total profile was filtered to generate the microtexture profile using a high pass of 0.5 mm and a low pass of 0.03 mm, instead of the cutoff wavelengths for microtexture, and the data sample spacing was set to 0.01 mm accordingly. This is because the laser scanner used by the authors was only capable of measuring pavement texture in the wavelength range of 0.03 mm–50 mm. As demonstrated in For the surface macrotexture profiles, the valleys vary more significantly than the peaks, and the valley depths are greater than the peak heights on the diamond-ground asphalt pavement. On the diamond-ground concrete pavement, the valley depths may vary more or less significantly than the peak heights. However, the valley depths are slightly greater than the peak heights. For the microtexture profiles, the variation in valley depths is close to that in peak heights on the diamond-ground asphalt pavement and both the valley depths and peak heights are close to each other. Similar observations were also made on the diamond-ground concrete pavement. Overall, the longitudinal diamond-ground concrete pavements have more significant periodic trends than the longitudinal diamond-ground asphalt pavements. The longitudinal diamond-ground asphalt pavements have greater deviations than the diamond-ground concrete pavements. The valley depths and peak heights on the longitudinal diamond-ground asphalt pavements are both greater than the valley depths and peak heights on the diamond-ground concrete pavements. Presented in For the microtexture produced by diamond grinding, two observations can be found from the MPD and RMS values in It is well known that the friction performance of diamond-ground pavement varies with many factors such as pavement type, aggregate type, and operation type. For the initial friction level, the operation type, i.e., preservation treatment for existing pavement or pavement re-profiling for new pavement, may play a critical role. As mentioned earlier, diamond grinding for pavement preservation generally aims at restoring surface friction on the existing pavement. Diamond grinding for pavement re-profiling, however, aims at improving surface smoothness on new pavements. Presented in Notice that both the macrotexture and microtexture MPD and RMS values on the tined concrete (friction track in Presented in Second, the surface friction numbers on the diamond-ground concrete pavements of both US-24 and US-50 experienced an ever-decreasing trend with service life. The friction number on the diamond-ground asphalt pavement of SR-162, however, fluctuated over time, particularly after 24 months of service. The friction numbers on the ground asphalt pavement of SR-162 were initially less than and then, became greater than those on both US-24 and US-50 after 24 months of services. The underlying reason may be that the asphalt surface deteriorates due to aging and raveling with time. This confirms the two earlier statements, i.e., the diamond-ground asphalt pavements have greater deviations than the diamond-ground concrete pavements and the texture MPD and RMS on the diamond-ground asphalt pavements are in general greater than those on the diamond-ground concrete pavements. The third observation is that while the diamond-ground concrete pavements demonstrated an ever-decreasing trend, the friction number on US-50 is around 25 measured using the standard smooth at 40 mph after 64 months of service. While the friction number decreased by more than 35% compared to that measured five years ago, the longitudinal diamond grinding on US-50 did provide durable friction performance taking into consideration the high traffic volume and the presence of signalized intersections. This paper presents a field evaluation of the surface texture and friction characteristics on longitudinally diamond-ground concrete and asphalt pavements in terms of surface macrotexture and microtexture and locked wheel friction number. Based on the field test and observations, four main conclusions can be drawn as follows: The longitudinal diamond-ground asphalt pavements may have greater surface deviations than the diamond-ground concrete pavements. The valley depths and peak heights on the longitudinal diamond-ground asphalt pavements are also greater than the valley depths and peak heights on the diamond-ground concrete pavements, respectively. For macrotexture profiles on diamond-ground pavements, MPD and RMS have the same order of magnitude regardless of pavement type. However, MPD and RMS produced by longitudinal diamond grinding are much less than those by transverse tining. The MPD and RMS on the diamond-ground asphalt pavements are greater than those on the diamond-ground concrete pavements. For microtexture profiles on diamond-ground pavements, the RMS is one order of magnitude greater than the corresponding MPD, regardless of the type of pavement. The MPD and RMS on the diamond-ground asphalt pavement are greater than those on the diamond-ground concrete pavement. In general, the microtexture MPD values are very small and fall in the lower range of microtexture cutoff depths. Therefore, it may be more appropriate to use RMS, rather than MPD, in modeling the effect of microtexture on friction. Generally, conventional transverse tining can produce greater texture than longitudinal grinding. However, the surface friction produced by longitudinal diamond grinding may be equal to and even better than that produced by conventional transverse tining. Pavement friction depends not only on texture depth and shape, but also on texture spacing and periodicity. For diamond-ground pavements, surface friction cannot be readily defined by a single texture profile parameter such as MPD. Surface friction on diamond-ground pavements may experience great decrease after opening to traffic. The surface friction on diamond-ground concrete pavements tends to have an ever-decreasing trend. The surface friction on diamond-ground asphalt pavements, however, tends to fluctuate with service life. Overall, diamond grinding can provide durable, satisfactory surface friction performance for both concrete and asphalt pavements. The authors would like to thank Mike Prather, Craig Allman, and David Dallas of INDOT for their assistance in selecting test sections. The supports from Steve Dick, Harry Greer, and Patrick Weaver of INDOT in field testing are also acknowledged. The contents of this paper reflect the views of the authors who are responsible for the facts and the accuracy of the data presented herein. The contents do not necessarily reflect the official views or policies of INDOT. This paper does not constitute a standard, specification, or regulation.