Laser surface alloying of aluminium AA1200 was performed with a 4kW Nd:YAG laser to improve the abrasion wear resistance. Aluminium surfaces reinforced with metal matrix composites and intermetallic phases were achieved. The phases present depended on the composition of the alloying powder mixture. The wear performance of the alloyed surfaces was characterised using an ASTM G65 three body dry abrasion apparatus. A maximum 82% improvement in the wear resistance of the pure aluminium was achieved with a 40wt% Ni+20wt% Ti+40wt% SiC composition. The three alloys which had the best wear resistance were all produced with a composition of 40wt% SiC and Ti and Ni powders ranging from 20 to 40wt%. No direct correlation was observed between hardness and wear resistance. Microstructural examination showed that the main wear mechanisms were intense plastic deformation with micro-fracture of the SiC particles and intermetallic phases. The wear behaviour is mainly determined by the response of the different alloy phases, either independently or in combination, to the action of the abrasive particles and the precise nature of this response is complex and requires further study.Aluminium is widely used in industry due to its attractive attributes such as low density, high strength to weight ratio, high thermal conductivity and good formability Research on the wear properties of aluminium alloys reinforced with either ceramic or metallic materials has been done by several authors Şahin Majumdar et al. Anandkumar et al. Shipway et al. In dry sliding wear tests of Al–12Si/TiB Molybdenum has been shown to improve the mechanical properties of aluminium. In a study done by Almeida et al. Several authors have attempted to model the wear behaviour of metal matrix composites and general multiphase materials as some of the prevailing wear theories do not provide adequate insight into multiphase material behaviour under abrasive wear conditions Published work is generally limited to higher aluminium alloys (i.e. 2 Laser alloying of the aluminium AA1200 surface was performed with a Nd:YAG laser. Aluminium AA1200 plates were initially sand blasted to enhance the absorption of laser energy by the aluminium substrate. The chemical composition of the aluminium plates was 0.12 The hardness was measured using a 1 Three body abrasion wear tests were conducted using an ASTM G65-04 Laser alloying was successfully performed with the laser processing parameters used.  From the SEM images of the worn surfaces similar features were found on the wear scars of all the alloys. The degree to which the different types of mechanisms occurred depended on the alloying composition and phases present.  The worn surfaces of the alloyed layers was characterised by plastic deformation mechanisms, fracture of the embedded SiC particles and micro-fracture of the intermetallic phases as presented in A reduction in wear rate was observed for the laser alloyed surfaces compared to the pure aluminium metal under three body abrasion wear conditions. A maximum reduction in wear rate of 82% (compared to pure Al) was observed when laser alloying with a 40 One of the main results of the study was that no direct correlation was observed between hardness and wear resistance. Similar trends were found by others It has been shown that there is a direct correlation between the microstructural properties, bonding and volume fraction of the reinforcement particles in metal matrix composites and intermetallic phases and their relationship to abrasive wear To a certain extent these factors determine if the alloyed aluminium surfaces would respond homogenously or heterogeneously under the abrasive wear test conditions. The type of response expected has been related to a comparison between the size of the reinforcement particles and the dimension of damage caused by the abrasive In the current study the worn surfaces did not display parallel grooving which is typically observed under abrasion wear testing. Rather gross plastic deformation as well as brittle fracture of the SiC and intermetallic phases was observed. Thus the dimension of damage done by the SiO If the alloyed surfaces were treated as having a ‘pure’ homogeneous response and the hardness of the SiO The influence of increasing reinforcement volume fraction showed a variable wear response and cannot be easily quantified as the alloying compositions were not kept constant for a wide range of compositions. However a few deductions can be made. When the Ni volume fraction was kept constant at 40 Abrasive wear generally occurs by plastic flow, plastic deformation, brittle fracture or combinations of the different modes The role of the mean free path between reinforcements has also been reported to play a role in the wear resistance of multiphase materials. Axén and Zum Gahr The hard intermetallic phases probably cracked due to repeated loading and the stresses applied during wear and these micro-cracks facilitated material removal as wear progressed. Fracturing of the embedded SiC particles also occurred due to cyclic loading but the strong bonding between the particles and the matrix ensured that decohesion (interfacial debonding and pull-out) of the SiC particles was prevented. A strong interfacial bond between the reinforcements and the matrix is important. When the bond is weak the reinforcements are easily pulled out during wear and can act as additional abrasives thereby increasing the wear rate, as was observed by reference Deeper analysis is required to fully understand the response of the alloyed layers to abrasive wear and to quantify the role of each individual phase in contributing to the overall wear performance. Existing models based on the abrasive wear of multiphase materials are generally limited to the addition of one reinforcement phase in varying proportions to a constant matrix. In the current work three reinforcement materials were added to a constant matrix which produced a wide variety of reinforcement phases. Due to the complex nature of the investigated systems a model to understand the abrasive wear has not been attempted in the present work. Existing models may be used to explain the behaviour of individual phases, e.g. fracture of the SiC and micro-cracking of intermetallic particles. However the application of these models is limited as they do not provide a holistic view of both the individual and the combined phase response of the investigated system under abrasive wear conditions. In general laser alloying improved the wear resistance of the aluminium AA1200 surface with an improvement of 19–82% was achieved. The three alloys which had the best wear resistance were all produced with a composition of 40 The authors gratefully acknowledge the financial support of the