Because the extracellular matrices of dentin and bone are composed mainly of type I collagen, their characteristics are determined by the nature of noncollagenous proteins (NCPs). Among these NCPs, some proteoglycans (PGs) belong to the small leucine-rich proteoglycans (SLRPs). Recently, osteoadherin (OSAD) has been described as a new member of this family, that is expressed by mature bovine osteoblasts. Here, we report the expression of OSAD messenger RNA (mRNA) in human dental tissues and during the development of rat molars, using in situ hybridization. For this purpose, we constructed a probe for OSAD mRNA transcripts from human odontoblast cells cultured in vitro. Our results indicate that the mature human odontoblasts overexpress the OSAD gene as compared with cells present in the pulp core. In rat developing molars, mRNA transcripts were first detected in alveolar bone in 19-day-old embryos. At the same age, no signal was detected in any cell of the first molar. In more mature teeth (newborn and 2-day-old rats), OSAD expression starts in the polarized odontoblasts and increases in the secretory and mature odontoblasts, respectively. Interestingly, a similar pattern of expression was observed in the ameloblast layer responsible for the deposition of enamel mineralized matrix. Together, these results lead us to speculate that OSAD may be implicated in biomineralization processes.Dentin is the major mineralized tissue in teeth and is closely related to bone in both chemical composition and in the mineralization process. As in bone, almost 90% of the organic matrix in dentin is collagen, which provides the framework for the deposition of apatite crystals. However, the mineralization process involves not only collagen as substrate for crystal formation but also noncollagenous acidic proteins, such as osteonectin, osteopontin, osteocalcin, bone sialoprotein (BSP), dentin phosphoprotein (DPP), dentin sialoprotein (DSP), lipids, From data bases, we identified three protein sequences closely related to bovine OSAD, corresponding to rat OSAD and human and mouse osteomodulin. Here, we demonstrate that OSAD and osteomodulin represent the same protein in different species. Because odontoblast cells share many of the functional properties of osteoblasts, we hypothesized that OSAD is also expressed during dentinogenesis. To test this hypothesis, we used a novel in vitro culture model of human odontoblasts Sprague-Dawley rats (Iffa-Credo, France) were killed at various stages of development (19-day-old embryo, newborn, and 2-day-old rats; vaginal plug = day 0). Lower jaws were removed and hemisected by incision through the midline symphysis. Tissues were immediately embedded in Tissue-Tek OCT compound (Miles Scientific), immersed in nitrogen-cooled isopentane, and stored frozen at −70°C. Cryostat sections (10 μm) were transferred to 3-aminopropyltriethoxysilane-coated slides, air dried, and kept frozen until pretreatment. The slides were briefly washed twice in phosphate-buffered saline (PBS), fixed in 4% paraformaldehyde in PBS for 20 min, and then again washed twice (10 min each) in PBS buffer. Sections were dehydrated in a graded series of ethanol and stored dessicated at −70°C until prehybridization. Similar sections of dental pulp were obtained from sound human third molar tooth germs (14–16 years old), partially developed and extracted for orthodontic reasons, with the informed consent of the patient. Tooth pulp was carefully pulled out from the pulp chamber with forceps and treated as previously described. Total RNA was extracted from human odontoblastic cells in culture as described by Couble et al., In situ hybridization was realized as described by Bleicher et al. Radiolabeling of the OSAD probe was done by asymmetric PCR. Twenty-five nanograms of electroeluted OSAD PCR product in 10 mmol/L Tris-HCl (pH 8.3) containing 50 mmol/L KCl, 1.5 mmol/L MgCl Sections were prehybridized for 2 h at 37°C in a humid chamber by incubation with a mixture containing 50% de-ionized formamide, 20 mmol/L NaPO Similarity searches of the EMBL data base indicated similarities between bovine OSAD (U67279), rat OSAD (AF104362), human osteomodulin (AB000114), and mouse osteomodulin (AB007848). Consequently, we aligned these four sequences, at the protein level, with the M RT-PCR allowed for amplification of OSAD transcripts from human odontoblastic cells in culture. The PCR products ran at the expected size of 299 bp ( In sections of extracted pulps To investigate the expression of OSAD during tooth development, in situ hybridization with the human probe was performed on tissue sections prepared from embryonic and neonatal rats. In 19-day-old embryos, OSAD transcripts were first detected in the alveolar bone surrounding the first molar In newborn rats, OSAD transcripts were detected in the odontoblast and ameloblast cell layers at the tip of the first molar cusps. A very weak signal was noted in the dental pulp In the first molar of the 2-day-old rats, an increase in OSAD mRNA expression level was observed Before commencing this study, we demonstrated that bovine and rat OSAD and human and mouse osteomodulin were homologous proteins. Indeed, in the four protein sequences analyzed, the 11 LRRs identified in OSAD were also present in human and mouse osteomodulin. In addition, two cysteines were situated closely in LRRs 5 and 6—this has been described as a characteristic feature of bovine OSAD, Using in situ hybridization, we identified, for the first time, the expression of OSAD mRNA in human odontoblasts. The human molar tooth germs used in this study were partially developed and all the odontoblasts aligned at the edge of the pulp were involved in the secretion of the primary dentin. Our results indicate that these cells express higher levels of OSAD transcripts as compared with dental pulp cells. In developing rat molars, our results show that OSAD mRNA is expressed not only in the odontoblast layer but is also expressed by ameloblasts and by cells of the alveolar bone surrounding the teeth. This latter finding is consistent with a previous study demonstrating that OSAD transcripts are expressed by mature osteoblasts in the bovine trabecular bone. Among the SLRP family members, expression of decorin, biglycan, and lumican has been reported in bone Interestingly, our results also indicate that the OSAD mRNA is present in the ameloblast layer involved in enamel matrix secretion. OSAD expression starts during the polarized stage of the ameloblasts and increases during the secretory stage. The enamel matrix, which has no collagen component, and is therefore completely different from bone and dentin matrices, is composed of unique proteins such as amelogenin, ameloblastin, enamelin, and tuftelin. The role of PGs in biomineralization is still controversial. The effects of NCPs and PGs often vary from promotion of This research was supported in part by the Ministère de l’Enseignement Supérieur (EA 1892) and by the Fondation Dentaire de France. The authors thank Dr. P. Exbrayat for collecting tooth samples and Dr. J. C. Farges and Lee Pape for editorial help.