The Gamsberg zinc deposit, located in the Northern Cape Province, represents South Africa’s greatest and most important unexploited base metal resource. Yet, in spite of its size, the low zinc grade combined with the high manganese content of the sphalerite continues to prohibit development of the deposit, as the high manganese content makes the zinc concentrates unsuitable for processing by conventional smelting methods, i.e. roasting, leaching/solvent extraction and/or electrowinning.
                  Although numerous published investigations of the Gamsberg deposit have been undertaken, few have focused on the correlation between petrography and mineral chemistry of sphalerite and their implications on mineral processing. In accordance, the aims of this investigation are to highlight the importance of conducting a detailed geometallurgical investigation, as well as provide some new constraints on the metallurgical behavior of sphalerite and zinc concentrates from the Gamsberg deposit. Detailed analysis of sphalerite by petrographic and various microanalytical techniques reveal a marked absence of correlation between crystal morphology and mineral chemistry, necessitating a chemically based classification scheme. As such, six sphalerite populations where identified. They are: zinc-, cobalt-, iron- and manganese-rich, as well as manganese-enriched and manganese-poor. The zinc- and cobalt-rich populations display high zinc contents and low concentrations of iron and manganese, while the iron-rich population displays higher iron contents. Dominating the sphalerites of the mineralized pelitic schist is the manganese-enriched population. Of volumetrically lesser importance are the manganese-poor and -rich populations. The manganese-rich population contains high levels of iron, manganese, cobalt and cadmium relative to the zinc-rich population. In contrast, the manganese-poor population displays similar concentrations of cobalt and cadmium to the zinc-rich population, with iron and manganese intermediate between the zinc- and iron-rich populations.
                  Comparisons between the sphalerite populations and milling size fractions reveal a consistent correlation between sphalerite mineral chemistry and size fractions with the coarser-grained concentrates being economically less favorable compared to the finer-grained concentrates, which display higher zinc contents. Combined with other lines of evidence, this suggests that the sphalerites of mineralized pelitic schist exhibit extensive solid solution that will have an effect on process optimization. For instance, it suggests that milling to a finer grain size will not remove or reduce the iron and manganese content. Another concern to processing will be the variable mineral chemistry of sphalerite, which might cause some sphalerites to display a delayed response during flotation or misreport to the lead concentrate. In spite of this, using solvent extraction, the elevated manganese content of the concentrates could be controlled, while simultaneously recovering zinc and manganese for sale. Hence, the recovery of manganese metal as a by-product could potentially enhance the economics of the deposit. Alternatively, other forms of mineral processing and metal extraction must be evaluated to meet the target grades and recoveries.Despite discovery of the world-class Gamsberg zinc deposit nearly 40 Sphalerite, the single most important source of zinc, is easily enriched by froth flotation to form a high-grade concentrate that can be easily shipped and refined by traditional Roast-Leach-Electrowinning (RLE) processes at most smelters. Naturally occurring sphalerite commonly incorporates variable concentrations of impurities (e.g. Fe, Cd, Mn, Cu, Co, Ni, Ge, In) that replace zinc in lattice sites. For example, FeS concentrations can range up to 25 Consequently, the economic value of the Gamsberg deposit is not strictly dependent on the geological knowledge of the ore bodies, but more importantly, the specific mineralogical characteristics and associations present in the ore assemblage. For example, the loss of sphalerite to tailings in flotation circuits, because of inadequate particle separation reduces the economic viability of the processing operation. In accordance, the aims of this investigation are to provide the first detailed petrographic and mineral chemical assessment of sphalerites from the mineralized pelitic schist of the North Body ( The sediment-hosted, stratabound Gamsberg deposit is hosted by the Bushmanland Group; a thin, less than 1 Situated along the eastern boundary of the polymetallic, i.e. Pb–Zn–Cu–Ag Within the Gamsberg deposit, economic grades of base metal sulfide mineralization are restricted to the intermediate unit of mineralized rock termed the B member. Irrespective of horizon, extensive evidence for large-scale secondary mobilization and re-concentration of the sulfide minerals, resulting from deformation and metamorphism, occurs throughout the deposit. These attributes are expressed through an increase in grain size and annealing of crystalline sulfide masses, repeated phases of recrystallization, retrogressive metasomatic overprinting, formation of compositional banding, aggregation of sulfide minerals into discordant areas of low strain and presence of numerous deformation textures (i.e. twinning, bend cleavage planes, schlieren and durchbewegung-textures, brecciation, etc.; For this investigation, fresh samples of the mineralized pelitic schist and mineralized amphibolite/calc-silicate gneiss were collected from underground workings in the North Body along the 922 South Access drift ( For the mineral chemical studies, 39 of the samples prepared for petrographic analysis were analyzed for As, Se, S, Pb, Bi, Ag, Cd, Sn, Sb, Te, Mn, Fe, Co, Ni, Cu and Zn using a CAMECA SX100 electron microprobe equipped with equipped with four wavelength-dispersive spectrometers (LIF, TAP, PET) and one energy-dispersive spectrometer. Operation conditions were set at 20 To investigate the variation in sphalerite mineral chemistry by milling size fraction, five North Body sphalerite concentrate milling size fractions (i.e. >75 The use of mineral chemistry in the classification of minerals, i.e. plagioclase, is a widely used technique, yet the application of this technique to the mineral processing industry is still gaining acceptance ( Mineralogical investigations ( Analogous to the morphological analysis, mineral chemical analyses correspondingly emphasize the presence of multiple generations of sphalerite with varying concentrations of zinc, iron, manganese, cadmium and cobalt ( The zinc- and cobalt-rich populations represent the economically most important sphalerites observed within the Gamsberg deposit, as they are characterized by high zinc contents, As highlighted in As illustrated by several studies ( To date, neither the iron nor manganese content of sphalerite are used in determining the basis for processing of sphalerite ( Likewise, another major concern to the flotation circuit is the lower iron and manganese contents of the finer-grained size fractions, which are dominated by the zinc- and cobalt-rich populations. Numerous authors ( In zinc electrowinning, the presence of minute amounts of manganese, i.e. 1–5 This investigation highlights the importance of conducting a detailed multidisciplinary (geological, mineralogical and metallurgical, i.e. geometallurgical) investigation of complex sulfide deposits, such as the Gamsberg deposit, as it can aid in determining the optimal techniques necessary for processing and/or future development. For instance, petrographic and mineral chemical analyses of North Body pelitic schist sphalerites reveal a consistent lack of correlation between morphology and mineral chemistry, warranting the use of an onsite chemically based classification scheme to determine the bulk chemical signature of the mill feed and/or concentrate. Likewise, sphalerites from the North Body mineralized pelitic schist of the Gamsberg deposit exhibit extensive solid solution between iron–manganese and zinc, resulting in numerous complications to process optimization. For instance, the absence of discrete iron and manganese mineral phases signifies that milling to a finer grain size will not remove or reduce the iron and manganese content, but also that some sphalerites may display a delayed response during flotation or misreport to the lead concentrate. Likewise, the positive correlation between sphalerite mineral chemistry and milling size fractions indicate that the coarser-grained concentrates may be economically less favorable compared to the finer-grained concentrates with higher zinc contents. However, through the selective recovery of zinc and subsequently manganese by solvent extraction, the elevated manganese content could be controlled and manganese metal sold as a by-product. Otherwise, alternate forms of mineral processing and metal extraction must be evaluated to meet the target grades and recoveries. The authors would like to thank Mr. P. Potgieter and Mr. N. German of the Black Mountain Mine for allowing us access to the underground workings, assistance with the collection of the sample materials. We would also like to thank the constructive advice, criticisms and critical reviews provided by Prof. Jens Gutzmer, Ms. Nichola McKay and Dr. Bryony Richards, which greatly assisted in the improvement of the paper. This research was partially supported by funds from the South African Department of Science and Technology Research Chair in Geometallurgy (FV) and the Department of Geology at the University of Johannesburg.  