Fracture healing describes the normal post-traumatic physiologic process of bone regeneration. Commonly, this complicated process occurs without interruption, however, certain clinical situations exist that may benefit from the usage of bone healing enhancement agents. Bone morphogenetic proteins (BMPs) assist in the process of bone healing by recruiting bone-forming cells to the area of trauma. The usage of BMP currently has two FDA-approved indications: (1) treatment of acute tibial fractures treated with intramedullary fixation and (2) treatment of long bone non-union. Despite this limited scope, off-label BMP usage continues to push the envelope for new applications. Although proven to be clinically successful, BMP use must be balanced with the large costs associated with their application. Regardless, more prospective randomised clinical trials must be conducted to validate and expand the role of BMP in the setting of trauma.Despite the relative success of normal fracture healing, roughly 5–10% of fractures that occur in the United States exhibit some degree of impaired repair. In 1965, Marshall R. Urist discovered the so-called bone induction principle. This theory postulated that bone matrix contained inducing agents that could help generate new bone formation when implanted into an extraskeletal site. Urist and his colleagues identified this factor as a protein that they named bone morphogenetic protein (BMP). In 2008, more than $ 1.6 billion was spent on bone grafts and substitutes, with one-fifth spent on fracture management. Much attention has focused on the ability of BMP to stimulate new bone growth. In the setting of trauma, BMP is utilised to augment fracture repair and treat delayed union and nonunion. Both commercially available options come with a collagen carrier. This delivery system both provides a scaffolding system that allows bony in-growth, as well keeps the liquid-BMP media concentrated in the point of interest. Although the process of healing is dynamic, as the collagen carrier dissolves, the BMP similarly decreases in concentration over a period of weeks. This allows ample time for the chemotaxis of bone-forming mesenchymal stems cells (MSCs) to be recruited to the area of healing. The technique of BMP application is still evolving. In sites of nonunion, all fibrous, necrotic, and sclerotic tissues should be debrided from the fracture site, such that the BMP-collagen carrier unit can be placed well apposed to the bone. Prior to BMP application, definitive fixation should be achieved, and attention should be paid to haemostasis, which when uncontrolled, could dislodge the BMP graft. The BMP should be applied adjacent to the viable tissue in a quantity sufficient to fill any bone defects, bridge fracture comminution, and be in contact with both proximal and distal fracture fragments ( Adjuncts used in fracture management can be classified in several ways. Osteoinductive materials contain agents capable of recruiting bone-forming MSCs. Osteoconductive substances act as scaffolding for in-growth of new bone and vascular tissue. Osteogenic substances already contain cells that are able to directly generate bone. Bone graft enhancers provide additional biological activity for stimulation of bone healing. By these definitions, BMPs are considered to be osteoinductive enhancers for fracture management. Fracture healing describes the physiologic restoration of bone tissue after injury. This specialised process normally regenerates bone in a well-orchestrated biological process that restores skeletal integrity. BMPs are known to play an important role in this normal healing process. During the initial inflammatory stage of fracture healing, BMPs quickly emerge as the central regulatory transcription factors involved in coordinating injury repair. The initial chondrogenic phase of endochondral bone healing appears to be dominated by BMP 2, 3, 4, 5 and 6. Additionally, BMP 7 and 8 emerge more specifically in the later osteogenic phase of fracture healing. This complicated process is regulated by a combination of auto-feedback loops and naturally occurring BMP inhibitors. Evidence exists that BMPs may additionally interact with cells of the osteoclast lineage, and this relationship may have implications on both bone formation as well as bone resorption. Specific BMP subtypes are now being identified as having important roles in angiogenesis regulation. Mutations in genes encoding components of the BMP signalling pathway have been linked to two specific genetic vascular diseases. Although two commercially available products exist, it is still unclear if BMP-2 or BMP-7 might individually be better suited to treat specific pathologic situations. Clearly, each BMP has a unique role in fracture healing, with specific BMP concentrations occurring at different periods of tissue recovery. The significance of these differences must be further investigated to help identify situations that might benefit from BMP-specific treatment. It is the complicated balance of BMPs and several naturally BMP antagonists that may serve as one intrinsic source for the development of pathologic fracture healing. Identifying the cause of pathologic healing can optimise successful treatment of nonunion. Traditionally, hypertrophic nonunions occur as a result of inadequate mechanical stability, whilst atrophic nonunion occurs as a consequence of inadequate biological healing. By these criteria, BMP seemingly would be best suited for treatment of atrophic nonunion, as BMP would help attract the needed biological stimuli required for normal fracture healing. Unfortunately, current studies fail to stratify nonunion by aetiology, and instead, treat all nonunions with fixation revision as well as additional of biological adjunct. Much of the original work on the efficacy of BMP in the setting of trauma is rooted in spinal arthrodesis literature. The BMP-2 Evaluation in Surgery for Tibial Trauma (BESTT) study reported on the results in a large multicenter, prospective, randomised, controlled study on the use of INFUSE. Here, 450 patients with open tibial fractures were initially managed with irrigation, debridement, and intramedullary nail placement. At wound closure, patients were randomised to receive normal closure without BMP, or closure with BMP-2 on an absorbable collagen sponge. The group treated with highest BMP concentrations demonstrated fewest secondary interventions, accelerated time to union, improved wound healing, and a reduced infection rate. A similar study to the BESST, McKee et al. compared open tibial fractures treated with either standard closure or 3.4 Despite the limited indication for BMP use in acute fracture management, extensive clinical investigation has focused on the management of delayed union and nonunion. In a multicenter study on 122 patients, Friedlaender et al. prospectively randomised patients with tibial nonunion to receive autograft or rhBMP-7 in a bovine bone-derived type-1 collagen-particle delivery vehicle. Results showed statistical equivalence between both groups with regard to union (clinical and radiographic) despite the higher amount of smokers found in the BMP treated study population. Documented prospective success of BMP-7 has also extended to treatment of upper extremity trauma. In evaluating scaphoid nonunion, Bilic et al. used BMP-7 and found reduced radiographic healing times as well as improved performance when used with autograft and allograft. Treatment has also extended to management of other non-long bone fractures. Giannoudis et al. reviewed the application of BMP-7 in the setting pelvic post-traumatic nonunion and post-partum pelvic instability. He found fusion was achieved in 89% of the patients, with 78% of the patients reporting excellent or good results. Few studies have evaluated BMP application on a more generalised scale. Moghaddam et al. reported their experience of 53 patients treated for atrophic non-union with BMP-7 on a collagen carrier. The non-unions were localised to the femur (21), tibia (26), humerus (3), and forearm (7). In 12 cases, BMP-7 was applied in isolations, without change in fixation. At 6 months follow-up, 82% of the patients demonstrated clinical and radiographic fracture healing. BMP use has formally been evaluated in the adult population, however, off-label use has included paediatric non-union cases. Dohin et al. found that a single dose of BMP-7 mixed with a bovine collagen carrier generated clinical and radiographic fracture union in 17 of 23 paediatric patients with symptomatic long-bone nonunions. With several complications now identified with the use of BMP in spinal arthrodesis, reports are now being recognised in fracture literature. Boraiah et al. evaluated complications associated with the use of BMP-2 in complex tibial plateau fractures. In this study, 10 of 17 patients developed heterotopic ossification, and four of these patients required additional operative interventions for ectopic bone removal. The proven benefit of BMP must be weighed against its exorbitant cost. Costs of commercially available BMP are volume-dependant, but large volumes can cost $ 5000. Conversely, the potential costs of additional surgical treatments for long-bone non-union, coupled with the financial societal burden of prolonged work absence is expensive, and should not be ignored. Using the German healthcare model, Alt et al. found that the overall savings achieved by rhBMP-2 treatment in open tibia fractures offset the upfront price of rhBMP-2, and led to net savings for health insurance companies. The future of fracture management will be linked with the optimisation of biological adjuncts coupled with the development of novel strategies for specific agent delivery. Although current research is dominated by BMP investigation, manipulation of naturally occurring BMP inhibitors may offer a promising technique to optimising fracture healing. Although the application of BMP is promising, it is important to reiterate that most fractures heal uneventfully without complications. Proper treatment rests with both the proper identification of fractures (and patients) that may benefit from BMP application, coupled with an understanding of the injury-specific local biological and/or structural needs necessary to achieve effective fracture healing. The majority of current clinical evidence supporting use of BMPs is dominated by retrospective analysis, and many off-label usages are currently being practised. Despite the clear FDA indications that exist, BMPs have exorbitant prices that most be examined and balanced with their cost effectiveness. BMPs clearly offer a technology that greatly enhances the management of musculoskeletal injuries, however, there still is a great need for continued prospective randomised controlled studies to standardise fracture treatment, optimise fracture healing, and develop novel therapies. None.