We investigated Fe recovery from EAF slag by means of Aluminothermic Smelting Reduction (ASR) at 1773K, especially the quantitative effect of initial Al/FeO molar ratio upon the Fe recovery. Both calculated and experimentally measured system temperatures continuously increased with increasing initial Al/FeO molar ratio. Furthermore, to predict the reduction behavior we calculated variations in the slag composition by using FactSage™ 7.0 software. FeO and Al2O3 contents in molten slag varied sharply within the first 5min of the reaction and stabilized soon thereafter. The aluminothermic reduction of FeO appeared to proceed rapidly and in good stoichiometric balance, based upon the mass balance between the consumption of FeO and MnO (ΔFeO and ΔMnO) and the production of Al2O3 (∆Al2O3). Adding an optimal amount of Al (Al/FeO molar ratio ~ 0.8) yielded a Fe recovery of about 90%. Furthermore, the Mn could also be reduced from the EAF slag in the case of excess Al addition (Al/FeO≥0.8). The solid compound spinel (MgO·Al2O3) was precipitated from the slag during the FeO reduction, as confirmed by means of XRD analysis and thermochemical computations. Herein, the mechanism of ASR reaction between FeO in molten slag and Al is explained in several steps.Steel production by means of the electric arc furnace (EAF) surpassed about 400 million tonnes worldwide in 2010, and the EAF process represents about 30% of all steel production Valuable metals such as Fe can be recovered from EAF slag by means of pyrometallurgy. Various physicochemical processing methods have been attempted as means to recover Fe, most notably thermal decomposition of slag by oxidation in air, followed by application of mineralogical treatments such as magnetic separation, eddy current separation, flotation, leaching, or roasting In Fe reduction from slag, various steps can act as the rate-controlling step depending on the experimental conditions; these include the Boudouard reaction Unfortunately, however, few studies have investigated the reduction behavior of iron oxide in the context of Fe recovery Several researchers have studied various aspects of aluminothermic reduction of diverse metal oxides such as Fe However, in view of the need for recycling, few studies have included attempts at quantitatively evaluating the recovery of Fe and production of ferroalloys from metallurgical by-products; most have instead provided qualitative interpretations In previous research, aluminum has been quite often considered as a reducing agent, but rarely so regarding the reduction of iron oxide. Furthermore, the reduction behavior of iron oxide in EAF slags by aluminum has scarcely been examined. Therefore, the goal of the present work was to quantitatively investigate the recovery of valuable metals such as Fe and Mn from EAF slag by means of the ASR process, with emphasis on understanding the reduction behavior of FeO and MnO and on elucidating the reaction mechanism of the ASR process based upon previous work The experimental apparatus used is illustrated schematically in The quartz reaction chamber (OD: 120 The experimental temperature was 1773 After the system stabilized at 1773 Slag samples were collected by dipping the tip of a stainless steel rod into the slag layer at defined time intervals (0, 5, 10, 30, and 60 Prior to the experiments, some preliminary estimations were carried out on the basis of Gibbs energy minimization principles by using a commercial thermochemical computing package, FactSage™ 7.0 (CRCT ThermFact, Inc., Montreal, Canada), with the ‘FToxid’, ‘FTmisc’, and ‘FactPS’ databases. The computation results included fundamental information on maximum temperature within an adiabatic condition, as well as variations in slag compositions and amounts of precipitated solid compounds at equilibrium conditions. The reduction of iron oxide in molten slag by solid aluminum, also known as the aluminothermic reduction, can be expressed as follows The maximum temperatures obtained both experimentally and by means of thermodynamic simulations are shown in Shibata et al. The calculated amounts of iron, slag, and the precipitated solids of spinel (MgAl The calculation results for the slag composition are plotted against added Al content in From the thermodynamic simulations discussed above, we were able to estimate the amount of added Al needed to reduce the FeO entirely, the changes in system temperature, the weight of reduced metal ingot, the change of slag composition, and the precipitation behavior of solid compounds during the reaction. However, it should be noted that the above computational results for the ASR process were based on thermodynamic equilibria between slag and the metal phase. Hence, it was crucial to understand the dynamic phenomena during the ASR process, which will be discussed in the following sections. The contents of FeO and Al In a previous study, we characterized the instantaneous interface morphology at specific Al/FeO molar ratios between FeO-rich Cu slag and solid Al particles The theoretical Al/FeO molar ratio for the complete reduction of FeO in molten slag by Al is about 0.67 according to Eq. These results agree well with the previously discussed computational results ( To confirm the reaction stoichiometry between reactants and products, the mass balance between consumption of FeO and MnO (ΔFeO and ΔMnO) and production of Al The recovery rate (%) of Fe and Mn, which is defined as shown in Eq. The Fe and Mn recovery rate is plotted versus Al/FeO molar ratio in The Mn recovery abruptly increased at the molar ratio of Al/FeO=0.8, followed by nearly constant with further increase in the Al/FeO molar ratio. One of the most important properties of a slag is good separability from a metal phase A quantitative triangular material balance diagram for the residual (unreduced) Fe in the slag, the reduced metallic Fe droplets physically dispersed in the slag, and the reduced Fe ingot according to the Al/FeO molar ratio was constructed as shown in In our previous study, The slag composition rapidly changed during the reduction of FeO by Al, as previously shown in Using FactSage™ 7.0, variations in the liquid–solid fractions of the slag phase versus reaction time were calculated from the chemical composition of slag samples taken at different time intervals; the results are shown in Furthermore, the mass fraction of precipitated spinel slightly increased with increasing Al/FeO molar ratio, but remained nearly constant with reaction time for a given molar ratio. Actually, the liquid–solid fractions did not clearly vary with reaction time in the present study, a finding different from those of other research works including Part II of the present series The variations in the slag compositions arising from various initial Al/FeO molar ratios (observed at 5 To simultaneously confirm the change in the maximum temperature as well as the change in slag composition, the slag compositions for each Al/FeO molar ratio at 5 To confirm the dispersion of metal droplets and solid compound (spinel) particles in the bulk slag phase, the morphology of the slag was observed using back scattered SEM combined with EDS, as shown in Park et al. The mechanism of the interfacial reaction between FeO and Al particles can be explained based on our previous study, as schematically illustrated in In summary, we confirmed that the FeO reduction in EAF slag by aluminum addition, called the ASR process, provided excess heat in conjunction with a very rapid reaction rate. Because Al We investigated Fe (and Mn) recovery from EAF slag of various initial Al/FeO molar ratios at 1773 FeO and Al The consumption of FeO and MnO (ΔFeO and ΔMnO) and the production of Al Fe recovery from EAF slag was about 85% and nearly constant for initial Al/FeO molar ratios of 0.8 and greater. Furthermore, Mn could also be reduced (approx. 30%) from EAF slag when excess Al was added (Al/FeO≥0.8). The solid compound of spinel (MgO·Al