An experimental study was performed in a 25.4 mm ID pipeline to evaluate the development of the bubble size distribution in the horizontal flow of an air–water system. As the air stream enters into the flowing water stream through a T-injector, it breaks into bubbles with a log-normal size distribution. Because of the small water velocity (1–3 m/s) and small initial bubble size, coalescence, not breakage, plays the dominant role in the present study. The effects of average water velocity, air volume fraction and air injector diameter on the initial bubble size distribution and its evolution along the length of the pipe in the coalescence dominant regime are investigated.
                  At larger water velocities, the log-normal bubble size distributions are also maintained downstream of the injector. At smaller velocities, the distributions deviate slightly from the log-normal pattern. For all distributions, the value of the ratio d
                     99.8/d
                     32 is about 2.2 and is fairly independent of average water velocity, pipe length, air volume fraction and air injector diameter. It is found that at large velocities of water, the prediction of d
                     max through Levich’s breakup theory agrees well with the experimental d
                     99.8 values for air volume fraction up to 0.003.In mineral processing industries, effective air bubble–particle attachment and subsequent mineral flotation is critical. This process is highly dependent upon the size and surface characteristics of both the solid particles and the dispersed air phase. Generally, bubble–particle attachment occurs in a flotation cell. In the oil sands industry of northern Alberta, bitumen is recovered from oil sand. The attachment of air bubbles to bitumen droplets occurs during the turbulent flow of a concentrated slurry of oil sand and water as the slurry is transported from the mine site to the extraction facilities. Thus it is essential to have a good understanding and reasonable estimate of the effect of turbulent slurry flow on bubble size distribution to successfully design and operate a system that can achieve high bitumen recoveries. In other applications, air is sometimes injected into hydrotransport pipelines because particle–air aggregates remain suspended under conditions at which the particles themselves would settle out of the flow. Because of the complexity and experimental design challenges involved in studying bubble size in highly concentrated solid–liquid flows, initial studies of air–water–sand systems have been limited to low concentrations of air and sand. This paper deals with some initial experiments conducted with a two-phase air–water system. Three-phase air–water–sand experiments are currently underway and these results will be presented in a subsequent paper. Although many theoretical and experimental studies are reported in the literature for the prediction of drop size distribution in two-phase liquid–liquid dispersions in stirred tanks ( In the present experiment, an air supply line is connected to a horizontal flow loop (25.4 mm ID) through a simple T-junction. The average velocity of water, In this paper, the effects of average water velocity, air volume fraction and air injector diameter on the initial bubble size distribution and its evolution along the pipe in the coalescence dominant regime have been analyzed and the influence of these parameters on bubble size prediction using existing theories have been investigated. In turbulent flow of a liquid containing dispersed bubbles, breakup and coalescence usually take place continuously and these processes determine the bubble size distribution. If the residence time of the bubbles is sufficiently long (i.e., if the pipe is long), a local dynamic equilibrium between coalescence and breakup is established. Two important parameters, the maximum bubble diameter, Since the fundamental contributions by The concept of minimum bubble diameter, It should be noted that all equations mentioned in this paper are valid for the SI unit system. A schematic diagram of the experimental loop is shown in The only source of heat generation in the flow is the wall-friction due to the flowing water. This small amount of heat was removed by flowing cold water in the outer pipe when the temperature inside the inner pipe exceeded 19 °C. The flow of cold water was stopped as soon as the temperature reached 18 °C. Two viewing sections (V1 and V2) made of 25.4 mm ID glass tube were placed in the loop. A glass box of rectangular cross-section was fitted over each glass tube. The space between the rectangular box and the tube was filled with water and thus the curvature effect of the tube was removed and undistorted images of bubbles could be obtained. Bubble size distributions were measured at both viewing sections V1 and V2 when air was injected through injector A1. V1 and V2 are located 0.3 and 27.5 m downstream of the injector A1, respectively. Bubble size distributions were measured only at V2 when injector A2 was used. V2 was located 12 m downstream of the injection point A2. Compressed air was continuously injected through a 2 or 4 mm ID stainless steel tube, which formed a simple T-junction with the loop. The air flowrate was measured with a calibrated rotameter placed in the air supply line. The cross-sectional area of the tank at the inlet of the pump was made large enough to let the air bubbles escape easily to atmosphere. The air–water mixture was discharged vertically upward into the tank. A perforated bottle was attached to the end of the return tube in the tank to prevent bubble entrainment in the flow into the pump suction. It makes the flow into the coriolis mass flow meter free from air bubbles as the air injection points are located further downstream. The average water velocity, A high-speed CCD camera (MotionScope PCI 1000S) connected to a computer was used to capture images of bubbles at the viewing sections (see At the magnification used in these experiments, the image processing software has a precision of 0.25 mm. The experiments are repeatable giving the size within 0.5 mm. The average water velocity was kept within ±2.5% of the stated value by adjusting the pump speed. The accuracy of the air–water ratio measurement was ±2%. For a fixed experimental condition, bubble sizes were evaluated for sampling times of different lengths. The bubble count and the bubble size are listed in The results reported in this paper are based on the images taken from the top of each of the viewing sections. It was assumed that each bubble is spherical, so that the diameter measured from the top view is representative of its actual size. To verify this assumption, some images were taken from both the top and the side of the viewing sections at similar conditions. Space limitation dictated the use of a couple of bends in the experimental loop to obtain the desired test section length. To quantify the effects of a bend on the measured bubble size, initially some tests were performed with two additional air injectors B1 and B2. The corresponding measured bubble sizes using the two injectors were found to be within 0.1 mm, which is of the order of the experimental error. Experiments were performed to determine bubble size distributions for three average water velocities ( The distributions of cumulative number percentage undersize of bubbles are shown in In As the bubbles traverse along the pipe, they interact with the turbulent eddies and among themselves. The large bubbles break up and the small bubbles coalesce. Since the bubble size distribution becomes wider and skews towards a larger diameter at the downstream locations, the coalescence process dominates in the present experiments. For the case of  It is evident from It is evident from When the predicted The solid symbols in Data presented in A bubble of diameter greater than In the present study, the air volume fraction, In an attempt to obtain large bubbles at the inlet to reduce the probability of coalescence, some experiments were performed with a 4 mm injector for air volume fractions, This study improves the current understanding of the evolution of bubble size and distribution during the coalescence dominant turbulent flow of an air–water system. It is known from previous studies that bubble size distributions in turbulent pipe flow in the breakup dominant regime follow a log-normal pattern. The present study shows that the log-normal bubble size distribution is also valid for coalescence dominant turbulent pipe flow. A continuous stream of air entering laterally into a flowing stream of water generates bubbles having a log-normal size distribution. As the bubbles traverse downstream, they increase in size due to coalescence. At larger average water velocities, the log-normal pattern of the bubble size distribution is maintained downstream of the injection point. At smaller average water velocities, the distribution deviates slightly at both ends (large and small) from the log-normal pattern. The air bubble size distributions measured during this study are characterized by a constant value of the ratio To predict the distribution of bubble sizes, it is proposed to use The air volume fraction significantly affects the bubble size. However, its effect is reduced as the velocity of water is increased. The injector size has only a secondary effect on the development of bubble size distribution through its role in generating the initial bubbles. At The authors gratefully acknowledge the financial support from the Natural Sciences and Engineering Research Council of Canada (NSERC) and Syncrude Canada Ltd. for this project.