Background
                  Bioceramics and their composites have found myriad applications in medicine as superlative osteoalloplasts. Their potential to function as a biocompatible resorbable drug delivery system is being explored. The present study is a preliminary investigation into the efficacy of these indigenously developed nanoporous materials as vehicles for therapeutic agents. An in vitro experiment was conducted with the goal of assessing this material and comparing it with a commercially available gentamicin-loaded polymethylmethacrylate cement.
               
                  Study Design
                  The drug-eluting characteristics of gentamicin bone cement and indigenously designed nanoporous bioceramic granules were analyzed spectrophotometrically and compared. Regression analysis was done.
               
                  Results
                  The first 5 days saw the elute from both samples containing drug concentrations >100 μg/g.
               
                  Conclusions
                  Both samples exhibit a high initial-burst release, which is ideal for prophylactic purposes. Drug eluent levels for both materials were >100 μg/g, which is sufficient for bactericidal activity. This study is a preliminary investigation into the efficacy of an indigenously developed nanoporous material as vehicle for therapeutic agents. An in vitro experiment was conducted to assess this material and to compare it with a commercial cement. Several important factors related to bone physiology that could influence the success of a pharmacologic treatment, including heterogeneity in bone remodeling activities throughout the skeleton, differences in blood supply and local vascularization, and the “blood-bone” barrier. Osteoporosis, arthritis, and periodontal disease are common diseases of the skeleton, all of which could benefit from new therapeutic strategies. The structural qualities of bone, especially the presence of hydroxyapatite (HA) crystals in the bone mineral and the established binding of certain molecules to this mineral phase, provide unique opportunities to treat skeletal diseases using targeted drug delivery. Additional opportunities exist in targeting sites with contrasting bone surface activities, including surfaces that are inactive, forming new bone, or being resorbed. Conventional drug formulations typically provide a prompt release of drug in a bolus form. Achieving and maintaining the drug concentration within the therapeutic window necessitates a multiple dosing regimen, which is often inconvenient and encourages noncompliance from patients. There is therefore an urgent need for technology that facilitates targeted site delivery of drugs at optimal concentration. Herein lies the genesis of controlled drug-release formulations. A plethora of delivery systems are available, and polymers have been their mainstay. However, owing to denaturing of the drug within the polymer matrix causing loss of biologic activity and changes in immunogenecity, efforts to develop biocompatible systems have gained impetus. Carriers used for local delivery of therapeutic carriers used for local delivery of therapeutic agents may be broadly classified as nonbiodegradable and biodegradable. Of the former, polymethylmethacrylate (PMMA) beads impregnated with gentamicin have been a commercial success. The latter category includes collagen sponges, HA, polylactide/polyglycolide implants, and polylactate polymers. All of these systems release antibiotics at concentrations exceeding those of the minimum inhibitory concentrations (MICs) for the susceptible pathogen, without systemic toxicity. The major disadvantages of PMMA beads are the necessity for surgical removal at the completion of antibiotic release and hindrance to bony healing. Individualized chemotherapy to administer various antibiotics is not possible. This is the rationale for development of biodegradable drug delivery systems. Bioceramics and their composites have found myriad applications in medicine as superlative osteoalloplasts. Their potential to function as a biocompatible resorbable drug delivery system is being explored, and they have been used successfully as carriers for antibiotics, antimetabolites, hormones, and growth factors. Shi et al. fabricated a mesoporous silica-HA composite for drug delivery, which showed good apatite deposition after being soaked in SBF for 7 days as well as 60% drug release. Fabrication of nanoporous HA using polyvinyl alcohol (PVA) as pore former resulted in an average porosity of 64 ± 1.4%. There were open and interconnected pores of average pore size <100 nm Mizushima et al. studied the usefulness of injectable spheric porous HA microparticles (SPHA) of average diameter 5 μm as a carrier for drugs such as interferon-alpha (IFN-α), testosterone enanthate), and cyclosporine A. Addition of human serum albumin and zinc (reinforcement) to IFN-α–adsorbed SPHA caused marked prolongation of release in vivo. SPHA seems to be useful as a biodegradable and subcutaneously injectable drug carrier. Andersson et al. synthesized HA through a sol-gel method in near–room temperature conditions. After the mineralization process, the crystal surface was coated with a mesoporous silica matrix using the templates already present in the bulk solution. The coating layer is distributed fairly homogeneously over the apatite surface, and the coating thickness is easily adjustable and dependent on the amount of added silica precursor. The hybrid material was shown to effectively induce calcium phosphate formation under in vitro conditions and simultaneously work as a carrier system for drugs. Tamai devised a novel tool for articular cartilage repair, consisting of a triple composite of an interconnected porous HA (IPHA), recombinant human bone morphogenetic protein-2 (rhBMP-2), and a synthetic biodegradable polymer [poly- Scientists at the Sree Chitra Tirunal Institute for Medical Sciences and Technology have developed nanoporous bioceramic bodies for bone implantation and drug delivery applications. Their efforts have attempted to capitalize on the remarkable features of nanomaterials, viz., high surface area, better control over pore size, morphology, and distribution, and broad possibilities for surface chemistry. The present study is a preliminary investigation into the efficacy of these indigenously developed nanoporous materials as vehicles for therapeutic agents. An in vitro experiment was conducted with the goal of assessing this material and comparing it with a commercially available gentamicin-loaded PMMA cement. The present study was aimed at developing a biodegradable drug delivery system that can be used for orthopedic, maxillofacial, and dental applications. This could potentially obviate the need for secondary surgical procedures and facilitate complete sustained release of the drug at serum concentrations required for bacterial death. The primary aims of the study were: To evaluate the drug-carrying capacity of indigenously developed nanoporous bioceramic bodies by means of spectrophotometric studies. To compare indigenously developed nanoporous bioceramic bodies with commercially available PMMA cement as regarding their drug elution characteristics. The materials used in the study were nanoporous HA granules indigenously designed and developed at the Sree Chitra Tirunal Institute for Medical Sciences and Technology and gentamicin bone cement. Gentamicin bone cements are self-curing cement-like formulations containing antibiotic that are used for positioning and securing metal or plastic prostheses to living bone. They are also used for local delivery of antibiotics in bones afflicted by osteomyelitis for sustained release of the therapeutic agent at the diseased site. It is a high-viscosity cement, available in both 40- and 20-g unit packs. Each unit pack consists of a powder component and a liquid component, equivalent to 1.0 g (1.0 MIU) gentamicin base in the 40-g unit, and 0.5 g (0.5 MIU) in the 20-g unit. The bone cement liquid is contained in a sterile ampule within a blister pack. The interiors of the blister pack are sterile. The radiopaque agent barium sulfate is incorporated directly into the powder component. Sterilization of the bone cement liquid is achieved via filtration. The sterile bone cement liquid is then aseptically packed into sterile ampules. The blister pack is sterilized by ethylene oxide. The bone cement powder together with the peelable pouch is sterilized by gamma radiation. The cement is mixed thoroughly to minimize the entrapment of air. The dough is kneaded and made into beads of the required size.  The creation of synthetic porous structure similar to bone matrix regarding pore size, shape, distribution, and relative orientation has been one of the most important problems of biomaterials engineering. Porous material can stimulate osteoconduction, cause better ingrowth of cells with increased blood circulation inside the implant, and carry pharmacologically active materials. Porous HA granules may release drugs by controlled diffusional flow rate, which would again depend on the dimension and the shape of pores. In this study, HA was prepared by a precipitation route using ammoniated calcium nitrate (LR grade; Ranbaxy Fine Chemicals) and ammonium dihydrogen phosphate (AR grade; S. D. Fine-Chem). The precipitate was aged in the mother liquor for several hours. It was then washed and centrifuged 4 times to remove traces of ammonium nitrate. The filter cake thus produced was dispersed in distilled water to make viscous slurry. In a separate arrangement, an aqueous solution of PVA was made by vigorously heating and stirring PVA powder (mol. wt. ∼1, 25,000, LR grade; S. D. Fine-Chem) and distilled water. The PVA solution and HA slurry were then mixed in stoichiometric amount to get 10, 25, and 50 wt% of PVA to HA. Spheres were made from the slurry, dried, weighed, and kept for debinding at 1,000°C for 4 hours.  Each bone cement sphere (control) had an average diameter of 10.65 mm, volume of 623.16 μL, and weight of 0.422 g. Each HA sphere (test) had an average diameter of 4.21 mm, volume of 39.05 μL, and weight of 0.345 g. One gram each of control and test samples was weighed. The test sample was loaded with gentamicin (Garamycin; Fulford, India) and dried. Both samples were placed into 5 mL phosphate buffer solution (NaH An indirect method was required for the spectrophotometric analysis of gentamicin, because it does not absorb ultraviolet or visible light. o-Phthaldialdehyde was used as a derivitizing agent. It reacts with the amino groups of gentamicin to yield chromophoric products due to isoindole formation. o-Phthaldialdehyde reagent was formulated by adding 2.5 g o-phthaldialdehyde, 62.5 mL methanol, and 3 mL 2-mercaptoethanol to 560 mL 0.04 mol/L sodium borate in deionized water. The reagent was stored in a brown bottle in darkness and settled for ≥24 hours before use. One mL o-phthaldialdehyde, 1 mL eluent from the phosphate buffer solution, 1 mL distilled water, and 4 mL isopropanol (to prevent precipitation of the reacted products) were taken in a test tube and mixed well. One mL of this mixture was pipetted and analyzed. The concentration of gentamicin sulfate was estimated by measuring the absorbance at 332 nm. The drug-eluting characteristics of gentamicin bone cement and indigenously designed nanoporous bioceramic granules were analyzed spectrophotometrically and compared. Drug release from the control material was assessed for 15 days and from the test material for 21 days. Calculation of the concentration of drug eluted from each sample had to be derived from the absorbency of each. The value is computed by using the following principle: To establish a relationship between the amount of drug released and the day of the experiment, a regression analysis was done using the raw data, i.e., amount of the drug. Because a linear relationship was not obtained, the values were transformed into logarithms and the data reanalyzed. This was done to linearize the relation between the amount of drug released and the day of the experiment and to stabilize the variation. There was a highly significant relationship between the amount of drug released and the day of the experiment. The fitted regression equation for the test is: amount of drug released = 2.144/0.066 day. The fitted regression equation for the control is: amount of drug released = 2.307/0.033 day. The average amount of decrease in drug release is exactly The significance of the difference between the rate of decrease of drug release was tested by 95% confidence intervals: test values 0.785-0.939 and control values 0.863-0.995. Therefore, we assumed that the rates of drug release in both samples were similar. Bucholz and Engelbrecht introduced gentamicin-loaded PMMA cement into arthroplasty for prophylaxis of infection. In 1979, Klemm produced antibiotic-impregnated PMMA beads and investigated their use in the treatment of acute and chronic osteomyelitis. Local antibiotic therapy with these beads is currently considered to be a safe technique for delivering high local concentration of drug with minimal systemic levels. Even when wound exudates demonstrated high levels of gentamicin, up to 300 μg/mL, the serum levels of the drug did not exceed acceptable values and toxic reactions were absent in the clinical milieu. In a comparable setting for treating fracture nonunion, these beads stood on par with systemic antibiotic therapy. When gentamicin PMMA beads are applied, they should be removed after 4-6 weeks. After releasing their antibiotics, they act as a foreign body to which bacteria preferentially adhere, grow, and cause a secondary infection. In some cases, beads left in situ for 5 years developed gentamicin-resistant staphylococcal strains from the residual antibiotic release. Another disadvantage of currently used nonbiodegradable PMMA carriers includes low antibiotic release by the cements. In contrast, biodegradable antibiotic carriers may result in high drug release levels and obviate the need for removal; they are gradually replaced by ingrowing tissue. Furthermore, secondary release of the antibiotic may occur during the degradation phase of the carrier. This could increase the antimicrobial efficacy compared with nonbiodegradable carriers. A high initial burst release is advocated for prevention of infection; whereas treatment of chronic infection mandates sustained antibiotic concentration. A safe release profile would feature a short duration of antibiotic release after which the release should stop completely to prevent subinhibitory gentamicin concentrations, which could induce resistant bacteria. A discrete burst after implantation eradicating the contaminating bacteria in the surgical site could be sufficient for prophylactic therapy. In the treatment of established osteomyelitis, a drug concentration of 8 μg/mL for several weeks has been suggested. The present in vitro evaluation revealed that both PMMA beads and nanoporous bioceramic granules exhibit a high initial burst release, which is ideal for prophylactic purposes. Drug eluent levels for both materials were >100 μg/mL, which is sufficient for bactericidal activity. This initial phase was followed by a sustained release phenomenon. The control material showed a high drug concentration compared with the test sample at this stage of the experiment. Although the concentration of drug released by the test sample was less than the control, it was above the level required for clinical efficacy. The quantity of gentamicin loaded into the granules is a major determinant of cumulative release. Another determining factor is the surface-to-volume ratio; our study used PMMA beads of average diameter 10.65 mm and bioceramic granules of average diameter 4.21 mm. Carrier-surface characteristics and drug-sequestration appear to influence the release profile. Favorable release properties should result in consistent safe therapeutic drug concentrations. Surface roughness, wettability, and chemical reactivity of the surface are also vital features for drug loading and elution. The porosity of granules and surface properties may limit the amount of drug that will attach. PMMA beads have cracks on their surface, and leaching of drug takes place from the surface. This is in distinct contrast to the drug-release profile of nanoporous granules. There is a “sphere within a sphere” model. There is a macrosphere of ∼2 mm diameter, which encloses microspheres of ∼10 μm diameter. These microspheres in turn encompass nanospheres averaging ∼100 nm in diameter. All spheres are loosely held to each other. This 3-layered porosity can explain the release characteristics, viz., initial burst from macrospheres and sustained release from microspheres and nanospheres. In the present testing model, all physiologic parameters were not duplicated. These include clearance of the drug by blood flow, buffered pH and ionic content, and the high concentration in the carrier-bone interface. In vivo evaluation of the results is necessary to confirm the veracity of the present study. The results of the study can be summarized as follows: Nanoporous bioceramic granules can act as antibiotic carriers exhibiting a high initial burst effect followed by sustained low-level release for 3 weeks. At all times throughout the study, the concentration of drug eluted was above that needed to maintain bactericidal levels. Gentamicin bone cement is a useful delivery vehicle for the antibiotic, showing both an initial burst effect and sustained low-level release. Prolonged in-hospital systemic antibiotic treatment of bone infections implies a heavy burden for both the patient and the health care system. The plethora of commercially available nonbiodegradable antibiotic carriers underscores the demand for sound local antibiotic treatment options. In contrast, only a few approved biodegradable antibiotic delivery devices are currently available. This emphasizes the clinical potential of biodegradable antibiotic carriers and the need for further preclinical and clinical studies. The authors thank Mr. Muraleedharan Nair, S. MSc Statistics, Retd. Associate Professor, Biostatistics, Government Medical College, Trivandrum, for the statistical analyses, and Mr. Shaji, S. Medical Photographer, Government Dental College, Trivandrum, for the artwork.