The preparation of cathode materials for aqueous Zn-ion batteries (ZIBs) with excellent electrochemical properties is an attractive research focus. However, the large size and high polarization of hydrated zinc ions limit the diffusion kinetics of Zn2+/electron, and the side reactions in the system also affect the performance of the battery. Herein, we present a novel hydrophilic self-supporting composite cathode for aqueous ZIBs, which employs V10O24·12H2O as active materials, acid-treated natural sepiolite and carbon nanotubes as structural and interfacial modifiers. It is demonstrated that the devices exhibit a high specific capacity of 191 mAh g−1 at a current density of 500 mA g−1 (93.6% retention after 100 cycles) and excellent rate performance. This good electrochemical performance is mainly related to the formation of hydrophilic surface/interface, the design of self-supporting and the good conductivity of the composite electrode. Specifically, the addition of acid-treated natural sepiolite and carbon nanotubes could improve the mechanical properties, hydrophilicity and the conductivity of electrode materials, respectively, making this strategy a promising choice for ZIBs.Traditional lithium-ion batteries utilize toxic organic electrolytes and exhibit potential safety hazards, as well as the scarcity and increasing cost of lithium limit their further applications To date, several cathode materials have been reported for aqueous ZIBs, including Prussian blue analogs In this work, we present a general and effective strategy to obtain self-supporting composite cathodes, including V The SNFs were prepared as follows: 4.0 g raw sepiolite powder (Hebei, China) was dissolved in 200 mL of 4 M HCl solution (analytical reagent grade, Zhuzhou Star Chemical Glass Co. Ltd., Hunan, China). The mixture was thermally treated at 85 °C for 8 h under constant magnetic stirring. Then, it was cooled naturally to room temperature and repeatedly washed with deionized water using differential centrifugation, until all Cl To fabricate the VCS composite cathode, 0.36 g of V To evaluate the cathode materials, 2016-type coin cells for ZIBs were assembled. The VCS and VS, which were self-supporting materials, were directly processed into 12 mm disc electrodes as the cathodes. The other two comparative samples (VO and VC, 80 wt.%), which could not maintain self-supporting, were homogeneously mixed with super P as a conductive agent (10 wt.%) and carboxymethyl cellulose (CMC) as a binder (10 wt%). The VO and VC mixtures were coated onto separate stainless-steel meshes and dried at 90 °C overnight. Commercial Zn foil and glass fiber were used as the anode and separator, respectively. And a 2 M aqueous solution of ZnSO The structure of the samples was determined from the X-ray diffraction (XRD, Rigaku DX-2500) patterns, which were obtained using Cu Kα radiation (λ = 1.5418 Å) in the 2θ range of 5° to 80°. Fourier transform infrared spectra (FTIR) were recorded using a Shimadzu FTIR 8120 spectrometer over the range of 400 to 4000 cm The galvanostatic discharge/charge performance of the assembled cells was evaluated at 0.4–1.8 V using a CT2001A battery-testing instrument (LAND Electronic Co.). For VCS and VS cathodes, the specific capacities were calculated based on the mass of the whole electrode. For VO and VC cathodes, the specific capacities were calculated based on the mass of the active materials in the composite cathode. Cyclic voltammetry (CV) was performed using an electrochemical workstation (CHI 600C Shanghai, China) at a scan rate of 0.1 mV s As illustrated in As shown in The density functional theory (DFT) calculations were used to evaluate the physical adsorption energy (ΔE) of the H In which  To reveal the Zn As discussed in the above characterization analysis, the excellent electrochemical performance may be mainly attributed to the following reasons. The addition of carbon nanotubes could provide abundant electron pathways. The layered structure of V In summary, we prepared a multi-functional and high-performance cathode and expanded the family of electrode materials for aqueous ZIBs. The introduction of SNFs can effectively enhance the hydrophilicity of V  There are no conflicts of interest to declare. This study was supported by the Supplementary material associated with this article can be found, in the online version, at doi: 