In this paper, a three-dimensional numerical model to study the static and dynamic behaviour of ultra-high performance steel fibre reinforced concrete is developed. Ultra-high performance steel fibre reinforced concrete is assumed to be a two-phase model consisting of concrete matrix and steel fibres. The concrete matrix is modelled with homogeneous material and the straight round steel fibres are assumed to be dispersed with random locations and orientations in the matrix. The interfacial transition zone (ITZ) effect is studied based on the single fibre pull-out tests, and parameters describing the fibre-matrix one dimensional bond-slip behaviour are obtained and discussed based on both experimental and theoretical results. After the three-dimensional model is validated with static split tensile tests, split Hopkinson pressure bar (SHPB) split tensile tests are numerically modelled and the stress-time history is interpreted in the mesoscale level. The proposed model qualitatively and quantitatively predicts the material static and dynamic behaviours, and also gives insights on the fibre reinforcement effect in the concrete matrix.Concrete is a widely used material in structural construction all over the world. Unreinforced concrete is brittle material with low tensile strength and tensile strain, it is, therefore, mainly used to carry axial compressive loads. With steel bar reinforcement, concrete extends its application into the bending elements. Despite this revolutionary improvement, concrete remains brittle and weak in tension as a material. Fibrous material additions have been used to enhance the performance of concrete-like material since ancient time. It is well known that the addition of fibre material significantly changes the behaviour of the concrete composite, especially during the post-cracking phase. Addition of fibre material leads to substantially improved structural ductility, better hysteretic response under cyclic load reversals, better bonding of the reinforcing bars, improved resistance of the concrete cover to spalling, improved shear resistance, savings in stirrups, and overall improved energy absorption capacity of the structure Extensive study was carried out to understand the behaviour of steel fibre reinforced concrete (SFRC). Ezeldin and Perumalsamy Although SFRC can be treated as homogeneous at macroscopic scale, when observed at a smaller length scale, SFRC is heterogeneous and consists of constituents including aggregate, CH crystals, C-S-H gel, water and fibre material. It is impractical to consider all the phases in the microstructure of SFRC. In general, to investigate the interfacial transition zone (ITZ) effect on the fibre bonding properties, SFRC is described as multi-phase material consisting of the cement paste, aggregates, fibres and ITZs among them. In some previous studies, the interfaces between fibres and cement paste are presumed to be perfect As can be noted in the literature, the mechanical behaviour of SFRC is mainly investigated through experimental and associated analytical studies. Over the past several decades, with the development of computer power and computational mechanics, numerical simulation of material and structural behaviour under both static and dynamic conditions are becoming increasingly popular. Mao et al. In a recent study, a specifically formulated steel fibre reinforced concrete material was developed, and material tests as well as structural components tests were carried out to understand the performance of this novel material under both static and dynamic loading conditions In the present paper, the bonding effect between the fibre material and matrix is investigated firstly by single fibre pull-out tests in which different fibre embedding depths are considered. The experimental results are then used to establish the bond-slip relationship in the numerical model. The numerical model is then calibrated through static split tensile tests, and SHPB tests are finally investigated with the mesoscale model. The material compositions in the present study are listed in A notable character which makes the current material distinguished from the other UHPC material is the addition of nanoscale particles. The addition of nanomaterial affects material hydration process. When a small quantity of the nano-particles is uniformly dispersed in the cement paste, the nano-particles located in the cement will promote and accelerate cement hydration due to their high activity. It was reported Quasi-static compression tests for the current UHPC specimens were conducted on a number of 100 To explore the tensile capacity of the UHPC, four points bending tests were conducted on UHPC beam specimens. The samples all have a dimension of 100 The primary reason behind the addition of fibre material into the concrete matrix is to delay and confine the crack. Although inclusion of fibre material is believed to enhance the concrete pre-cracking strength, the effect of fibre addition becomes more prominent only after the crack initiates. Fibres bridge over the cracked parts, delaying the sudden failure of brittle concrete matrix. The fibre bridging effect is primarily related to the interfacial bonding strength which governs the post-cracking material performance under external pull-out loads. It is therefore critical to understand the fibre pull-out behaviour. In the present study, to obtain the interfacial bond properties between fibres and matrix, a series of fibre pull-out tests are conducted. As shown in Test results reveal that with the increase of fibre embedding length, the failure mode alters from fibre pull-out to fibre fracture. For a smooth fibre with round cross-section, the whole process of fibre pull-out contains three stages as shown in Mathematical derivation of straight fibre pull-out from the matrix has been formulated by Naaman et al. It can be noted from the above equation that there is a linear relationship between the applied force and the displacement of the fibre free end. For debonding stage between In the numerical simulation of the single fibre pull-out tests, the matrix is modelled with solid element and material model 72 Mat_CONCRETE_DAMAGE_Rel3 in LS-DYNA. This material model uses three shear failure surfaces and includes the damage and strain rate effects. This model provides model parameter generation capability which is based solely on unconfined compression strength of the concrete. The automatic generated model parameter can also be examined and modified by the user. For the fibre material, material model 98 Mat_ SIMPLIFIED_JOHNSON_COOK is adopted, and fibres are modelled with truss element so as to avoid computational difficulties while maintaining reasonable accuracy. Parameters used in the current numerical model are listed in It is worth noting that, in spite of the modelling efforts found in the literature A feasible alternative contact modelling algorithm in LS-DYNA is Contact_1D. This one-dimensional contact algorithm, suitable for defining one-dimensional bonding and sliding mechanism between solid elements and truss elements in LS-DYNA, has been used to simulate the bonding, debonding and sliding between the steel fibre and concrete matrix In this model, the slave node of a string of beam or truss elements, modelling the steel fibre, is forced to slide along a master line of nodes embedded in the solid mesh, which models the concrete matrix. This kinematic constraint is applied using a penalty function approach. Fictitious springs are inserted between slave nodes and their projections over the master lines. These springs produce internal forces along the rebar and are proportional to the distance between slave nodes and master lines, as shown in Considering the accumulative damage, the bond between fibre and concrete is represented in a two-phase constitutive model. In the elastic range, the bonding strength is linear proportional to the slip The shear force, acting on the bonding area Based on the above equations, the contact algorithm is defined as shown in It is worth noting that this relationship is a simplified model for fibre-matrix interaction. In the real fibre pull-out test (as shown in In the present study, single fibre pull-out tests were carried out, and the relationship between the pull-out load and slip is now known for a given fibre, and the bond shear stress versus slip curve can be theoretically obtained. Assuming the curve is as described in When determining the bond modulus, first of all, the slope of the linear ascending portion ( The slip Previous study reveals that to prevent fibre fracture, the embedded length of fibre is limited by Based on the present experimental trails, the IFSS can be calculated as 2.1 In this simulation, the parameter used in the contact algorithm for fibre with 20 The comparison between the simulation and the experimental results of 20 After calibration with the experimental study, the bonding between the fibre materials with the base matrix is determined and simulated with contact algorithm, and in this section, static split tension test is numerically studied based on the 3D mesoscale model. Static split tensile test were conducted on cylindrical UHPC specimens with diameter of 75 In the numerical model, the steel fibre is assumed to be straight in the matrix with a predefined length The established 3D mesoscale model contains 2,664,000 solid elements for concrete matrix and 291,342 truss elements for fibre phase which are determined based on sensitivity analysis. Comparison of the failure modes between the numerical model and experimental results is shown in Comparing the splitting tensile stress displacement data, it is seen the simulation results collate well with the experimental study, and the peak stress from the simulation is around 22.5 Concrete material is strain-rate sensitive, and the reason behind is ambiguous. Ross et al. In the current study, the dynamic tests were conducted on SHPB test specimens with 75 When the striker impacts the incident bar, a one-dimensional compressive stress wave is generated. The stress wave (incident wave) propagates along the incident bar towards the specimen. When it reaches the interface between the incident bar and the specimen, the incident wave splits into two smaller waves. One of them, the transmitted wave, travels through the specimen and into the transmitted bar, causing plastic deformation in the specimen. The other wave, called the reflected wave, is reflected away from the specimen and travels back down the incident bar. Strain gages are then placed on the bars to measure strains caused by the waves. Assuming deformation in the specimen is uniform, the stress and strain can be calculated from the amplitudes of the incident, transmitted, and reflected waves. The SHPB split tension setup is shown in Based on the theory of one-dimensional wave propagation, the equation below is used to calculate the stress in the incident bar. The dynamic tensile force and strength of UHPC specimens in the SHPB tests are calculated by: From the SHPB test, the typical stress-time relationship of UHPC from SHPB split tension test can be obtained. Previous study had revealed the material dynamic performance of this novel UHPC material, and influence of nano particles and steel fibres are discussed extensively Adequate modelling of material under dynamic loads requires the information of strain rate effect. The dynamic increase factors of normal strength concrete under tensile loads which are obtained from formulae proposed by Malvar and Crawford For normal strength concrete compressive strength: Despite these well-established empirical equations for normal strength concrete, an analogous conclusion form normal concrete to UHPC is not adequate. With the alterations to the material composition, the failure mechanism changes, instead of progressive crack propagation and failure in normal strength concrete, fibre material in UHPC limits and confines the crack initiation and propagation which can significantly influence the inertia effect under high rate loading condition. The low water-cement ratio in UHPC also warrants a much dense micro structure with less porosity (initial defects) and water content. In the previous study, the rate effect is discussed through experimental study Material strain rate effect is less prominent under compressive loads, and this conclusion applies to UHPC as well To provide in-depth comparison, homogenised model without modelling the steel fibres is also considered in the current study. Teng et al. In the tests, two strain gauges were attached on the incident pressure bar and transmitted pressure bar, and the measured stress histories under the applied impulse are shown in  In the test, the high-speed camera photography was used to record the developing of crack of the UHPC specimen. The corresponding failure patterns from the test and 3D mesoscale numerical simulation are compared in The fibre bridging effect can be interpreted by relating the crack propagation with the stress-time history curve as shown in Closer observation on the behaviours of embedded fibre is shown in In the present paper, three-dimensional numerical model, considering the random distribution of steel fibres, has been proposed to investigate the behaviour of UHPC material under both static and intense dynamic loading. Random fibre distribution and orientation is considered in the model development. Fibre interaction with the concrete matrix is studied through single fibre pull-out tests, and the results are used to establish the one dimensional bond-slip contact algorithm in the three-dimensional model. Based on the proposed model, static split tensile test is simulated, and it is noted the proposed model gives good prediction of material behaviour under static load. In the simulation of the SHPB test, results from the proposed model correlate well with the experimental results, while the homogenised model without explicit modelling of steel fibres over predicts the concrete damage. Compared with the frequently used homogeneous concrete model, the proposed 3D numerical model, considering the random distribution of steel fibres, could predict the responses of SFRC material subjected to intense dynamic loadings more realistically, especially in the post-cracking phase. The dynamic stress-time history curve is interpreted with the aid of the proposed model, and the effect from fibre reinforcement can be clearly viewed in the three dimensional model. The research presented in this paper jointly supported by the