Due to the increasing share of renewables in the energy system, research into thermal storage systems is becoming increasingly important. Phase change slurries (PCS) consisting of a phase change material (PCM) within a carrier fluid can be used as thermal storage. The advantage of phase change slurries is that they can be pumped through a hydraulic system independent of the state-of-matter of the emulsified phase change material. In this work a PCS containing 35 wt% Parafol 18 97 (Sasol Germany, n-octadecane, Tm
                      = 27.3 °C) as the PCM was characterized under realistic thermomechanical stress in a 0.5 m³ storage tank test facility. Measurements showed that at a temperature difference of 7 K (20 °C – 27 °C) the PCS was able to store 2.6 times more heat than water. Furthermore, the influence of PCS on the energy demand of a pump was investigated.median particle diameter distribution shear rate of 100 s crystallization cooling circuit heating circuit natural numbers melting constant pressure phase change slurry primary secondary storage tank total water measurement specific heat capacity (kJ kg mean specific heat capacity (sum of latent and sensible enthalpy) (kJ kg particle diameter acceleration of gravity (m s head of the pump (m) melting enthalpy (kJ kg pressure (kPa) stored heat in water, measurement for cooling circuit (kWh) heat flux (W) temperature (K) mean temperature inside the storage tank during charge and discharge (°C) total inner volume of the storage tank (m volumetric flow (L h dyn. viscosity (mPa s) Heat conductivity (W/m K) density (kg m Due to the discrepancy between the availability of renewable energy sources and energy demand thermal storage systems are gaining importance to help close the gap between energy production and consumption. Latent heat storage systems in the form of phase change slurries (PCS) provide a high thermal storage capacity. PCS consist of a phase change material (PCM) and water as a carrier fluid. PCS use the solid–liquid phase change of the PCM for energy storage and can transfer heat at an almost constant temperature ( PCS can be classified as either suspensions or emulsions – depending on the state-of-matter of the emulsified PCM. PCS can be pumped regardless of the state-of-matter of the PCM and can be used as a heat transfer fluid, for example, even if the PCM is crystallized ( The particle comminution during the production of the PCS distributes the PCM bulk material into a large number of confined droplets. This enlarges the surface to volume ratio of the PCM in water and thus enhances the heat transfer ( In this paper the thermal storage capacity of a PCS emulsion is investigated. A PCS composition found to be stable at a technical scale of 5 L is enlarged to a scale of 600 L and examined in a storage tank test facility. There are only a few publications in the literature on the thermal characterization of phase change emulsions on a larger scale. Delgado et al. describe the thermal characterization of a phase change emulsion on a scale of 46 L in a stirred tank and a coil heat exchanger ( The main measurements will be performed to determine the thermal storage capacity of the PCS at different temperature differences. Prior to the PCS measurements, reference experiments are carried out with water as heat transfer fluid. In addition, a comparison of the stored energy measured at the test facility with DSC measurements of the PCS is carried out. Furthermore, a pump characteristic is also determined in the test facility, which is used to investigate the influence of the PCS on the electrical energy consumption of the pump. The PCS is an emulsion, which consisted of 35 wt% Parafol 18–97 (Sasol Germany GmbH, n-octadecane, A total volume of about 600 L of PCS is required to fill the test facility. The storage tank itself contains a volume of 500 L. Mechanical particle comminution processes are used to produce the PCS. In the first step, a pre-heated pre-emulsion is prepared with the aid of a KPG stirrer. A first particle communition is achieved by dispersing the pre-emulsion with the help of a rotor-stator machine (IKA ProcessPilot 2000/4, 2P/4 M/6F 3-stage geometries). In the final step, a high-pressure homogenizer (Bertoli Molecola) is used to produce the final PCS with particle diameters in the nanometer range. Due to a limitation of the production tank volume of 100 L, the volume of 0.6 m Thermal analysis was performed by DSC measurements in a Q200 DSC by TA Instruments using Tzero hermetic crucibles at an accuracy of ±5%. Specific heat capacity measurements were performed at an accuracy of 3% in a MicroSC calorimeter by Setaram. Heat conductivity measurements were performed at an accuracy of 5% in a LabTemp 300 by PSL Systemtechnik. Particle size distribution was analysed via light scattering using a LS13320 by Beckman Coulter. Viscosity measurements were performed in a MCR502 rotational rheometer by AntonPaar using concentric cylinder geometry (according to DIN 53019) with a viscosity accuracy of ±5%. Density measurements were executed in an oscillating u-tube density meter DMA4500 by AntonPaar at a density accuracy of ±0.05 kg m Temperature measurements were done using PT100 temperature probes, which were calibrated to an accuracy of ±0.05 K. Volumetric flow was measured using magnet flow meters by Krohne with an error of ≤±1%. Pressure measurements were done using the sensors ATM ECO by STS (≤±1% error), dTrans p30 by Jumo (≤±0.5% error) and PRRD by Baumer (≤±0.5% error). The energy demand of the installed pump was recorded using CLT313 by Christ with a current/voltage measuring error of ≤±1%. For all sensors, the maximum error was assumed for the error analysis. Uncertainty evaluation was done using Gaussian error propagation.  The storage tank has a cylindrical shape with a diameter of 650 mm and a height of 1655 mm. All connections were made with a pipe diameter of DN40. Inside the storage tank the temperature is measured on five levels on different radial positions to determine the stratification of the stored PCS. For pump 1 the energy demand is measured and the hydraulic head of the pump is determined using two pressure sensors at the suction and pressure side. Evaluation of the PCS was executed at a volumetric flow rate of 250 L h The energetic balancing of the stored heat quantity is carried out via the primary circuits of the heat exchangers in the heating and cooling circuit, since the material properties of the PCS cannot be precisely determined or could change during the characterization in the test facility. Therefore, the heat released or absorbed in these primary circuits is used to determine the amount of heat transferred to the PCS. By integrating this heat flow, the storage capacity of the storage tank filled with PCS can also be determined. In order to be able to compare the PCS with other heat storage fluids, the following figure mean heat capacity Using Before starting with the experiments, the properties of the primary circuit fluids were determined. In the heating circuit, water is used as a heat transfer fluid whose density and heat capacity are well documented in the literature ( The heat quantity inside the storage tank is calculated by using the average temperature of the storage, determined by the measured temperatures inside of the tank (see  It is shown that the values for the stored heat quantity After performing the reference experiments using water, the storage tank test facility was dried and filled with the PCS. As already mentioned the formulation for the PCS used in this work was characterized by One charge or discharge cycle takes about 3 h. The PCS was first pumped from the bottom of the storage tank into a heat exchanger, in which the PCS is heated to 29   For the measurement at a temperature spread of 20–27    In addition to balancing the stored heat quantity, the heat transfer rates in the plate heat exchangers used were also determined. In order to determine the influence of the PCS on the energy consumption of the centrifugal pump installed in the test facility, a pump characteristic curve for the PCS and water was determined. The test facility allows the hydraulic connection of the installed components to be changed while the PCS is filled. To determine the characteristic curve the energy demand of the pump at various volumetric flows was recorded. Additionally the pressure on the discharge and suction sides of the pump was recorded. The measurements were performed at a constant temperature of 20 Using When comparing the pump characteristic curves shown in Within the scope of this work, a PCS was characterized with regard to its storage capacity under near-application conditions in a storage tank test facility. In the temperature range of 15–29 These results show that PCS are a promising alternative to sensible heat transfer fluids and have a significantly higher thermal capacity in small temperature differences. The current thermal characterization does not include an investigation of the natural convection that may occur inside the storage tank. In future work, this influence needs to be investigated in more detail, as this phenomenon could have an impact on the heat transfer rate and capacity. The PCS presented in this paper shows a supercooling of 5.7 K. Especially in comparison of the measurements at a temperature range of 15–29 The influence of the PCS viscosity on the pump was demonstrated. In the molten state, the viscosity at a shear rate of 100 s The authors are grateful to the German Federal Ministry of Economics and Technology for funding the work of this project (03ESP357B) and the Project Management Jülich for the administrative support.