The blast-induced ground vibration prediction using scaled distance regression analysis is one of the most popular methods employed by engineers for many decades. It uses the maximum charge per delay and distance of monitoring as the major factors for predicting the peak particle velocity (PPV). It is established that the PPV is caused by the maximum charge per delay which varies with the distance of monitoring and site geology. While conducting a production blasting, the waves induced by blasting of different holes interfere destructively with each other, which may result in higher PPV than the predicted value with scaled distance regression analysis. This phenomenon of interference/superimposition of waves is not considered while using scaled distance regression analysis. In this paper, an attempt has been made to compare the predicted values of blast-induced ground vibration using multi-hole trial blasting with single-hole blasting in an opencast coal mine under the same geological condition. Further, the modified prediction equation for the multi-hole trial blasting was obtained using single-hole regression analysis. The error between predicted and actual values of multi-hole blast-induced ground vibration was found to be reduced by 8.5%.The most popular and frequently used methods and procedures for vibration forecast are empirical and based on simplified correlations. Scaled distance regression analysis is the handiest and less complicated method used by engineers for many decades. The scaled distance is a concept put forward by using the amount of explosive energy in air shock and seismic waves, while considering the effects of distance. The scaled distance is derived from combining the distance between the source and measurement points, and the maximum charge per delay. Although the approach is well accepted due to its ease of use, it is merely an empirical approach which does not consider the inevitable phenomenon of blast wave superimposition. Many attempts have been made by researchers to obtain the actual charge per delay which will contribute to the superimposed waveforms resulting from production blasting. Many different numerical methods, such as artificial neural network (ANN) ( All the modern techniques require the use of computer program which is time-consuming and complicated for a field blasting engineer. Whereas different PPV predictor empirical equations are generated using field data, the effect of superimposition of waves is not yet incorporated in the empirical equation. In this paper, we try to incorporate the effect of interference/superimposition of waves in the scaled distance regression analysis equation to predict more precise result of PPV. The most acceptable concept of vibration prediction is of scaled distance given by the United States Bureau of Mines (USBM) ( The peak level of ground motion at any given point is inversely proportional to the square of the distance from the shot point ( The PPV values are recorded during single-hole blasting conducted with a varying charge per delay at different distances. The single-hole blasting will generate the vibration waves, where no superimposition of vibration waves will occur. With the data of single-hole blasting conducted, regression is performed to find out the scaled distance equation. After that, using the same equation obtained with single-hole blasting data, the values of PPV are predicted for production blasting. The predicted PPV value is lower compared to actual production blasting value, as the superimposition of vibration waves is not considered. The actual PPV value recorded for production blasting was then compared to predicted one using single-hole scaled distance equation. The correlation obtained between the actual and predicted PPV values is used to find out the factor to be added to minimize the errors occurring due to superimposition of vibration waves. The correction factor found is then incorporated in the final prediction equation for precise prediction of production blasting PPV. The study site was an opencast coal mine, Gondudih in Kusunda Area, Bharat Coking Coal Limited (BCCL), a subsidiary of Coal India Limited. The Gondudih opencast coal mine is located in eastern-central part of Jharia Coalfield in Dhanbad District of Jharkhand, India. The satellite map of the mine is shown in The mine area is covered by various types of rocks belonging to Barakar formation of Lower Gondwana group under a moderately thick cover of soil, alluvium and sandy soil. The major portion of the cluster is covered by alluvium and sandy soil of recent age, which ranges in thickness from 1.6 m to 1.8 m and occupies lower grounds. Metamorphic rocks cap the higher grounds, mainly in the northern part of the block. The thickness of the top formation up to the weathered mantle varies from 0 to 11.6 m made up of alluvium, sandy soil with consolidated weathered Barakar sandstone and is underlain by the coal-bearing rocks of Barakar formation. Barakar formation, occurring below the soil covers, consists of sandstone, argillaceous sandstone, arenaceous shale, carbonaceous shale, gray shale and coal seams. The mine is worked on fully hiring basis using PC-dumper combination for removal of overburden (OB), extraction and transportation of coal ( Blast-induced ground vibration was measured by three Minimate Plus (Instantel Inc., Canada) vibration monitors. These instruments are a microprocessor-based unit having triaxial transducers. The instrument records blast waves in three mutually perpendicular directions, i.e. longitudinal, transversal and vertical along with respective frequencies and particle velocities ( Blastware™ is a software for the Instantel Inc., Canada, vibration monitoring instruments. It offers powerful, easy-to-use features for event management, compliance reporting and advanced data analysis. This software is designed to perform several tasks to assist with monitoring operations. The software can be used to monitor and manage recorded events, remotely control monitors, as well as customize report content, language, frequency standard and others. It also can generate fast Fourier transform (FFT) to find out the dominant frequency wave out of recorded waves. Single-hole blasts were conducted with a varying charge per delay, and the vibrations were recorded at different distances using Minimate Plus (Instantel Inc., Canada). Also, the vibrations were recorded at different distances for production blasting with varying blast design parameters and charge per delay. The single-hole blasting data collected are summarized in Data of PPV recorded with single-hole blasting at different distances with a varying charge per delay are then plotted on PPV versus scaled distance curve to find out the single-hole scaled distance (SHSD) regression equation ( Eq. In Substituting Eq. Hence, the general modified scaled distance equation can be written as Verification of results was done between the PPV values predicted using Eq. Using Eq. To validate Eq. The errors between predicted PPV values obtained using Eqs. The single-hole scaled distance equation (Eq. The modified scaled distance regression analysis approach (Eq. We wish to confirm that there are no known conflicts of interest associated with this publication and there has been no significant financial support for this work that could have influenced its outcome.