Cenospheres are hollow, low-density particles found in power station fly ash. They have many commercially-useful properties which make them a valuable by-product. However, recovering cenospheres from fly ash is difficult due to their low concentration and fine size. Experiments were performed to test the novel approach of using an Inverted Reflux Classifier. In this configuration, the particles are fluidised by adding wash water from above which helps to wash any entrained dense material from the overhead product. Inclined channels are mounted at the base to minimise the loss of buoyant cenospheres in the waste underflow stream.
                  Experiments were performed at both laboratory scale (80mm×100mm cross-section) and pilot scale (300mm×300mm cross section) using mixtures of cenospheres and silica, all nominally less than 100μm in size. In batch tests, the bed expansion behaviour of the positively-buoyant cenospheres in the Inverted Reflux Classifier was found to be analogous to the behaviour of negatively-buoyant particles in the standard configuration. Continuous steady-state experiments were performed using feeds with suspension solids concentration varying from 0.3 to 9.5wt.% solids and a buoyant cenosphere grade of 0.5 to 65wt.%, with a range of fluidisation wash water rates, and degree of volume reduction (ratio of volumetric feed to product rate). Both units delivered high recoveries and product grades. An increase in volume reduction (decreasing overflow rate for a given feed rate), caused a drop in recovery and an improvement in grade. The throughput advantage compared to a conventional teetered (fluidised) bed separator was over 30 in some cases. Both laboratory and pilot-scale units displayed similar behaviour and the results were also consistent with existing correlations for negatively-buoyant particles in the standard Reflux Classifier. Hence this technology has clear potential for recovering and concentrating cenospheres from fly ash.Cenospheres are hollow spherical alumina-silicate particles formed during coal combustion. The effective density of individual cenospheres can vary from that of silica (~ There are some major challenges in efficiently recovering cenospheres. Their surface, magnetic and electrical properties are similar to many of the other components found in fly ash. Thus methods such as flotation and electrostatic separation that are routinely used in mineral processing for separating fine particles, and have been successfully applied to remove combustible material from fly ash, cannot be effectively applied to recovering cenospheres. Gurupira et al. It is in theory simple to separate positively buoyant cenospheres from the denser components of fly ash by float-sink separation in water. Indeed the usual approach to producing commercial grade product involves scooping the buoyant cenospheres from the surface of fly ash tailings ponds The objective of the present study is to evaluate the potential for an Inverted Reflux Classifier (IRC) to efficiently separate and recover cenospheres from fly ash. The standard Reflux Classifier (RC) is a separation device that consists of a fluidised bed with a set of parallel inclined channels mounted above ( The standard Reflux Classifier design has been in commercial use for about 8 The background theory of how standard Reflux Classifiers work is outlined in This paper is focussed on the recovery of positively buoyant cenospheres that float, whereas existing theory was developed for negatively buoyant particles that settle. So in this section the existing theory is summarised, but then some further comments are provided on potential additional factors that may come into play when separating buoyant cenospheres from negatively-buoyant particles. For fine particles, the terminal free settling velocity Here When a suspension of many particles is present, their settling (or rise) velocity is lower. The semi-empirical Richardson and Zaki Within an inclined section, particles have only a relatively short vertical distance to fall before they settle against the lower surface of the channel, from where they can slide down to the base of the channel. In the case of buoyant particles such as cenospheres, they will instead rise to the upper (downward facing) surface of the channel and then slide up to the top. This so-called Boycott effect The well-known PNK theory Here, Eq. Laskovski et al. Although the re-suspension phenomenon reduces the throughput advantage, the selectivity on the basis of particle density is improved. Particles with a density far from the fluid density are less likely to be re-suspended than particles with a density close to that of the fluid. Therefore the efficiency of density separation is higher than in a purely vertical elutriation column. Most of the experiments of Laskovski et al. Hence in the limit for particles that are small compared to the channel thickness ( Hence for particles in the Stokes settling regime (Eq. All of the above theory for negatively buoyant particles in the standard Reflux Classifier ( Intuitively it might be expected that the interactions between upward rising positively buoyant particles and downward settling negatively-buoyant particles would always lead to increased hindered settling and thus a reduced efficiency of separation. However, this is not always the case. The first suggestion of this was in work by Whitmore A certain minimum critical concentration is required before streaming behaviour occurs. Below this limit, the presence of a second species does indeed reduce the settling rates Due to supply availability, two different grades of Q-CEL Hollow Microspheres (Potters Industries) were used in this work. According to the manufacturer's specifications, these both had a nominal size range of 5–90 Not only do these commercial microspheres vary in size, but they also vary in density. Float-sink separation in water showed that around 35 % of the particles in both grades were denser than water. For the 5020FPS grade, the average densities of the floats and sinks fractions were found by water pycnometry to be 400 For some of the later laboratory-scale experiments, the concentration (grade) of cenospheres in the feed was lowered to make it similar to that of raw fly ash. This was done by adding silica flour (Sibelco, 400 G) as the gangue material. The manufacturer's specification sheet quotes a typical silica flour density of 2670 The laboratory-scale Inverted Reflux Classifier was built from Perspex. The upper section was a vertical column with internal cross-sectional area of There was a pair of pressure tappings spaced 475 Fluidising (wash) water was supplied from the mains water supply and the flowrate measured using a rotameter. It entered through a pyramid shaped distributor. The inner chamber of this distributor had internal dimensions of 100 In continuous experiments, feed was prepared in a stirred 300 Except when samples were being collected, both the overflow and underflow streams were directed back into the feed tank in order to provide enough feed for long continuous experiments to be performed. To operate in this closed-loop manner, it was necessary to remove water at the same rate as fluidising wash water was being added, otherwise the feed would gradually become more dilute and the feed tank would eventually overflow. Hence a discard water stream was removed via a distributor plate located at the base of the unit. This distributor had the same dimensions as the one at the top of the system. The small holes helped to reduce the rate of loss of solids in this stream, but this was not perfect and some solids were observed in the collected discard water. The pilot scale Inverted Reflux Classifier was built from stainless steel. It had a square cross sectional area of 300 The fluidising water was again taken directly from the mains water supply. Feed was prepared in a 1300 Similar to the laboratory-scale rig, the underflow and overflow streams were directed back into the feed tank except when samples were being collected. In order to discard water to compensate for the added fluidisation wash water, a side stream was removed from the underflow and passed upwards through a lamella thickener to minimise loss of any solids in the discard water stream. This lamella thickener (visible in Doroodchi et al. Samples of the floats solids left in the bed after this time were measured by water pycnometry and found to have an average density of 315 Then a series of bed expansion experiments was performed. In these batch experiments, there was no feed or overflow stream. Fluidising water was passed down through the column at a known rate. When conditions were steady, the bed pressure drop was measured. This value was used to estimate the solid volume fraction (see The arrangement used in the continuous experiments is shown in The laboratory-scale system was deemed to be at steady state when the pressure transducer reading was steady. Once the system was at steady state, timed samples of the feed, overflow product and underflow reject were then collected for analysis. Samples of the full cross-section of each stream were collected by diverting it into a beaker or bucket. The overflow and underflow streams were sampled before the feed stream, so as to avoid the disturbance of the feed affecting the subsequent measurements. Operation of the pilot-scale Inverted Reflux Classifier was carried out in a similar manner to the laboratory-scale unit, but with larger flowrates. However, there were no pressure readings taken on the pilot scale unit. So instead, the unit was operated for at least 2 In the bed expansion experiments, the solids volume fraction was estimated by measuring the pressure drop Δ Knowing the density of the cenosphere particles The samples of the feed, product and reject streams were float-sink separated in 1 or 2 The mass flowrates and compositions of all the streams into and out of the system were calculated from the measured sample masses and collection times. For a steady state system, the mass flow rate of feed into the unit divided by the combined rate of the exiting product and reject streams should equal one. A similar balance should also hold for each of the two density fractions. However, in practice calculations based on the raw data usually do not exactly satisfy these mass balances due to random sampling and measurement errors. It is important to have an internally consistent set of data so that system performance parameters, such as recovery, can be calculated unambiguously. Therefore mass balance reconciliation was used to objectively obtain a self-consistent set of data. There were three measurements for each stream, the total mass rate (i.e. water plus all solids), the rate of float solids (cenospheres) and the rate of sink solids (silica). There were three streams analysed, the feed, product and reject, so there were a total of nine measurements for each experiment (NOTE: the mass rates of wash water and discard water were not included as these were physically balanced before the start of each experiment). Errors were assigned to each of these nine measurements, and the true value was assumed to be the measured value plus the error term. An objective function was defined equal to the sum of the squares of the relative errors of each measurement. Then the Solver numerical search routine (Microsoft Excel) was used to minimise this objective function, by varying all the individual error terms, subject to the constraint that the adjusted values must satisfy all of the mass balance equations for steady state conditions, namely that the mass of each component (water, cenospheres and sinks) into the system must equal the total mass rate out. Experiments where the ratio of measured solids mass rate in divided by measured solids mass rate out varied from 1.0 by more than 40 % were not analysed further. In addition, experiments where any of the nine raw measurements were adjusted by more than 20 % during mass-balance reconciliation were also omitted. This left 15 laboratory-scale and 14 pilot-scale experiments that were retained for further analysis. The tabulated results in Once a consistent set of data was obtained, the The other important parameter reported is the In some of the pilot-scale experiments, representative samples of the floats and sinks fractions of each stream were also analysed using a Malvern Mastersizer 2000. If the material was dried, it formed a cake that was then difficult to re-disperse. So these samples were kept in wet form. The laser sizer purports to measure the volume size distribution of the particles. At steady state, the volume of solids in each size fraction of each density interval into the unit should equal the combined volume leaving in the two outlet streams. Similar to the mass balance reconciliation procedure outlined in From this reconciled data, the total recovery of all floats material to the product could be calculated. It was also possible to construct the size partition curve for the floats fraction, where the It is well known and accepted that in gravity separation performance tends to deteriorate as particle size becomes smaller, so it is unrealistic to expect high recoveries of the finest particles. This poor performance at the fine end of the size distribution may obscure good recoveries being obtained for the larger particles. Therefore the volume-based recovery of particles larger than 20 In a conventional fluidised bed consisting of particles of one size and density there is a unique relationship between the fluidisation velocity and the steady state volume fraction of the particles. As the velocity increases, the solids volume fraction decreases. This can be predicted by the Richardson–Zaki equation (Eq. Batch bed expansion experiments were therefore performed to confirm whether analogous behaviour occurs when positively-buoyant particles are downward fluidised in an Inverted Reflux Classifier. These results show that the Inverted Reflux Classifier applied to positively-buoyant particles gives equivalent behaviour to that obtained using negatively buoyant particles in the standard Reflux Classifier. This is important because it shows that the inclined channels at the base can be relied on to prevent cenospheres being entrained downwards into the underflow. This phenomenon should be able to be combined with a downward flow of wash water to remove entrained high density fly ash while preventing a large reduction in cenosphere recovery. The laboratory scale mass-balance results are shown in The pilot scale mass-balance results are shown in  Due to the similar behaviour of the laboratory and pilot scale, these two sets of results are now discussed together in parallel. The following sub-sections focus on different aspects of performance, including: size partition, recovery, volume reduction, feed concentration and wash-water rate. In some of the pilot-scale runs, representative samples of the floats and sinks fractions from the three streams were sized using a Malvern Mastersizer 2000. Typical size distributions are shown in  This classification is shown in the size partition curve obtained from the volume-balanced size distribution data, shown in The particle cut size inferred from the partition curve enables calculation of the throughput advantage which can then be compared with the prediction from the Laskovski correlation (Eq. The experimental throughput advantages    Increasing the volume reduction should also improve the upgrade, which is indeed the case as shown in The laboratory and pilot scale work covered a wide range of operating conditions and also used slightly different cenosphere feed stocks. Given this variation, the similarity in both qualitative trends and quantitative values between laboratory and pilot-scale results shown in Laboratory-scale Experiments 8 to 12 had a much higher feed concentration of 8 In laboratory-scale Experiments 5 to 7 the fluidisation wash water rate was varied from 0.38 to 3.0 The recovery and concentration of cenospheres from fly ash are challenging given that technologies such as flotation or electrostatic separation are unable to target a property that distinguishes the cenospheres from the denser silica. Gravity separation is arguably the only option, but has significant capacity constraints. A novel device, the Inverted Reflux Classifier, was therefore investigated at both laboratory and pilot scale. The Inverted Reflux Classifier efficiently separated positively-buoyant cenospheres from negatively-buoyant silica particles. High recoveries and upgrades were obtained, with similar performance achieved at both scales. Results were consistent with the existing correlations developed for negatively buoyant particles in standard Reflux Classifiers. The throughput advantage compared to a conventional teetered bed separator was over 30 in some cases. Hence this technology has the potential to efficiently recover and concentrate cenospheres from power station fly ash, thus creating a valuable by product. Further research is required using real fly ash samples to confirm this potential. This research has been supported by a grant from