The hydrothermal crystallization of hematite (α-Fe2O3) from goethite (α-FeOOH), in sodium aluminate solutions has been studied for the first time using in-situ synchrotron time-resolved energy dispersive diffraction. This technique has allowed the transformation to be followed in real time and under the high temperature and pressure conditions (200–250 °C, 42 bar) required to allow (or induce) crystallization. To promote crystallization from goethite, hematite seed was added to accelerate the otherwise slow kinetics of crystallization. The reaction proceeds via goethite dissolution and subsequent hematite growth and the kinetic data was fitted using Avrami–Erofe'ev expression and Sharp–Hancock method. The rate of transformation of goethite to hematite increases at higher caustic concentrations, hematite surface area, and temperature. Crystallization is inhibited by the presence of anatase (TiO2).In a high temperature Bayer process, when bauxite is hydrothermally digested at 250 °C with caustic liquor to dissolve alumina and boehmite, many important mineral changes occur. These changes influence the physical characteristics of the red mud residue produced affecting its separation from the alumina saturated caustic liquor. Iron oxides such as hematite (α-Fe The relative ratio and absolute percentages of goethite and hematite, in particular, affect their efficient separation and subsequently the quality of the alumina product ( The two principal methods of iron oxide transformation are thermal (topotactic) transformation or hydrothermal transformation via a dissolution reprecipitation mechanism. The kinetics of thermal transformation between 300 °C and 550 °C, where a topotactic change occurs has been extensively studied using XRD, TEM and Synchrotron diffraction ( Hydrothermal transformation of goethite to hematite under Bayer process conditions is proposed to be a dissolution–reprecipitation mechanism ( While much valuable data has been obtained from these previous studies, accurate rate data through in-situ methods has yet to be determined. The use of in-situ time-resolved Energy Dispersive Synchrotron diffraction presents the possibility of following the transformation in real-time. Under Bayer digestion conditions, the dissolution of goethite and simultaneous growth of hematite can be observed and recorded using a specially designed reaction vessel. While similar synchrotron studies have examined the mechanism of solid-state crystallization of hematite from goethite by thermal dehydration ( The Synchrotron source used to carry out these experiments was at EDDI-BESSY in Berlin. The beam is generated by a 7T-Wiggler magnet, which can provide excellent flux energies from 10 to 80 keV and up to 150 keV for many experiments. It has a maximum X-ray flux of 3 Bragg's law can be rearranged and expressed in terms of photon energy For a fixed angle θ, a measurement of Reactions were performed using a purpose built reaction vessel for studying hydrothermal Bayer reactions ( TEM images of the iron samples were obtained using a Jeol JEM2010 Fastem electron microscope. Samples were positioned on a carbon microgrid supported on copper by placing a few droplets of a suspension of sample in methanol. The grid was then dried in air under ambient conditions. Micrographs were registered using bright-field imaging. BET specific surface area analysis of samples was carried out using an ASAP 2010 volumetric adsorption analyser manufactured by Micromeritics, Norcross, Ga. Samples were first weighed before being placed under a vacuum and degassed for 12 h at 140 °C in the degass port of the adsorption analyser. The degassed sample was then reweighed, placed on an analysis port and immersed in a Dewar of liquid nitrogen. The BET specific surface area was calculated using the adsorption data in the relative pressure range from 0.04 to 0.2. Synthetic inorganic iron mineral phase samples (pigment grade) of goethite and hematite were acquired from Lanxess GmbH (Bayferrox®) and details are displayed in The study consisted of 13 experiments to examine the kinetics of transformation with respect to (a) goethite to hematite ratio; (b) available hematite surface area; (c) temperature; (d) caustic concentration; and (e) the presence of anatase; as outlined in The hydrothermal transformation of goethite to hematite at 240 °C was followed in 15 mL of solution containing 3.77 M NaOH. 2.65 M Al(OH) To quantify the reaction progression, the peak areas were converted to a degree of reaction parameter The purpose of inverting the goethite dissolution measurements is to highlight that the dissolution of goethite is consistent with the growth of the three main hematite peaks. It is apparent that the more accurate values of The kinetic information was then extracted from the collected data using the Sharp–Hancock method. This method takes a kinetic model, such as the Avrami–Erofe'v equation (Eq. The plot of ln[− The hydrothermal transformation of goethite is known to be a very slow process, with the timescale of conversion at 260 °C being hours in the absence of hematite seed (  The data displayed in Sharp–Hancock analysis ( In-situ measurements of the transformation of goethite to hematite were conducted at 250 °C, 240 °C and 230 °C using a molar ratio of 0.9 to determine the impact of temperature on the goethite transformation kinetics and the activation energy. The measured relative rate constants show that temperature has a significant impact on the transformation kinetics ( In-situ measurements of the transformation of goethite to hematite were conducted using NaOH concentrations of 1.97, 3.77 and 4.53 M to determine the impact of caustic concentration on the transformation kinetics. A goethite: hematite molar ratio of 1.8 was again selected and the data collected was then normalized to determine the extent of reaction ( An in-situ measurement of the transformation of goethite to hematite was conducted at 250 °C in the presence of 0.5 g anatase to determine its impact on the transformation kinetics using a goethite: hematite molar ratio of 1.8. Previous dissolution and transformation studies of iron oxides have shown the Avrami–Erofe'ev expression to be applicable to the transformation of one iron oxide phase to another ( Generally, an order of In our experiments, nucleation was replaced by the seeding of the reaction mixture with hematite, allowing the assumption of no induction time and hence instantaneous growth. The fact that no nucleation occurs indicates that the concentration of iron in solution is in the metastable zone of the hematite solubility diagram (i.e. between the solubility of hematite in its supersaturated state and its equilibrium state; hematite being the less soluble of the two iron oxides). Under these conditions the driving force for nucleation is low but growth can be initiated by the presence of seed. Therefore, as goethite is more soluble than hematite, this results in the solution being slightly supersaturated with respect to hematite. The findings are consistent with Stranski's rule ( It has been shown that increasing the total available hematite surface area by either; (a) increasing available hematite mass ( This shows that the rate-determining factor is the available hematite growth sites, which is consistent with the interpretation of The extent of reaction plots illustrate that the maximum rate of transformation occurs at a low value of The images of hematite in Comparison of TEM images of the initial goethite sample to that of residual un-transformed goethite after the experiment showed no noticeable differences. The selected area diffraction patterns of the respective samples confirmed that the crystals were goethite. This provides further evidence that the transformation in solution is not topotactic but dissolution–reprecipitation based transformation. Temperature was seen to have a profound effect on the kinetics of transformation. While transformation is completed in under 1500 s at 250 °C, the rate dramatically decreases for temperatures ≤ The increase in transformation with increased caustic concentration as illustrated in Comparison of kinetic data obtained using our in-situ cell to other literature shows consistency with published results.  The addition of anatase effectively stops any transformation of goethite to hematite ( The results of this study demonstrate that the kinetics of transformation of goethite to hematite is strongly dependent on the available surface area of hematite, the digestion temperature, caustic concentration and the presence of anatase. The results also demonstrate that in order for the reaction to take place in a Bayer digestion timeframe, hematite seeding is necessary. The kinetic analysis showed no change in activation energy (or mechanism) in the temperature range 200–250 °C examined in this study with the apparent activation energy of 137.8 kJ mol