Epidemiological studies using coronary artery calcification measurement have linked calcification strongly with coronary events and mortality. Formerly considered as a passive age-related phenomenon, coronary artery calcification is now recognized as an active and regulated process. In fact, there is a local influence linked to the inflammation generated by the presence of oxidized lipids and, equally, a general influence from mineral metabolism factors, such as inorganic phosphate, calcium, pyrophosphate or fibroblast growth factor 23, which are regulators of cell differentiation and of phosphate and calcium deposition on the vascular layers. Despite active research in this field, no therapy is currently able to stop the progression of calcification. However, new data have provided a better understanding of atherosclerosis, enabling us to see calcification as a marker of the state of stability or instability of the atherosclerotic plaque, and opening new perspectives for atherosclerotic plaque imaging.Human atherosclerosis generally develops through intimal lipid accumulation, which induces atheromatous plaques and inflammation, leading to thrombotic complications. This paradigm comes from epidemiological studies linking atherosclerosis with traditional cardiovascular risk factors, and the high efficiency of antihypercholesterolaemic, antihypertensive and antiplatelet therapies in slowing atheroma and decreasing cardiovascular events and mortality. Vascular calcification has long been considered a passive process, caused by vascular degeneration linked to age and sometimes to metabolic disorders, such as chronic renal insufficiency or hyperphosphataemia. According to this traditional view, vascular calcification is an unregulated phenomenon, independent of lipid atherosclerosis and inflammation, and far removed from acute coronary events. However, over the past decade, intensive research in this field has led to a breakthrough in our comprehension of vascular calcification. Besides the epidemiological value of coronary calcification measurement, local and general regulation, and the role of calcification in the thrombotic complications of atherosclerosis have been described. Vascular calcification is a complex process that includes active and passive mechanisms. Active vascular biomineralization involves cellular mechanisms, and leads to organized calcified tissue. An understanding of active vascular calcification was facilitated by the similarity to bone mineralization. Cellular mineralization is regulated by local vascular cells, which differentiate into an osteoblastic phenotype. Several cell types have differentiation capacity, such as intimal vascular smooth muscle cells (VSMCs) On the other hand, passive calcification is a process that is independent of cellular activity; it results from calcium and phosphate ion deposition, and leads to “amorphous calcification”. Demer et al. have argued that passive calcification accounts for the majority (85%) of vascular mineralization Cellular mechanisms of calcification are strongly regulated, particularly the cellular differentiation of multipotent cells, such as pericytes or pericyte-like cells, and the dedifferentiating and redifferentiating processes of mature cells, such as VSMCs, under an osteoblastic phenotype. Several local factors govern this phenomenon. One of the most studied systems is the bone morphogenic protein (BMP) family and its antagonist, matrix γ-carboxyglutamic acid protein (MGP), which are key regulators of ectopic calcification. BMP is a polypeptide of the transforming growth factor-β type, from the large growth factor family; MGP is a small protein and a potent calcification inhibitor. BMP-2 and BMP-4 are found in calcified atherosclerotic lesions Passive mineralization also undergoes strong local regulation. One of the most powerful endogenous calcification inhibitors is probably inorganic pyrophosphate Local vascular inflammation is linked to inflammation. It is well established that inflammation in the atherosclerotic lesion promotes plaque rupture. The activation of T helper lymphocytes induces neoangiogenesis, intraplaque haemorrhaging and the release of matrix metalloproteinase, which destroys collagen The different factors and regulation pathways of mineral metabolism may have an impact on vascular calcification. Calcium circulates in plasma in an ionized free form (50%) and in a form bound to protein (50%). Elevated plasma calcium is associated with coronary artery calcification Serum calcium and phosphorus concentrations are regulated by several hormones, such as parathyroid hormone and 1,25-dihydroxyvitamin D. Parathyroid hormone is produced by parathyroid under a low calcium concentration. Parathyroid hormone decreases urinary calcium excretion and increases calcitriol production, which increases the intestinal absorption of calcium. Both hormones increase osteoclastic activity in bone, mobilizing calcium stocks. High serum parathyroid hormone concentrations have been linked to cardiovascular events and mortality in secondary-prevention patients One of the most interesting regulators of mineral metabolism is probably the fibroblast growth factor 23 (FGF23)/Klotho system. FGF23 is a small peptide, synthesized by osteocytes, which increases phosphaturia and decreases the conversion of 25-hydroxyvitamin D to 1,25-dihydroxyvitamin D. Klotho is a pleiotropic protein, expressed in the distal kidney tubule, the choroid plexus and germinal cells; it is an FGF23 coreceptor, essential for FGF23 activity. In murine models, a defect in Osteoporosis is another example illustrating the complex relation between mineral metabolism and vascular calcification. The clinical link between osteoporosis and vascular calcification has been described previously The current cardiology paradigm is that the culprit plaque of an acute coronary event is not calcified, compared with stable plaques, giving the calcification a protective role against plaque rupture. Recent studies have shown that this idea is not completely true. In fact, once formed by the mechanism described previously, hydroxyapatite crystals form clusters of microcalcifications in the necrotic core of the intimal plaque or in the fibrous cap. The size of the microcalcification is generally defined as being Each type of calcification and state of atherosclerotic plaque is now accessible using invasive and non-invasive imaging modalities. Historically, coronary calcifications were measured using the quantitative Agatston's calcium scoring method, assessed by computed tomography scanning Furthermore, calcium scoring is a static reflection of coronary atherosclerotic infiltration, and is also associated with major cardiac events and mortality; it is not a marker of atherosclerotic activity or plaque instability Sequential calcium scanning could improve the evaluation of atherosclerotic activity. Raggi et al. showed that an annual calcium score progression of The characterization of a high-risk plaque has been the subject of intensive research for decades, and new invasive and non-invasive coronary imaging modalities have offered new perspectives. While coronary angiography does not allow plaque study, and gives only a visual semiquantitative assessment of calcification (none, moderate, severe), the intravascular ultrasound used in the PROSPECT study has revolutionized our understanding of the natural history of plaque in vivo. In fact, this study identified the predictive factors for coronary plaque complications, such as thin cap fibroatheroma, luminal area, plaque burden and dense calcium volumes However, if intravascular ultrasound is an efficient tool for studying atherosclerotic calcification, with a sensitivity of 100% and a specificity of 99% In a study by Joshi et al. On the other hand, In clinical practice, the most cost-effective screening test for the evaluation of atherosclerotic burden is still calcium scoring, which allows the reclassification of intermediate to high cardiovascular risk patients. In patients with a high anatomical atherosclerotic burden, (Agatston's calcium score Despite the poorer prognosis associated with coronary calcification, no medical therapy can currently treat ectopic mineralization. However, specific drugs targeting independent mechanisms of calcification could have value, particularly in the early stages of vascular calcification, generating microcalcifications and plaque instability. The effects of hydroxymethylglutaryl-coenzyme A reductase inhibitors on coronary calcification have been studied widely, and the results are inconsistent. Statins were initially suspected to protect against vascular calcification in computed tomography studies Bisphosphonates could be a promising therapy against vascular calcification; they are non-hydrolysable agonists of inorganic pyrophosphate, and may also reduce passive phosphate calcium deposition by the different mechanisms seen above. A study in patients from the MESA cohort showed that bisphosphonates decreased coronary calcifications in women aged Sevelamer is a phosphate chelator, which is used in chronic renal insufficiency to reduce serum phosphate concentration. Several studies, including prospective randomized trials, showed a reduction in coronary calcification progression in chronic kidney disease populations As previously described, one interesting therapeutic target could be MGP, the secretion of which may be increased using vitamin K1 or K2. This metabolic pathway is currently the most active subject for research in the field of vascular calcification. Several studies, including randomized controlled trials, are currently ongoing in patients with normal or impaired kidney function, to test the effect of vitamin K agonists on vascular calcification Invasive treatments for coronary heart disease also face the problem of calcification. During percutaneous coronary intervention, because of the need for high-pressure dilatation and the difficulty of stent apposition, coronary calcification increases the risk of procedural complications, such as dissection, thrombosis and restenosis Coronary artery calcification is a strong marker of coronary events, and is probably a risk factor for atherosclerotic complications. The complex calcification process, which includes active and passive mechanisms, is beginning to be understood. The natural history of vascular calcification is associated with the evolution of the atherosclerotic plaque, and may be used to detect the state of stability or instability of the plaque. Because of the poorer prognosis associated with coronary artery calcification, and the lack of efficiency of invasive devices, new therapeutic targets should be investigated with the aim of preventing atherosclerotic calcification. Loïc Panh was supported by a grant from the French Federation of Cardiology. The authors declare that they have no competing interest.