The behaviors of impurity elements Ca and Fe in vanadium-bearing stone coal during roasting were investigated in two aspects: combining with vanadium and reacting with other phases. As compared to Na, Ca was more easily combined with vanadium generating water-insoluble calcium-bearing vanadate during roasting. The phase distribution calculated by FactSage showed that Ca reacted with quartz and albite to form amorphous phases, resulting in the entrapment of vanadium, thereby decreasing vanadium recovery markedly. In contrast, Fe in stone coal did not affect vanadium recovery as it did not combine with vanadium and not react with other phases during roasting. In order to decrease the negative effects derived from the impurity elements such as Ca, a control measure of concentrating vanadium and reducing impurities treatment was carried out to decrease the dosage of Na2SO4 and improve vanadium recovery.The gross reserve of vanadium in stone coal which is a unique vanadium-bearing resource in China ( Two mica-type stone coals collected from the same place were ever investigated by In fact, the root cause of the impurity elements decreasing the VRWL is that they are capable of combining with vanadium over the sodium in the competition. However, the proposed mechanisms of the impurity elements affecting VRWL just remain at the speculative stage at present, and the investigation of the competition between impurity elements and sodium in combination with vanadium is not involved. In addition, although the addition of Na The mica-type stone coal was obtained from Teng-da Mining and Metallurgy Co. Ltd., Hubei, PR China. The chemical composition and mineral composition of the sample were analyzed in the previous research ( Unless otherwise specified, the compound additive with 6 The stone coal samples were mixed with additives mentioned above and a certain content of CaO (i.e. 0%, 2%, 4%, 6%, 8%, 10%) or Fe X-ray diffraction (XRD) analysis was conducted for the roasted samples using Rigaku D/Max-RB X-ray diffractometer with Cu-Kα radiation, voltage of 40 The vanadium content in water leaching solution was measured by ammonium ferrous sulfate titrimetric method (GB/T 8704.5-2007). The vanadium, iron and calcium grades in samples were determined in accordance to the methods of GB/T 19226-2003, GB/T 6730.5-2007 and GB/T 19281-2003, respectively. The phase distributions of the roasted samples with different CaO and Fe  In order to illustrate the reason why the VRWL decreases with increasing the content of Ca, the behaviors of Ca combining with vanadium and reacting with other phases in stone coal were investigated respectively. There is a competition between the V The XRD analyses of the roasted samples with different molar ratios of Na to Ca in the NaVO The Gibbs free energies for Eqs. Ca is expected to not only combine with vanadium during roasting, but also react with other phases in stone coal to generate new phases, which may also cause the decrease in VRWL. The phase distributions of the roasted samples with different CaO contents were calculated by FactSage. As shown in As shown in In order to illustrate the reason why the VRWL changes indistinctively with various Fe, the behaviors of Fe combining with vanadium and reacting with other phases were investigated respectively. The experiments, roasting the roasted sample again with added Fe As can be seen from the XRD patterns ( The phase distributions of the roasted samples with different Fe The aforementioned study shows that the impurity elements such as Ca in stone coal have negative effect on vanadium recovery. In order to reduce this negative effect, a treatment for concentrating vanadium and reducing impurities (CVRI) was proposed. As can be seen from In order to investigate the effect of CVRI treatment on roasting, the CVRI treated samples were roasted and leached in water, to compare with the non-treated samples. During roasting, calcium reacts with vanadium to generate water-insoluble calcium vanadate (Ca This research was supported by the