In this study, the recovery of nickel from a low-grade chromite overburden was attempted by employing two fungal strains, Aspergillus niger and Aspergillus fumigatus, and a mixed culture of mesophilic acidophiles (predominantly Acidithiobacillus ferrooxidans). Various factors were studied for bioleaching of chromite overburden such as, temperature, pH and pulp density. It was found that the At. ferrooxidans culture solubilized nickel effectively at temperatures ranging from 30 °C to 37 °C, whereas the organism was not able to solubilize nickel at higher temperatures, such as 45 °C. The use of higher pulp density resulted in a decrease of the percent nickel recovery whereas lower pulp density resulted in higher recovery values. Besides, increased supplemental ferrous iron increased the leaching efficiency of the At. ferrooxidans culture. The maximum nickel solubilization was 40%, at 2% pulp density, and 24%, at 10% pulp density, at 30 °C after 28 days leaching at 150 rpm.
                  In the case of fungal strains, a comparison of leach ability of chromite overburden and roasted overburden was made. The factors studied were pulp density and reaction time. The adapted fungal strain showed better leaching results as compared to the unadapted strains. The in situ nickel leaching efficiency of a laboratory stock culture of A. niger showed maximum recovery of 34% nickel with roasted chromite overburden, at 2% pulp density, while 32% nickel was solubilized by A. fumigatus, under the same conditions at 30 °C and 150 rpm, after 28 days incubation.Nickel is a strategic metal of vital importance in many modern industrial and metallurgical applications. Nickel is widely used in a number of alloys, both ferrous and non-ferrous, including high temperature and electrical resistance alloys. Nickel occurs in nature in two forms, namely sulphides and oxides/laterites. Sulphides are the high-grade ores, whereas oxides/laterites are the low-grade ores. About 85% of the total known nickel reserves of the world are associated with the lateritic type of ore, making it significant as a future supply. The continued depletion of high-grade nickel sulphides ores, high cost of fuels and implementation and enforcement of stricter environmental regulations will collectively dictate the future production of nickel from low-grade laterite ores. Overburden in Sukinda chromite mines in Orissa, India, is generated in huge amounts along with the production of chromite ore. This chromite overburden is known to contain nickel in lateritic form. However, the overburdens are not amenable to concentration by any physical beneficiation method because the metals, i.e. nickel, cobalt, are present in the ore only as minor constituents of other minerals. Bioleaching of laterite ores/chromite overburden by using microorganisms is a less energy intensive and an environmentally safer process, which could provide an alternative technology for processing abundant reserves of low-grade laterite nickel ( Microbial leaching using chemolithotrophic bacteria, The overburden samples were obtained from the major deposits of chromite overburden of Sukinda Mines, Orissa, India. As reported, lateritic ores are highly weathered material rich in oxides of iron, containing minor amounts of nickel, cobalt and chromium ( The chromite overburden, roasted overburden and leached residues of the chromite overburden samples were analyzed using a high-resolution synchrotron based X-ray Diffractometer (XRD). Two fungal strains and one mixed mesophilic, acidophilic bacterial consortium, consisting predominantly of the Fungal strains were isolated from the agricultural soil of Bhubaneswar, Orissa, after serial dilution of soil suspension on Potato Dextrose Agar plates. Predominant, morphologically distinct colonies were selected and isolated by repeated subculturing. Isolates were identified by their colony characteristics, spores morphology and microscopic observations. One of these fungi, identified as The Mineral salt medium used for growth of fungi contained (g/L): NH The experiments were conducted with mesophilic acidophilic bacterial consortia enriched in ferrous sulphate 9K Bioleaching experiments were carried out with 8.9-g/L iron at different pH such as 1, 1.5, 2 and 2.5 with chromite overburden and roasted overburden, at 30 °C. Different pH were adjusted with addition of 1N H Leaching experiments were conducted in two sets at 2% and 10% (w/v) pulp density, with iron varying from 1 to 8.9 g/L and supplemented as ferrous sulphate in the 9K In this study, the leaching experiments were conducted at five different temperatures i.e 25 °C, 30 °C, 35 °C, 40 °C and 45 °C, using chromite overburden at 10% (w/v) pulp density. The pH of the medium was maintained at 1.5. Samples were taken for analysis of nickel at regular intervals. Bioleaching studies were carried out with both roasted overburden and chromite overburden. For The microorganism was progressively adapted to tolerate nickel concentrations from 0.25 g/L to 1 g/L. The recovery of nickel as a function of time at two different iron concentrations (1 and 8.9 g/L) in the 9K  At pH 1.5, nickel dissolution was maximum using the adapted cultures of mixed mesophilic acidophiles (predominantly Nickel recovery at 2% pulp density using roasted chromite overburden was 27.1 and 45.7 with 1 g/L and 8.9 g/L iron respectively ( It was found that The chromite overburden from Sukinda, India, is a low-grade ore, which makes the recovery of metals difficult. The presence of metals in mine overburdens, if proper care is not taken, may cause environmental pollution due to the leaching of metals by natural weathering processes (physico-chemical or microbial). In such cases, microbial processes may prove efficient and environmentally friendly. In this study, the strain This fact was confirmed by our research, as it was found that A comparative study was made to determine the effect of preadaptation of fungi to overburden on the metal solubilization. The fungal strains that were adapted to the overburden showed better leaching results as compared to those that were not adapted (  To establish the effect of mineralogy on nickel leaching, the chromite overburden, roasted overburden and the leached residues were examined by optical microscopy and synchrotron X-ray diffraction. Laterite is a highly weathered material in which the main nickel-bearing mineral is the hydrated iron oxide or goethite (FeOOH) as reported in a previous study ( The synchrotron X-ray diffraction of the chromite overburden, roasted overburden and leached residues of chromite overburden reveal the presence of goethite, hematite and traces of quartz, chromite and silicate ( Nickel in chromite overburden and roasted sample of overburden was 0.97% and 1.06%, respectively. The XRD analysis of chromite overburden and roasted overburden revealed the conversion of goethite to hematite due to roasting. Mixed acidophilic bacterial culture predominated by In the case of Different fungal strains exhibited different patterns of nickel leaching. A maximum 14% nickel was released from the overburden by The authors wish to thank the Department of Science and Technology, New Delhi, India, for its financial support to the project. They also wish to express their gratitude to Dr. R. P. Das, Director of the Regional Research Laboratory (CSIR), Bhubaneswar, Orissa, who helped them to carry out these research studies.