The main objective of the present paper was to experimentally investigate the grinding kinetics of red grape seed which is the by-product of winery and juice industry. Stirred media mill was used as a high energy density mill to improve the raw grape seed fineness, i.e. mean particle size approx. 10µm using various rotor circumferential velocities under dry condition. The effect of stress intensity and stress number on the particle size distribution of ground grape seed was investigated. Optimum conditions (rotor velocity and residence time) were determined, mean particle size close to 10µm and 5000cm2/g geometric specific surface area were reached within the studied variables. Additionally, concerning the material structure, FTIR measurements of the ground grape seed samples were carried out which demonstrated that no structural changes were detected. Furthermore, the specific grinding work was measured for each test, in this way energy utilization, efficiency was determined.Grape pomace is the byproduct of juice industry and winery, approximately it counts for 25% of the grape weight. Various utilization possibilities of the components of this material are known worldwide – agriculture, food industry, pharmaceutical industry, cosmetics; i.e. functional foods (dietary fiber Grape pomace was also used as raw material for biogas production experiments carried out by Hajdú Jayaprakasha et al. The study of Molva and Baysal Polyphenols from grape-derived products have been associated with the prevention of numerous diseases including cardiovascular and neurodegenerative diseases such as Alzheimer’s disease, as well as several forms of cancers Bagchi The grape seed structure can be divided into five parts: 1 - cuticle and epidermis, 2 - outer integument or soft seed coat, 3 - medium integument or hard seed coat, 4 - inner integument and 5 - endosperm and embryo. Cadot et al. Boussetta et al. Bucić-Kojić The above technologies are based on mainly chemical processes (i.e. extraction). However, there are numerous application in which mechanical preparation by (grinding) is appropriate to produce a valuable final product in powder form or to enhance the extraction efficiency. The grinding process has a very important role in the industry. Beside the traditional applications, such like metallurgical, chemical, cement and mineral processing industry, it is more and more widely used in the cosmetics, food, pigment and pharmaceutical industry (active materials) as well as treatment of biomass and different kinds of waste. Smekal There are only limited papers reported the process of grape seed grinding. One of the known and published technology Recently Zhao et al. According to the literature the following mills are reported as micro grape seed manufacturing apparatuses: air jet mill, impact mill, cutter mill, disc mill Based on the fact, that only very limited number of papers are dealing with grape seed grinding (micronization), in spite of the relevance of the size reduction process during its utilization, the goal of the research reported in this paper is to investigate the grinding kinetics of grape seed in a high energy density mill (stirred media mill) and study the particle morphology and material structure during the grinding process. The red grape seed pellet sample originated from Verimpex 2000 Co. Ltd. Hungary was generated during the grape oil manufacturing after cold pressing treatment. The maximum particle size was 15  The cuticle and epidermis are very thin layers on the outer surface, followed by the outer integument or soft seed coat ( The raw grape seed pellet was pre-ground in a hammer mill and a Retsch centrifugal ZM 200 type impact mill prior to the systematic grinding experiments in stirred media mill. The hammer mill was used with 2 The grinding of the grape seed was carried out in a batch stirred media mill with 530 The material of the liners and the five stirrer discs made of high wear resistant Al The particle size distribution and the calculated specific surface area (S) of the ground grape seed samples were determined using a HORIBA LA-950V2 type laser particle size analyzer. From the measured data the computer calculated the particle size distribution according to the Fraunhofer-theory. The measurement range of the analyzer is between 10 In order to investigate the size and shape of the ground grape seed particles measurements were carried out with optical microscopy using Zeiss ImagerM2m under various magnifications (50×, 200×). Alcohol media was used in order to disperse the particles on the surface of the glass plate prior to the investigation. At least 10 images were taken after each grinding residence time to have representative number of particles, then image analysis was performed. The material structure after grinding was detected by FT-IR method using a JASCO FT-IR 4200 type apparatus used in reflection mode equipped with diamond ATR type PRO470-H. Two spectra were made from each grape seed sample. Spectra are the average of 32 measurements with 4 BET specific surface area (SSA) of the ground red grape seed (Langmuir surface area) samples were determined by a Micromeritics Tristar 3000 apparatus. The Micromeritics Tristar 3000 Analyzer uses physical adsorption and capillary condensation principles to obtain information about the surface area and porosity of a solid material. The analytical method is simple: a sample contained in an evacuated sample tube is cooled to cryogenic temperatures and then exposed to the analysis gas (nitrogen) at a series of precisely controlled pressures. With each incremental pressure increase, the number of gas molecules adsorbed on the surface increases. The equilibrated pressure (P) is compared to the saturation pressure (P The stress models are widely used for the description of the stirred media milling. Using the product related stress model, described by Kwade During the evaluation of the measurement result the product related stress model was applied to describe the effect of the operational parameters on the product dispersity. The stress intensity (SI) of the grinding media (GM) was calculated by the following equation, based on However, the above presented model was developed for wet grinding processes, therefore, the stress number was needed to be modified for dry grinding. Details about the recently developed product related stress model for dry batch grinding and its application can be seen in the work of Rácz and Csőke In case if The energy utilization (EU) is defined as the ratio of the new produced specific surface, ΔS, to the specific energy W If a single particle is stressed once, the stress intensity corresponds to the specific energy for stressing the particle; hence, in this case, the energy utilization is equal to ΔS/SI. At the optimum stress intensity, SI The grinding of the grape seed is of great importance since the active ingredients can be utilized more efficiently by the human body if the reaction surface is higher. The primary goal of our grinding investigation was to reach mean particle size close to 10  In order to evaluate the total specific surface area (total SSA), BET (Langmuir surface area) related to the experimental series of 7 From energetic point of view the relationship between specific grinding work and mean particle size of the ground grape seed was determined; the results are plotted in The specific grinding work is plotted as function of span of the particle size distribution of the ground red grape seed ( The   The multimodal frequency distribution curves show the different grindability between the various grape seed zones (epidermis, integuments, endosperm). There is a mode between 200 and 300  In order to monitor the morphology of the ground grape seed samples produced at v Ground particles after 1 Grinding of non-brittle (elastic, elastic-plastic, viscoelastic) materials is a complex and unique task During ultrafine grinding, the surface of ground material undergoes some changes, bringing out advantageous characteristics. Due to these favorable properties, these powders might find more applications than conventionally-ground materials in the food industry or in other fields  Future aim of our research is to fulfill bio viability tests of the ground products in order to control more accurately the application of the resulted materials. As a result of the experimental investigation of grape seed grinding the following conclusions are drawn: Successful grinding (micronization) of grape seed was achieved in a high energy density stirred media mill in dry condition. Ideal conditions in the examined cases (residence time, stress number, rotor velocity, stress intensity) of red grape seed grinding were determined. These were as follows: residence time t No structural changes of the ground material were detected by FTIR due to the grinding process. The micronization of the grape seed might have the advantage on the extraction process of the active ingredients in a further step of the technology. The research work was performed in the framework of the Centre of Excellence in Sustainable Natural Resource Management at the Faculty of Earth Science and Engineering, University of Miskolc. The authors greatly appreciate the help in the experimental work for Zoltán Molnár (PhD student) and Diána Tamás (MSc student).