The effect of rosemary extract, chitosan and α-tocopherol, added individually or in combination, on microbiological parameters and lipid oxidation of fresh pork sausages stored for 20days at 4°C was investigated. Microbiological determinations included the enumeration of Enterobacteriaceae, Pseudomonas spp., total viable count, yeasts and moulds and lactic acid bacteria, while pH values were also determined. Lipid oxidation was evaluated through measurement of primary (peroxide value) and secondary (malondialdehyde concentration) oxidation products. Chitosan addition resulted in significant (P
                     ⩽0.05) inhibition of microbial growth, while the lowest microbial counts were obtained in the samples containing both chitosan and rosemary, indicating a possible synergistic effect. Chitosan and its combinations with either α-tocopherol or rosemary, and especially the latter combination, showed also the most intense antioxidative effect (P
                     ⩽0.05), at least when compared to α-tocopherol alone or the controls, while use of rosemary extract alone had a comparable (P
                     >0.05) antioxidative effect with chitosan and its combinations. Shelf life of samples containing chitosan was almost doubled compared to the remaining samples. In conclusion, the best antimicrobial and antioxidative effects were obtained from the combination of chitosan with the rosemary extract.Fresh pork sausages, commonly referred to as “traditional Greek sausages”, are well-known and very popular meat products in Greece. Most Greek rural families produced them in the past on Christmas day using pork meat and fat. Nowadays, most fresh pork sausages are produced throughout the year both in butcher’s shops and sausage manufacturing companies. Lean or semi-lean pork meat, pork bellies and pork back fat, more or less coarsely minced, are common as raw materials and can be mixed with 1.6–2.5% salt, phosphates, nitrites and/or different seasonings, sometimes using 1–2% added water. The sausage mixture is stuffed in natural casings and the ready products have to be kept until consumption under cold storage ( Due to the high fat content, the comminuted nature of the raw materials and the lack of thermal processing such products are prone to spoilage by both lipid oxidation and microbial contamination. Lipid oxidation contributes to the development of unacceptable organoleptic characteristics, whereas microbial growth may cause both spoilage and foodborne diseases. Therefore, delaying lipid oxidation and preventing bacterial growth are factors that can have a significant contribution towards the extension of shelf life. In order to achieve these goals, meat product manufacturers in the past few decades have used several synthetic food additives with antioxidative and antimicrobial properties, such as nitrites. Nowadays, there is increasing consumer awareness and health-consciousness which results in pressure to avoid the use of synthetic additives. This trend is also reflected in the recently issued EU Directive 2006/52/EC referring to the necessity of reduction in the use of nitrites ( Rosemary ( Chitosan, which is the deacetylated form of chitin, has been identified as a versatile biopolymer with a broad range of food applications ( Tocopherols are effective natural antioxidants for lipid containing foods. α-tocopherol behaves as a chain-breaking electron donor antioxidant by competing with the substrate for the chain-carrying peroxyl radicals. Moreover, α-tocopherol has also been associated with retarding the decomposition of hydroperoxides ( As can be seen, several studies have demonstrated the beneficial effects of these natural antioxidants on lipid oxidation and/or microbial growth inhibition, when applied individually. Due to the interaction of these compounds with the substrate, the investigation of their activity in a range of food systems is still needed for successful application to meat products. To the best of our knowledge, the use of these natural antioxidants, either individually or in combination, has not been studied until now in fresh pork sausages of the traditional Greek-type. The objective of the present research was therefore to determine the effect of rosemary extract, chitosan and α-tocopherol, applied individually or in combination, on microbiological parameters and lipid oxidation during refrigerated storage of fresh pork sausages of the traditional Greek-type. The α-tocopherol oil preparation (670 Boneless pork meat from the shoulder and pork belly were obtained fresh from the local market. Pork meat was trimmed of visible fat and connective tissue and pork belly of adhering skin and then fat contents for both materials were determined. Pork meat was cut into cubes and was stored at 4 The meat blend for each treatment was stored at 4 For all tested parameters, determinations were performed on days 0, 5, 10, 15 and 20 of refrigerated storage on two separate samples in duplicate. Analyses on day 0 were conducted only for the control samples, except for the determination of pH value, which was conducted for all treatments. A 20 The pH of the sausage samples was measured after homogenisation with distilled water at a 2:8 ratio using a digital pH meter (Hanna Instruments, HI 9219; Proximate analysis and fatty acid profile was determined only in the initial meat mixture used for the preparation of the experimental sausages before the addition of corn oil. Moisture, crude protein, fat and ash content were determined according to Lipid oxidation was assessed through determination of primary (hydroperoxides) and secondary (malondialdehyde) oxidation products formed during refrigerated storage. Hydroperoxides were determined in the lipids extracted from the sausages on each sampling day, according to the procedure of All data were analysed using the General Linear Model of ANOVA with treatment and time as factors, after normality and homogeneity of variances were confirmed. The statistical significance of the differences was checked using the Student–Newman–Keuls (SNK) test at the 0.05 level. All statistical analyses were conducted by use of the SPSS statistical package (SPSS 10.05, SPSS Inc., Woking, Surrey, UK). Results of the microbiological analyses of the sausages during the 20-days storage period are presented in Samples containing chitosan generally had lower microbial counts compared to the remaining samples, regardless of their Gram-positive or Gram-negative classification. The antimicrobial activity of chitosan is documented both The antimicrobial activity of chitosan depends on several factors, such as its final concentration in the substrate, its molecular weight as well as pH value and temperature. The addition level used in the present research (10 Among the remaining treatments, samples containing only rosemary extract had lower ( The results of the present study as regards microbial inhibition in meat products are in agreement with a number of other studies. Changes of pH values during the 20-days storage period are presented in The pH value slightly decreased until day 5 for all samples, whereas after day 5 there was a gradual increase which was more intense in samples containing only α-tocopherol and the controls. This is associated mostly with increase of Gram-negative bacteria populations ( Similar pH values to ours for ROS and TOC samples have been reported in fresh pork patties containing rosemary extract ( Mean percent contents of protein, fat, moisture and ash for the raw material (meat mixture) used in for the preparation of experimental sausages were 16.5%, 25.2%, 54.2% and 2.9%, respectively. These results are in accordance with the range of values reported by Concentrations of primary oxidation products in the lipid fraction of the sausages measured as peroxide value (PV), together with those of MDA during the 20-days storage at 4 In agreement with our findings, the positive effects of individual use of chitosan, rosemary and α-tocopherol as regards prevention of lipid oxidation are well documented, whereas, to the best of our knowledge, there are no reports on the combined use of chitosan with either rosemary or α-tocopherol. Lipid oxidation in the controls was more intense compared to the treated samples; maximum values for PV were reached on  Shelf life of meat and meat products is defined as the storage time until spoilage. The point of spoilage may be defined by a certain maximum acceptable level of microbial group and/or chemical indicators as well as by an unacceptable off-odour/off-flavour or appearance ( Results of the present study demonstrate the effectiveness of chitosan, added individually or in combination with rosemary or α-tocopherol, on microbial growth inhibition, retarding of lipid oxidation and shelf life extension of fresh pork sausages of the traditional Greek-type during refrigerated storage (4 The authors would like to thank Dr. Dimitrios Fletouris for expert advice regarding MDA determination.