In this study, the effects of bridging liquid concentration, agglomeration time, pH and various salts on the combustible recovery and ash contents of the agglomerated products have been investigated. Kerosene was used as bridging liquid. The optimum values of kerosene concentration, pH and agglomeration time have been determined as 20wt%, 7.5 and 15min, respectively. Metallic salts, such as FeSO4, NaCl, FeCl3, Al2(SO4)3 were used in the experiments in which the effects of salts were investigated. While the combustible recovery slightly increased depending on the increase in the concentration of NaCl, very small decreases have been recorded in the recoveries depending on the increase in the concentration of the FeCl3. A considerable reduction occurs in the agglomeration recovery with the increasing concentration of FeSO4, while the combustible recovery slightly decreases at low concentration of Al2(SO4)3.Nowadays, fine coal production increases continuously due to the increase in mechanization in coal mining and demands in its related fields of application (i.e. liquefaction and slurry with water). These fine particles usually contain large amount of mineral matter due to non-selective caving of the coal seams. Therefore, the mineral matter must be removed to exploit these fine coals. In addition, the concentration of fine fraction is necessary for the prevention of environmental pollution and several economical reasons The classical gravity methods are not efficient enough in the concentration of fine coal particles. Hence flotation, selective flocculation and oil agglomeration methods have gained importance As it is known, the electrokinetic behaviour of the particles affects the process recovery and selectivity in the concentration processes based on the surface properties, such as froth flotation, flocculation, oil agglomeration. Coal recovery and separation efficiency, which are achieved by oil agglomeration depend on a number of factors including the surface properties of the solids, the nature of the agglomerates and certain properties of the aqueous medium Another aspect of the aqueous medium that deserves special consideration is the presence of multivalent cations, which form metal hydroxy complex ions in intermediate pH ranges and colloidal precipitates of metal hydroxides in higher pH ranges The electrokinetic behaviours of coal and mineral matter in the presence of inorganic electrolytes were examined by many researchers in detail As it is understood from the studies mentioned above, inorganic salts affect the surface properties of coal and/or mineral matter, and oil droplets. The behaviour of coal in the oil agglomeration process mainly depends on the both of the surface properties of coal and the adsorption of different reagents on the coal surface. In this study, effects of agglomeration time, pH and various salts on the agglomerate recovery by oil agglomeration of bituminous coal sample taken from Zonguldak-Kozlu District in Turkey were investigated. The sample was obtained from Zonguldak Coal basin in Turkey. The run-of-mine coal was ground to −0.6 Some characteristics of this coal sample are given in In the experiments, kerosene was used as a bridging liquid. It was characterized by 0.78 The experiments were performed in a 1000 In the evaluation of experimental results, combustible recoveries and ash contents (grades) of products were considered. The combustible recovery was expressed as the ratio of dry kerosene and ash-free product to dry ash-free feed coal. The combustible recovery was calculated from the equation below. The results obtained from the experiments were shown in In the case of high concentration of bridging liquid, the spherical shape of the agglomerates changed into pasty lumps. In this situation, the fine particles were dispersed in the bridging liquid and partly passed through the screen during screening. Therefore, the agglomeration recovery decreased in high concentrations. The statements mentioned are in good agreement with the results given in literature The effect of agglomeration time on the combustible recoveries and ash contents of agglomerates is shown in As can be seen in At an agglomeration time of 25 In In the light of findings above, the decrease in the combustible recovery at high pH values can be attributed to the electrostatic repulsive forces between the negatively charged coal particles and/or agglomerates. In addition, the decrease in combustible recovery can also be due to the electrostatic repulsive forces between kerosene droplets and coal particles or agglomerates. On the other hand, the partial decrease in combustible recovery at low pH values can be attributed to both electrostatic repulsive forces between the positively charged particles and the increase in hydrophilic character of coal surface. These findings accord with those in the literature As the pH value of the pulp was increased up to pH 7.8, the ash contents of agglomerated products increased. This behaviour may be attributed to the electrostatic attractive forces between the mineral matter and coal particles and those between the mineral matter particles and kerosene droplets. The ash contents of the agglomerated products generally decreased with increasing pH at the range of 7.8–11. This behaviour could be due to the improved dispersion of the mineral matter resulted from the increased electrostatic repulsive forces between the mineral matter particles and the coal particles and those between the mineral matter particles and kerosene droplets. At pH 12 the ash content of the agglomerated product increased. This behaviour may be attributed to the loose agglomerate structure and entrapment of the water phase. In this part of the study, the effect of various salts on the agglomeration recovery for different salt concentration was investigated. Very small changes in the pH of solution were observed when the salts were added in different concentrations. The changes in pH for each salt addition were given in related figures ( As it was seen in On the other hand, the decreasing tendency was observed in ash contents of concentrates depending on the increase in FeSO In the studies related to Zonguldak bituminous coals, it was reported that there was no significant change in the zeta potential depending on the concentration of NaCl However, very small decreases in the ash contents of the agglomerated products were observed with increasing of sodium chloride concentration up to 200 As can be seen in The decreasing tendency of the ash contents of the agglomerated products was observed depending on the increasing of the concentration of FeCl  The decrease in the combustible recovery at low concentrations can be attributed to the prevention of the contact between the kerosene droplets and coal surface by partial coating of coal particle surface with Al(OH) Aluminium hydroxy complex ions affect the electrokinetic potential of coal particles and kerosene droplets. As the concentration of Al On the other hand, the ash contents of agglomerated products changed depending on the concentration of Al The conclusions obtained from this study are as follows: Optimum bridging liquid concentration was determined to be 20 Maximum combustible recovery was reached at a mixing time of 15 The optimum pH value was found to be 7.8 without salt additions. Minor changes were obtained by the addition of salts. FeSO The combustible recovery slightly increased especially at the high concentration of NaCl. A very small decrease in the combustible recovery was obtained by using FeCl In the case of Al These findings proved that NaCl had the best effect on the agglomeration of Zonguldak bituminous coal in the studied salt concentrations according to the combustible recovery.