Solar energy can be efficiently used if thermal energy storage systems are accordingly designed to match availability and demand. Thermal energy storage by thermochemical materials (TCM) is very attractive since these materials present a high storage density. Therefore, compact systems can be designed to provide both heating and cooling in dwellings. One of the main drawbacks of the TCM is corrosion with metals in contact. Hence, the objective of this study is to present the obtained results of an immersion corrosion test following ASTM G1 simulating an open TCM reactor, under humidity and temperature defined conditions. Four common metals: copper, aluminum, stainless steel 316, and carbon steel, and five TCM: CaCl2, Na2S, CaO, MgSO4, and MgCl2, were studied. Aluminum and copper show severe corrosion when combined with Na2S, aluminum corrosion is more significant since the specimen was totally destroyed after 3 weeks. Stainless steel 316 is recommended to be used as a metal container material when storing all tested TCM.Solar energy is one of the most promising renewable energies to be used worldwide for house heating and domestic hot water applications and contributes in decreasing fossil fuel consumption, thus greenhouse gases emissions. The main drawback of solar energy is the mismatch between the availability and the demand, then thermal energy storage (TES) is needed to match it. Up to now, there are mainly three known TES methods. Sensible TES systems store energy by applying a temperature gradient to the storage medium, for instance molten salts, water, ceramics, etc. Latent TES systems are based on the energy implied in a physical state change of a substance. These two methods have been widely studied and several commercial applications can be found TCM are based on adsorption materials like zeolites, silica gel, etc., absorption processes concerning concentrated and diluted salt solution and chemical reactions with salt hydrates such as magnesium chloride, aluminum sulfate, etc. One of the main advantages that TCM present is their theoretical energy storage density, which makes the development of compact systems for dwellings applications, be viable. Energy densities of some TCM based on reversible chemical reactions are shown in Furthermore, despite the need to heat the TCM up to reach the discharging reaction temperature, heat losses when storing are almost zero. This last makes TCM suitable for long-term storage also known as seasonal storage On the other side, these systems are more complex to design than latent and sensible TES since TCM involve more than heat transfer. TCM systems design must consider also mass transfer and kinetics. A complete study on solid reactants and products is missing when designing a technology based on TCM, which could lead to a lower storage capacity Several prototypes are being tested at lab scale No data is found regarding corrosion test between solid salt hydrates under real conditions of the system design considering the working temperature, the relative humidity as well as pressure. These results are totally necessary for the optimal development of a TCM system and to resolve practical aspects to make them viable for market implementation Therefore, the main objective of the present paper is to perform immersion corrosion test of common metals used as a vessel material and as reactor components and TCM under research at defined operating conditions. These results are useful to select the optimal metal of the TCM container when transported, stored and reaction takes places. Five salt hydrates TCM were selected among the most used ones in research to carry out corrosion test: CaCl The vessel metals under study are the most common metals to build up reactors, heat exchangers, piping, etc.: copper, aluminum, stainless steel 316, and carbon steel. Metal pieces of 5 cm × 1.1 cm × 0.01 cm were tested (see Each metal specimen was immersed in each component Metal samples are removed after 1, 4 and 12 weeks of test. Quantitative analyses of metal corrosion were done following Eq. Corrosion rate CR (mg cm Qualitative data are also important to draw conclusions. Therefore, a detailed analysis of the solution appearance is carried out in order to detect changes in color, appearance of bubbles, and formation of precipitates. Furthermore, the specimens were analyzed using Vision SX45 microscope with Pixel-fox v5.0 digital camera checking for pitting corrosion. Corrosion rate results of the experiments with calcium chloride (CaCl Stainless steel specimens in combination with CaCl These results are in agreement with Porisini Results concerning corrosion test performed with sodium sulfide hydrate (Na Stainless steel presents no corrosion and carbon steel presents much less corrosion than copper or aluminum. In order to better compare corrosion rate values for these two metal-alloy containing iron, Carbon steel content is mainly iron (98%–99%) which reacts with H Oil industry can provide a guidance regarding corrosion protection since they have H In According to the literature, magnesium chloride does not act corrosive when combined with aluminum Aluminum is not corroded when in contact with magnesium sulfate Carbon steel is highly corroded when combined with MgSO Once the experiments are performed and CR values obtained, a recommendation on combinations (TCM-metal) to be used is presented using a guide corrosion weight loss for the industry ( The most corrosion-resistant metal to all the hydrated salts under the corrosion test conditions was stainless steel. Corrosion rate (CR) of stainless steel with all studied TCM is always between 0.3 and 9.9 mg cm Neither copper nor aluminum can be used as a vessel material to contain Na Further tests will be based on performing immersion corrosion test with coated metals samples, since aluminum and copper are highly needed in these energy storage systems. Then, the coating should be metals based or conductive polymers. Also, other atmospheres and test conditions (temperature, pressure) can be considered. Corrosion experiments were carried out between common vessel metals and five solid TCM. Under the tested conditions, the concluding main remarks are as follow: Stainless steel is the most resistant metal to all the tested TCM under the tested conditions being recommended to be used to contain all the TCM under study. Copper is only recommended with caution when combined with CaCl Aluminum is recommended with caution to be in contact with all the TCM, except with Na Further research is needed in this field. More corrosion tests involving TCM under other test conditions for instance vacuum atmosphere are interesting to be performed. The research leading to these results has received funding from the