Li-metal battery (LiMB) has received considerable attention as an alternative energy storage device to Li-ion battery in recent years. However, uncontrolled Li dendrite growth prevents the practical applications of LiMB. Herein, we report the use of concentrated electrolytes based on dual salts of lithium bis(fluorosulfonyl) imide (LiFSI) and lithium difluoro(oxalato) borate (LiODFB) to suppress Li dendrite growth. The compatibility of electrolyte and LiFePO4 cathode was further verified by the long capacity retention and high rate performance of Li/LiFePO4 battery. The superior electrochemical performance was attributed to the concentrated electrolyte, which could simultaneously suppress Li dendrite growth at the anode side and Aluminum (Al) current collector corrosion at the cathode side. This work provides new insights to develop high-performance LiMBs by carefully tailoring the multivariate composition of concentrated electrolyte.As a high-efficiency energy storage device, Li-metal battery (LiMB) is considered as a promising power supply for various smart grid storage systems and electric vehicles [ In general, uncontrolled Li dendrites are mainly generated by the unstable and uneven solid electrolyte interphase (SEI) film formed on Li anode [ Tailoring the composition of electrolyte, such as additives, solvents and salts, is a facile and efficient way to stabilise SEI films [ Among these new salts, imides are one of the most efficient salts to suppress Li dendrites [ Al is the standard material as current collector for cathode. However, corrosion of Al at high potentials vs. Li/Li Herein, we first employed the concentrated electrolytes based on dual salts of LiFSI and LiODFB for LiMBs. A highly uniform and stable SEI film was formed on Li metal anode in the concentrated electrolyte. As a result, Li dendrite growth was effectively suppressed. Simultaneously, Al corrosion was solved due to the presence of LiODFB in the concentrated electrolyte. The compatibility of the electrolyte and LiFePO The electrolytes were prepared by dissolving LiODFB (≥99.9%, Suzhou Fluolyte Co., Ltd., China) and LiFSI (≥99.9%, Suzhou Fluolyte Co., Ltd., China) with a molar ratio of 1:1 in 1,2-dimethoxyethane (DME, ≥99.9%, Suzhou Fluolyte Co., Ltd., China). The concentrated electrolyte was 4.0 M LiFSI+LiODFB-DME. The commercial electrolyte (1.0 M LiPF The coin cells (Li/Cu, Li/Li and Li/Al) were assembled in the glove box. The Li foils were used as both the counter and reference electrodes without further purification and treatment. The Cu foils were washed by immersing them in 1.0 M HCl for 15 min, followed by washing with deionized water and acetone three times. The Cu foils were then quickly dried in a vacuum oven at room temperature. And the Al foils were polished on emery paper (#1200, 15 mm grit size) before CVs test. After polishing, the Al foils were washed in deionized water for 10 min to remove any residuals. Finally, the Al foils were dried using dry nitrogen flow at room temperature. The Cu foil served as the substrate for Li metal deposition in Li/Cu cells, and Al foil used as a working electrode in Li/Al cells. Celgard 2400 (polypropylene membrane) was used as the separator. The LiFePO The current density for the Li/Cu cells was set to 1.0 mA/cm The morphologies and surface analysis of Li metal after plating on Cu substrates were conducted by scanning electron microscopy (SEM) and X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS). And the morphologies of Al electrodes after CVs were also observed by SEM. Prior to analysis, the Al and Cu electrodes were first rinsed with DME solvent three times to remove residual electrolytes and then dried in an Ar-filled globe box. SEM images of the electrodes for the surfaces were obtained with SEM (FE-SEM, LEO 1530) at an accelerating voltage of 5 kV. XPS test was performed on Thermo Electron model K-Alpha surface analysis system. To avoid electrode contamination or side reactions with atmospheric moisture and oxygen, the samples were transferred from the glove box to the SEM and XPS quickly. The electrochemical performances of Li/Cu cells were tested in different electrolytes, as shown in A Li/Li cell was used to further illustrate the stable deposition of Li metal anode in the concentrated electrolyte ( The surface morphologies of Li metal after depositing on Cu substrates in different electrolytes are shown in X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS) analysis was conducted to analyse the compositions of SEI film. Prior to analysis, the Li metal was plated on a Cu foil with 1.5 h deposition time at 1.0 mA/cm Al corrosion was also investigated in our work. CVs tests and the morphologies of Al foils are demonstrated in the concentrated electrolyte with/without LiODFB ( Li/LiFePO In summary, we first employed the concentrated electrolyte based on dual salts of LiFSI and LiODFB for LiMBs. Given the uniform and stable SEI film on Li metal surface in the concentrated electrolyte, dendrite growth was efficiently suppressed. Li/Cu cells were cycled for 250 cycles with a high CE of 95.2%, and Li/Li cells could be cycled for more than 6000 h in the concentrated electrolyte. Al corrosion was suppressed in the concentrated electrolyte with the existence of LiODFB. Considering the suppression of Al corrosion and the stable electrode/electrolyte interphases at the anode side, both the capacity retention and rate performance of Li/LiFePO The authors acknowledge the financial support of the The following is the Supplementary data to this article: Supplementary data to this article can be found online at