Typically, 15–45% of the mixed liquor (sludge) in biological wastewater treatment plants (WWTPs) consists of inorganic (fixed) suspended solids. A portion of these inorganic compounds is grit (sand) originating from the influent. Grit accumulation impacts WWTP design and operating costs as these unbiodegradable solids reduce the effective treatment capacity of the bioreactor and other unit operations that must be sized to carry this material.
                  The goal of this study was to characterize the performance of a hydrocyclone to selectively separate grit from activated sludge. Laboratory experiments were conducted with a 13mm diameter Krebs hydrocyclone treating sludge from eight WWTPs. Reduced efficiencies of 17±7% on fixed suspended solids and 9±6% on volatile suspended solids were obtained. Grade efficiency curves enabled the development of a modified definition for cut size useful for this application. The characterization of hydrocyclone performance for grit removal from activated sludge will enable modelling of the process for integration into wastewater treatment simulators used for process performance prediction and design.concentration factor particle size distribution expressed as cumulative percentage undersize total efficiency reduced total efficiency mass flowrate fixed suspended solids concentration grade efficiency for a given particle size reduced grade efficiency grade efficiency at the maximum cut size reduced grade efficiency at the maximum reduced cut size fraction of fixed to total suspended solids mass after drying at 104 mass after burning at 550 mixed liquor particle size distribution return activated sludge underflow to throughput ratio ( total suspended solids concentration (VSS sample volume volatile suspended solids concentration waste activated sludge wastewater treatment plant equiprobable cut size reduced equiprobable cut size maximum cut size reduced maximum cut size The biological treatment of wastewater by an activated sludge process involves oxidation of pollutants such as organic matter and nitrogen by microorganisms and transformation of a portion of these into new biomass in an aerated bioreactor. The mixed liquor (ML), which includes the biomass and unbiodegradable organic and inorganic material, is settled in a secondary clarifier and the settled solids are returned to the bioreactor (return activated sludge, RAS; Many WWTPs are simultaneously faced with increasingly stringent effluent discharge limits and increasing sludge treatment and disposal costs. Since lower discharge limits lead to increased sludge production, new technologies and processes to reduce the amount of sludge produced are actively researched. Most research has focused on biological and chemical approaches for reducing sludge production ( The application of hydrocyclones as a general unit operation to separate one material phase from another or two immiscible phases has become increasingly widespread as evidenced by the numerous and varied application examples from minerals processing ( Hydrocyclones have a cono-cylindrical shape with no moving parts. When a suspension is pumped tangentially into the cylindrical part of the unit, a vortex is produced and centrifugal forces enable separation to occur based on particle size and relative density. The single inlet of the hydrocyclone is located in the cylindrical portion of the body and two outlets are located at the top and bottom ends of the unit. Lighter material exits through the vortex finder at the top of the cyclone, while coarser material finds its way out through the apex at the bottom of the hydrocyclone ( The purpose of this study was to verify the feasibility of selectively separating grit from wastewater activated sludge by hydrocycloning and to develop methods for characterizing the hydrocyclone’s grit removal performance from wastewater activated sludge based on concepts similar to those used in mining engineering. This research was conducted in the context of evaluating methods for reducing sludge production in wastewater treatment systems. Sludge for experiments was either ML or RAS from eight different full-scale WWTPs in Quebec, Canada. Sludge was screened (200, 300 or 500 Approximately 200 All solids analyses were carried out according to Standard Methods ( Volume-based particle size distributions (PSDs) of hydrocyclone feed, underflow and overflow were measured by laser diffraction using a Malvern MasterSizer S equipped with a small sample dispersion unit. Laser diffraction is reported to be the preferred method of measuring PSDs of activated sludge particles ( Total efficiency ( The total efficiency as defined in Eq.  Grade efficiency, The dead flux effect is removed from The most common definition for cut size is the particle size at which 50% of the particles end up in the overflow and the other 50% in the underflow. This size, denoted Concentration factors (CFs) are defined as the ratio between the underflow concentration and the feed solids concentration and can be calculated for TSS, FSS and VSS; for example: Reduced efficiency results for TSS, VSS and FSS are presented in The advantage of using the reduced efficiency parameter over the concentration factors can be seen when comparing As for the effect of the WWTP sampling point on hydrocyclone performance, runs carried out on RAS showed lower reduced efficiencies compared to ML. Considering that RAS is a thickened ML (by the secondary clarifier), it is more concentrated and therefore more particle–particle interactions are present; this may interfere with the hydrocyclone’s separation efficiency. The effect of the feed fixed solids fraction ( The difficulty of separating particles of different densities was highlighted by the low grade efficiencies obtained. Results for Grit removal by hydrocycloning is a physical means for removing unbiodegradable material and reducing sludge production in activated sludge wastewater treatment plants. This study showed that a 13 Process scale-up, presently underway using a 50 The eight cities that provided access to their activated sludge plants are thanked for their collaboration, and Fannie L. Côté, François Denault-Déziel and Anne Lautier for sampling and analytical support. The Natural Sciences and Engineering Research Council (NSERC), John Meunier Inc., Veolia Water and EnviroSim Associates are acknowledged for their financial support.