 The primary goal is to restore shoulder function to the preinjury level. Indications for surgical treatment include open fractures, scapulothoracic dissociation, and fractures associated with gunshots, threatened skin, or neurovascular injury ( Relative surgical indications include patients with multiple-system trauma in whom fixation of the clavicle will contribute to rehabilitation, a floating shoulder, and fractures with severe comminution, those displaced greater than the width of the bone, those with a displaced middle fragment, and those with shortening greater than 2 cm (  Patients and surgeons should be aware of the following: In most patients who are treated nonoperatively, the fracture will heal and they will have good function (  The need for operative treatment of floating shoulder injury has been questioned but should be considered for patients who place substantial demands on the shoulders (  Nonoperative treatment: usually, a sling or figure-of-8 brace is applied in the acute setting. With either device, immobilization is, typically, for 2–6 weeks based on the patient’s level of comfort. Now criticized for heterogeneity and surgeon-based outcomes measures, traditional literature supported nonoperative management even for displaced fractures. More recent studies have shown that patient dissatisfaction, nonunion, and decreased shoulder strength are more common in displaced fractures than previously thought ( Other techniques exist for fixation of clavicular fractures in addition to the plating procedure that is described here (intramedullary fixation).  A standard physical examination is performed to assess for deformity, tenderness, crepitation, and excessive tenting of the skin; In addition, the entire upper extremity, chest, and spine are evaluated for concomitant injuries. Include evaluation for possible rib fractures, pneumothorax, hemothorax, neurovascular injury, and other fractures or dislocation of the shoulder girdle and upper extremity. When the fracture is accompanied by high-energy trauma, a complete body examination should be performed to avoid missing associated injuries. Plain radiographs are obtained in anteroposterior and 45 degrees cephalic tilt views. Radiographic film should be large enough to evaluate the acromioclavicular and sternoclavicular joints and the remainder of the shoulder girdle and upper lung fields. When assessing displacement, upright (as opposed to supine) positioning of the patient during the radiograph will simulate physiologic distracting forces ( Radiographic evaluation assesses the fracture pattern, presence of comminution, displacement, and shortening or distraction of the fracture ( An abduction lordotic view, in which the shoulder is abducted above 135 degrees and the central ray angled 25 degrees cephalad, is useful for clavicle evaluation after internal fixation.  The clavicle is relatively subcutaneous, with only the supraclavicular nerves crossing the bone. The junction of the outer and middle thirds is the thinnest part of the bone ( The muscles attachment to the clavicle creates the predictable deformity seen with fractures. The proximal fragment is pulled superiorly and posteriorly by the sternocleidomastoid muscle. The distal segment sags forward and rotates inferiorly because of the weight of the upper extremity and the pull of the pectoralis muscle on the humerus. The clavicle is in intimate relation to the brachial plexus, subclavian artery and vein, and apex of the lung. These structures should be carefully protected during the surgical procedure.  The patient is placed in a supine, semi-sitting (beach chair) position. The arm should be prepped in the field to allow for traction and manipulation to assist in the reduction ( When there is a chance that bone graft will be needed, the iliac crest is prepped and draped.  An arm-holding device positioned on the ipsilateral side of the table can help support the upper extremity and resist gravity during reduction and fixation of the fracture.  The head and neck should be tilted away from the surgical site. A bump is placed behind the scapula to aid in the reduction.  Care must be taken during positioning and fracture manipulation to avoid stretching of the brachial plexus.  A longitudinal incision is made in the skin, parallel and just inferior to the long axis of the clavicle ( The crossing supraclavicular nerves should be identified and protected (  The skin incision can be made parallel or perpendicular to the clavicle’s longitudinal axis. The perpendicular incision is claimed to produce a more aesthetic scar. The authors have used both perpendicular and parallel incisions and have found that the scars are not appreciably different in appearance.  Incision of the inferior skin after pulling it over the fracture site will prevent the wound from being in contact with the plate on the clavicle. This improves cosmesis and reduces wound complications.  Minimal soft tissue dissection is recommended. The fracture site is exposed with minimal periosteal and muscle attachment elevation to preserve the vascularity to the fragments (  The close proximity of the brachial plexus and the subclavian vessels make the use of oscillating drill bits recommendable. In complex multifragmentary fractures, the plate is best used as a bridge spanning the fragments, which is far more successful than dissecting each fragment. When the vascularity to the fragments has been preserved and there is no bone gap, no bone graft is needed.  Semitubular plates are not rigid enough and should not be used. Reconstruction plates are more easily contoured and have been used with success; however, they account for several failures to obtain union and would not be the authors’ first choice. Locked plates are not necessary for the acute plating of nonosteoporotic clavicular fractures as there is no significant advantage in using them over conventional plating, and the cost is higher.  Reduction can be achieved by stripping the clavicle subperiosteally and manipulating the fragments with bone clamps. However, this compromises the vascularity of the clavicle. We prefer to use a temporary external fixator or small skeletal distractor to facilitate gradual restoration of alignment (  For fixation, ideally, a 3.5-mm limited-contact dynamic compression plate (LCDC Plate, Synthes, Paoli, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania) or a plate of similar strength, with at least six cortices on each side, should be used ( The plate is contoured to match the clavicle anatomy ( Low-profile, precontoured plates may alternatively be used, which may reduce the risk of hardware irritation ( A minimum of three screws should be placed in each major fragment (see Placement of interfragmentary screws (when the fracture pattern allows it) greatly enhances the stability of the construct.  Flexible intramedullary nails are also effective for displaced transverse fractures.  The plate can be placed on the anterosuperior or the anteroinferior side of the bone. An anteroinferior position, although less favorable biomechanically, allows for drilling in a direction that is away from the subclavian vessels and lung. It also keeps the plate from being placed under the incision. This position is, theoretically, less likely to cause irritation, thereby decreasing the need for plate removal. However, the anteroinferior position demands additional soft tissue stripping and a more difficult contouring of the plate compared to the anterosuperior position (  The wound is irrigated copiously, and all bleeding should be controlled. The fascia is repaired over the plate, if possible, and the skin incision is closed. Suture closure is preferable to staples.  Clavicle rotation is relatively small until humeral elevation exceeds 90 degrees; thus, early rehabilitation that avoids over-the-shoulder activity will significantly limit rotational forces at the site of a clavicular fracture.  With a sufficiently stable construct, unrestricted shoulder motion is allowed, with the exception of overhead lifting during the first 6 weeks. Once healing is demonstrated, progressive strengthening exercises are permitted. A return to all occupational activities and recreational pursuits is usually possible by 4 months after operative treatment. Hardware removal may be necessary in 15%–65% of cases ( Most clavicular fractures heal without incident when length and alignment are maintained. Acceptable cosmetic and functional results should be expected. Satisfactory results occur less consistently when the fracture fails to heal or heals with a significant deformity. The complications that have been reported for this procedure are refracture, usually due to premature resumption of full activity or premature plate removal, nonunion, and malunion (