Prediction of ash fusion temperatures by using the chemical composition of the ash has previously been conducted only with linear correlations. In this study, a new technique is presented for predicting the fusibility temperatures of ash. Non-linear correlations are developed by using the chemical composition of ash (eight oxides) and coal parameters (ash content, specific gravity, Hardgrove index and mineral matter content). Regression analyses are conducted using information for Turkish lignites. Regression coefficients and variances of non-linear and linear correlations are compared. The results show that the non-linear correlations are superior to linear correlations for estimating ash fusion temperatures.Coal is a complex substance containing a certain amount of mineral matter, whether intrinsic or extraneous, which may vary in form and in composition. When coal is burned, mineral matter, generally in the form of oxides, are left as an incombustible residue, called ash. Minerals in coal vary widely. Their practical importance is evident in nearly every phase of the industry from mining to utilization (e.g. diverse problems such as grindability characteristics, washability, heat transfer, coke oven wall attack and fireside deposits in boilers) Ash is different both qualitatively and quantitatively from mineral matter. The difference depends on the type of minerals, i.e. carbonates and clay minerals that usually decompose during combustion. Therefore, the content of ash is related to the amount of decomposable minerals. Although, the percentage of mineral matter does not reflect the type of minerals originally associated with coal directly, more reliable explanation and prediction of ash fusibility is possible when the ash and mineral matter amounts are known, which has been indicated in the literature Minerals in coal exhibit a considerable range of specific gravity; e.g. shale, clay and sandstone have a specific gravity of about 2.6, carbonaceous shale ranges in specific gravity from 2.0 to 2.6, while gypsum, kaolin and calcite have specific gravities of 2.3, 2.6, and 2.7, respectively. There is a linear relationship between the specific gravity of the coal and the type and amount of minerals associated with the coal. The segregation of mineral matter in pulverized fuel is due to the variation in grindability of impurities in the coal which may be determined by the Hardgrove test. The most common method of determining ash fusibility is to measure ash fusion temperatures (AFT). AFTs indicate the temperature range for possible formation of deposits on heat adsorbing surfaces. The test procedure is covered by ASTM D 1857 The chemical and mineralogical compositions of coal ash determine its melting characteristics and fusion temperatures. Many investigations have been conducted to relate ash fusion temperatures with chemical composition (6,10-12(. Both statistical and empirical relations have been established Meriçboyu et al. For the development of the relationship between AFTs and phase equilibria of the coal slags, a new thermodynamic database for the simplified Al-Ca-Fe-O-Si system was used in conjunction with the thermodynamic computer package F*A*C*T* and the predicted AFT's of 53% of the coals were within ±40 The aim of this research is to provide a new technique-using non-linear regression analysis-for the prediction of AFTs by using certain coal and ash parameters to an accuracy comparable to parallel measurements in different laboratories. The results are compared with the linear regression analysis. From the developed equations, the variables which are the most effective on AFTs are determined. Thirty coal samples collected from different parts of Turkey were analyzed for their physical properties and coal ash compositions In this study, both linear and non-linear regression analyses were used to develop correlations between ash chemical composition and the ash fusion temperatures. The analyses were performed by using the oxides in coal ash calculated on weight and mole basis, normalized and SO      Ash Content,% of coal Specific Gravity of coal HGI of coal Mineral Matter content,% of coal Percentage of SiO Percentage of Al Percentage of Fe Percentage of CaO in coal ash Percentage of MgO in coal ash Percentage of K Percentage of Na Linear and non-linear relations were used to estimate softening, melting, and fluid temperatures from the ash chemical composition. The goal of regression analysis is to determine a correlation for estimating the AFTs that best fits the set of data observations. In linear regression, the function is a linear equation, i.e. straight-line, in the form: Unlike in previous works, in this study, non-linear relations are also used to determine softening, melting, and fluid temperatures. One of the properties of non-linear systems is that they can also explain linear relations. The general appearance of the non-linear relation is assumed to be: A statistical program, STATISTICA General forms of linear and non-linear relations defined in this study, respectively, are presented as follows: If the first five terms, i.e. silica value, base, acid, dolomite ratio and R Major Group Major Group, Ash content Major Group, Specific Gravity Major Group, Ash Content, Specific Gravity Major Group, Ash Content, Specific Gravity, HGI, Mineral Matter Content Major Group, Chemical Composition of Ash Major Group, Chemical Composition of Ash, Ash Content Major Group, Chemical Composition of Ash, Specific Gravity Major Group, Chemical Composition of Ash, Ash Content, Specific Gravity Major Group, Chemical Composition of Ash, Ash Content, Specific Gravity, HGI and Mineral Matter Content Using statistical methods, analysis on linear and non-linear correlations for determining softening, melting and fluid temperatures were conducted for each case, as described above. The accuracy of each correlation was identified by comparing their regression coefficient (  The performances of the developed correlations for estimating softening, melting and fluid temperatures are presented in the form of histograms, as presented from The analyses in When all coal parameters were considered together with the ash parameters, as in case 10, the accuracy and the performance of the correlations were enhanced for both linear and non-linear analyses. When the equation coefficients for both linear and non-linear correlations were investigated, it was observed that the effects of some parameters on AFTs were very slight. Based on this analysis, some parameters can be removed or might not be considered, such as ash content, HGI, and mineral matter. Also, it was observed that specific gravity had a minor effect on the temperatures, but when included, the accuracy increased slightly. Interestingly, when all variables were taken into consideration, i.e. case 10, In all cases, this study showed that non-linear regression analysis gave more accurate results than linear analysis, with respect to regression coefficient, When As When the constants of the developed equations were investigated, numerous trends of the variables used in the equations could be identified. One of the major findings was that the presence of SiO Another interesting point was that, when only linear correlations were considered, a strong relation between the temperatures and K The coefficients of CaO and MgO showed that there was a very slight or even negligible relation between these variables and the temperatures. Since the numerator of the dolomite ratio term contains these variables, a similar trend should be observed when the coefficients of the dolomite ratio are analyzed. Interestingly, the coefficients indicated that dolomite ratio had also a very slight effect on the temperatures. The following conclusions can be derived from this study: Non-linear regression analysis is more accurate for the prediction of ash fusion temperatures (AFTs) than linear regression analysis. In both linear and non-linear regression analyses, when the mole percentages of oxides are used in the calculations, more accurate predictions are obtained than with weight percentages. The use of major group (silica value, base, acid, dolomite ratio and Addition of coal parameters, such as ash content, specific gravity, mineral matter content and Hardgrove Index, enhance the precision of the estimated AFTs. The non-linear regression analysis predict the AFTs with the following accuracies:  Twelve to 16 parameters are sufficient to estimate AFTs by using non-linear correlations.