The grinding bodies’ motions (grinding disc and grinding ring) in the mill chamber of a vibratory disc mill have been experimentally studied and subsequently evaluated as well as interpreted in detail.
                  The horizontal movements have been recorded by means of a high-speed camera positioned perpendicularly above the mill and the vertical movements using a measurement sensor, which enables a sensitive measurement of the grinding disc’s variation in height. Simultaneously, the influence of the fluid viscosity and the fluid’s filling quantity on these movements have been determined. Both parameters distinctly influence the grinding bodies’ motions.
                  An increasing viscosity shows initially no visible influence on the grinding bodies’ centre velocities. In the case high viscosities are reached, a significant decrease in the grinding bodies’ velocities appears due to the higher flow resistance or more specifically, higher fluid’s resistance or lower fluid’s flowability counteracting the motions. Due to increased sliding of the grinding bodies on a highly viscous fluid, an inversion of the grinding bodies’ direction of rotation develops additionally. A larger fluid’s filling quantity causes a reduction of the sliding friction between the elements, wherefore the grinding bodies’ velocities increase accordingly. The vertical analysis of the grinding disc’s variation in height clearly reveals that the grinding bodies slide on a viscous fluid during operational mode. At the same time, a small vertical gap between the respective grinding body and the mill chamber bottom appears.constant eccentricity, mm filling level, mm gap width, µm radii, mm mean roughness, m path, distance, mm time, s velocity, m/s volume, ml coordinates dynamic viscosity, mPa·s angle, grd angular velocity, rad/s outside points inside the coordinate system path inside centre maximum minimum ring resulting rotation disc gap coordinates In vibratory mills, a spring mounted mill chamber is set into motion via a revolving unbalance and more specifically, an eccentrical drive. The mill chamber is usually operated either filled with a grinding media consisting of a large number of small spheres or rods or filled with few but large grinding bodies, which can be a combination of rings and a cylindrical core (disc). In the latter case, the type of mills is specified in more detail as vibratory disc mills. During milling or more precisely, operational mode, the mill chamber including the grinding bodies are set in motion due to the vibration of the mill and hence, perform complex relative movements to each other. As a consequence of these relative movements, an effective comminution of the grinding material results from compression, impact as well as friction processes between the grinding bodies and the mill chamber as well as the grinding bodies themselves. During these friction processes, normal and shear forces appear and thus, the forces are also transferred to the grinding material in the gaps between the grinding elements. All in all, vibratory disc mills are already well established for a long time and are mainly used in analytics. This type of comminution machine is especially suited for the targeted fine to ultrafine grinding of medium-hard to hard and brittle as well as fibrous materials and may be operated in dry, moist as well as wet condition. According to publications of our own research group, these comminution machines are also convenient for the exfoliation of graphite particles In spite of the wide range of application and usage for already many years, there is only a limited number of scientific articles available in literature which are related to the evaluation of the comminution in this type of mills or are even focussed on their extremely complex grinding bodies’ motions. As specified and described by Raasch By neglecting the gravitation, Raasch In contrast, however, several application-oriented studies concerning vibratory disc mills are available in literature. While Odo et al. As a result of the significantly risen computing power within the recent decades, numerical simulations are increasingly applied, whereby the discrete element method (DEM) represents an excellent tool. Introduced by Cundall and Strack The present publication focusses on the experimental recording of the grinding bodies’ motions in a vibratory disc mill, their evaluation and interpretation as well as the simultaneously investigation of the influence of the fluid viscosity and the fluid’s filling quantity in the mill chamber on these motions. Moreover, the study provides necessary fundamentals for continuative works concerning the numerical simulation of the grinding bodies’ motions as well as the derivation of the flow conditions along with forces appearing during milling or more specifically, operational mode of the vibratory disc mill including the estimation of their magnitude. As experimental setup, a vibratory disc mill has been used, which had been fabricated in the formerly VEB Bergbau- und Hüttenkombinat “Albert Funk” Freiberg in the 1970s. In operational mode, the vibratory disc mill is set into predominantly horizontal vibration by an eccentrical drive. Due to the vibrations thereby transmitted into the mill chamber, the grinding bodies also move on predominantly horizontal and rotatory trajectories and subsequently, comminute or at least stress and treat the grinding material mainly through high friction and shear forces. To date, there are no examinations concerning the ratios between the occurring friction and shear forces available from literature. However, Beinert et al. The massive grinding bodies are made of steel and have the geometrical shapes of a ring and a disc (see During milling process, comminution of the grinding material takes place in the varying gaps between both grinding bodies (grinding ring and disc) as well as the grinding ring and the mill chamber wall. Moreover, comminution occurs in the small vertical gap between the respective grinding body and the mill chamber bottom. In this connection, high grinding bodies’ velocities or more precisely, high relative velocities are favourable and increase comminution effect. For the recording of the grinding bodies’ vertical motions during operational mode, the mill chamber’s cover has been equipped with the high-precision measurement sensor GT2-P12K from KEYENCE International (Belgium) NV/SA. For this purpose, an opening has been drilled into the mill chamber’s cover (see Mixtures of different ratios of glycerol and distilled water (see Glycerol (propane-1,2,3-triol) is a clear, sweetly tasting, syrup-like, colour- and odourless liquid, which is freely soluble in water and ethanol. The viscosity of glycerol highly depends on the degree of purity or more precisely, on the mixing ratio of glycerol and water or ethanol as well as the temperature of the liquid. The boiling temperature of glycerol is 209 °C. Glycerol is a component of many vegetable oils and animal fats and is applied in pharmaceutical industry for the production of salves or cosmetics, at textile finishing, refining of tobacco as well as used as brake fluid or anti-freezing agent in the automotive industry The used glycerol provided from the Grüssing GmbH has a purity of 99 vol% according to the manufacturer’s information. The viscosities of the used GWMs have been determined on the basis of the viscosity table from Sheely Every experimental setting was performed and recorded with a high-speed camera in triplicates. The limitation of the number of measurements to three in each case has been necessary due to the enormous requirements on the measuring computer’s memory capacity. During preparation of the measurements, the mill chamber has been first carefully filled with the according GWM and fluid amount. Thereafter, the vibratory disc mill has been switched on to start the operational mode or more precisely, the milling process. After a short phase-in period, which the mill requires to reach the stationary milling period, the recording of the high-speed camera could be started likewise. All experiments have been carried out at a constant room temperature of 20 °C. In the next step, the operational mode has been stopped after successful recording and the mill chamber as well as the grinding bodies have been cleaned, dried and the mill has been filled again for the next experiment. Due to the short period of just a few seconds for each experiment, a temperature influence on the fluid viscosity can be excluded because the fluid can only negligibly heat during experimental procedure. To enable a physical description of the comminution process in the vibratory disc mill, the flow conditions as well as forces (normal and shear forces) and the according shear stresses appearing during operational mode have to be estimated initially. For this, the horizontal grinding bodies’ motions have been first recorded by means of a high-speed camera, hereinafter evaluated systematically and finally mathematically. Hence, the appearing flow conditions as well as forces may be derived in a further step because they are directly connected with the grinding bodies’ motions. The used high-speed camera has been the model MC1362 from Mikrotron. The camera has been positioned perpendicularly above the vibratory disc mill and the experimental setup has been adapted to ensure optimal recordings. For this purpose, the heavy mill’s iron cover has been replaced by a transparent acrylic glass cover. Moreover, the grinding bodies have been varnished on their top side to receive a clear contrast to the rest of the milling chamber which is highly necessary since the camera exclusively records monochrome images. On the grinding ring’s top side, boundary points have been added by placing markings (two black crosses and two black circles), which have been plotted in such a way that they face each other exactly orthogonal to the according symmetry axis (see On the mill’s black outer case, two markings have been additionally plotted in the form of white circles exactly at the opposite side. Hence, the motions of the complete case can be computed and then, subtracted from the grinding bodies’ motions, whereby a stabilisation of the recordings is achieved. Overall, the added markings offer a big contrast to the surface of the according grinding element they are plotted on and can be thus distinguished clearly and easily. For the analysis with the high-speed camera, clear GWMs have been used because they hardly influence the visibility of the markings on the grinding bodies due to their transparency. As high-speed camera’s frame frequency or rather frame rate, 1190 fps (frames per second) with an exposure time of 835 µs has been selected and each single test has been recorded 3.6 s (recording time) with an image resolution of 720 × 700 px (pixel). The recorded images have been evaluated by means of the software Fusion 8.0 developed from Blackmagic Design and MATLAB from Mathworks. The markings on the grinding bodies and the mill have been tracked via Fusion 8.0 and their position data have been stored in a file. This file can be imported into MATLAB and used for further calculations. Problematic recordings, in which the fluid covers the markings necessary for evaluation, have been evaluated using a computer program based on MATLAB which had been specially programmed for such complex events. The centre of the ring has been determined with a transformation of the recordings into binary images (pixel either black or white), see From the tracking of the markings on the grinding bodies and more specifically, from the image sequence as well as a geometrical analysis of the vibratory disc mill (see In particular, the individual grinding bodies’ angular velocities At this trivial analysis, it is important that the distance between the positions of the centres do not vary too much between single consecutive images, since the grinding bodies’ centres move on circular paths through the mill chamber. Therefore, the particular average speed Hence, for the average speed’s value as well as the resulting translational velocity’s one applies. Then, both the average speed and the resulting translational velocity equal the grinding bodies’ instantaneous velocity. The difference between The approximate average speed can also be determined directly. However, for this purpose, enough measurement points have to be available to determine the centre and the circular path’s radius, on which the grinding body is moving, in a sufficiently exact way. The following equation for the average speed is related to the central path opening angle  Due to the convenient selection of the coordinate system, which moves along with the circular motion and whose x-axis therefore always points to the centre A, the velocity in y-direction corresponds to the average speed defined in Eq. Furthermore, the angular velocity Likewise, the velocity at point C can be calculated with Eq. Moreover, in case the angle is selected conveniently to In this connection, it has to be considered that Consequently, according to the above-mentioned assumption of the angle Therefore, instead of Eq. By means of the position data of a boundary point of each grinding body, the angular velocity as well as the circumstance that the angular velocity’s absolute value equals the first derivative of the rotation angel The horizontal gap From the difference between During evaluation of the high-speed recordings, the grinding bodies’ positions cannot sufficiently precisely be determined in some cases. Therefore, it is necessary to identify defective or non-existent tracking results, sort them out and to replace them with interpolated values. In particular, the evaluation of the grinding ring’s motion is highly challenging because the centre ( By equating both Eqs. Now, the solution of A source of errors of this approach is already that at least two boundary points or more specifically, markings of the rim have to be always detected simultaneously on the high-speed recordings. Furthermore, the related grinding body’s radius has to be known, whereby errors may already occur due to the necessary conversion of the real radius into pixel of the corresponding images on the basis of the conversion factor. Hence, the method shown in However, using the selected method, the evaluation of the measurement values leads also often to a not negligible variation around the real grinding bodies’ motions. Therefore, a curve-fitting is indispensable. The grinding bodies’ motions and consequently, the progress of grinding bodies’ centres, boundary points as well as velocities are periodic. This periodic behaviour can be expressed with the following approach, whereas the individual parameters affect the trigonometric function according to the specifications summarised in Additionally, the displacement of the function in y-direction can periodically oscillate, wherefore Eq. It is assumed that each time after starting of the operational mode, the grinding bodies’ circular motions determined by means of their markings go initially through an acceleration process or phase first and after a short period of a few seconds, the elements reach already an angular velocity which varies around a constant value. Until the end of the operational mode, no further acceleration takes place. Therefore, within this period, the function of the angle For the detection and exclusion of defective tracking as well as the acceleration phase during evaluation, a time span is hence always selected in which the function of the angle By means of the obtained linear equation, positions at further instants of time outside of the time span, in which the boundary points do not undergo any acceleration or deceleration, can reliably be extrapolated. Two different measurement series have been carried out by using clear GWMs and measurement recordings have been performed by means of the high-speed camera. On the one hand, the influence of the fluid viscosity and on the other hand, the influence of the filling quantity on the grinding bodies’ motions were to be investigated. As descriptive example for the evaluation of the grinding bodies’ motions based on MATLAB, The movement of the marking of the grinding disc centre (blue cross), the rim of the grinding disc (red circles) and the theoretical centre of the grinding ring (green crosses), the rim of the grinding ring (yellow circles) as well as their corresponding trajectories (coloured curves) appearing during the time interval between the single consecutive images are added into each image of To guarantee an exclusive consideration and thus, evaluation of the grinding bodies’ motions, the disruptive vibratory disc mill’s motion is initially eliminated by means of an image stabilisation. The stabilisation is performed by tracking the small white markings plotted on the mill chamber wall, see The measurement series related to the investigation of the fluid viscosity’s influence on the grinding bodies’ motions have been carried out by using GWMs of different mixing ratios, see  However, the disc’s and ring’s angular velocities of their centre motions are not observably influenced by the increasing fluid’s resistance and remain almost constant also in case of high viscosities. To counteract the smaller grinding bodies’ rotational radii of their centres, an increase of the mill’s power is necessary. A different behaviour appears for the velocities of the grinding bodies’ boundary points By reaching higher viscosities corresponding to a glycerol content of about 65–70 vol%, the grinding bodies increasingly begin to slide on the fluid. At higher viscosities, the sliding causes a grinding bodies’ rotation in clockwise direction around their cylinder axis and thus, an inversion of the direction of rotation in comparison to lower viscosities. Therefore, in contrast to the velocities of the grinding bodies’ centres The highest velocities arise at a mixture of 75 vol% glycerol, whereat the highest velocity occurs for the grinding ring’s outer ring’s boundary point which can be traced back on the larger radius compared to the disc’s one. At even higher viscosities, the difference between the velocities of the grinding bodies’ centres and their boundary points is indeed larger in some cases, but, considered in absolute terms, reduced due to the smaller deflection of the grinding bodies’ motions. At very high viscosities, a strong decrease in velocities of the grinding bodies’ boundary points takes place and thereafter, the velocities remain on a level of only slightly larger velocities than these ones of the corresponding centres. The second measurement series have been carried out to analyse the influence of the fluid’s filling quantity or rather the mill chamber’s filling level ( At a low fluid viscosity corresponding to a glycerol content of 50 vol% and below, no influence of the filling quantity on the grinding bodies’ velocities has been observed, whereas a rapid increase in velocity develops with increasing filling quantity for a glycerol content of 75 vol%. This increase in velocity results from an improved sliding behaviour of the grinding bodies inside the mill chamber and progresses proportional to the fluid’s filling quantity, because the fluid disperses increasingly better within the mill chamber and is able to wet the grinding bodies’ outer surfaces more effectively. Thereby, the sliding friction between the grinding bodies itself and the grinding bodies and the mill chamber bottom, their wall as well as cover becomes clearly diminished. Thus, the energy dissipation due to friction is significantly reduced, whereby in total, the vibratory disc mill works significantly more even during operational mode when loaded with a larger fluid amount. However, at high fluid viscosities corresponding to a mixture of 99 vol% glycerol, the increased flow resistance or more precisely, higher fluid’s resistance or lower fluid’s flowability counteracts the discussed effect of reduced friction. Hence, a strong decrease in velocity takes place, which has been already evaluated in Moreover, it becomes evident from the results that the standard deviation and the variation of the results increases with increasing radius. Depending on the grinding bodies’ rotation around their own centre in opposite direction to their direction of motion, a lesser velocity than the centre’s one appears for the larger radius at a mixture of 50 vol% glycerol. This effect has also been discussed already in All in all, the results presented in During the experiments for measuring the grinding bodies’ vertical motions, the vibratory disc mill is filled with a GWM and the variation of the arising vertical gap width between the grinding disc and the mill chamber bottom are recorded during operational mode by means of an appropriate measurement sensor (see Due to the vibratory disc mill’s geometry, only the grinding disc’s vertical variation could be recorded because the necessary continuous contact between the grinding body and the position sensor could only be ensured for this centred position, see A typical measurement curve of the vertical gap width during operational mode as a function of the time is presented in The results of the distance measurements of the vertical gap width between grinding disc and the mill chamber are summarised in Directly proportional to an increase in viscosity, an almost linear increase of the gap width as well as their standard deviation appears ( Likewise, measurements with solely distilled water have been carried out. However, the vertical gap width varied extremely during each single experiment so that the measurement values could not be adequately approximated by means of a linear function like the one presented in Additional to the measured gap width, the grinding element’s mean surface roughness has to be summed. A roughness of With the present study, the horizontal and vertical grinding bodies’ motions in a vibratory disc mill have been successfully investigated. During operational mode, the vibratory disc mill is actuated by an eccentrical drive into mainly horizontal vibrations, whereby the mill chamber including the grinding bodies having the geometrical shape of a cylindrical disc and a surrounding ring are activated likewise and perform complex relative movements to each other. The horizontal movements have been recorded by means of a high-speed camera positioned perpendicularly above the mill and subsequently evaluated in detail. For the recording of the vertical movements, a measurement sensor, which enables a precise measurement of the grinding disc’s variation in height, has been installed. The influence of the fluid viscosity and the fluid’s filling quantity or level inside the mill chamber on the grinding bodies’ motions has been studied using different GWMs. Initially, an increasing viscosity has no significant effect on the grinding bodies’ centre velocities, which remain constant within a wide range of viscosities. At high viscosities, a strong decrease in the centre velocities occurs nevertheless because the higher fluid’s resistance counteracting the grinding bodies’ motions increasingly dominates, whereby the grinding bodies’ rotational radii of their centres decrease. However, the grinding disc’s and ring’s angular velocities of their centre motions are not influenced by the increasing fluid’s resistance and remain almost constant. Furthermore, an increase of the fluid viscosity causes the effect of an inversion of the grinding bodies’ direction of rotation due to a decreased sliding friction between the particular grinding body and the mill chamber bottom or more precisely, an increased sliding of the particular grinding body on a highly viscous fluid. The inversion of the direction of rotation greatly influences the velocities of the grinding bodies’ boundary points. A larger fluid’s filling quantity improves the sliding friction between the elements (mill chamber bottom, wall and cover as well as grinding disc and ring), wherefore the grinding bodies’ velocities proportionally increase with the fluid’s filling quantity. The vertical analysis of the grinding disc’s variation in height clearly reveals that the grinding bodies slide on a viscous fluid during operational mode. In the course of this, a small vertical gap between the respective grinding body and the mill chamber bottom appears. This effect correlates with the fluid viscosity, whereat a larger vertical gap width develops with increasing viscosity. During comminution, in case the vibratory disc mill is charged with grinding material and fluid, the particles influence the grinding bodies’ motions by increased friction between the grinding bodies as well as the grinding bodies and the mill chamber leading to lesser grinding bodies’ velocities. Moreover, the grinding material may significantly influence the fluid viscosity by increasing the viscosity, for example. However, these resulting complex effects highly depend on the grinding material and have to be studied individually. The present scientific paper provides the basis for continuing studies to estimate the flow conditions as well as the forces appearing during milling process or more specifically, operational mode of the vibratory disc mill as well as numerical simulations of the grinding bodies’ motions by means of the DEM or preferably the Combined Continuum and Discrete Model. The authors declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this paper.