The history of development of Process Mineralogy is reviewed, and updated. Specifically, the approach taken by Xstrata Process Support is discussed. It is shown that across the current generation of practice, a multi-disciplinary approach of sampling, geology, quantitative and qualitative mineralogy, applied statistics and mineral processing hybridises well into a synergistic arrangement that delivers better flowsheeting for the concentrator. The development of modern mineralogical and mineral processing equipment and methodology has contributed in great measure to an overall ability to correctly assess the processing needs of an orebody. This leads to a more accurate understanding of the flowsheet requirements, thus the flotation testing becomes more focussed and delivers a more viable flowsheet at an earlier stage of the project. The role of applied statistics in this practice additionally contributes relevant quality controls to the sampling and laboratory quality controls, as well as to the all-important plant scale trial, which must be able to demonstrate the expected performance gains. Some suggestions for the path forward from here onward are made.Historically, the design of concentrators treating sulphide ores was treated with the tools available at the time – for example, pioneer work by For the operating concentrator, the question had always arisen as to what further gains could be made by way of recovery, selectivity or concentrate grade whilst sustaining or increasing throughput. At the time, such a concentrator had at best a platform of monthly composites of feed, concentrate and tailings which would be sized, weighed and assayed, producing size-by-size recovery models, sometimes supported by optical microscopy, informing the grinding and classification circuit of possible improvements. Some investigators saw the link between the type of size distribution produced by the grinding circuit, and the limitations or opportunities that this presented to the flotation circuit ( The connection between mineralogy and metallurgical performance in a plant was recognised long ago ( Whereas particle measurement was itself an important part of this programme, so was the condition of the particle surfaces. In this series of endeavours, significant new understanding of activation and collection mechanisms developed, covering both sulphide and silicate species. Early electrochemical studies catalysed a series of studies in galvanic interactions between sulphide minerals, such as reported by Finch and his co-workers ( As it stands at the time of writing, Modern Process Mineralogy has been advanced to a more powerful, integrated practice as a hybrid discipline. The salient features of its structure follow. This description specifically describes the current practice at Xstrata Process Support, Sudbury, Ontario: First and foremost, the work dynamics of a Modern Process Mineralogy team must be recognised as one of the most powerful enabling features of best practice. No single team member is able to perform an entire project in this hybrid discipline alone. It is the interaction between the individuals in the team, and their sharing of and contribution from their specific discipline, that pulls the hybrid practice together. It is obvious from the recent publications by the more advanced groups that their co-authorship approach reflects this interaction. Representative sampling is a key component to any testwork programme. Although historically bulk samples from one location within a deposit were deemed appropriate for process diagnosis and flowsheet development, it is now recognised that a set of unoxidised drill core samples, representative of the resource in terms of space, grade, grade distribution and lithology will better quantify process performance. In cases where random sampling methodologies are required, Gy’s sampling models ( Samples collected for the metallurgical testwork programme are crushed and screened in two stages to minimise the generation of fines and blended using an odds and evens blending ( Geometallurgical units ( Scoping or pre-scoping level studies are often labelled Ore Characterisation programs. Corresponding mineralogical work is usually done on coarse samples so that in situ textures and mineral grain sizes can be defined prior to grinding. Once flotation testing has been completed on an ore, mineralogical characterisation of milled feeds, concentrate and tailings provides additional detail which can further define opportunities for improved metallurgical performance. These measurements can take place at either the scoping or pre-feasibility stage of the programme and when completed will provide additional information to help optimise the flowsheet. Similar strategies are followed when diagnosing plant problems. Samples representing specific areas of a mine can be sampled to better understand the reasons for inferior metallurgical performance, or plant streams can be sampled to measure the mineralogical characteristics relating to a specific metallurgical result. Mineralogical data are collected using QEMSCAN/MLA and EPMA. At Xstrata Process Support, QEMSCAN is installed and used as an automated system that produces mineral maps (colour coded by mineral), through collection of rapidly acquired energy dispersive X-rays and/or by identification based on backscattered electron images. The mineral maps describe the texture and mineral associations in each of the samples. In addition to the coloured map, the output of the QEMSCAN measurement includes a quantitative measure of modal mineralogy, mineral grain size, mineral liberation and element deportment by mineral. A key component of the mineralogical result is that in addition to all economic minerals of interest, each gangue mineral is also identified and quantified. In any automated mineralogical system, compositional information for every mineral is a required input to allow elemental deportment calculations. Although textbook compositions will provide a basis for these calculations, elements that occur as low level solid solution values are not captured when using textbook compositions. In addition, variations in composition can occur for the same mineral type from different deposits. Accurate deportment assessments require quantitative compositional analyses. Quantitative compositional analysis at XPS is performed using a Cameca SX-100 Electron Microprobe. This model represents considerable improvement over the earlier microprobes, and includes programmable measurement programmes and imaging abilities that earlier models did not offer. Other platforms such as produced by Jeol also offer this type of capability. Compared to energy dispersive spectrometry (EDS), Electron Probe Microanalysis produces higher electron beam currents and increased beam stability, coupled with higher resolution wavelength dispersive spectrometry (WDS). These features allow for improved detection limits and accuracy of the resulting analysis. Detection limits can be as low as 100 The older X-ray Diffraction (XRD) technology may still be recognised for its place in quantitative mineral measurement. This technology was developed by W.L. and W.H. Bragg from 1912 on, and resulted in them being awarded the Nobel Prize in Physics in 1915. This platform has undergone steady modernisation and automation since then, including development of the Rietveld refinement, which uses a least squares approach to a best fit to the instrument’s output, and dealt to some extent with the issue of overlapping reflections ( In cases where it is desirable to understand the activation of mineral species and/or the identification of which collector has adsorbed on certain minerals in the flotation system being studied, TOF-SIMS has a definite place in the best practice of Modern Process Mineralogy. Various commercial laboratories now offer this service, thus it is not necessary to purchase the instrument and invest in the long learning and training curve involved, since the sample preparation methods and data interpretation are very specialist ( In addition to the tools described to measure mineralogical characteristics, XPS uses several mineral processing procedures in an attempt to correlate mineralogy with the metallurgical performance. These procedures use replicate flotation as described in high confidence flotation testing ( High confidence flotation is based on two principles: one, to ensure that the ore sample is representative and has been well-blended and representatively subsampled; two, to perform a sufficient number of flotation tests with appropriate quality controls, so as to improve the reproducibility of the test data and reduce the error level. The use of representative samples, as previously discussed, is a necessary prerequisite for these high confidence tests ( The crushed mill feed sample is blended using a spinning riffler with an odds and evens procedure as referenced in the earlier discussion. After blending, a total of 10–12 subsamples are taken from the blended 2 A minimum number of replicate flotation tests is required for each high confidence flotation test observation. This is so as to engage the powerful averaging effects of the Central Limit Theorem, which in this context reduces the random errors and leaves residual error normally-distributed ( Factorial design or design or experiments (DOE) is documented elsewhere in detail ( The sequence of these tests is randomised so as to avoid any operator preference. Data are interpreted in terms of main effects and interactions on key performance measurements such as tailings grade, concentrate grade or recovery. This analysis is done using Mini-Tab or Stat-Ease software, however the same results can be calculated by hand. The key advantage of this testwork layout is that each main effect is calculated from eight observations. Therefore, the standard error of that main effect is much lower than with conventional singleton or duplicate tests. It is thus possible to test for small differences in recovery and establish, for example, the best combination or grind size and reagent addition as suggested by the mineralogy. Typically, optimised conditions are tested using the high confidence testing protocols to further increase confidence in results. Modelling of the response surface within the cube forms the final step of the data interpretation. This often finds an internal (untested) point in the cube which offers superior performance ( Typically, high confidence flotation testing and DOE procedures are performed on a batch basis in either rougher or open circuit cleaner formats. Following batch testing and correlation between quantitative mineralogy and metallurgical testing, the geometallurgical units and flotation conditions are confirmed. Once confirmed, these geometallurgical units can be tested in a locked cycle test or in continuous mode using a Mini Flotation Pilot Plant (MPP) ( The inherent advantages of the MPP over conventional piloting include smaller sample size, reduced time to steady state and ability to test samples on a geometallurgical unit basis. This smaller sample size is made possible by stratified sampling. The MPP requires significantly lower sample mass than a conventional pilot plant, and can operate a continuous flowsheet test including regrinding and column cleaning at feed rates as low as 8 At plant operations scale, a procedure was developed and validated whereby a representative suite of flowsheet samples could be taken from an operating concentrator for mass and value balancing, followed by QEMSCAN measurement across a series of closed size fractions. This became known as Statistical Benchmark Surveying, and made the connection between the operating plant and the microscopic-scale measurements of the minerals. The key in this system is to tie the tests of representativity to measurements of ore grade, so that the accepted set of flowsheet samples correspond to treatment of ore of similar grade to that which is typically milled at that operation in the 3-month period surrounding the survey. Ultimately two forms of this survey were developed. One, the standard benchmark form, or “Statistical Benchmark Survey”, described the flowsheet behaviours under typical mining and milling conditions ( The role of applied statistics has long presented an opportunity in mineral processing, both at laboratory scale in flotation testing, and at plant scale with trials such as new reagents ( By recognising the autocorrelation problem and rather designing the plant trial with this problem in mind, it is possible to break the autocorrelation by using a replicated blocking technique. This results in a plant trial that operates in an on–off format with variable block lengths of anywhere from 1 to 2 In all, this interface between applied statistics and successful plant trials has contributed to a recent history of more successful proofs of these small performance opportunities, providing a key technology transfer tool for Process Mineralogy. The Montcalm Ni/Cu Ore was processed at the Kidd Creek concentrator located near Timmins, in Northern Ontario, Canada between 2004 and 2009. It is hosted in a norite and gabbro intrusive complex with minor peridotite lenses and mafic and granodiorite dykes. Shear zones and faults are locally encountered and host chloritic alteration products including talc ( The Montcalm ore reserves occurred as three distinct lenses, referred to as the East, West and Deep Zones. The mineralogical assemblage is locally variable, with changing ratios of the main sulphides: pyrrhotite, pyrite, pentlandite and chalcopyrite. The silicate gangue is primarily composed of plagioclase and amphibole, exhibiting variable degrees of sericitization or chloritization. Calcite, magnetite, zoisite (a Ca–Al silicate), quartz, biotite and talc occur as minor accessory gangue minerals.  At the time Falconbridge Limited acquired full ownership of the project, an extensive body of metallurgical work existed from the prior Outokumpu ownership. It was recognised, however, that further work would be necessary to align this project with Falconbridge Project Guidelines. Falconbridge’s mandate was to evaluate the project’s economic viability and validate the proposed flowsheet (shown in In It was important to understand the variability that the concentrator would probably encounter. Use of the geomet unit approach (described earlier in this paper) found three geomet units. These were massive sulphides, net-textured sulphides and disseminated sulphides. Sample material taken from drill core allowed a whole rock thin section investigation, and size-by-size liberation measurements of laboratory scale simulated rougher float feed at the designed grind. High-Confidence Flotation Testing (HCFT) was then used to simulate the specified flowsheet and to characterise the probable metallurgical response. Images of polished thin sections prepared from these geomet units are shown in A Life-of-Mine drill core composite was prepared for flotation testing to simulate the flowsheet as set out in Further, a McNulty start-up model was constructed after the commissioning to benchmark the start-up in terms of type. The format of the model is discussed in detail by The Montcalm start-up met or exceeded Type 1, the very best outcome desired. This is directly a result of the Process Mineralogy approach. Thereafter, a Statistical Benchmark Survey of the concentrator operations was commissioned so as to identify and quantify the next flowsheet opportunities ( Since the life-of-mine was estimated at 7 These outcomes confirm the ability of Process Mineralogy to retrofit improvements to a non-optimal design that has been commissioned into operation, as well as the key ability to scale-up accurately from laboratory testwork to production operations. As a discipline, Process Mineralogy has come a long way in a short time. If we regard the milestone reference of Provided that future Process Mineralogy teams keep the ongoing practice of hybridized operations in which synergy develops, it is certain that many more significant tools and methods will develop in this field. The author would like to gratefully thank the management of Xstrata Nickel for permission to publish this paper. They and the earlier Falconbridge Ltd. have been a founder client for this Xstrata Process Mineralogy Group, and have provided many meaningful projects and associated challenges for us to work on and solve whilst we developed the practice. Additionally I would like to sincerely thank my colleagues and co-founders of the Xstrata (and earlier Falconbridge) Process Mineralogy team for their energetic and innovative contributions to the group. Several others, such as Professor Dee Bradshaw, of the SMI, University of Queensland; Professor Cyril O’Connor, of the University of Cape Town; Dr. Michael King, retired Director of the earlier Falconbridge Metallurgical Technology Group; Paul Gottlieb, originally of CSIRO, and now of FEI; and Greg Wilkie, originally of CSIRO, and now of Rio Tinto, are gratefully acknowledged for their encouragement and support in these endeavours.