Due to the outstanding bioactivity and biocompatibility, calcium phosphate (CaP) based materials have been widely investigated for applications in the biomedical fields. In this study, amorphous calcium phosphate (ACP) nanospheres and hydroxyapatite (HA) nanorods have been prepared and hybridized with poly(d,l-lactic acid) (PLA) to fabricate the composite nanofibers through electrospinning. The as-prepared ACP-PLA and HA-PLA composite nanofibers exhibit favorable mineralization behaviors in simulated body fluid (SBF). In the mineralization process, the ACP nanospheres and HA nanorods play an important role in the formation of HA nanosheets on the surface of composite nanofibers. The ACP-PLA and HA-PLA composite nanofibers show a high biocompatibility. The in vivo bone defect repair properties of the ACP-PLA and HA-PLA composite nanofibers are preliminarily investigated. The as-prepared ACP-PLA and HA-PLA composite nanofibers have promising applications in the biomedical fields.Bone defects originated from trauma and other bone diseases are frequent clinic problems. Many therapeutic strategies have been developed for the therapy of bone defects, including transplantation of autoglaft and alloglaft, and filling with metal scaffolds or synthetic biomedical scaffolds Electrospining is considered as a promising way to fabricate polymer nanofibers, which have been widely used as drug carriers and tissue engineering scaffolds Herein, ACP nanospheres are synthesized using a block copolymer of polylactide-block-monomethoxy (polyethyleneglycol) (PLA–mPEG) by a simple precipitation method in aqueous solution. HA nanorods are prepared by the hydrothermal method. The as-prepared ACP nanospheres and HA nanorods are hybridized with PLA to prepare ACP-PLA and HA-PLA composite nanofibers through electrospinning. The structure, properties, The polymers of PLA–mPEG (Mw The ACP nanospheres were synthesized according to a modified method reported in the literature In a typical experiment for the synthesis of HA nanorods, the above mentioned 60 For the preparation of ACP-PLA composite nanofibers, 0.300 The transmission electron microscopy (TEM) micrographs were obtained with a JEOL JEM-2100F field-emission transmission electron microscope with an accelerating voltage of 200 Mechanical measurements were carried out using the specimens of electrospun ACP-PLA and HA-PLA nanofibrous mats with a fixed planar dimension of 10 The electrospun ACP-PLA and HA-PLA composite nanofiber mat with a round shape was prepared and immersed in 20 In this study, we compared the The ACP-PLA and HA-PLA composite nanofibers were used for the study of cell viability using the osteoblast-like (MG63) cells which were cultured in α-minimum essential medium (α-MEM) supplemented with 10% Fetal Bovine Serum (FBS) and 1% penicillin–streptomycin at 37 Moreover, the confocal laser scanning microscopy (CLSM) was used to investigate the adherence of the MG63 cells on the PLA nanofibers, ACP-PLA and HA-PLA composite nanofibers. After culture for 4 Articular bone defects (5 The morphologies of the as-prepared ACP nanospheres and HA nanorods were observed by TEM. As shown in The as-prepared ACP nanospheres and HA nanorods were respectively hybridized with the PLA polymer and electrospun into ACP-PLA and HA-PLA composite nanofibers. The SEM micrographs of ACP-PLA and HA-PLA composite nanofibers are shown in   The SEM micrographs of the electrospun single-phase PLA nanofibers, ACP-PLA and HA-PLA composite nanofibers after mineralization in SBF at 37 FTIR spectra of single-phase PLA nanofibers, ACP nanospheres, HA nanorods, ACP-PLA and HA-PLA composite nanofibers before and after mineralization (ACP-PLA AM and HA-PLA AM) in SBF for 7 days are shown in The crystal phases of the electrospun ACP-PLA and HA-PLA composite nanofibers after mineralization in SBF for 7 days were investigated by XRD, which are shown in The TG and DSC curves of the as-prepared ACP-PLA and HA-PLA composite nanofibers before and after mineralization in SBF for 7 days were investigated, and the results are shown in Contact angles on the surfaces of the as-prepared ACP-PLA and HA-PLA composite nanofibers before and after mineralization in SBF were measured using deionized water, as shown in The mineralization is a simple strategy for the formation of HA/PLA composite materials by the immersion of the PLA polymer in SBF. However, this is usually a time-consuming process and takes several weeks to form a mineralized HA layer on the PLA polymer However, ACP-PLA and HA-PLA composite nanofibers have remarkable change after mineralization in SBF for only 1 day. The ACP nanospheres play a very important role in the formation of HA nanosheets on the ACP-PLA composite nanofibers in SBF. The ACP nanospheres are not stable in SBF solution and easily crystallize to form HA which is a stable crystal phase. Firstly, when the ACP-PLA composite nanofibers are immersed in the SBF solution, the transformation from ACP to HA occurs. As shown by the SEM micrographs, the ACP-PLA composite nanofibers become rough on the surface after mineralization in SBF for only one day. Secondly, the newly formed HA largely changes the surface chemical constituent and hydrophilicity of the ACP-PLA composite nanofibers, and promotes the reaction between Ca  As shown in In addition, the adhesion and spreading behavior of MG63 cells cultured on the as-prepared ACP-PLA and HA-PLA composite nanofibers are investigated by CLSM ( A preliminary study of The photomicrographs of bone slices with defects after being grafted with ACP-PLA and HA-PLA composite nanofibers as well as the control groups of untreated defective bone after van Gieson and toluidine blue staining are shown in In summary, ACP-PLA and HA-PLA composite nanofibers have been prepared by electrospinning. Firstly, ACP nanospheres are prepared by a simple precipitation method in aqueous solution. The HA nanorods are synthesized by the hydrothermal treatment. Then, the ACP nanospheres and HA nanorods are separately hybridized with the PLA polymer and electrospun into composite nanofibers. In the mineralization process, the ACP nanospheres and HA nanorods play an important role in the formation of HA nanosheets on the surface of ACP-PLA and HA-PLA composite nanofibers. This result can be explained by the addition of ACP nanospheres in the PLA polymer, and ACP nanospheres are not stable and easily crystallize to form HA nanosheets on the surface of ACP-PLA composite nanofibers. Similarly, HA nanorods in the as-prepared HA-PLA composite nanofibers also play a role to promote the growth of HA nanosheets. The cell viability results indicate that ACP-PLA and HA-PLA composite nanofibers have a good biocompatibility. The The financial support from the