The Drop Weight Tester (DWT) for ore impact breakage characterisation uses particles in five narrow size fractions, and the JKMRC Rotary Breakage Tester (JKRBT) uses four size fractions, both with three impact energy levels for each size fraction. It is time consuming to prepare these narrowly sized particles and to carry out size analysis on the 15 DWT or 12 JKRBT products, so a Wide-size JKRBT characterisation method was developed. In this method, the mixed particles in 13.2–45mm size range are tested as one size class in the JKRBT by single-particle breakage mode. The wide-size feed is then divided into several virtual narrow size fractions by simulation, based on which the impact product size distributions are calculated using a size-dependent breakage model. Four sets of measurement data, consisting of two feed samples in the 13.2–45mm size range with different size distributions tested with two impact energy levels, are adequate to determine the three model parameters. In the case where a benchmark ore of known breakage characteristic parameters is available, one Wide-size JKRBT impact treatment can determine the ore competence change parameter using a t
                     10-based model.The mining industry has long recognised that the performance of a comminution machine depends not only on its operating conditions, but also on the materials resistance to breakage (called ore competence in this paper). As a result, ore breakage characterisation plays an essential role in the design and optimisation of comminution circuits. The main objective of ore breakage characterisation is to quantify the product size distribution resulting from the application of energy to a selected feed size by a specific breakage mechanism. In particular it aims to establish the relationship between specific energy input and resultant product through various types of laboratory testing on a given ore ( The single-particle test is one of the standard breakage characterisation methods adopted in the Drop Weight Tester (DWT, Despite significantly reducing the time taken to break particles in the JKRBT test, it is still time consuming to prepare these narrowly sized particles (over 360 pieces for one characterisation test), and to carry out size analysis on the 15 DWT or 12 JKRBT products. In addition, only particles in the specified size fractions are used for breakage characterisation. In some cases the ability to supply sufficient particles in the desired size fractions, in order to complete one characterisation test, may become a problem. The limitations in the existing breakage characterisation tests restrict their applications when dealing with massive ore samples such as geo-metallurgical testing, optimisation of ore pre-weakening operation and on-line ore competence measurement for comminution circuits. A new ore breakage characterisation method was developed at the Julius Kruttschnitt Mineral Research Centre (JKMRC) using the JKRBT to test mixed particles in a wide size range as one size class, in contrast to the narrow-size testing method used in the traditional ore breakage characterisation. This method significantly simplifies the feed particle preparation and product sizing procedures. The single-particle impact breakage characterisation method used at the JKMRC consists of two steps: Single-particle breakage testing at the controlled input energy levels. Data reduction to determine ore breakage characteristic parameters from the testing results. Modelling, simulating and optimising a comminution machine or a circuit requires the establishment of a relationship between the product size distribution and the breakage testing conditions (for example, the AG/SAG model implemented in the software package JKSimMet), in addition to a single ore competence indicator. The single particle impact tests can be conducted using either DWT or JKRBT. The DWT consists of a steel drop weight mounted on two rails and a steel anvil bolted on a heavy frame. The tests with DWT are conducted on single rock specimens positioned manually on the anvil. The breakage energy is adjusted manually by changing the release height as well as the mass of the drop weight. In a standard DWT test, particles in five size fractions are tested (13.2–16 The JKRBT uses a rotor-stator impacting system, in which particles gain a controlled kinetic energy while they are spun in the rotor and are then ejected and impacted against the stator, causing particle breakage. The specific comminution energy of JKRBT is dependent solely on the impact velocity of the feed particle, which is mainly determined by the rotation speed of the rotator and to a lesser extent by particle size ( Despite the time saved in the JKRBT impact testing, the preparation of representative particles in narrow size fractions is time consuming. The sieving process used for the 12 JKRBT products to determine their size distributions also takes significant effort. The general data reduction procedure is illustrated in The sum of squares ( The values of the model parameters are adjusted iteratively until the minimum of Traditionally the size reduction resulting from the DWT test was related to the specific comminution energy as follows ( The   Eqs.  With the aid of the size-dependent breakage model (Eqs. In the traditional test, the raw material received is sieved and split to prepare 30 particles for each of the four nominal narrow size fractions. As three energy levels are applied to each size fraction, 120 particles are required. At each energy level the feed sample is broken by JKRBT separately. The JKRBT products (4 sizes In the new wide-size testing process, the feed sample is sieved to determine the size distribution. Particles in the typical JKRBT testing size range (13.2–45 The Wide-size JKRBT characterisation offers a flexibility to test particles in the wider size range, for example, from 13.2 The size-dependent breakage model is employed in the data reduction for the Wide-size JKRBT characterisation. The advantage of using the size-dependent breakage model is that the effect of particle size on breakage results can be well described by Eqs.  Divide the wide-size feed into several virtual narrow size fractions by simulation. The same size fraction series used in the standard JKRBT test are recommended. Use the size-dependent breakage model (Eqs. Use the calculated Sum up the product size distribution matrices using the feed proportion to form a combined product size distribution. Estimate the weighted error between the calculated and the measured product size distributions. Repeat the procedures for three products at various impact specific energy levels and calculate the total Adjust the model parameters Note that the approach introduced above can only be performed providing the In some cases the purpose of ore breakage characterisation is to find out whether or not the ore competence changes. Typical examples can be found in assessing the pre-weakening effect by different ore treatment methods, such as HPGR ( The In the Eq. The Divide the wide-size feed into several virtual narrow size fractions by simulation. The same size fraction series used in the standard JKRBT test were recommended. Use the size-dependent breakage model with a set of From the initially estimated Use the Sum up the product size distribution matrices using the feed proportion in the virtual narrow size fractions to form a combined product size distribution; Estimate the weighted error between the calculated and the measured product size distributions and calculate the total Adjust the Five sets of data of two copper–gold ores were collected to validate the Wide-size JKRBT characterisation method. Each set of data consists of a pair of the narrow-size JKRBT and the Wide-size JKRBT tests. Data details of the narrow-size JKRBT are given in Two ore samples were tested. Ore A was the SAG mill feed collected from a gold–copper mine operation in Australia. The gold–copper mineralisation for Ore A occurs as quartz veins, sheeted quartz sulphide veins and as disseminations. The gold occurs mainly as free grains in quartz or on the margins of sulphide grains. The principal copper sulphide minerals are chalcopyrite and bornite. The major silicate minerals are quartz, orthoclase, hornblende, chlorite, anorthoclase, and the non-silicate minerals include magnetite, calcite and apatite. Ore B was collected from an iron oxide copper–gold deposit in Brazil. The ore is composed of chalcopyrite, magnetite, minor pyrite, and trace molybdenite. Alteration minerals closely associated with chalcopyrite include amphibole, epidote, apatite, calcite, quartz, and locally biotite. The data shown in The data presented in As there is no spare Ore B sample available to carry out an experiment using the Wide-size JKRBT tests in order to compare it with the historical Datasets 4 and 5 as presented in The testing data given in The model parameter fitting process illustrated in  Statistical measurements of Since using the identical feed size distributions in the Wide-size JKRBT method cannot uniquely determine the The values of As shown in Eq. The Wide-size JKRBT data shown in  A Wide-size JKRBT characterisation method has been developed. Two data reduction methods for the Wide-size JKRBT tests were investigated. When the size-dependent breakage model is used, four impact treatments on two feed sizes broken with two energies (four sets of measurement data) are recommended to determine three model parameters ( When using the The financial support from Newcrest Mining for a PhD candidate in this study is gratefully acknowledged.