The present study describes an alternative, environmentally friendly, simple, and material- and cost-effective process for the selective separation and recovery of uranium from phosphate rocks by cation-exchange using an iminodiacetic resin after EDTA-mediated sample dissolution. The process was successfully completed at laboratory scale and is very attractive for large/industrial-scale applications because all of its steps are performed under mild conditions, such as ambient conditions, no organic solvents, and aqueous solutions with pH values between 2 and 7. In addition, recycling and reuse of the main reactants (e.g., EDTA and cation-exchange resin) and recovery of the phosphate in the form of calcium phosphates and apatites are simple and almost quantitative.Phosphate rock (PR) is a naturally occurring material used mainly in the manufacturing of phosphate fertilizers, which are essential in today's agriculture. PR found in Earth's crust contains relatively high levels of environmentally toxic elements as well as precious elements, which have a wide variety of applications in green and sustainable industrial energy production and manufacturing. Uranium is one such element found in PR, usually at levels between 50 and 200 ppm, but deposits have been found containing significantly higher levels of uranium (> 800 ppm). The worldwide amount of uranium in PR is estimated to range between 9 and 22 Tg. Considering the current global rate of uranium consumption, exploitation of this PR resource is expected to satisfy the global uranium demand for >50 years ( In addition to environmental impact minimization and human health protection, extraction of uranium from PR can reduce mine waste and extend resource use ( Besides material recovery, extraction and selective separation of uranium from mineral/rock matrices are of particular interest for uranium analysis in geological samples by destructive methods such as alpha-spectroscopy ( The recovery of uranium from PR is based on liquid extraction after leaching of the parent rock with sulphuric acid, followed by extraction of uranium using strong uranium complexing ligands (U(VI)) ( However, technologies related to uranium extraction from PR and associated wastes (e.g., solvent extraction) are either still in their laboratory testing stages or are too complex and expensive to be applied at an industrial level ( In the present study, we propose a new alternative cation exchange-based method using an iminodiacetic resin (IDA) for the selective separation and recovery of uranium after EDTA-mediated dissolution of PR. The main advantages of the present method are (a) use of water as the solvent for the dissolution and separation steps, (b) no use of organic solvents, and (c) recycling and almost quantitative recovery of the main reagents (e.g., EDTA and cation-exchange resin) and phosphates. Evaluation of the uranium separation and recovery was performed by alpha-spectroscopy after tracing with the Analytical grade reagents and de-ionized water were used in all experiments. The IDA (Chelex®100, 1% cross-linked polystyrene beads, sodium form, 50–100 mesh, Merck) was used as received. The electrolyte solutions (0.12 M (NH EDTA-mediated dissolution of the PR was performed by mixing 1 g of the powdered solids with 70 ml of the 0.2 M Na After pre-concentration and separation by cation-exchange and electrodeposition of the radionuclides on stainless steel discs, radiometric analysis was performed using a high-resolution alpha-spectrometer (Alpha Analyst Integrated Alpha Spectrometer, Canberra) equipped with semiconductor detectors. The performance characteristics of the method are described elsewhere ( For EDTA recovery, the eluate obtained from the uranium separation was reacted with 8 M HCl until the pH of the solution was acidic (2 < pH < 3). The precipitation of a solid phase (chloroapatite) has already been observed at pH 3.3. The solid phase was separated by filtration, washed, dried in a vacuum oven at 100 °C, weighted, and characterized by X-ray diffraction (XRD, Shimadzu XRD-6000 diffractometer) and FTIR (Shimadzu, IR Prestige-21) measurements. The filtrate containing the recycled EDTA was then ready to be used for the next PR dissolution. The procedure, which includes the different steps for the selective uranium separation and recovery, is schematically described in The first step involved the EDTA-mediated dissolution of the PR. Specifically, 1 g of PR was dissolved in 70 ml of 0.2 M EDTA solution (pH ~ 5). The solid sample was continuously stirred so that it was thoroughly dissolved, and the solution was separated from the undissolved residues (mainly sand particles) by filtration using a fritted funnel. The relative amount of uranium in the undissolved material, which is basically amorphous silicate is estimated to be <5%, because uranium is predominantly found in the apatite phase, which is almost quantitatively dissolved. The dissolution of the PR solid phase, which is described by Eq. In the next step, the IDA resin (0.5 g of Chelex@100) were added to the filtrate obtained from the first step to selectively bind the uranium (U(VI)) from the solution ( The U(VI)-loaded resin was separated from the solution by filtration, and the uranium was eluted from the resin with 2 M HNO  However, the EDTA eluate obtained from the first step was acidified with 8 M HCl to recover the phosphate for use in fertilizer production. For pH < 3, the formation of a white solid phase was observed, and its analysis by XRD and FTIR spectroscopy revealed that the precipitate is composed of calcium phosphates (e.g., Ca(H It is clear that after removal of the phosphate and calcium load (Eq. Generally, even at laboratory scale, the proposed procedure had estimated material losses of approximately 10%. Hence, after each cycle some new EDTA solution is added and after several cycles the EDTA solution should be renewed. Nevertheless, the facts that the reagents (EDTA and resin) can be recycled and reused within the process and the process itself runs under ambient and relatively mild conditions make the process more attractive for large-scale applications than other existing processes, which make use of organic chemicals and solvents and highly concentrated acids ( A new, alternative, environmentally friendly, simple, and material- and cost-effective process for the selective separation and recovery of uranium from PR by cation-exchange using IDA after EDTA-mediated sample dissolution has been proposed and successfully applied at laboratory scale. This process could be very attractive for large/industrial scale applications because all steps of the process are conducted in aqueous solutions (2 < pH < 7), ambient conditions, and without the use of organic solvents. Moreover, recycling and reuse of the main reactants (e.g., EDTA and cation-exchange resin) and simple and almost quantitative recovery of the phosphate in the form of calcium phosphates and apatites reduce mine waste and minimize the environmental impact of the process. Hence, it would be of particular interest to investigate the EDTA-mediated dissolution and following selective separation of uranium by cation-exchange from other rock/mineral matrices.