Two-aqueous phase extraction of chromium (III) as a solute from their aqueous solutions was investigated using polyethoxylated alcohols (CiEj) as a biodegradable non-ionic surfactant in the presence of anionic sodium dodecylbenzene sulfonate (SDBS). First, the combined effects of chromium and surfactants mixture (anionic and non-ionic) on the cloud point temperature were determined. After this, the phase diagrams of binary systems water–surfactant (NW342 and C10E3) were traced. According to the given surfactants concentration, the extracted solute reached 98.5% and 60% for NW342 and C10E3, respectively at pH equal to 3. The addition of sodium chloride lowers the cloud point temperature of surfactant where the phenomenon of salting-out was pronounced. Under the optimal extraction conditions, the suggested extraction mechanism is based on chromium species-NW342 non-ionic surfactant micelles solvatation. Since, the prevalence species (93.82%) were Cr(III)4(OH)6
                     6+, given by a theoretical calculation using CHEAQS V. L20.1. The first stage regeneration of NW342 surfactant was 27.82% at pH equal to 4.
                  23 factorial designs were employed for screening the factors that would influence the overall optimization of a batch procedure of sorption.Cloud point extraction (CPE) can constitute an interesting alternative to traditional liquid–liquid solvent extraction which is widely used in hydrometallurgy The solubility of non-ionic surfactants (NS) in aqueous solution is depressed above a well-defined temperature known as cloud point temperature ( The NS chemistry showed that, NS dissolves in water due to hydrogen bond formation between oxygen atoms of polyoxyethyl chain and water molecules Possible synergy was also investigated by addition of sodium dodecylbenzene sulfonate (SDBS) anionic surfactant to these latter The surfactants used were obtained from fatty Oxo alcohol ethoxylation. The non-ionic surfactant triethylene glycol monodecyl ether (Oxo-C The determination of the cloud point was carried out using a Mettler FP 900 apparatus: temperature was measured for the sample introduced in a cell using a precise sensor incorporated in a small oven. At the bottom of the measurement cell there is a luminous source, and an optic driver which illuminates the sample. The crossed sample light was converted by photoelectric cell to an electric signal proportional to the transmitted light intensity. The transmission of light was measured continuously, while the cell temperature increases linearly according to the chosen heating rate. The cloud point designates the temperature of the unique limpid phase which becomes cloudy inducing transmission decrease. Extraction experiments of chromium (III) were carried out using a Memmert precise oven. Chromium concentration was analyzed by means of a Jobin Yvon–ULTIMA 2R instruments inductively coupled to a Plasma spectrometer. The initial chrome concentration used in water was 0.15 To study the experimental design, the Mathematica 5.0 software was used to calculate the equation coefficients. The variation of cloud point temperature (CPT) versus the surfactant concentration was studied within the range 1–15 The addition of SDBS anionic surfactant at 0.1 Addition of SDBS at 1 In the other hand, when the NW342 and C  By analogy with solvent extraction, chromium (III) being the “solute”, water and surfactant are considered as the “diluent” and the “solvent”, respectively (  The extractions carried out using C For a concentration at 0.17 The result ( The coacervate volume fraction ( The influence of ionic-strength on chromium extraction extent by NW342 non-ionic surfactant solution was studied in presence of the NaCl. It showed no significant effect, thus the yield extraction ranges from 95% to 100%. These results agree with the those provided by the literature The pH at which NW342–SDBS surfactant at its maximum extracting capacity, 6 The solute–micelle interactions are strongly influenced by the solute ionization. Therefore, the metal chelates shared between the dilute phase and coacervate varies with the initial pH of the non-ionic surfactant solutions In regard to the optimal extraction conditions, the pH variation between coacervate and diluted solutions was not observed. This suggested that the extraction mechanism is based on chromium species-NW342 non-ionic surfactant micelles solvatation. Otherwise, the free Cr(III) is present in small quantity (6.18%) and the major species is Cr(III) Re-extracts chromium (III) was realized under these best conditions (6% NW342 The study results of the extraction of chromium (III) by NW342–SDBS surfactant at optimal initial pH equal to 3, according to three variables: temperature Preliminary observations show that the extraction yield of Cr(III) is significantly according to the experiment parameters, reaching values of 58.6–98.5 % under certain operating conditions ( The chromium (III) extraction modelling was achieved on the basis of the eight measured values, using Eq.  The individual effects and interactions of the parameters were discussed on the basis of the sign and the absolute value of each coefficient. These coefficients will define the strength of the corresponding effect involved and the way it acts upon yield extraction (favourable or detrimental), respectively. The first observations from High extracting capacity of the NW342 ought to be obtained within the fixed parameter ranges, justifying there by the suitable choice of the limits. The favourable individual effect of the surfactant concentration is three times stronger than the favourable individual effect of the temperature, while the solute concentration in aqueous phase does seem to play only one weak negative role within the investigated ranges. Except between the temperature and chromium (III) concentration, all interactions are detrimental. No synergy must be involved by the three parameters. Pronounced maximum with respect to NW342 concentration and, to a lesser extent, to the concentration of chromium (III) solution will characterize the response surface, giving rise to precise optimal values of these parameters. The optimum is supposed to be included in the vicinity around these central values, but accurate determination should take into account all the possible effects and interactions. For the sake of reproducibility, one must check whether this model accurately describes the process investigated by determining which coefficients could be neglected, through Student's and Fisher's tests Thus, with a 95% confidence (i.e., This model is supposed to accurately fit to the extraction process of chromium (III) investigated herein. Thus in the vicinity of the expected optimal parameters values, it appears that only NW342 concentration and interactions between concentration of solute in aqueous phase and temperature are important effects on the chromium (III) extraction. Furthermore, adequacy tests were applied to check whether the model calculated is valid within the parameter ranges investigated. For this purpose, a first method of adequacy calculations 3D representations of the surfaces response function were plotted three times ( Two-aqueous phase extraction experiments were carried out on H With higher salts concentrations (between 0.17 and 1.7 The authors thank the laboratory of I.N.P.T-ENSIACET, Toulouse and ANDRS-Algeria for the financial support.