The purpose of this study was to investigate the content of trace elements in relation to the composition of domestic herbal mixtures. Cluster analysis, principal components analysis, and self-organizing maps were applied to identify existing relationships. The concentrations of Ni, Pb, Cd, Cr, Cu, Fe, Mn, Zn in 81 samples of herbal mixtures were determined with application of FAAS. The study showed that the levels of trace elements in some herbal mixtures of the same composition were comparable. The projection of herbal samples onto topological maps of adjustable sizes allowed recognition of the identical herbal preparations characterized by dissimilar levels of trace elements. The elements which played the most important role in recognition of the herbal samples were Mn, Ni, Zn and partly Cu, Fe and Cd.The therapeutic potential of medicinal herbs is dependent on pharmacologically active organic compounds e.g. alkaloids, glycosides, flavonoids etc., which are the second metabolic products of plant cells Taking these into consideration, the most commonly available domestic herbal mixtures were chosen as the object of the study. Having assumed the differences in the levels of trace elements, the aim of the study was to determine whether herbal mixtures composed of the same medicinal plant raw materials demonstrate similarities in terms of the analysed trace elements. The concentration of six trace elements with well-established role in plant metabolism (Ni, Cr, Cu, Fe, Mn and Zn) The collection of 81 independent samples of 17 different herbal mixtures commercially available in drug or herbal stores was included in the study. The mixtures are produced by Polish herbal products manufacturer “Herbapol” and they are as follows: Bobofen (Bo, 4); Bronchial (Br, 8); Cholagoga II (Ch, 4); Circulosan (Ci, 4); Diabetosan (Di, 4); Gastrosan (Ga, 8); Hipokrates (Hi, 2); Infektoten (In, 3); Nervinum (Ne, 3); Nervosan (Nv, 6); Normosan (Nm, 9); Prostasan (Pr, 2); Pyrosan (Py, 3); Septosan (Se, 8); Somnoten (So, 2); Ulventroten (Ul, 2); Urosan (Ur, 9). Two letter abbreviations of the mixtures and the number of samples are given in parentheses. The herbal mixtures were composed of 3–6 different medicinal plant raw materials. Some raw materials are found in several preparations e.g. melissa leaf ( The samples of herbal mixtures were placed in a grinder Knifetec 1095 (Foss Tecator, Höganäs, Sweden) and homogenized at 20 The contents of metals were determined using SpectrAA 250 Plus (Varian, Australia). The accuracy of the procedure was verified on the basis of analysis of the Certified Reference Material CTA-VTL-2 (Virginia Tobacco Leaves), obtained from The Institute of Nuclear Chemistry and Technology (Warsaw, Poland). The level of the recovery was established in the range of 98.3 (Mn)–112.3% (Cr) depending on the element. The pattern recognition methods were executed in Statistica 8.0 (Statsoft Inc.). The characteristics of these methods are described in detail elsewhere The concentrations of all elements varied among the herbal mixtures. Fe and Mn were the most abundant metals in all herbal preparations (77.8–730.8 and 37.8–684 On the basis of metals content CA divided the samples into five groups. Since various mixtures were classified to particular groups, it was problematic to observe directly any similarities or differences between the herbal preparations. Group I – Urosan (Ur.1,3–9), presents samples of the highest concentration of Mn, above 522 The results of PCA are displayed in In PCA projection, the samples can be divided into five homogeneous groups situated on the edges of the plot. On the left side, there are all the samples of Urosan (Ur.1–9) described by the highest concentration of Mn, above 522 Some relationships observed in PCA were reflected on the Kohonen maps of various topologies (6 As a result of the conducted research, the relationship between the composition of herbal mixtures and the contents of the trace elements was not fully confirmed. Nevertheless, the trace elements content in some herbal mixtures composed of medicinal plant raw materials of the same kind demonstrated similarities. In consequence, the herbal samples were located in near vicinity in the data visualizations performed by CA, PCA and SOMs. The samples represented the following mixtures: Urosan, Pyrosan, Infektoten and Cholagoga. Furthermore, the projection of herbal samples onto Kohonen topological maps with possibility of adjusting their sizes, enabled to recognize the mixtures of the same kind e.g. Gastrosan, Diabetosan, even though the levels of the trace elements in these mixtures differed extremely. In course of the research, the mixtures of the same kind characterized by considerable differences in trace elements were identified e.g. Bobofen, Circulosan and Bronchial. The elements contributing to recognition of herbal samples in the highest degree turned out to be Mn, Ni and Zn, to the lesser extent Cu and Fe. The toxic element of significant importance in the classification was Cd, with the concentration above 0.5