This paper presents the results of modelling the residence time distribution (RTD) in mechanical flotation cells, measured in several plants, using the radioactive tracer technique. Results include mechanical cells of 100–300m3 operated with effective residence times from 2 to 7min. Data were obtained in forced air and self-aerated cells for liquid and non-floatable solids (per size classes). Different RTD model structures including perfect mixing, Large and Small Tanks in Series (LSTS) and by-pass flow plus perfect mixing were evaluated and compared for single cells. The actual mixing regimes were related to the effective residence times and cell designs based on the model fitting. By-pass flow percentages were typically lower than 10%, therefore the perfect mixing model plus a dead time was a suitable model structure in most cases.
                  On the other hand, the arrangement of cells in series was in most cases effective in reducing the bypass flow observed in single cells. In addition, the N mixed tanks-in-series model was used to represent the mixing regime along flotation banks, which were operated with mean residence times in the range of 18–53min. Results showed that the N equivalent tanks-in-series values were closer to the actual values in most cases. In some applications, slight by-pass propagation was observed because of circuit layout, problems with the level control system, solid settling and/or high flowrates.The hydrodynamic characterization of flotation machines allows for the analysis of the mixing properties and the residence time of the different phases. Mixing allows the particle suspension and gas dispersion as well as the formation of particle–bubble aggregates. The identification of the residence time distribution (RTD) in flotation machines has been performed by means of the impulse response of liquid tracer and non-floatable irradiated solid ( Several model structures have been used to characterize and simulate the mixing regime in mechanical flotation cells. The perfect mixing model has been extensively used to model mechanical flotation cells due to its simple conceptual representation and suitable mathematical treatment (  Additional mixing regimes have been observed in single cells at industrial scale. On this subject, a different model structure consisting of two perfect mixers in parallel is proposed. Eq. RTD in banks of mechanical cells has been successfully modelled using the In this paper, RTD data of industrial mechanical cells were modelled with the aforementioned model structures. The RTD characterization is useful to detect process failures such as dead volumes and bypass flow. The effect of the arrangement of cells in series on the channelling along the circuits was also identified. The RTD identification consists of using a small amount of radioactive tracers for measuring the effective residence time distribution of liquid (Br The perfect mixing model of Eq.  Two additional mixing conditions have also been observed at industrial scale, which can be described by the model of two perfect mixers in parallel, Eq.  The LSTS model showed suitable model fit in self-aerated 130 Despite the previous finding that solid particles (mainly in the coarse class) have lower residence times ( The effect of the mixing regimes in single cells on the RTD of arrangements of cells in series was also evaluated.  Industrial RTD data recorded in mechanical flotation cells from different plants and circuits was analysed and modelled. The dataset included cells of different design, self-aerated and forced air, and sizes from 100 to 300 The effective residence times of single cells ranged from 2 to 7 Three conditions were observed with significant channelling in single cells (4–25%), in which the by-pass was modelled by means of a perfect mixer with a very small residence time (in parallel to a main perfect mixer). The LSTS model was adequately fitted to RTD data from 130 In most cases, the arrangement of cells in series was effective in reducing the by-pass observed in single cells (by-pass flow percentage >5%). The In some applications of open circulation and forced-air cells, slightly larger by-pass propagation was observed. In these cases, other aspects such as circuit layout (input/output streams angle), problems with level control, solid settling (presence of coarser material) and higher flowrates might have favoured the channeling down the flotation bank. Funding for process modelling and control research is provided by