The crystal structure, crystal chemistry and surface properties of kaolinite in kaolin clays have been studied. The crystallinity index was lower for hard kaolin than for soft kaolin. The floatability of hard kaolin was lower than that of soft kaolin. Hard kaolin was the dominant kaolin in bauxite. A new type of collector for hard kaolin was studied in order to selectively separate kaolin from diaspore in bauxite. The surface zeta potential variation of the hard kaolin as a function of pH was almost the same as that of the soft kaolin. The IEP of the hard kaolin varied from 2.5 to 3.8. The SiO2 (wt%) content of the several kaolins showed negative correlations with IEP, but Al2O3 (wt%) content showed positive correlation with IEP. The crystallinity index of kaolinite was not the major factor determining IEP. In the broad range of pH, the negative potential of the hard kaolin was lower than that of the soft kaolin. At the point (pH=7.3±) of zero net proton charge at the edge of the kaolinite, TFe (wt%) showed negative correlation with surface zeta potential of the kaolin, but the crystallinity index of kaolinite showed a positive correlation.Each kaolinite layer comprises one octahedral sheet and one tetrahedral sheet. Kaolinite layers are less tightly bound together in the It has been shown that an edge surface which should carry a positive double layer in acid solution, and a negative double layer in alkaline solution, with a point of zero charge (PZC) in the neighborhood of pH 7, dependent on the particular kaolinite crystal structure ( Zeta potential represents the electric potential at the shear plane between a particle and the surrounding liquid when the charged particle moves in an electric field ( Kaolin clays from four different deposits were collected for this study. Sample Ka-ML from Hunan Miluo was representative of the so-called “soft kaolin” type. The other three samples Ka-JX, Ka-DYG, Ka-MC were from Henan Jiaxian, Henan Dayugou and Henan Mianchi respectively. They were of the “hard kaolin” type. The chemicals used in the present study include: acetic acid (AR), dodecyl amine (AR) and hexadecyl trimethyl ammonium bromide (AR). HCl and NaOH (AR) were used for pH adjustment. The high-purity water used in the experiments was distilled water. A powder diffractometer (Shimadzu) was run in the reflection mode with graphite-filtered Cu-Kα radiation (50 mV, 100 mA), and a goniometer speed of 4° 2 The zeta potential was measured by standard procedures on a Brookhaven Zeta Plus Zeta potentialmeter. The kaolin was added into a 100 ml beaker. The solid concentration was about 0.02%. The suspension was agitated for 2 min and transferred to the testing vessel, after which the zeta potential measurement was made. pH was measured to an accuracy of ±0.02 (REX Model PHS-3C pH meter) and unless otherwise stated the pH is that of the stationary suspension. For each condition, at least three suspensions were prepared and measured. The measurement error was found to be within 5 mV. Flotation tests were conducted in a 40 ml micro flotation cell on a XFG type flotation-machine. For each test, 3 g of mineral samples were added to 35 ml of water, agitated with a magnetic stirrer. After sequential addition of pH modifiers and collectors, the suspension was conditioned for 1 and 3 min, respectively. Flotation time was fixed at 4 min. Kaolinite crystal structure is highly complex, due to the large number of stacking faults that may appear during its formation and growth. The XRD methods usually employed to study kaolinite order only provide an approximation of the real structure. There are many factors influencing kaolinite order such as stacking layer disorder, cation distribution disorder, non-plane layer structure, machine disorder etc. The Hinckley index (usually abbreviated as HI) is one of the most widely used crystallinity indices to express kaolinite order ( X-ray diffraction analysis indicated that all four clays were essentially comprised of kaolinite. Illite is a minor component in Ka-DYG and Ka-MC samples, which contained no more than 10 wt% of this mineral, it not being found in any other mineral except kaolinite in Ka-ML and Ka-JX samples. Hard kaolin is the dominant kaolin in bauxite as the Ka-MC sample was collected in bauxite horizon. The zeta potentials of the kaolin clays are shown in The chemical analysis results are shown in Two selected plots of the oxide percentages vs. the iso-electric point (IEP) for the four samples are shown in   The studies of the influence of the different agents on Ka-JX hard kaolin and Ka-ML soft kaolin were followed up by laboratory flotation tests. With dodecyl amine acetate (2 There were apparent differences between soft kaolin and hard kaolin in the crystal structure, crystal chemistry and surface property of kaolinite in kaolin clays, as well as in structure of clays. The crystallinity index is lower for hard kaolin than for soft kaolin, such that the floatability of hard kaolin was lower than that of soft kaolin. The surface zeta potential variation of the hard kaolins as a function of pH was almost the same as that of the soft kaolin. The IEP of the hard kaolins varied from 2.5 to 3.8. SiO The authors would like to thank the China’s Important Basic Research Program (G1999064901) and National Fund for Distinguished Young Scholar (59925412) for the financial support of this research.