Magnetic hyperthermia experiments were carried out using a biphasic gel of La1−
                     
                        x
                     Sr
                        x
                     MnO3(LSMO) and γ-Al0.07 Fe1.93O3 with an AC magnetic field of amplitude 88mT and a frequency of 108kHz. Specific absorption rate (SAR) increases with the increased ratio of Al-substituted maghemite. The T
                     max value for the gels prepared by the mixture of LSMO and Al-substituted maghemite can be adjusted to suit therapeutic temperature. The time required to reach optimum temperature decreased with the increased ratio of later. Such biphasic gel could be very useful for magnetic hyperthermia with in vivo control of temperature.Magnetic nanoparticles (MNPs) (1–100 The MHT efficacy against cells and in tumor models in animal experiments is well established Superparamagnetic iron oxide nanoparticles (Fe The synthesis and characterization of MNPs of Al-substituted maghemite, γ-Al La Magnetic measurements for the LSMO samples after calcination at 1173 For the study on mixtures, both samples were physically mixed together in various weight proportion and magnetic gels were prepared. For the preparation of gels, 25 The plot of temperature vs. time was fitted by the exponential law The temperature vs. time curves for LSMO MNPs-based gels suggest that the temperature stabilizes below 333 The temperature rise for the gels of biphasic mixtures with different ratios of L75C and Al-substituted maghemite was also recorded. It was found that A promising behavior was observed in the case of the MNPs of L73E, whose Concerning SAR values, it may be noticed that in this work these were calculated per mass unit of MNPs. It would increase by approximately 1.5–4.2 times as a function of the MNP mixture composition, if these are calculated per mass unit of magnetic component (e.g. Mn or Fe) as generally reported In summary, the current study suggests a new way for controlling heat generation during MHT experiments. In such biphasic gels, one of the components (LSMO) is capable to control the temperature rise, while the other one (Al-substituted maghemite) provide sufficient heating ability and biocompartibility in nature. Further, efforts are required for tuning the ideal composition of the MNP mixture, evaluating and improving its biocompatibility, and checking the biodistribution of each MNP type both The financial support from nano mission of DST, Government of India is greatly acknowledged. This work was performed in the framework of the Indo-French Laboratory of Solid State Chemistry (LAFICS). N. K. Prasad is thankful to French embassy for providing financial support to carry out research in ICMCB, France.