Available energy resources should be efficiently used to meet the global energy demand. The storage of energy resources, especially as natural gas, is important to balance extreme fluctuations in demand and supply of energy. Underground caverns in deep salt domes are used as storage for natural gas due to the low permeability and appropriate creep conditions of salt. Several projects are being carried out in Turkey to store imported natural gas. The design and construction parameters of these deep salt caverns should be determined to provide reliable and durable storage. Dissolution rate, which is an important parameter affecting the design and construction of underground salt caverns, is generally measured from core samples in laboratory settings. However, results do not match actual underground dissolution rates. The aim of this study was to predict actual dissolution rates from some rock properties. The physical and mechanical salt properties were determined from core samples obtained from different depths of drilled wells opened for salt caverns. The relationships between salt properties and actual dissolution rates were statistically analyzed. A statistical model was developed to predict actual dissolution rates using uniaxial compressive and tensile strengths, Poisson's ratio, and cohesion and experimental vertical dissolution rates. The model is reliable for predicting actual dissolution rates in construction of underground gas storage caverns in salt domes. Predicted dissolution rates can be used in the design of underground gas storage caverns in salt domes.Global demand for energy is rapidly increasing due to population and economic growth, and therefore, underground gas storage (UGS) has recently become a primary concern of the gas industry. Various underground gas storage projects are being developed in line with increasing demand. Natural gas is stored mainly to meet seasonal changes in demand. Gas is injected into storage during periods of low demand and is withdrawn from storage during periods of peak demand. Gas storage is also used for secondary purposes such as: Balancing the flow in pipeline systems Meeting regulatory obligations (Turkish Natural Gas Market Law No. 4646 issues: annually 10% of the natural gas imported) Leveling production over periods of fluctuating demand Insuring against any unforeseen accidents Reducing price volatility Maintaining contractual balance Offsetting changes in natural gas demands Gas storage formations are depleted oil and gas fields, aquifers, salt domes and abandoned underground mines. Depleted petroleum and gas reservoirs have good closure structure. Therefore, these reservoirs can be reused for safe storage. Detailed hydraulic and hydrogeologic studies should be carried out to provide tightness in aquifer layers. Moreover, sufficient porosity and permeability are required for these two types of storage due to economic reasons. Salt strata or salt domes are solution-mined to construct underground gas storage caverns. Fresh water is injected into salt domes and brine is withdrawn to construct gas storage caverns. Abandoned underground mines are also used as underground storage under suitable conditions. Harabacka Fluorite Mine, which is currently used as underground petroleum storage in Sweden, and the Anderlues Coal Mine, which is used as natural gas storage in Belgium can be given as examples. There are many parameters affecting the design and construction stages of underground gas storage caverns. Geological structure of salt formation, salt rock properties, dissolution rate and direction, cavern geometry (shape, height, diameter, volume), cavern depth, minimum and maximum operating gas pressure, cushion gas depth, cavern temperature, amount of insoluble material, distance between caverns play a role in the design of underground gas storage caverns within salt domes. These are the basic input parameters used in simulation programs for the design of caverns. Dissolution rate is especially important in leaching process for the design of underground caverns. Numerous studies focus on critical problems related to salt properties, underground salt cavern construction and operation. Previous studies on underground gas storage in salt domes mostly address time-dependent deformation (creep) of salt and geomechanical durability of underground salt caverns. Vouille and Tassel Wang et al. Most studies have focused on underground salt cavern stability and determination of salt properties. However, no studies have used in-situ data to develop a statistical model between actual dissolution rates and rock properties. Experimental dissolution rates in the design of underground gas storage caverns are very different from actual dissolution rates in construction, causing design outputs and construction outcomes to differ. The aim of this study was, therefore, to determine the correlation between some physical and mechanical properties of rock salt and actual dissolution rates and to develop a regression model. Statistical model is reliable in predicting actual dissolution rates, which is an important parameter for the design of caverns. Predicted dissolution rates can be used to design gas storage caverns in salt dome and to predetermine some economical and technical conditions, such as time required for the construction of underground caverns and amount of salt water during leaching. Turkey, as an importing country, should ensure the security of natural gas supply. Therefore, Tuz Gölü Underground Gas Storage (UGS) Project is carried out by BOTAŞ, Petroleum Pipeline Corporation approximately 40 km south of Tuz Gölü. The objective of Tuz Gölü UGS Project is to supply gas to the network, and hence, provide security and stability for Turkey's natural gas consumption. Twelve (12) underground gas storage caverns are being formed by controlled leaching of deep underground natural salt formations. Each cavern will be between 1150 and 1450 m in depth and have a geometrical volume of approximately 630000 m Three 18-m long UGS Project core samples ( Unit volume weight, uniaxial compressive and tensile strengths, Poisson's ratio, cohesion and experimental horizontal and vertical dissolution rates are used to design underground salt caverns for natural gas storage. Therefore, these parameters were determined separately for the three core samples and three different depths of each core sample. Blanket levels were used as base to assess both rock properties and dissolution rates under the same conditions. Blanket levels are defined as nitrogen gas levels used as cushion gas in each leaching phase (LP) to monitor the cavern roof development and efficiency of leaching. The physical and mechanical properties of the rock salt for each drilled well (wells 6, 7 and 9) were determined in Middle East Technical University (METU) Petroleum Research Center and Department of Petroleum and Natural Gas Engineering Laboratories ( Underground cavern volumes after each leaching phase were measured using a sonar survey. The total reaction time of salt with fresh water (leaching time + shut down time) was used to calculate actual dissolution rates as the ratio of measured net cavern volume to total reaction time. The most important part of a scientific study is to explain results in a way that they can be utilized. To this end, simple or multiple regression models are often used to statistically determine the correlation between outputs. In this study, there was a statistically significant correlation between actual dissolution rates during leaching in salt dome and some physical and mechanical properties of the salt. First, salt parameters were determined for regression equation. Underground gas storage caverns are constructed in seven phases. This study assessed the first three leaching phases ( Data were analyzed using Minitab statistical software. The descriptive statistics of the dependent variable (DR) and independent variables (UVW Best subsets regression was used to select the smallest group of independent variable subsets that accounted for the statistical model. The most common criteria to compare models in the best subsets regression are the adjusted R The model with the highest adjusted R Model 9 and 11 were suitable regressions for DR prediction. However, the highest adjusted R The VIFs of all parameters in Model 9 were lower than 10, whereas those of some parameters in Model 11 were higher than 10. Therefore, Model 9 was chosen as the optimal regression model for DR prediction. The multiple regression equation for DR according to The coefficient of determination (R According to This study investigated the effects of physical and mechanical properties of rock salt on actual dissolution rates during the construction of underground salt caverns. The main objective of this study was to develop an empirical equation that uses physical and mechanical properties of rock salt to predict actual dissolution rates. The results are as follows: Uniaxial compressive strength, tensile strength, Possion ratio, cohesion and experimental vertical dissolution rates correlated most with dissolution rates of salt. The actual dissolution rate model developed based on the rock properties was statistically significant, with its coefficient of determination being 0.987. The predicted dissolution rates derived from the regression model represented the measured dissolution rates with high accuracy. Several suggestions based on the findings are as follows: The actual dissolution rate model developed can be used to predict dissolution rates within the scope of this and future underground cavern projects in the Tuz Gölü Basin. Dissolution rate is the basic input parameter for simulation software used to design the size and shape of underground salt caverns opened in salt domes. Therefore, in simulation software, dissolution rates predicted from rock salt properties yield more accurate results than those obtained from different salt deposits. The prediction of dissolution rates based on rock salt properties allows for the adjustment of solution mining parameters applied to each well before leaching. Thus, the contact time between salt and water can be determined exactly for the desired amount of dissolution, and excessive salt falling and asymmetrical shape are prevented in underground salt caverns. The authors declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this paper. The authors are very grateful to the BOTAŞ Petroleum Pipeline Corporation for its support during this research. The following is the Supplementary data to this article: Supplementary data to this article can be found online at