The total reflection X-ray fluorescence method was applied to study the trace element concentrations in human breast malignant and breast benign neoplasm tissues taken from the women who were patients of Holycross Cancer Centre in Kielce (Poland). These investigations were mainly focused on the development of new possibilities of cancer diagnosis and therapy monitoring. This systematic comparative study was based on relatively large (∼100) population studied, namely 26 samples of breast malignant and 68 samples of breast benign neoplasm tissues. The concentrations, being in the range from a few ppb to 0.1%, were determined for thirteen elements (from P to Pb). The results were carefully analysed to investigate the concentration distribution of trace elements in the studied samples. The measurements of concentration of trace elements by total reflection X-ray fluorescence were limited, however, by the detection limit of the method. It was observed that for more than 50% of elements determined, the concentrations were not measured in all samples. These incomplete measurements were treated within the statistical concept called left-random censoring and for the estimation of the mean value and median of censored concentration distributions, the Kaplan–Meier estimator was used. For comparison of concentrations in two populations, the log-rank test was applied, which allows to compare the censored total reflection X-ray fluorescence data. Found statistically significant differences are discussed in more details. It is noted that described data analysis procedures should be the standard tool to analyze the censored concentrations of trace elements analysed by X-ray fluorescence methods.It is well known that many trace elements play an essential role in a number of biological processes and consequently trace minerals exert action, directly or indirectly, on the carcinogenic process. The study of elemental concentrations in relation to tumor diseases, including breast tumor, has been an active area of research for several decades The samples of breast tissues analysed were taken from the women who were patients of Holycross Cancer Centre in Kielce. These investigations have been made to correlate measured trace element concentrations with the clinical stage of cancer. The results of the performed studies were presented in our earlier paper Despite the rather low detection limits achieved, being from about 0.01 μg/g for heavy metals to 1 μg/g for light elements, the important problem, which appeared in investigations of trace elements in breast tissue, was related to the presence of the so-called “nondetects”, i.e. the measurements in which the concentration cannot be measured directly, being below the detection limit of the method used. Consequently, from the population of the breast samples considered, the concentration was measured directly only in those samples for which the measured concentration According to our recent results achieved in the topic of non-measured concentration, the “nondetects” can be included in data analysis by using the statistical concept of This paper presents improvements on a previously reported method for the statistical analysis of censored trace element concentration distributions in breast malignant and benign neoplasm tissues. The calculation of distribution parameters and two-sample comparison under censoring conditions are discussed. The paper is organized as follows. After a short presentation of samples studied and experimental procedure in Analysed samples were taken from 94 women with benign breast tumor (68 patients) and with malignant breast tumor (26 patients) who were between 17 and 86 years of age. Mean age of patients was 34 years in group with benign breast tumor and 57 years in group with malignant breast tumor. All samples originated from Polish women who were patients of Holycross Cancer Centre in Kielce (Poland). The samples of analyzed tissue weighing from about 0.05 to 0.5 g were washed with redistilled water to remove remains of blood. A determine amount of tissue of each patient was separately mineralized in a closed high-pressure Teflon vessel with 2 ml high-purity HNO In the present study to determine the concentration of elements of interest the total reflection X-ray fluorescence method, known to be well suited to study the trace elements in biological and medical samples, was used. The measurements were performed using 3-kW Siemens Mo-anode X-ray tube operated at 45 keV with electron current 40 mA using the TXRF attachment module The study was performed according to the Helsinki Declaration of Human Rights and its revisions. The results were carefully analysed to investigate the concentration distribution of trace elements in the studied samples. For a given element in the population of both the malignant and benign breast neoplasm tissue samples, the parameters of concentration distributions, i.e. mean value, standard deviation and median, were calculated. The concentration distribution of trace elements measured in the cancerous and benign neoplasm tissues were found to be strongly asymmetric, as was similarly observed for other medical samples in our earlier studies As it was mentioned above, the measurements of the concentration of trace elements performed by TXRF technique are limited by the finite detection limit of the experimental method. This effect is especially important when the measured concentrations are close to the detection limits, particularly for large populations studied. Such incomplete concentration distributions are called For estimating the mean value and median of the censored concentration distributions in breast tissue, the Kaplan–Meier method was used. The Kaplan–Meier estimator It was observed that in the analyzed breast tissue samples, for more than 50% of elements determined, the concentrations were not measured in all samples both in malignant and in benign neoplasm population. In measurements discussed, the censoring level, defined by the ratio of the number ( In order to demonstrate the application of the Kaplan–Meier estimator to statistical analysis of censored concentration distributions, in A comparison of trace element content in populations of breast malignant and breast benign neoplasm tissues, called in statistics the two-group comparison, was one of the aspects of the performed studies. In order to make final conclusions concerning a possible dependence of trace elements' concentrations on the clinical stage of cancer, the level of concentration of the trace elements in the two sample populations had to be compared systematically. In order to perform the two-group test with censored data, special care has to be taken to include censoring in test statistics. In particular, for a non-parametric comparison of two groups, say A and B, under random left-censoring, the log-rank (Mantel–Haenszel) test The final results of the comparative studies of trace elements' concentrations in malignant and benign neoplasm breast samples are summarized in As an example, a comparison of the censored concentrations distribution of rubidium (Rb) measured by TXRF method in breast tissue samples drawn from two different populations, namely from malignant (M) and benign (B) neoplasm tissues, is presented in A systematic comparison of the measured mean values and medians of concentration of trace elements in the breast malignant and breast benign neoplasm tissues are showed graphically in More detailed results of the statistical tests performed for other elements are the following. The concentrations of P, S, K, Ca, Fe, Ni, Se, and Rb in the samples studied were found to be statistically different, particularly, an increase of concentrations of P (248%), S (137%), K (252%), Ca (290%), Fe (177%), Ni (165%), Se (151%) and Rb (190%) in samples of breast malignant tissues was observed, as compared to breast benign neoplasm tissues. In comparison with earlier results The enhancement or depletion of an element establishes a definite pattern in the carcinoma of the breast. For example, selenium (Se) is recognized as an anticarcinogenic agent. Its anticarcinogenic role depends on its dose and chemical form In the studies presented, rich enhancement of potassium (K) in cancerous tissue was also observed. Possibly during malignancy, this element may be accumulated as per requirement causing enhancement. The same role is associated with phosphorus (P) enhancement in cancerous tissue It is worth noting here that in some cases, see e.g. the results for Pb ( Concentrations of elements in breast malignant and benign neoplasm tissues were determined by using the TXRF method in order to understand the mechanisms of breast carcinogenesis and as a possible complementary diagnostic tool. It was observed that some of the measurements were censored due to the finite value of the detection limit of the experimental method and caused in consequence the censored elemental concentration distributions. In analyzing the censored distributions, the Kaplan–Meier estimator and log-rank test were applied. The statistical analysis of censored concentration distributions introduced substantial correction (5–50%) of mean values and median values of concentration. The comparative studies of breast malignant and benign neoplasm tissues indicated statistically significant (confidence level 95%) elevation of the levels of some trace elements in the cancerous tumors. It is noted that the described data analysis procedure should be the standard tool to analyze the censored concentration distribution of trace elements analysed by X-ray fluorescence methods. Two of the authors (U. M. & A. K-K.) express their thanks to the Organizing Committee for the financial support. The financial support of the Foundation for Polish Science (FNP) as well as the Warsaw Scientific Society is kindly acknowledged by U. Majewska. This work was supported by the Polish State Committee for Scientific Research under Grants No 1 P03B 105 27.