For the analysis of spatial and spectral correlations in RGB, multispectral, or hyperspectral images, different ways of combining Principal Component Analysis and multiresolution analysis are investigated and integrated into a unified framework. The integration of different frameworks is the purpose of this paper since a unified framework is necessary in the situation where the efficient analysis of both spatial and spectral correlations is needed at the same time. This unified framework also provides a remedy for a limitation of multivariate image analysis (MIA), namely the loss of spatial information in the images. The unified framework, multiresolutional multivariate image analysis (MR-MIA), is illustrated visually through the decomposition of a simple color image, and then used in a quantitative manner for color-textured image classification where the extraction of both spatial and spectral information is necessary. The performance of MR-MIA approaches are shown to be equal to or better than that of wavelet texture analysis, while employing a smaller number of features, and maintaining computational complexity at the same level. Wavelet texture analysis is shown to be a limiting case of one form of MR-MIA. The true advantages of MR-MIA will be most evident when analyzing hyperspectral images having a large number of spectral bands.Image analysis has been successful in its traditional areas like character recognition and remote sensing, and it is drawing considerable attention in many new areas including medical science, chemistry, biology, and quality control. Most contemporary research on image analysis is focused on operations in the image space; therefore a large amount of image processing literature deals with topics such as enhancement, restoration, and segmentation of images. This is mainly because the primary purpose of the research is closely related to the visual perception of human beings and hence to gray-scale and color (RGB) images. Recently, new technologies have emerged that make it possible to get a new type of image other than gray-scale or RGB images. Multispectral imaging systems with up to 20 wavelength bands have been used in remote sensing since the 1960s, but hyperspectral imaging systems with more than 200 wavelength bands are now often being used Multivariate statistical methods such as the principal component analysis (PCA) have been preferred for handling multivariate data because they can easily handle high dimensional and highly correlated data through the projection of the data onto orthogonal latent variable spaces of reduced dimension. Multivariate image analysis (MIA) One advantage of MIA is that it extracts spectral features independent of their spatial location and it is this aspect of MIA that allows for masking of features in the score space and makes it useful for relating images to product quality properties The main contribution of this paper is to propose a flexible and easy-to-use framework for the analysis of both the spatial and spectral information of an image. The framework is based on different combinations of multiresolution analysis (MRA) and MIA. We call this multiresolutional multivariate image analysis (MR-MIA) for simplicity. MR-MIA will provide versatile approaches for analyzing both the spatial and spectral correlations of multivariate images either The rest of this paper is organized as follows: In Multiresolution analysis provides a simple hierarchical framework for identifying the spatial properties of a univariate image. At fine resolutions, the details of an image generally characterize different physical structures of the scene and, at a coarse resolution, these details correspond to the larger overall structures which provide the image context The DWT coefficients of a signal Scaling functions and wavelets functions are given as With a one-dimensional spatial vector, wavelets will decompose the signal into sets of detail coefficients, giving the fine spatial variation in the highest (  A multivariate image is a stack of congruent images MIA was originally developed to analyze only the spectral information in multivariate images. Any spatial information in the images is lost in MIA during unfolding a multivariate image (i.e., a three-way array) into a two-way matrix and performing PCA A closer look on MRA gives a more general solution to these problems. Axiomatic definitions of MRA (see Eqs. (4.2.1)–(4.2.3) in Ref. There are two possible algorithms in MR-MIA depending on the application sequence of PCA and multiresolution decomposition. But their implementations are independent of the type of multiresolution decomposition (e.g. DWT or wavelet packets).  Apply multiresolution decomposition on each ( Apply PCA to each of the new multivariate images. This gives score images and loading vectors at each resolution. MR-MIA (I) can be viewed as the direct extension of MIA to a multiresolution framework; it provides all the analysis tools of MIA such as score plots and loading plots at each resolution, thus enabling the analysis of spectral correlation at different resolutions. Some psychophysical research shows that spatial patterns influence human visual perception of color appearance and discrimination When a multivariate image has hundreds of variables (wavelengths), it is desirable and usually possible to greatly reduce the number of variables before applying multiresolution decomposition  Apply PCA to the original ( Apply multiresolution decomposition on each score image. If the number of principal components is chosen to be MR-MIA (II) may be preferable in the case where spatial and spectral correlations don't interact with each other too much, and where the number of variables or wavelengths ( The two algorithms proposed above may provide different results on the same problem since frequency responses of score images are not necessarily the same as those of the original variable images. Therefore, the appropriate algorithm should be chosen for every application. When a multivariate image has low spectral resolution (e.g., RGB images), the frequency responses of all spectral bands are often very similar. For this case, the two MR-MIA algorithms will usually show very little difference in their results. When the spectral resolution is high and covers a wide range, the frequency responses of spectral bands can be very different since a spectral response of a feature at a certain pixel location may be confined to few adjacent spectral bands. MR-MIA (I) may be preferable in this situation since it can capture specific frequency responses of all the spectral bands. This situation can very likely happen in NIR images of biological and chemical materials because a specific chemical group, whose distribution can affect product quality greatly, often shows its response within only certain spectral bands and will not show it elsewhere. Using MR-MIA (II), this chemical group may not be adequately captured when the magnitude of its response is small. In this section we use the simple color tartan sample image In the MRA stage of MR-MIA (I) ( In the MIA stage of MR-MIA (II) ( As mentioned in the The use of MR-MIA (I), applying PCA after wavelet transforms, has seldom been used. This is probably because interaction between spectral and spatial features is most likely to happen in hyperspectral images where the spatial resolution of imaging spectroscopes has begun to increase only very recently. However, MR-MIA (I) is the clearest way to analyze both spectral and spatial information simultaneously, which is desirable when spectral and spatial features interact with each other. Possible applications may include assessment of the composition, structure and uniformity of an Active Pharmaceutical Ingredient on medication tablets, and prediction of physical properties of multi-layer polymer films using an NIR imaging spectroscope. The main purpose of this example is to demonstrate the use of MR-MIA to efficiently extract spectral and spatial image features that can be used for the classification of images, and to compare the relative efficiencies of different approaches. When both spatial and spectral correlations are important in analyzing multivariate images, MR-MIA proposed above will be a method that can handle both correlations separately or simultaneously. In recent years, color texture analysis has gained much attention due to its importance in many areas of image processing and computer vision. Therefore, a color texture classification example is chosen for testing MR-MIA quantitatively since it is already reported that considering both spatial and spectral correlations provided improved results When a wavelet detail sub-image When MR-MIA (I) is applied to texture analysis, the comparison between WTA and MR-MIA (I) reveals close relationships between the two methods. In the case of a univariate image, WTA is equivalent to MR-MIA (I). To illustrate this relationship, the case of a one-stage DWT ( In the case of a RGB image, or a multivariate image in general, the scatter matrix of MR-MIA (I) ends up as a highly structured matrix due to the correlated nature of variables as well as the orthogonality of different sub-images. To illustrate this, one-stage DWT of a RGB image is considered here for its simplicity. If an unfolded matrix Analysis by MR-MIA (II) is somewhat different than that by WTA and MR-MIA (I). For a RGB image, the first score image is very close to the gray-scale version of the original RGB image. Then, subsequent score images have color information which is decoupled from the intensity component of the RGB image since PCA projects multivariate images to orthogonal latent spaces. Multiresolution decomposition of score images gives a set of new score images at each resolution. A similar approach Wavelet energy signatures characterize the texture by channel variances since the mean values of detail sub-band signals are equal to zero. All these signatures characterize the texture by a set of 3 Whereas energy signatures use univariate PDFs for texture characterization, correlation signatures use multivariate PDFs. Wavelet correlation signatures characterize the texture by a set of 3 The VisTex image database Each image was decomposed to the 3rd stage ( To compare the classification performance of both WTA based on correlation signatures, and MR-MIA approaches to color texture classification, a The performance of a classification system is based on its ability to label a high percentage of all data correctly, but this can only be estimated using the data that are available. The performance estimate employed here is the percentage of samples that are classified correctly. Although it is computationally expensive The dimension of the feature space can be another criterion for comparing different classification systems. A classification system with low-dimensional features that shows approximately the same performance as one with high-dimensional features can be considered as the better one. Also, computational cost can be a criterion for comparison depending on the type of application (on-line or off-line) or on the computing power available. Based on the conditions given in The mean classification rates over all images for the nine feature sets, based on leave-one-out cross-validation, are also summarized in The energy signatures of MR-MIA (II) when As mentioned earlier, the first score image of a RGB image captures global intensity variation throughout the variables and thus it is very close to the gray-scale version of the original RGB image. This explains why the classification rates of F7, the energy signatures of MR-MIA (II) when A summary of the computational costs needed in the calculation of features is given in A framework for the analysis of both the spatial and spectral information of a multivariate image is presented. The proposed method, called multiresolutional multivariate image analysis (MR-MIA), combines the advantages of MIA and MRA. The analysis tools of MIA such as loading plots and score plots are made to work in a multiresolutional way. Two variations of the framework are proposed: MR-MIA (I) (first applying wavelet decomposition on the images at each wavelength, followed by PCA on the set of resulting images at each resolution), and MR-MIA (II) (first applying PCA to the original multivariate image, followed by wavelet decomposition on each resulting PCA score image). Each variant has potential advantages under different conditions. MR-MIA can be applied to any image analysis problem such as the analyzing the NIR images of chemical or biological materials or using RGB images to estimate the quality of industrial products, where spectral information and spatial information are important at the same time. The concepts of MR-MIA decomposition methods are illustrated visually with a simple color image. A color texture classification problem is then used to show quantitative differences using various feature vectors extracted using the different approaches. A limiting case of MR-MIA (I) is shown to be equivalent to wavelet texture analysis (WTA). However, the overall performances of MR-MIA are generally better than that of WTA when considering classification rates, the size of feature vectors, and computational cost. MR-MIA will be most advantageous in the spatial and spectral analysis of hyperspectral images characterized by interacting spectral and spatial features.