For technological design and operation of hydrocyclone classification a separation model should be available, which largely comprises the physical phenomena of the process, reflects their effects by appropriate process parameters and can be mathematically formulated as separation function. The most models, which are known so far, do not meet these requirements in their entirety. In the main they have been empirically formulated and/or do not reflect that the separation effect, caused by the centrifugal field, is superimposed by an intensive mixing effect caused by the macroturbulence of the hydrocyclone flow. Only the models of turbulent cross-flow classification, which are adjusted to the conditions of hydrocyclone classification in dilute suspensions, come in the form of the tapping model or partition model close to the satisfaction of the demands mentioned above.
                  After outlines of the characteristics and the transport phenomena of turbulent flows as well as of the indispensable simplifications and adjustments to given materials, geometrical and hydrodynamical properties, the model derivation is described. In particular the wide range of the rheological properties of the feed suspensions as well as the phenomena of turbulence damping cause restrictions regarding the quantification of the model predictions. Further improvements of the model predictions are only attainable by means of empirical adjustment corrections. In order to ensure an adequate reliability of the correction factors, they should be determined using similar material systems and also similar hydrocyclones. Meanwhile several working teams have successfully tested the efficiency of such models for dilute flow classification.
                  The first and so far only known model development for dense flow classification in hydrocyclones starts from the fact that the operation space must be divided into two subspaces and thus also two subprocesses, namely the sediment formation in the outer subspace and the formation of the radial concentration profiles of the particle sizes in the inner suspension subspace. Progress in this field necessitates further research.
                  The so-called fishhook effect is based on flow forces, which cause an enrichment of finest particles in the zones of the velocity gradients around settling coarser particles in a certain Re-range, and superimposes the turbulent cross-flow classification.There is no doubt that hydrocyclones belong to the most applied separation equipments in technology. In this connection the process results aimed at are the classification of fine and finest solids, the solid/liquid separation (cut size It is typical of classification processes in hydrocyclones that their separation function shows a shape as qualitatively represented in Obviously the highly turbulent character of the hydrocyclone flow is the reason for the shape of the separation function ( The strong turbulence effects in hydrocyclones result in correspondingy high values of the relative turbulence intensity Here component of fluctuation velocity ( time of averaging ( macroscale of turbulence Using a hot-wire technique, the measurement of the relative intensity in the water flow in a hydrocyclone yielded noteworthy and comprehensible results ( Furthermore, it is characteristic of the turbulence that it consists of a superposition of eddies of ever-smaller sizes, i.e. a spectrum of eddies exists. The primarily generated large and energy-containing eddies belong to the macroturbulence and decay step-by-step into smaller ones (microturbulence) until the energy of the smallest laminar flowing eddies dissipates by friction into heat. The dimensions of the large eddies are characterized by the macroscale Analogous to the molecular diffusion coefficient In turbulent liquid two-phase flows, the eddies of the macroturbulence control the turbulent transport phenomena of the particles analogously to the transport phenomena in one-phase flows. If the particles are very small in comparison with the macroscale and, furthermore, their concentration is low enough so that their counteraction on the flow turbulence can be neglected, then the turbulent diffusion coefficients ascertained for the one-phase flow can also be applied to the turbulent particle transport ( Provided that a force field must be taken into consideration only in one direction (here In the case which is mainly important in technology that the gradients of the particle concentrations are only relevant in one direction (here From this it follows by integration for the particle number concentration This simplified model makes clear that in stationary flows as a consequence of the macroturbulence, particle concentration profiles arise which are controlled by the value of the term ( Because the object of a classification process is the separation of a particle collective into size fractions, it follows that the model must reflect its statistical character. This demand fulfils a separation function which meets the requirements mentioned in the introduction. As in every particle separation process, it must be achieved by means of an action mode that the product fractions to be separated must carry out motions in different directions within the operation space, so that they can be discharged separately. This requires accordingly directed motions under the action of a force field (here centrifugal field), which can be superimposed, however, by diffusive motions (here caused by the flow turbulence). Consequently, the model must include the respectively directed and diffusive transport phenomena. In hydro-classification three characteristic action modes can be differentiated. They are represented in In this equation Because T In case of the partition model, the concentration profile Considering the interval limits ( Tapping and partition models can be compared for equal This ratio is represented in The conclusion can be drawn that in turbulent cross-flow classification the realization of the tapping model should be aimed at. For example it can be realized in mechanical classifiers (rake and spiral classifiers) with high approximation ( Now the question arises, which separation model can best reflect the real process in hydrocyclones? It can be assumed that despite the very short retention times of the particles in the operation space (fractions of a second to few seconds ( Analysing the international state of process modelling in hydro-classification, it must be realized that the models partly contain far-reaching but unavoidable simplifications, at which nothing important can be changed in the foreseeable future. This is already valid for the motion of irregular particles in a fluid. Their motions consist of translation and rotation components, for whose description no general theory is available. If at all, then one makes an attempt to describe these facts approximately by a size parameter (e.g. diameter of the sphere having equal volume) in combination with a shape parameter ( Further problems follow from the fact that in separation processes single particles do not move but particle swarms (hindered settling), whose solid concentrations are usually even local dependent. Models for the prediction of the hindered settling velocities are available up to now, above all, for monodisperse particle collectives, which must be moreover completely dispersed. From that a very limited applicability arises. The few models which have become known for polydisperse particle collectives are neither validated by experimental data nor usable for the integration into a separation model because of their complexity ( In modelling separations in centrifugal fields, one normally disregards the local dependence of the field force and in this context the particle accelerations by using the mean field forces. Also the quantitative description of the turbulent diffusion causes considerable problems because of the damping effects (see e.g. In addition it must be emphasized in this connection that also in hydrocyclone flows the interactions between the particles influence the flow properties (viscosity) of the suspension and thus the settling velocity of the particles in the centrifugal field on the one hand, and further the turbulence damping and in that way the mixing effect on the other hand. From that a very complicated situation arises for model predictions. The mentioned examples, which could be broadened, make clear the difficult prerequisites that are given for the physically based process modelling in hydrocyclone classification. The described complex effects as well as the stochastic character of the turbulence phenomena, which the particles are subjected and can be analytically only described by approximate formulas (if there is any chance at all), exclude a roughly correct calculation of particle trajectories. Therefore, this situation necessitates a statistical procedure for the description of the separation process, for which the developing concentration profiles of the particle sizes in the operation space are applied. Not least this way is also claimed by the transport phenomena caused by the macroturbulence. From these points of view and by utilization of indispensably essential simplifications, process modelling should aim at the integration as well as the at least qualitatively correct reproduction of the decisive process parameters and their relations which are relevant for design of the equipment, operation and optimization of the process. In general, quantitative model predictions will necessitate additional adjustments. At present and in a foreseeable future these are only available empirically (experimentally). Therefore, it is an illusion to expect more from the developed models. In order to ensure a sufficient reliability of the model predictions, it should be aimed at that the adjustments are carried out with material systems having an adequate similarity with regard to their composition and properties (solids volume fraction, particle size distribution, solution concentrations, Starting from the variety of materials which are met in applications of hydrocyclone classification, it has been realized already some decades ago and underlined by newer tests that a subdivision of modelling regarding solids percentage in the feed suspension is indispensable (see e.g. In dilute flow hydrocyclone classification, it is to be supposed that the particles are in suspension state over the total operation space. Consequently, the concentration profiles of the particle sizes can form according to Eq. In dense flow classification, a sediment layer forms on the hydrocyclone wall, and the lower conical part of the cyclone volume is even fully filled with sediment, which flows to the underflow discharge ( The transition between dilute flow and dense flow classifications and with that between spray and rope discharges is characterized by instabilities and thus by continuous fluctuations between both discharge types ( As far as an assessment of the rheological properties of the feed suspension is concerned, so these have only been considered up to now in research and modelling – if at all – by the viscosity of the suspensions or their yield point, respectively (see e.g. Looking at the present state of modelling hydrocyclone classification, then some empirical models have been available for years (e.g. In the last years a considerable number of publications have aimed at the achievement of essential progress in the description of the complex flow structures of cyclones (hydro- and aerocyclones) by application of the so-called Computational Fluid Dynamics (CFD). In this context, the inclusion of turbulence terms plays an important role (e.g. The first approach to apply the radial profiles of the particle sizes for modelling was suggested by Neesse (see also An approach to apply the particle distribution state calculated with CFD simulations as basis for modelling has been recently published by As explained above, the conditions of dilute flow classification exist, if the particles are in suspension state over the total operation space and the coarse product leaves the hydrocyclone by spray discharge. In general, this is the case if the following requirements are met: solids volume percentage in the feed suspension Eq. (A1) in It illustrates that the following process parameters mainly determine the curve trace of the separation function (see also ratio of the suspension volume flow rates hindered settling velocities of the particles in the centrifugal field of the operation space, which are simplistically replaced for each particle size by the mean value of the terminal settling rate in the centrifugal field of the hydocyclone flow; radial settling ways of the particles, which are described by a characteristic mean value turbulent diffusion coefficients of the particles, which can also only be described by a mean value In accordance with practical separation results, Eq. On the assumption that typical dilute flow conditions can be mainly realized with fine particle materials, whose settling rates can be described with the Here, the model by Richardson and Zaki has been used for the formulation of the hindered settling factor k Analysing the last form of the model equation for a given solid material as well as For the further model development the following relationships can be substituted without neglecting the physically based model character (   effective pressure drop of the hydrocyclone flow; suspension density;   By insertion of these relationships into Eq. A number of empirical relationships are available for predictions of the ratio of suspension volume flow rates exponent, above all between 3 and 4, constant (in the magnitude of 1). Therefore, considering Eq. The constant K contains all numerical values which directly appear within the scope of model development, but also those which result from the knowledge of substituted proportionalities. For the latter, however, further research is required. Because of this situation as well as the problems discussed in On the conditions made for dilute flow classification, the reduced separation function T( A comparison with experimentally determined particle dispersions If the solids volume fraction is higher and/or the particle size distribution is coarser than the conditions underlying the derivation of the models of dilute flow classification, so both gain a distinct influence on the separation process and thus also on the cut size, namely above all by their effect on turbulence damping (see in m in kg/m³ For typical dilute flow separation, it is valid k For an extensive regression analysis the following formulation of the cut size equation was taken as the basis: In this equation the coarsening of particles is also considered by the hindered settling factor in the form k The cone angle Although the models of dilute classification mentioned above were already developed more than two decades ago, their international attention has remained limited. This can be attributed to the following reasons. Although also in English a satisfactory number of publications are available, it seems that there is a lack of a comprehensive, all aspects and phenomena containing description as it has been tried by the author in this article. Furthermore, it must be realized that the willingness is not much displayed in modelling particle processes to claim the methods of the statistical mechanics including the statistical theory of turbulence. Besides working teams in the former USSR ( At the development of a model of pronounced dense flow classification ( The operation space in the hydrocyclone must be subdivided into two subspaces in which the process phenomena fundamentally differ, namely: sediment subspace and inner suspension subspace, in which the radial concentration profiles can form according to Eq. The flow rate of the coarse product discharge is limited to the discharge capacity of the underflow orifice, and a solids congestion forms in the lower conical part of the hydrocyclone. The only model development on this basis, which has become known up to now, has been formulated by Because of the size of the problems which have to be discussed, it is not possible to describe this model development in this article in detail. Furthermore, it must be mentioned that up to now there is a lack of adequate comparisons between model predictions and practical results. But if one wants to make further progress in the development of a physically based model of dense flow classification, it should be inevitable to continue the way briefly discussed. In the introduction, it has been pointed out that the phenomenon of the fishhook effect has been left aside in the subsequent discussion of the separation models of hydrocyclone separation. But in dilute flow classification of feeds < The outlined concept about the drag effect can be verified by experimental classification results. Particularly the results achieved by Gerhart are suitable for that, because they are not only very extensive and carefully compiled but also due to the fact that the relevant separation parameters are mentioned (  A separation model for particle materials should largely comprise the essential physical phenomena of the respective process and reflect their effects by appropriate process parameters as well as should be mathematically formulated as separation function. In comparison with other models known up to now for dilute flow separations in hydrocyclones, only the models of turbulent cross-flow separation can meet these requirements. They start from the indisputable fact that in the operation space the separation effect, caused by the centrifugal field of the hydrocyclone flow, is superimposed by an intensive and rapid mixing effect, mainly caused by the macroturbulence of the flow. The stochastic process character resulting from this situation is reflected in the circumstances that the concentration profiles of the particle sizes, which develop radially to the cyclone axis, become the basis of modelling. Regarding the realization of turbulent cross-flow separations, the suspension partition model and the suspension tapping model must be distinguished. Under comparable circumstances, the tapping model yields the lower cut sizes and, above all, sharper separations than the partition model. Therefore, also in hydrocylones the realization of the tapping model should be aimed at as far as possible. The following process parameters mainly determine the curve trace of the separation function in dilute flow classification (see Eq. ratio of the suspension volume flow rates hindered settling velocities of the particles in the centrifugal field of the hydrocyclone flow; radial settling ways of the particles; turbulent diffusion coefficients of the particles in the hydrocyclone flow. Despite the locus-dependence of the three last-named process parameters, only mean values can be substituted into the model equations. In addition, it must be taken into account that the hindered settling velocities and the turbulent diffusion coefficients depend on the rheological properties of the suspension. Therefore, not only the solids volume fraction but also the particle size distribution and the interactions between the particles (attractive or repulsive) have an effect on the quantities of the process parameters. Moreover, the latter are mostly not accessible to an exactly quantitative determination. Summarizing, it follows from this complex situation that, in general, far-reaching simplifications are unavoidable at the determination of the process parameters. On utilization of such essential simplifications, process modelling must aim at the integration as well as at least qualitatively correct reproduction of the decisive process parameters and their relations which are relevant for design of the equipment, operation and optimization of the process. In general, quantitative model predictions will necessitate additional adjustments. At present and in a foreseeable future these are only available empirically (experimentally). Therefore, it is an illusion to expect more from the model predictions. In order to ensure an adequate reliability of the predictions, the adjustment corrections should be determined using similar material systems and related hydrocyclone types. The first and up to now only known model development for pronounced dense flow classifications in hydrocyclones starts from the fact that the operation space must be subdivided into two subspaces and thus also two subprocesses, namely the formation of the radial concentration profiles of the particle sizes in the inner suspension subspace and the sediment formation in the outer subspace. For further progress in the development of a physically based model of dense flow classification, it is indispensable to use this approach as the basis. The so-called fishhook effect is based on flow forces which cause an enrichment of finest particles in the zones of the velocity gradients (boundary layers) around settling coarser particles in a certain  Archimedes number Acceleration of a force field Centrifugal acceleration Classification number Diameter, generally Underflow and overflow diameter, respectively, of a hydrocyclone Hydrozyklone diameter Eddy diffusion or transport coefficient, respectively Cumulative particle size distribution by mass Particle size Cut size Median value of the particle size distribution by mass Height, generally Hindered settling factor Mass Particle number concentration of i-th size class Power input Inlet pressure of a hydrocyclone Recovery Suspension volume recovery in coarse and fine product, respectively Reynolds number Separation function (separation curve) of a classification process Relative turbulence intensity Time Fluid velocity Root–mean–square value of turbulent velocity fluctuations of a fluid Tangential velocity of fluid Volume Volume flow rate Volume flow rate of coarse and fine product suspension, respectively Particle velocity Stationary settling rate of a particle Stationary hindered settling rate of a particle  Cone angle Energy dissipation rate Dynamic viscosity Particle dispersion Macroscale of turbulence Kinematic viscosity Fluid density Solid or particle density, respectively Suspension density Retention time Volume content Volume fraction of particles or solids, respectively