Masticatory muscle electromyograms (EMGs) were recorded while patients with bulbar myasthenia gravis chewed artificial food and compared with those of patients with ocular myasthenia gravis, patients in clinical remission who had previously suffered from bulbar myasthenia gravis and healthy individuals. Masticatory performance and EMGs were significantly smaller in the bulbar group. There were no indications of subclinical masticatory muscle weakness in patients with bulbar myasthenia gravis in remission and in patients with ocular myasthenia gravis. Patients with bulbar myasthenia gravis barely compensated for muscular weakness by chewing at a higher percentage of their maximal EMG. These quantitative findings, when combined with subjective reports of masticatory muscle weakness, show that a need to support the jaw is characteristic of patients with bulbar myasthenia gravis who produce low EMG activity.Myasthenia gravis is a neuromuscular disease characterized by fluctuating weakness of voluntary muscles and abnormal fatigue on exertion. It is caused by antibodies directed against acetylcholine receptors on striated muscle. All skeletal muscles may be involved. If the external eye muscles only are affected the term ‘ocular myasthenia gravis’ is used. ‘Bulbar myasthenia gravis’ refers to weakness in muscles innervated by cranial nerves V, VII, and IX–XII ( Chewing problems can be quantified by determining objective masticatory function, defined as masticatory performance ( Our aim now was to quantify masticatory performance and masticatory muscle activity in patients with myasthenia gravis. We used a standardized artificial test food to determine masticatory performance. We assessed muscle activity during chewing by recording the surface EMG of the jaw muscles. We compared the objective quantification of oral function with the subjective masticatory ability assessed by standard interview. We performed the measurements in patients with bulbar myasthenia gravis, patients with ocular myasthenia gravis who had never experienced bulbar complaints, and in patients now in remission but previously suffering from bulbar myasthenia gravis. The ocular and remission groups were included so that we could determine whether mastication was impaired in these groups. The same experiments were also performed on a control group of healthy individuals. The patients were selected by two neurologists with special experience in the field of myasthenia gravis. Bulbar symptoms were defined as difficulties with chewing, speech or swallowing, or facial weakness. Most of the patients with bulbar disease had other generalized symptoms as well. Diagnoses of bulbar and ocular myasthenia gravis were made by clinical examination of the bulbar, ocular and limb musculature. This clinical examination included: (1) evaluation of eye movements in six directions and of ptosis after rest and sustained gaze for 30 The standardized test food was Optosoft, which is based on Optosil Jaw gape was obtained by recording the position of two infrared light-emitting diodes (on the chin and forehead) with an optical motion-analysis system (Northern Digital Optotrak™; Duration of the opening and closing phase of each chewing cycle. Mean area per cycle of the EMG of the closing muscles in the closing phase; this value was obtained by calculating the area under the EMG curve during the closing phase of a cycle (the integral of the EMG signal). Mean area per cycle of the EMG of the closing muscles in the closing phase divided by their maximum EMG during maximal clenching. The maximum EMG was obtained by having the participants clench as hard as possible on a bite-force transducer for a few seconds ( Possible decrease of the EMG as a percentage of the area in the first stroke, determined by linear regression. A two-way ANOVA was applied to test the null hypothesis that there would be no statistical differences in oral function among the groups of participants or among the various dental states. Subsequently, post-hoc tests (least significant difference) were used for comparisons of the various groups. We compared the oral function of the bulbar group with that of the control, ocular and remission groups in order to see whether oral function was affected. We also tested whether those in the ocular and remission groups had subclinical masticatory muscle weakness. The degree of correlation between the indices was determined with Spearman’s correlation coefficient. Linear regression was used to determine changes in the muscle activity as a function of cycle number. ANOVA on masticatory performance showed a significant effect for group ( A significant effect for group ( The decrease in the area under the curve of the masseter and temporalis EMG bursts during the closing phase of the chewing cycle for the 15 cycles was not significant. ANOVA showed no significant differences for groups or for dental state in relation to the duration of the opening phase, closing phase and total cycle. A significant positive correlation between masticatory performance and muscle activity was found in all patient groups (0.45< Nine patients with bulbar myasthenia gravis and one in the remission group reported a need to support the jaw to prevent it from opening. In Previous studies have demonstrated poor masticatory performance in patients with progressive muscular dystrophy ( Significant differences in masticatory performance were found between the patients with bulbar myasthenia gravis and those in the other groups, in spite of a considerable overlap in the pooled data ( Absolute EMG activities were lower in the bulbar group than in the other groups. However, after normalization with respect to maximal voluntary clenching ( If masticatory muscle weakness is accompanied by swallowing difficulties, the patient’s nutritional well-being may be at risk ( In conclusion, our results show that masticatory muscle weakness is compensated for by an increase in EMG activity, expressed as a percentage of maximum voluntary contraction. However, this increase in relative muscle activity is not enough to compensate for muscle weakness, as it appears that masticatory performance is poor in patients with bulbar myasthenia gravis. Interviews are important for estimating the impact on daily life of masticatory muscle weakness due to myasthenia gravis. However, quantitative measurements are particularly important in the longitudinal evaluation of the often drastic immunosuppressive therapies in the individual patient. They could also serve as an objective measurement in clinical trials of the effects of various treatments. This work was supported by the Faculty of Medicine of the University Medical Center Utrecht and The Netherlands Institute for Dental Sciences. We are grateful to Dr. Ir. J.A.J. Faber (Department of Biostatistics, Utrecht University) for advice on the statistical analysis, and to Dr. J.A.W.M. Weijnen for critical reading of the manuscript.