Fault affecting silicoclastic sediments are commonly enriched in clay minerals. Clays are sensitive to fluid–rock interactions and deformation mechanisms; in this paper, they are used as proxy for fault activity and behavior. The present study focuses on clay mineral assemblages from the Point Vert normal fault zone located in the Annot sandstones, a Priabonian-Rupelian turbidite succession of the Alpine foredeep in SE France. In this area, the Annot sandstones were buried around 6–8 km below the front of Alpine nappes soon after their deposition and exhumed during the middle-late Miocene. The fault affects arkosic sandstone beds alternating with pelitic layers, and displays throw of about thirty meters. The fault core zone comprises intensely foliated sandstones bounding a corridor of gouge about 20 cm thick. The foliated sandstones display clay concentration along S–C structures characterized by dissolution of K-feldspar and their replacement by mica, associated with quartz pressure solution, intense microfracturation and quartz vein precipitation. The gouge is formed by a clayey matrix containing fragments of foliated sandstones and pelites. However, a detailed petrographical investigation suggests complex polyphase deformation processes. Optical and SEM observations show that the clay minerals fraction of all studied rocks (pelites and sandstones from the damage and core zones of the fault) is dominated by white micas and chlorite. These minerals have two different origins: detrital and newly-formed. Detrital micas are identified by their larger shape and their chemical composition with a lower Fe–Mg content than the newly-formed white micas. In the foliated sandstones, newly-formed white micas are concentrated along S–C structures or replace K-feldspar. Both types of newly formed micas display the same chemical composition confirmed microstructural observations suggesting that they formed in the same conditions. They have the following structural formulas: Na0.05 K0.86 (Al 1.77 Fe0.08 Mg0.15) (Si3.22 Al0.78) O10 (OH)2. They are enriched in Fe and Mg compared to the detrital micas. Newly-formed chlorites are associated with micas along the shear planes. According to microprobe analyses, they present the following structural formula: (Al1,48 Fe2,50 Mg1,84) (Si2,82 Al1,18) O10 (OH)8. All these data suggest that these clay minerals are synkinematic and registered the fault activity. In the gouge samples, illite and chlorite are the major clay minerals; smectite is locally present in some samples.
                  In the foliated sandstones, Kubler Index (KI) ((001) XRD peak width at half height) data and thermodynamic calculations from synkinematic chlorite chemistry suggest that the main fault deformation occurred under temperatures around 220 °C (diagenesis to anchizone boundary). KI measured on pelites and sandstones from the hanging and footwall, display similar values coherent with the maximal burial temperature of the Annot sandstones in this area. The gouge samples have a higher KI index, which could be explained by a reactivation of the fault at lower temperatures during the exhumation of the Annot sandstones formation.Clays are commonly observed as major constituents of fault zones in a broad range of geological contexts, particularly in sedimentary basins. The presence of clay minerals in fault zones and their textural arrangement can play a crucial role on fault behavior, for instance by controlling frictional and hydraulic properties of the faults (e.g. In sedimentary basins, clay minerals are able to increase the fault sealing potential and can participate to the reservoir compartmentalization (e.g. During the formation, infill and structuration of sedimentary basin, faults may register different stages of deformation at various burial conditions. Consequently, their hydrological and mechanical behavior may have changed through time. The aim of the present study is to determine the origin and conditions of formation of clay minerals in a fault zone affecting low porosity, well lithified arkosic sandstones in a deep diagenesis context. The studied fault is the Point Vert fault located in the Annot sandstones, a Priabonian-Rupelian turbidite succession of the Alpine foredeep in SE France. The fault core zone comprises intensely foliated sandstone bounding a gouge corridor about 20 cm thick, suggesting that clays registered polyphase deformation processes. The Grès d’Annot Formation corresponds to a Priabonian-Rupelian arkosic turbidite succession mainly sourced from the Variscan crystalline basement of the Corsica–Sardinia massif and deposited in tectonic depressions in the Alpine foreland basin ( Normal faults cross cut the Grès d’Annot ( The Point Vert fault ( The host rock succession ( The core zone comprises a 20 cm-thick band of gouge bounded by a few cm-thick bands of sandstone featuring a foliation and quartz or quartz-calcite veins. ( In the upper part of the core zone, a thin layer (1 or 2 cm) of phyllonite is located at the hanging wall boundary in direct contact with the sandstones wall. An isotropic gouge with heterometric grain distribution forms a corridor of several centimeters in the bottom part of the core zone. The gouge is characterized by its non cohesive behavior and consists in a clay rich matrix with fragments of foliated sandstone of various sizes. The hanging wall damage zone, 3 m-wide, comprises anastomosing second order normal faults with ten centimeters-spacing and offsets ( 27 samples have been selected on the studied outcrop. They come from the footwall and hanging wall and from the core zone of the fault ( Samples of sandstone and gouge were impregnated for thin section preparation. Polished thin sections of samples were carbon-coated and examined for petrographic analyses with a Jeol 5600 SEM equipped with a Fondis EDS detector at the Centre Commun de Microscopie of Université de Franche Comté in Besançon. The SEM was operated with an accelerating voltage of 20 kV. SEM micrographs were collected in backscattered electron mode. The samples were also analyzed for mineralogical composition with the EDS Fondis detector. X-ray diffraction analyses were performed on bulk pelite and sandstone sample powders and on <2 μm oriented preparations on a Bruker-AXS D8 Advance diffractometer with Cu Kα radiation (40 mA, 40 kV), Ni Kβ filter and a LynEye position sensitive detector (PSD) (Université de Franche Comté in Besançon). Spectra were acquired from 4° to 65° 2θ, at 0.01°, 0.5s per step. The identification of all minerals was done with Bruker's DiffracPlus EVA software and PDF-2 database. The clay fractions were extracted from 19 selected pelite, foliated sandstone and gouge samples. The <2 μm and, for selected samples, the <16 μm fractions were extracted by sedimentation after decarbonatation with HCl 1N solution. Two oriented preparations of the clay fraction were scanned between 0 and 30° after air drying and ethylene glycolation. Illite cristallinty (IC) were measured on < 2 μm and <16 μm XRD patterns using the half-weight of the (001) illite reflexion. Our IC measurements were converted into Kubler Index (KI) ( Microprobe analyses of phyllosilicates from two foliated sandstones from the core zone were realized at the Université of Montpellier on a CAMECA SX100 at 20 kV and 10 nA with a spot size of 3 microns. Analysed standards are Wollastonite for Si and Ca, Corindon for Al, Rutile for Ti, Albite for Na, Forsterite for Mg Hematite for Fe and Orthose for K. We determined the temperature of formation using the thermodynamic model of The temperatures of equilibrium (Eq. As is the case for other phyllosilicates, substitution of Al A simultaneous estimation of Fe All the studied sandstones correspond to lithic arkose according to the Folk classification ( All sandstones from the damage zone display a shape fabric of grains with long-axis parallel to bedding. The high degree of compaction and diagenesis is marked by quartz-sealed intragranular extensional microfractures and strong imbrication of grains by pressure solution at grain boundaries ( In samples located at the core zone boundary, the phyllonite layer has been observed in optical microscope ( Sandstones from the core zone are characterized by their well defined foliation ( Samples from the gouge corridor characterized by its incohesive texture display an isotropic clay rich matrix with micrometric rock and mineral fragments ( These observations attest to polyphase deformation processes. The first deformation process can be associated to sandstone foliation and results in newly formed synkinematic mica and chlorite. The second one is associated to brittle deformation (cataclase formation). Brittle deformation probably occurs in different steps as suggested by the presence of vein crossing a cataclase. The gouge would then represent the last brittle deformation events. The SEM images of the foliated sandstones show that phyllosilicate-rich areas contain very small sized micas with preferential orientation, as well as partially dissolved feldspars ( The clay rich matrix of the isotropic gouges from samples 10PV11 and 10PV34 observed by SEM does not display any preferential orientation ( All samples display similar mineralogical assemblages according to bulk XRD ( XRD patterns on the 2–16 μm and <2 μm are very similar, with illite and chlorite as the two major clay constituents. XRD patterns of the <2 μm fraction are presented in The amount of illite (mica) relative to chlorite has been estimated from the peak intensities of the two major reflexions of illite and chlorite: the (001)Ill/(002)Chl ratio ( The Kubler Indexes were calculated from the 10 Å illite reflection from the clay fraction diffraction patterns. KI for pelitic sediments from the footwall and hanging wall ranges between 0.4 and 0.7 for the <2 μm fraction ( KI of samples from the core zone are reported on the structural sketch in Samples with highest KI values have a 10 Å reflection, showing asymmetry in the lower angles on the air dried <2 μm preparation. This asymmetry disappears after glycolation treatment. A decomposition of this reflection, reveals that the 10 Å reflection can be decomposed into two Gaussians, at 9.9 Å and 10.3 Å respectively ( These data are consistent with the microtextural investigation of the studied samples which suggest that clay minerals have various origins and various crystallinity. Furthermore, most samples from the core zone are a mixture of foliated sandstones and gouge, explaining the larger variation of the KI values. However, the clays from the gouge samples, registered lower temperature deformation (or fluid–rock interaction) event according their KI. Microprobe analyses have been performed on larger chlorite and mica crystals in foliated sandstones from the core zone ( According to the data presented in Detrital chlorite: (Al Newly-formed chlorite: (Al All studied chlorites are tri-octahedral chlorite. The newly-formed chlorites are slightly enriched in Mg and Al compared to the detrital ones. All microprobe analyses are close to the clinochlore/daphnite end member ( Average structural formulas for micas are the following: Detrital mica: Na no significant difference being detected between detrital micas from pelities and sandstones. Newly formed mica: Na The Point Vert fault affects sedimentary rocks which contain detrital clays derived from the erosion of the Corsica–Sardinia massifs but also diagenetic clays related to burial. The mineralogical and petrographical investigations on pelites and sandstones from the Point Vert fault permitted a chemical and morphological characterization of both detrital and newly-formed clays. Detrital micas are generally large crystals present in both sandstones and pelites and are characterized by their muscovite-like composition. Newly-formed micas are particularly abundant in foliated sandstones from the fault core. This increase in newly formed micas in the fault core is clearly related to sandstones deformation processes. In the present study, microprobe analyses showed that newly-formed and detrital micas can be distinguished from their chemical composition, the former being Mg and Fe richer compared to the latter ones. Newly-formed chlorite has a clinochlore-daphnite composition and its composition is not very different from that of detrital chlorite. However, newly-formed chlorite occurs only in shear veins where it is commonly associated with newly-formed mica. Based on microstructural observations of S–C structures, their precipitation is thought to be synkinematic and related to fault activity at about 220 °C. The Illite cristallinity measured on the two different clay size fractions (<2 μm and <16 μm) are consistent with petrographic and mineralogical data described above. The KI on <2 μm fraction of pelites and sandstones located in the damage zone is around 0.45, suggesting that clay minerals registered PT conditions corresponding to the diagenesis-low grade metamorphism (anchizone) boundary. The kubler index measured on the <16 μm fraction is generally lower, consistent with a better cristallinity of larger detrital mica. Diagenetic conditions registered by the <2 μm fraction is consistent with the temperatures calculated from the chlorite chemical analyses using the thermodynamic model of On the studied outcrop the core of the fault is characterized by the occurrence of a gouge corridor. This (non indurated) gouge is composed of a mixture of pelite and highly fragmented sandstones of various sizes in an isotropic clay-rich matrix. Samples from the gouge (10 PV 34 and 10PV11) do not display different mineralogical composition but they have KI values around 0.65. This higher KI reflects the presence of illite crystals with smaller sizes, but also the presence of IS. Decomposition of the 10 Å reflection reveals the occurrence of IS mixed layers (with 80% of illite) and illite. Disaggregation and communition processes may be responsible for the decrease of illite crystallinity, but illite to IS reaction can also be the result of low temperature fluid–rock interaction. Clay mineral transformations in fault gouge were studied in detail by A clay-rich fault gouge can significantly change fault permeability and therefore a prediction of the volume of clay and its textural arrangement within the core zone, is fundamental (e.g. The Point Vert fault is enriched in clay minerals but this clay enrichment has three different origins: The clay enrichment of the studied fault core is partly related to the mechanic incorporation of pelite layers into the fault zone. The large offset of the fault and the thickness of the sandstones layers allow a prediction of a shale gouge ratio (SGR): The Point Vert fault has an offset of 32 m, the proportion of pelite layers on the turbidites affected by this fault represent around 40% of the stratigraphic section. If we consider that sandstone layers have a maximum of 10% clays and pelitic layers about 70%, the estimated SGR would then be around 35%. According to .The clay enrichment of the fault core is also related to sandstone deformation around 220 °C according to the chlorite thermometer. Indeed, cleavage and S–C structures are developed during this process ( The isotropic gouge seems to form later, as suggested by the petrographic investigations. The texture of the gouge described above, suggests that brittle deformation and comminution are the major deformation process which permits a clay enrichment of the core zone. The gouge corridor described here is absent in the nearby Restefond fault. The Point Vert fault has a higher offset and this fault affects turbidites with pelites intercalation. The embedding of pelite layers in the fault core zone during the first stages of deformation induced a mixture of soft and competent rocks in the core zone. This heterogeneity probably facilitated fragmentation and communition processes during fault reactivation at lower temperatures. Late alteration process, related to fluid circulating through this permeable layer, permit local precipitation of low temperature clay minerals (IS, smectite). Finally, the Point vert fault clay enrichment is due to multi stage deformation processes: pressure-solution, feldspar fracturation combined to fluid–rock interaction processes but also pelite smearing allowing the formation of a fault core, composed of a mixture of highly foliated sandstone and gouge. Pressure solution creep, feldspar fracturation and newly clay precipitation occurred at about 220 °C during the first stages of the fault activation during maximum burial. Pelite smearing probably started in the same conditions ( All these deformation processes have major consequences on the hydraulic and frictional properties of the fault. These properties changed during the different stages of fault activation. During the early stages of deformation in maximum burial conditions, the newly formed phyllosilicate concentrations along the SC surfaces form preferential channels for fluid flow through a micro-permeability ( Shear deformation of sandstone beds in the Point vert fault zone was mainly achieved by the combination of pressure-solution (and precipitation) of quartz and alteration of feldspar giving rise to the formation of newly-formed mica. The foliation in the fault core zone is underlined by preferentially oriented newly-formed phyllosilicates (illite and chlorite) and cross-cut by mineralized veins of quartz–calcite. Chemical analyses of chlorites and thermodynamical calculations suggest that fault deformation occurred under temperatures around 220–250 °C in accordance with the peak temperature of the host rock estimated from vitrinite reflectance. These data suggest that synkinematic clay minerals registered the early stages of the fault deformation close to the maximal burial of the sandstones between 6.5 and 8 km, assuming a mean geothermal gradient between 25 and 30 °C.km-1. The core zone comprises intensely foliated sandstones, bounding a corridor of gouge about 20 cm thick. The gouge samples have a higher illite crystallinity index (IK) than the foliated sandstones, which could be explained by fluid–rock interactions at lower temperature. This paper has been improved by the helpful comments of Fernando Nieto and an anonymous reviewer. We thank