Thiol collector mixtures are commonly used in the flotation of base metal sulphides and platinum-bearing ores. There are synergistic benefits claimed for these collector mixtures, with mixtures lowering total dosage requirements, improving coarse particle recovery and the rate of flotation.
                  Some of these co-collectors are known to have frothing effects. Therefore, the aim of this study was to decouple froth and pulp effects and to consider only the bubble-particle attachments in the pulp. This was achieved through microflotation experiments, where various ratios of the ethyl and isobutyl chain lengths of xanthates, dithiocarbamates and dithiophosphates were used as collectors. The flotation recoveries and rate constants of galena were analysed as a function of particle size in order to determine whether collector mixtures produced any beneficial effects over those of using single collectors.
                  Mixtures of ethyl xanthate with ethyl dithiocarbamate were shown to significantly increase rate and recovery of galena flotation above those of the single collectors. Mixtures of ethyl xanthate and ethyl dithiophosphate showed smaller improvements in recovery. However, isobutyl xanthate, as a single collector, was superior to the mixtures in all cases.The base metal sulphide and platinum mineral flotation processes make use of thiol collectors to induce selective hydrophobicity onto the valuable minerals in order to separate them from the gangue in the froth phase. For some time use has been made of thiol collector mixtures because of evidence of enhanced performance over single collectors. Flotation is a complex interaction of many variables and the processes by which improved performance may occur are varied. Increases in rate and/or recovery of different components of an ore by collector mixtures may selectively target: different minerals; slow floating or fast floating components of an ore; different particle sizes; particles of differing liberation states. Additionally, they may result in an increase in the flotation performance of the ore as a whole. Alternatively, they may not improve true flotation of the ore in the pulp phase but may have an effect on the behaviour of the froth phase. Increases in froth stability would result in a higher recovery of valuable mineral, but a decrease in the grade of that mineral due to increased entrainment of gangue minerals ( The route by which flotation performance may be enhanced when using mixtures has been reported by various authors ( It is clear that much experimental evidence points to increased flotation performance when using collector mixtures. However, a clear fundamental understanding of the mechanism/s by which this occurs has yet to be established. There are a number of theories offered to explain enhanced flotation when using mixtures.  Bradshaw and co-authors have suggested a mechanism which proposes either selective adsorption of collectors onto particular sites or the specific orientation of the molecules resulting in better surface coverage ( The present study focussed on the pulp phase floatability of galena using xanthate (X), dialkyl dithiocarbamate (DTC), dialkyl dithiophosphate (DTP) and their mixtures. A separate and identical investigation was carried out using pyrite in order to evaluate whether or not the observations made were ore-specific. Those results are however not reported in the present paper. The froth phase was purposefully excluded initially since it is known that some secondary collectors have frothing properties. Pure galena was chosen as it is widely studied in sulphide flotation and has a highly regular morphology. Two chain lengths (ethyl and isobutyl) of each of the collectors and their mixtures were investigated. A microflotation cell ( Galena is an extremely well-studied mineral by virtue of the fact that it is readily obtainable in its “pure” form (trace impurities aside), its central metal atom which does not readily change oxidation state and its well defined crystal structure ( The galena sample was obtained from Ward’s Natural Science Establishment, Rochester, NY. Each sample was received in chunks of particles of up to 150 The collectors used in this study were supplied by Senmin (Pty) Ltd. Xanthates were received in powder form. Dithiocarbamates and dithiophosphates were stabilised in a high pH solution. Reagents were prepared on a daily basis using deionised water adjusted to pH 9 (using NaOH). Dosage was determined to approximate the equivalent of 50% of a pseudo monolayer coverage. It was assumed that a xanthate, dithiocarbamate and dithiophosphate molecule occupied approximately the same surface area when attached to the mineral surface. The calculations are based on the diethyl dithiocarbamate sulfhydryl head occupying a surface area of 37 The microflotation cell used in this study has been previously described ( The rate of galena recovery was modelled using least squares non-linear regression analysis according to the first order rate equation: Batch flotation tests were carried out using 1 The 1 The air supply to the flotation cell was maintained at a flow rate of 7   The naming convention for mole ratios used in this study is that the xanthate contribution is always the first number shown. For example 10:90 SIBX:SIBDTP denotes a 10  With respect to the isobutyl chain lengths, no significant improvement in recovery beyond that of using SIBX alone (the stronger collector in the mixture) was observed when using mixtures of SIBX and SIBDTP as seen in  The longer chain length isobutyl mixtures of xanthate and dithiocarbamate, however, did not increase flotation behaviour of galena beyond using SIBX alone. This is similar to the previous findings for mixtures of xanthate and dithiophosphate for this alkyl chain length. The results shown in preceding sections were for cases where xanthate was added first, allowed to condition for 6 However, there were some specific cases in which sequence of addition played a significant role in the results. Interestingly, these isolated cases were the cases in which increases in recovery had been observed and have been highlighted in the previous sections of this paper. These included: 10:90 SEX:SEDTP 90:10 SEX:SEDTC 10:90 SEX:SEDTC A comparison of galena recoveries is made in For both 90:10 and 10:90 SEX:SEDTC mixtures, marked differences in galena recovery were observed depending on the order of addition. Once again, adding xanthate first resulted in the best flotation performance of galena. Adding diethyl DTC first resulted in a flotation response only slightly better than that of using either pure collector. Adding SEX and diethyl DTC simultaneously resulted in flotation behaviour poorer than that of using either pure collector alone for both 10:90 and 90:10 SEX:SEDTC mixtures (not shown). Batch flotation tests were performed using the best performing microflotation mixture, i.e. 90:10 SEX:SEDTC, as well as the two single collectors and the collectorless case, for comparison purposes. The lead recovery as a function of time is shown in The increased floatability seen by the use of the 90:10 SEX:SEDTC mixture must, however, be understood in terms of froth effects. The effect of the froth phase can be observed by plotting the lead recovery per unit of water recovered as shown in This study focused on the pulp phase floatability (and thus hydrophobicity) of a well studied sulphide mineral (viz. galena) using different collector mixtures. The collectorless recovery (at pH 9) of galena was observed to be 44.7%, with the fines fraction (−38 The order of collector strength of the reagents used in this study has been reported to be dithiocarbamate Thiol collectors may, in some cases, be oxidised to their dithiolate derivatives. However, the dominant xanthate surface species on galena has been found to be the chemisorbed xanthate ion ( The most significant increase in floatability when using xanthate:DTP mixtures was observed for a 10:90 ethyl xanthate:diethyl DTP mixture on galena (when xanthate was added first). A possible explanation for this lies in the fact that xanthate is thought to be a stronger adsorber than dithiophosphate ( In terms of the isobutyl chain lengths of mixtures of xanthate and DTP, there was no improvement in flotation above that observed for SIBX. This may be seen in the light of the findings of A marked increase in galena flotation performance was seen for ethyl xanthate with diethyl DTC mixtures at the 10:90 and 90:10 conditions. The means by which this large increase in hydrophobicity of galena is postulated to occur is through the formation of thiol dimers, which would not normally occur when using pure collectors ( In addition to the above proposal on the production of dixanthogen, The performance of the SEX:SEDTC mixture versus the single SEX collector in batch flotation tests did not show as marked an improvement as the microflotation results did. In these tests SEX alone performed better than was observed in the case of the microflotation tests. The Pb recovery did, however, increase when the mixture was used (68% compared to 62.7%). The most significant difference observed was in the amount of water recovered in the case of the mixture, the latter resulting in a 60% increase in water recovery above using SEX alone. This clearly illustrates that the mixture had an important effect on the behaviour of the froth phase. Given the critical role which the froth phase plays in flotation this result highlights the critical importance of studying the effect which mixtures may have on the froth phase when evaluating their effect on flotation performance. This result also emphasises the fact that the effect of mixtures on the relative adsorption of each collector onto the mineral may be overshadowed ultimately by the changes occurring in the behaviour of the froth phase. Improvements in recovery for the microflotation of galena with the following mixtures were noted (percentage in brackets is the improvement over and above that of SEX as a single collector): 10:90 SEX:SEDTP (17%) 90:10 SEX:SEDTC (29.5%) 10:90 SEX:SEDTC (12.2%) These improvements were only when the xanthate was added first. No improvements in microflotation recovery of the isobutyl chain lengths were noted above that of SIBX alone. The improvements in the SEX:SEDTP mixture were thought to be due to a simple case of competitive adsorption, with the more strongly adsorbing xanthate adsorbing selectively onto the fines since they accounted for most of the surface area. Such finer particles may also have higher concentration of high energy sites available for adsorption. This allowed the less selective, but stronger collector, SEDTP to adsorb to the coarse particles and increase their recovery. The improvements in recovery when using the SEX:SEDTC mixtures were postulated to be due to the DTC/surface-catalysed formation of highly hydrophobic dixanthogens. These dixanthogens were then postulated to physisorb to the more evenly distributed, chemisorbed dithiocarbamate molecules resulting in a uniformly hydrophobic surface coverage. Batch flotation tests emphasised the need to consider the role of mixtures on the froth phase.