TKA periprosthetic fractures can occur either intraoperatively and postoperatively. Many classification systems exist, but most have significant deficiencies. In this article we are introducing a classification that the authors use for periprosthetic fractures of the knee. 12 consecutive patients who underwent revision TKA using distal femoral implant-allograft composites for periprosthetic supracondylar fractures associated with major bone loss were reviewed. Average postoperative HSS and SF-36 scores were 75 and 88 respectively. Nine of ten patients showed no migration, no loosening, achieved radiographic union, and were able to fully bear weight. This article provides guidance on dealing with such difficulties.Periprosthetic fractures adjacent to knee replacement implants can occur either intraoperatively or postoperatively. The creation of stress risers, excessive patellar bone resection, cortical perforations and other intraoperative technical issues can result in periprosthetic fractures in the Many classification systems attempt to guide the management of these types of fractures, but all have some deficiencies. Neer’s Femur (defined: supracondylar femur fracture within 15 cm of the femoral prosthesis) Type F1: Extent of distal fracture fragment provides adequate bone for retrograde nail locking screws. Type F2: Extent of distal fracture fragment does not provide adequate bone for retrograde nail locking screws. Tibia (defined: tibial fracture within 15 cm of the tibial component) Type T1: Extent of proximal fracture fragment large enough to allow internal fixation. Type T2: Extent of proximal fracture fragment not large enough to allow internal fixation. Additional qualification of all fractures includes the prosthesis stability and the bone stock quality, as follows: S - Stable prosthesis; L - loose prosthesis g - Good bone stock; p - poor bone stock For example, a supracondylar periprosthetic fracture of the femur 5 cm from the intercondylar notch with stable implant and with good quality of the bone stock would be classified as an F1Sg fracture. This classification system is designed to distinguish between periprosthetic fractures which require revision from those that can be fixed, either temporarily or definitively, using a method of osteosynthesis. This comprises the main difference between the Type 1 and Type 2 fractures. Whereas Type 1 fractures can be responsive to plate or nail fixation, Type 2 fractures more likely require revision. The g/p are subtypes are used to distinguish fractures based on bone quality with subtype g fractures less likely to require structural allografts or megaprostheses than subtype p fractures. Taking certain preventative measures can help avoid intraoperative or early postoperative periprosthetic fractures. When performing TKA after a previous lateral closing wedge high tibial osteotomy, it is important to avoid the lateral placement of the tibial component as this can result in perforation of the lateral tibial cortex. When primary TKA is performed in the context of previously placed hardware, the hardware may be removed three months in advance through a separate procedure. This provides adequate time for screw holes and other stress risers to heal. However, if the hardware removal is performed at the same time as the knee replacement, a stem should be used to bypass stress risers. For posterior stabilized femoral components it is important to avoid overly eccentric placing of the box cut. Perforation of anterior cortex by intramedullary instrumentation or anterior cortical notching is potential risk factors for fracture. As such, a stress riser should be bypassed with a stem if any perforation or notching of more than 3 mm occurs. When performing revision TKA, before reaming, guide wires and x-rays can be used to confirm intramedullary placement. Stemmed components should be used routinely while performing revision arthroplasty. Whenever there is a concern about cortical perforation or trial component position, trial stems should be in place for intraoperative radiographs. The stability of the fracture, the stability of the implant, and the quality of the bone stock are factors which affect the method of treatment of periprosthetic fractures. If fractures are found early after the operation in the recovery room radiograph, conservative treatment is an option that can be considered as long as the fracture and the implant are deemed to be stable. Such fractures are generally small cortical cracks, and not comprised of major segments of bone. Weight bearing should be protected and range of motion exercises should be monitored closely in order for displacement not to occur. Even minimal trauma can result in fractures during the postoperative period, if the bone was weakened by osteolysis, osteoporosis, or osteopenia. Often times these fractures are adjacent to the implant and are located in the metaphyseal area. Such fractures of the femur which have a stable implant can be fixed by a buttress plate, a periarticular plate, a locking plate, or a retrograde locking intramedullary nail ( If the fracture is diaphyseal and distant from the implant, the implant is usually stable and the fracture is fixed using modern plating techniques. The use of locking plates for distal fractures, or fractures associated with a closed femoral box has been a major advancement as these devices allow for fixed angle fixation in multiple points in the distal fragment. Furthermore, there is evidence supporting their use under conditions where there is a well fixed component while the fracture is too distal for intramedullary nailing. Metaphyseal fractures of the femur are more common then of the tibia. Tibial fractures can be managed by buttress plates or periarticular plates as long as the implant is stable. Either femoral or tibial fractures with an associated unstable implant require revision with stemmed components where the stem is used to provide fixation for the fracture. In addition, internal fixation is often necessary to further stabilize the fracture fragments. Our recommendation is to use uncemented stems unless the patient has minimal physiologic demand and is unlikely to ever require further revision surgery since a cemented stem can impede fracture healing and would certainly cause difficulties with further surgeries. The most difficult periprosthetic fracture to treat is one where there are loose implants in combination with poor bone stock. In these situations there are massive bone deficiencies after the loose implants are removed from the periprosthetic fracture. Revision can be performed using augments to replace mild to moderate bone loss up to 20 mm on the femoral side and in combination with polyethylene for a circumferential defect, up to 50 mm on the tibial side. These augments are able to compensate for greater bone loss on the tibial side from the combination of thicker polyethylene along with the metal augments. However, a mega-prosthesis or structural allograft-implant composite is required if the bone loss is beyond augments. A constrained, instead of a hinged prosthesis can be used as an allograft-prosthetic composite reconstruction allows for the reattachment of residual host bone with its attached host collateral ligaments. Cain and coworkers