In this study, we suggested a novel recovery system for lithium using electrostatic field assistance (EFA) to improve the conventional adsorption method, which requires a long adsorption time. To verify our suggested concept, a lithium selective electrode was prepared using a lithium selective adsorbent and hydrophilic PVA binder, and a test set was fabricated by modifying the conventional membrane capacitive deionization (MCDI) system. The adsorption performance by EFA was compared to that of the conventional adsorption process. The results showed that the adsorption performance by EFA increased with increased cell potential up to 1.0V and initial lithium concentrations. The adsorption performance for lithium by EFA was superior to that by physisorption in the range of initial lithium concentration tested. The adsorption time to reach an equilibrium state by EFA was reduced compared to that of physisorption, which showed the acceleration effect of EFA. The suggested system also showed good reproducibility and durability during the repeated adsorption/desorption cycles. This system could be an alternative recovery system for lithium from aqueous solution containing lithium ions.Lithium is a crucial resource used in the raw materials of secondary batteries, light aircraft alloys, catalysts and fuel for nuclear fusion reactions ( Inorganic adsorbents with high selectivity for lithium ions in aqueous solution have been investigated, of which spinel-type lithium manganese oxides, such as LiMn In our previous work ( The objective of this study is to verify the feasibility of the proposed concept. A spinel type of LiMn A spinel-type lithium manganese oxide (LMO, LiMn The crystalline forms of the obtained adsorbents were determined using an X-ray diffractometer (XRD, D/MAX 2200, Rigaku), and the morphology was examined using analytical scanning electron microscopy (SEM, S-4700, Hitachi). The test cell was fabricated by modifying the conventional MCDI cell that consists of carbon electrodes, an anion exchange membrane and a dielectric spacer ( In the preliminary experiments, the adsorption performance was tested to fix the adsorption time. In applying the cell potential, the conductivity of effluent solution in the general CDI cell rapidly decreases with time due to capacitive adsorption onto electrode surface and the subsequent depletion of ions. Then the conductivity with time increases slowly as the sorption capacity became saturated. The further reduction in the conductivity occurs with the strength of applied cell potential ( In this system, as soon as LiOH solution was supplied to the cell, the ion exchange reaction between Li  The conductivity curve obtained with EFA (in Period 1) reached the plateau state slower than that by physisorption. This result can be explained that Li The comparison test with the conventional MCDI system, in which the adsorbent electrode was replaced to that manufactured with the mixture of PVA and activated carbon powder without the adsorbent on the graphite sheet, was also conducted under identical adsorption/washing/desorption process. From the result, the detection level of extracted lithium amount without the adsorbent (less than 5%) by ICP analysis was negligible. This result confirmed that ions not being adsorbed can be removed by washing with distilled water. The monitored conductivity curve reaching the plateau state was also checked by ICP analysis, which indicated the initial lithium concentration and no lithium ion after the adsorption and washing times (40 The initial concentration of ions in an aqueous solution is a crucial factor in the adsorption reaction. As the initial lithium concentration increases, the amount of adsorbed lithium tends to increase. To evaluate the effect of the initial lithium concentration on the adsorbed amount in our system, a series of experiments was conducted with varying initial lithium concentrations and cell potentials in the adsorption step under identical desorption conditions, as displayed in Lee et al. reported that the pH decrease in the effluent solution occurs above the cell potential of 1.2 The acceleration effect on the adsorption reaction with EFA was not clearly observed within one cycle of tested time (adsorption time of 40 From the results, the difference in the Li The repeated cycle test was conducted to confirm the reproducibility of the adsorption capacity and the durability of the adsorbent electrode, as displayed in In this study, a novel recovery system for lithium by EFA to improve the adsorption reaction was proposed. To verify the feasibility of the improved adsorption process, an adsorbent electrode was prepared using a PVA binder having hydrophilicity, and a test set was fabricated by modifying the conventional MCDI system. The adsorption test of lithium ions was conducted to examine the effect of various factors on the adsorption capacity. The results showed that the adsorbed amount of lithium by EFA increased with increasing cell potential up to 1.0 This research was supported by the National Research Project titled “The Development of Technology for Extraction of Resources Dissolved in Seawater” of the Korea Institute of Geoscience and Mineral Resources (KIGAM), funded by the