Extraction of Be(II) and Al(III) from aqueous sulfate solution by CYANEX 921 (commercial trioctylphospine oxide) in kerosene was separately studied. The parameters affecting the extraction process, such as hydrogen ion, sulfate ion, and CYANEX 921 concentrations, and temperature were investigated. It was found that Be(II) was highly extracted by CYANEX 921 from an aqueous medium of 0.001 M sulfate and pH 9.0, while Al(III) was highly extracted from a similar solution at pH 5.0. Be(II) extraction was found to decrease with temperature (exothermic), while Al(III) extraction increased with temperature (endothermic). The different species that might be extracted are given and discussed. Extraction of Be(II) and Al(III) by purified TOPO under similar experimental conditions showed that purified TOPO gives relatively less extraction, especially for Al(III) in the pH range 4.0–6.0.
                  Based on the obtained results, separation of beryllium from aluminum and recovery of pure beryllium from beryl mineral were studied. Removal of iron as the main interfering ion in the beryl solution was investigated. A flow chart for the Be/Al separation process was developed and applied to recover pure Be(II) from Egyptian beryl.Beryllium is rare in the earth's crust (6 In its pure form, beryl is a beryllium–aluminum silicate and occurs as colorless crystals. In industrial grades, it contains about < The production of beryllium from beryl ore is a complicated process because beryl ore is very inert in the sense that mineral acids under the normal conditions of temperature and pressure do not attack it (except hydrofluoric acid). Therefore, leaching of Be from the mineral is generally carried out by fusion of the ore with potassium hydroxide and potassium carbonate mixture, followed by quenching in cold water to destroy the original crystal structure of beryl ( Different approaches were reported to purify the produced beryllium hydroxide precipitate. One approach is to wash the precipitated hydroxide with solution containing a complexing agent such as EDTA to bring aluminum and other impurities as soluble complexes into solution, leaving pure beryllium hydroxide precipitate ( Solvent extraction was also reported to purify beryllium from aluminum ( In Egypt, beryl together with its gem emerald and aquamarine are known since the ancient times. The ancient Egyptian explored emeralds and aquamarine in many localities in the eastern desert of Egypt. This is evidenced by the large excavation dump sites at Zabara and the ruins of Medinet Nugrus and Sikat at the southeast of Luxor, Egypt. The present work is directed to investigate the extraction equilibrium of Be(II) and Al(III), as main constituents of beryl mineral, by CYANEX 921 in kerosene. Based on the data obtained, the extraction equilibrium is proposed and a process is developed to recover pure beryllium from Egyptian beryl ore in a chemical purity of more than 99.5%. Further, a flowsheet for the beryllium/aluminum separation process is developed. Analytical grade beryllium sulfate, BeSO The beryl mineral sample was obtained from Zabara dump materials. The composition of this mineral is given in Beryl solution was prepared by dissolving 1 kg of finely divided beryl (mesh size ≤ Unless otherwise stated, the volume ratio of the organic phase to the aqueous phase was kept at one in the solvent extraction experiments. The effects of various factors, such as hydrogen ion, sulfate and CYANEX 921 concentrations were examined by changing the concentration of one parameter while keeping all other parameters constant. The extraction tests were carried out batchwise by mechanically shaking both the organic and aqueous phases in stoppered glass tubes at constant temperature in a thermostated water-bath shaker. After phase separation, the concentration of each element in a known volume of the aqueous phase was determined spectrophotometrically. The concentration of the investigated metal in the organic phase was calculated by the difference between its concentration in the aqueous phase before and after extraction. The distribution ratio, The percentage of extracted metal, % To assess the effect of Al(III) on the extraction of Be(II), different aqueous solutions were prepared. In this respect, different amounts of BeSO Stripping investigation was carried out by loading 0.20 M CYANEX 921-kerosene solution with Be(II) (5.0 mg/L) or Al(III) (8.5 mg/L) at a phase ratio O/A of 1.0. Stripping of metal ions from their loaded organic solutions was carried using two groups of strip solutions; the first group included the mineral acids; HCl, HNO Aqueous solutions containing Be(II), 5 mg/L, Al(III), 8.5 mg/L, and Fe(III), 1.61 mg/L, in ratios equal to that present in the Egyptian beryl samples were prepared and shaken with equal volume of 0.20 M CYANEX 921 in kerosene for 15 min at 25 °C. Scrubbing of Fe(III) from this loaded organic phase was investigated using different H For liquid extraction investigations, the concentration of beryllium was determined spectrophotometrically ( Beryl mineral and final pure beryllium product were analyzed at the Central Analytical Laboratory, Nuclear Research Center at the Egyptian Atomic Energy Authority, using Energy Dispersive Spectroscopy (EDS), ICP-MS and AA. Preliminary experiments on the extraction equilibrium of beryllium and aluminum were carried out with 0.20 M CYANEX 921 in kerosene at 25 °C for different shaking times and different aqueous solutions containing 5.0 mg/L beryllium or 8.5 mg/L Al(III) dissolved in 0.001 M sodium sulfate solutions at pHs 2.0, 5.0 and 9.0. The results obtained indicated that the extraction equilibrium was reached after 15 min shaking period. Based on these preliminary experiments, further investigations used a shaking period of 15 min. Unless otherwise stated, the aqueous phase contained 5.0 mg/L beryllium or 8.5 mg/L of Al(III) in 0.001 M sulfate medium and the organic solution was 0.20 M CYANEX 921 in kerosene and the extraction was carried out at 25 °C. The effect of hydrogen ion concentration on the extraction process was studied in the pH range 2.0–11.0. A series of sulfate solutions having constant Be(II) and Al(III) concentration were used. The relations between the pH and the respective extraction percent obtained for Be(II) or Al(III) using CYANEX 921 or purified TOPO for comparison are given in In their work on the composition of different commercial CYANEX neutral extractants, The effect of the sulfate ion molar concentration on the extraction of the two elements was studied using sodium sulfate, from 0.001 to 0.050 M, at different hydrogen ion concentrations. The results obtained are given in The effect of the extractant concentration on the extraction of Be(II) and Al(III) was investigated. The concentration of CYANEX 921 in kerosene was varied from 0.01 to 0.3 molar. The results obtained are given in In the case of aluminum, at pH 9.0 there is a linear logarithmic relation between The effect of temperature in the range 15–70 °C on the extraction of beryllium and aluminum dissolved in 0.001 M sulfate solutions of different pH values by 0.20 M CYANEX 921 in kerosene was studied ( The values of the distribution ratio, The logarithmic values of the distribution ratio of the extracted Be(II) at pH 9.0, and Al(III) at pH 5.0 at different temperatures were plotted against the reciprocal of the corresponding absolute temperature (1/ To investigate the type of coordination of beryllium and aluminum with CYANEX 921 in the organic phase, the IR spectra of the extractant in kerosene before and after loading with Be(II) and Al(III) were measured ( Comparing this spectrum with that of the extractant in kerosene after loading with beryllium, it was found that the intensity of the OH band at 3400 cm The IR spectrum of the extractant in kerosene after loading with aluminum showed similar features concerning the P The different species of Be(II) and Al(III) in aqueous solution were considered. Be(II) is an electron deficient cation with a high tendency to form inner sphere complexes with hydroxyl anions in aqueous solutions ( As found experimentally, Be(II) is mainly extracted in the pH range 8–10, therefore it is suggested that beryllium is extracted mainly as [Be(OH) To verify this assumption, extraction of Be(II) by purified TOPO was carried out under similar extraction conditions and given in In the case of Al(III), maximum extraction by CYANEX 921 was obtained when aluminum was in aqueous sulfate solution of pH 4.5–5.5. In aqueous solutions, Al(III) hydrolyses to form mononuclear complexes of the type [Al(OH)] Since the values of In aqueous solution of pH in the range up to 5.8, aluminum is mainly present as the cationic species Al The analysis of the beryl mineral sample given in Based on the extraction results given in When Be(II) concentration was 5.0 mg/L, the presence of Al(III) in the aqueous phase up to five times to that of Be(II) decreased the extraction percent of Be(II) about 5% (from 95% to 90.8%) than in the absence of Al(III). In addition, the Al(III) extracted with Be(II) contained less than 3.18 mg/L Al(III), which represents more than 50% of the extracted Be(II). When Be(II) concentration in the original solution increased to 10.0 mg/L, it was found that 89% of Be(II) was extracted in absence of Al(III). The presence of Al(III) in 2.5 times the concentration of Be(II) decreased the extraction of Be(II) to 86.2%. For solution containing 15.0 mg/L Be(II) and 25 mg/L Al(III), it was found that in absence of Al(III) only 85.8% of Be(II) was extracted, whereas in the presence of 25 mg/L Al(III) the extraction of Be(II) decreased to 81%. Therefore, it is recommended to use a solution containing 10.0 mg/L Be(II) concentration with Al(III) concentration up to 2.5 times of Be(II) to obtain more than 85% extraction efficiency for Be(II) extraction together with reasonable selectivity. The stripping investigations were carried out to choose appropriate strip solutions, which can successfully strip beryllium and leave Al(III) in the organic phase. Two groups of strip solutions were tested; the first group included the mineral acids HCl, HNO As iron is present in Egyptian beryl mineral with beryllium and aluminum and can be extracted with CYANEX 921/kerosene solution, studies on the removal of iron from extracted beryllium/aluminum mixture were carried out. From sulfate solution of pH 9.0 containing 1.61 mg/L iron, the metal extracted by 0.20 M CYANEX 921 in kerosene was about 90.0%. As H In this investigation, beryl sample from Zabara dump mineral was used ( Application of this technique on concentrated stock beryl solution (15 mg beryllium/L) carried out using 0.2 M CYANEX 921 in kerosene gave similar beryllium product with the same efficiency. This indicates that the process is efficient and can be scaled-up for the recovery of beryllium from solutions containing increased amounts of beryllium.