Objective
                  Currently, no spinal classification system has achieved universal acceptance. Therefore, it is important to choose a reliable classification within clinical practice. The objective of this study was to determine and compare the intraobserver and interobserver agreement of the Load Sharing Classification (LSC), the Thoracolumbar Injury Classification System (TLICS), and the AOSpine Thoracolumbar Spine Injury Classification System.
               
                  Methods
                  In this web-based intraobserver and interobserver study (www.spine.hostei.com), plain radiographs and computed tomographic scans of traumatic thoracolumbar fractures (T12–L2) were evaluated. By use of a questionnaire, fractures were classified according to the LSC, the TLICS, and the AOSpine classification. Data were analyzed with SPSS (Version 21, 76 Chicago, Illinois, USA). Intraobserver and interobserver agreement was determined by the Cohen κ. Statistical significance was defined as P < 0.05.
               
                  Results
                  Data from 91 patients were classified twice by 7 board-certified spine surgeons. The intraobserver and interobserver reliability considering the LSC total score was noted as fair (intraobserver/interobserver reliability: κ = 0.26/0.22). Considering the resulting TLICS total score, a moderate intraobserver agreement (κ = 0.41) was noted, whereas the interobserver results presented only fair reliability (κ = 0.23). In contrast to the LSC and the TLICS, the AOSpine classification showed substantial agreement considering the fracture type (A;B;C) (intraobserver/interobserver reliability: κ = 0.71/0.61) and moderate agreement considering the fracture subtype (e.g., A0;A1;…;B1;…) (intraobserver/interobserver reliability: κ = 0.57/0.48).
               
                  Conclusion
                  In conclusion, the reliability of the AOSpine fracture classification is superior to the TLICS and the LSC. Therefore, this classification system could best be applied within clinical practice.Spinal fracture classifications aim to describe the morphology and the severity of an injury in a reproducible way. An ideal classification should incorporate relevant clinical factors to standardize the therapeutic decision-making process. To facilitate the decision-making process for surgical stabilization of spinal fractures, McCormack et al. The Thoracolumbar Injury Classification System (TLICS) describes the natural history of an injury pattern but also serves to rank the degree of instability. This system is based on 3 major characteristics: the morphology of the injury, the integrity of the PLC, and the neurologic status of the patient. The AOSpine Thoracolumbar Spine Injury Classification System was introduced in 2013 by Vaccaro et al. Under consideration of the advantages and disadvantages of those classification systems, this study aimed to determine and compare the intraobserver and interobserver agreement of the Load Sharing Classification (LSC), the TLICS, and the AOSpine classification by analysis of 91 clinical cases. This study was approved by the Independent Ethics Committee of the RWTH Aachen University, Aachen, Germany (Reference number: EK-078/15). This intraobserver and interobserver study was performed on the basis of online documentation. A website ( All participants were experienced surgeons from orthopedic or trauma departments, specialized in spine surgery. Each participant was well versed in the LSC, the TLICS, and the AOSpine classification schemes and received the original article of each classification system 1 month before the start of the study. All participants stated that they would routinely apply the new AOSpine classification at the time of the study. The spine surgeons from Germany stated that they used the AO Magerl classification before the implementation of the AOSpine classification in 2015, whereas the participating surgeons from the Netherlands indicated that they had used the TLICS previous to the AOSpine classification. A committee of experts assembled a case series of 91 consecutive patients treated in 1 of 2 university hospitals (Aachen and Maastricht). Only patients with acute traumatic injuries of the thoracolumbar junction (T11–L2) were included. Patients with osteoporotic fractures, tumors, or spondylodiscitis and patients with incomplete CT reconstructions were excluded. The treating surgeons did not serve as observers in the study. The LSC uses 3 radiologic spinal fracture characteristics and allocates 1 to 3 points to each of those items. Consequently, this results in a scale of at least 3 to a maximum of 9 points. The TLICS is an advancement of the thoracolumbar injury severity score (TLISS). Within this classification system, 3 major elements are scored: fracture morphology (1–4 points), integrity of the posterior ligamentous complex (0, 2, or 3 points) and neurologic status (0, 2, or 3 points). By summing up the scores of the 3 categories, a total score of 1 to 10 points can be allocated. In contrast to the AOSpine classification, the observers were asked to determine the neurologic status within the TLIC system. This course of action was chosen because the neurologic status in the TLIC system is an elementary component for the calculation of the TLICS score and the associated recommendation for therapy. The AOSpine classification consists of a morphologic fracture classification and a grading system for neurologic status, and it involves patient-specific modifiers. Thoracolumbar fractures are classified on the basis of 3 major fracture types (type A, B, or C) and 9 further specified subtypes (e.g., A0;A1;…;B1;…). The deidentified data were analyzed with SPSS (Version 21, 76, Chicago, Illinois, USA). To determine interobserver agreement, the Cohen κ and the percentage agreement between the surgeons were used. As in previous studies, we used the guidelines of Landis and Koch The plain radiographs and CT scans of the 91 patients were classified twice by 7 board-certified spine surgeons. An overview of the patients' characteristics can be found in Within the LSC, moderate and almost equal agreement was found between all 3 subgroups (comminution, apposition of fragments, and deformity) (κ value/percentage agreement: LSC A, κ = 0.46 (67%); LSC B, κ = 0.46 (67%); LSC C, κ = 0.44 (68%)). Only fair intraobserver agreement was found in the resulting LSC total score (κ = 0.26; percentage agreement: 39%) ( The TLICS classification showed moderate agreement determining the variable injury pattern (κ = 0.51; percentage agreement, 73%) and integrity of the PLC (κ = 0.47; percentage agreement, 74%). Even substantial reliability was found for the variable neurologic status (κ = 0.78; percentage agreement, 96%). Considering the resulting TLICS total score, moderate agreement (κ = 0.41; percentage agreement, 58%) was noted ( Overall, the intraobserver reliability for the AOSpine fracture type (A;B;C) showed substantial results (κ = 0.71; percentage agreement, 92%). One observer even achieved almost perfect agreement (κ = 0.81; percentage agreement, 95%) ( The evaluation of the fracture subgroups (e.g., A0;A1;…;B1;…) revealed moderate results between the first and the second rounds (κ = 0.57). Consequently, the percentage agreement was 68% ( The interobserver agreement of the LSC during the first assessment was fair (κ = 0.24), whereas the agreement of the second assessment showed only slight reliability (κ = 0.19). Interestingly, there was no significant difference in the agreement between both assessments (percentage agreement: first assessment, 36%; second assessment, 32%; The TLICS total score showed fair agreement during the first (κ = 0.21) and the second assessments (κ = 0.26). There was no significant difference in the agreement between both rounds (percentage agreement: first assessment, 38%; second assessment, 43%; The interobserver reliability of the AOSpine fracture type (A;B;C) showed substantial reliability (κ = 0.61; percentage agreement, 89%). There was no significant difference between the first and second evaluations ( Fracture classifications are conceptual tools for the understanding and communication of an injury pathomechanism with, preferably, therapeutic and prognostic consequences. In this line our main findings are as follows: The interobserver agreement of the AOSpine fracture classification was superior to the results of the TLICS and the LSC total score. The intraobserver agreement for fracture subtypes (e.g., A0;A1;…;B1;…) of the AOSpine classification and the TLICS total score were moderate, whereas the LSC total score just achieved fair reliability The intraobserver reliability of the LSC and the TLICS showed moderate to substantial results when the subgroup qualities were considered. Several studies have focused on the reliability of LSC, Urrutia et al. Within this study we found moderate to substantial intraobserver agreement for the individual TLICS elements, and moderate to fair intraobserver and interobserver reliability regarding the TLICS total score. These findings are in line with the results of Kaul et al., Within this study, the LSC presented the lowest agreement compared to the TLICS and AOSpine classifications. Even though all 3 separate components of the classification achieved moderate agreement, the intraobserver and interobserver agreement for the total score showed only fair results. Elzinga et al. Chhabra et al. One strength of our study is the large sample of 91 spine cases, which subsequently leads to a high variability regarding the fracture morphology. Furthermore, the inclusion of 3 different spine classification systems offers the possibility to compare the reliability within a single case series. By contrast, our study has certain limitations. First, the participating surgeons of this study may be more familiar with the AO system because of their previous use of the Magerl classification, from which the new classification system is derived. Furthermore, we did not consider the influence of different fracture types on the reliability of the respective classification systems within our study. Other studies could show that particular fracture types appear to be more or less difficult to classify. In conclusion, the reliability of the AOSpine fracture classification is higher than the TLICS and the LSC. By means of our study, this classification system could best be applied within clinical practice. The authors thank all surgeons for participating in the study.