This paper mainly presents the in-plane and out-of-plane vibration analysis of thin-to-moderately thick composite beams with arbitrary lay-ups using the first order shear deformation theory. The material couplings, i.e. bending–stretching, bending–twisting and stretching–twisting couplings, along with the effects of shear deformation, rotary inertia and Poisson's effect are taken into account. In order to obtain the free response of the structure, a semi-analytical solution is adopted based on the variational formulation and solving the weak form of the governing equations by extremizing the objective functional with respect to unknown displacement components and Lagrange multipliers. We also propose a higher order beam element which is a convenient tool for numerical implementation in one-dimensional finite element analysis of the problem. Semi-analytical and finite element solutions are utilized and verified for various numerical case studies. Numerical examples are presented for both the semi-analytical and finite element solutions. The results show excellent agreement with the solutions obtained by the full three-dimensional finite element model in commercial package ANSYS. These numerical examples also demonstrate that ignoring the role of out-of-plane displacement in the conventional one-dimensional models can lead to significant error in calculating the torsional modes of laminated composite beams.The ability to design composite structural components with high strength/stiffness to weight ratio and less vulnerability to corrosion/fatigue offers great promise for their diverse functionality. Due to a variety of applications in different environmental conditions and engineering fields (e.g. automobile, aviation and marine industries), composite components are very likely to be subject to loads of complex directions and magnitudes. Accordingly, the accurate and predictive simulation of composite laminates, which are mostly considered as laminated plates and beams, and understanding their dynamic characteristics under different loading conditions are of crucial importance to achieve the desired structural performance. Fruits of continuous research endeavors in computational mechanics, several theories and analytical/numerical methods have been developed in the literature to understand the free/forced dynamic behavior of beam-type components, either isotropic or anisotropic With a growing interest for the use of composite materials over the last decades, substantial contributions can be found in the literature dedicated to the vibration analysis of laminated plates and beams. The computations of structural dynamics for three-dimensional (3D) composite mediums, which may include several laminates, require high computational cost. This is why engineers tend to use the equivalent single layer theories that reduce the 3D problem into the corresponding two-dimensional (2D) plate or one-dimensional (1D) beam models representing the overall system properties. It is well-known that the analysis based on the equivalent single layer theories can provide sufficiently realistic description of the global behavior for thin to moderately thick laminates From another prospective and regardless of the type of theory for the displacement field, there are two main approaches in the literature to reduce the 2D constitutive relations of plate model into 1D models for in-plane dynamics of laminated beams In particular, studies on the in-plane vibrations of laminated beams investigated different aspects of their dynamic behavior. For instance, these studies include, but not limited to, the free vibrations of symmetrically laminated composite beams with arbitrary boundary conditions using analytical methods However, studies that explore the effects of out-of-plane deformations on the dynamic characteristics of laminated beam-type components with arbitrary lay-ups are rare. In particular, only Yıldırım and Kıral  Using Eq. Thus, the strain energy presented in Eq. In order to obtain the semi-analytical solutions for the natural frequencies and mode shapes of the problem in hand, we propose a variational formulation for the free vibration analysis, which delivers the weak form of the governing equations (i.e. extremizing the objective functional that includes the kinetic and potential energies of the system along with the constraint conditions, i.e. boundary conditions). First, we utilize the separation of variables method and prescribe the harmonic solutions for the displacement fields as: B.C.s at In order to obtain the numerical solution of the problem in hand, we introduce a higher order beam element as illustrated in The vector of degrees of freedom for the beam element Utilizing a similar process as explained in The natural frequencies obtained from the present model for the laminated composite beams are compared with those reported in the literatures and also with commercial software ANSYS Unless mentioned otherwise and in all subsequent sections, the width of the beam is taken to be unity (i.e. First, we check the convergence rate of the present analytical and finite element solutions. The antisymmetric angle-ply beams with stacking sequence In this section, the laminated composite beams with different layups and clamped–clamped boundary conditions have been studied. The first three natural frequencies for the in-plane, out-of-plane, torsional and axial vibrations have been presented in As can be seen from There is an important point in The influence of slenderness ratio ( Next, we study the effects of material anisotropy on the natural frequencies of the laminated beam. In this case, a beam with the slenderness ratio of In the last example, the influence of width to thickness ratio ( This paper has examined the structural dynamics of laminated composite beams with arbitrary lay-ups in the presence of out-of-plane deformation. The free vibration response of the beam has been predicted with the first order shear deformation theory to account for the effect of transverse shear deformation in moderately thick components. We have developed both semi-analytical and numerical schemes to obtain a detailed description of the coupling of the spatial directions due to Poisson's effect and torsional mechanics where the axial, in-plane and out-of-plane displacements are taken into account. In this way, one would be able to obtain all vibration modes, namely in-plane bending, out-of-plane bending, torsional and axial modes of the laminated composite beams with arbitrary stacking sequences. A variational formulation has been used for the semi-analytical solution of the system where the weak form of the governing equations is solved by extremizing the objective functional with respect to the unknown displacement components and Lagrange multipliers. This functional includes the kinetic and potential energies of the system along with the boundary conditions as the constraints. We also showed that Legendre polynomials can be applied to approximate the displacement functions of the harmonic solution, which leads to a rapid convergence of the solution. We have also introduced a higher order beam element with 18 DOFs in order to obtain the finite element solution of the problem. The proposed semi-analytical and numerical methods are validated against the available results for several numerical case studies from the literature and also, against the results obtained for more complex cases from the full 3D FEM simulation in ANSYS. The comparison showed a promising accuracy of the proposed models. In particular, the numerical examples demonstrated that ignoring the role of out-of-plane displacement in the conventional 1D models for the laminated composite beams leads to significant error in calculating the torsional modes (using the full 3D FEM results as the reference), while the proposed 1D model provides a high level of accuracy. The methodology presented in this paper is simple and general and it can be readily adopted in more sophisticated cases for health monitoring and vibration control of composite panels in order to avoid a suboptimal system design. The authors declare that they have no conflict of interest.