We show a wafer-level encapsulation technique for microelectromechanical system (MEMS). The process flow for fabrication and encapsulation of a MEMS accelerometer is presented. The main features of the approach are the use of a second sacrificial layer on top of the device made from silicon, a thick cap layer also made from silicon and the use of gaseous ClF3 for the etching of the sacrificial silicon layer. The protection of the cap and functional layer of the device during sacrificial etching was achieved by thin oxide layers confining the sacrificial etching to a predefined volume. The acceleration sensors were electrically tested before dicing and after plastic mould packaging. The presented technique offers several advantages such as CMOS compatibility, a low area consumption, a reduced total thickness of the sealed device and an integrated cap with high mechanical stability for damage-free handling and second level plastic mould packaging.Unlike CMOS chips, MEMS devices cannot be diced and then packaged directly in their housing as these devices often have free-standing structures, which have to be protected hermetically from the surroundings (e.g. dust, moisture and particles). Moreover, MEMS devices often need special working conditions such as a vacuum enclosure or inert gas atmosphere. The most effective way to protect fragile MEMS structures is the packaging of the devices on wafer level. Today, several industrial processes successfully apply a wafer level packaging technique by attaching a second wafer as a cap to the device wafer, for example by bonding with seal glass. A different approach for the encapsulation of surface micromachined sensors has emerged making use of a cap layer deposited directly on the device wafer. In consequence a separate cap wafer is not necessary and die size and chip thickness can be reduced. Several thin film wafer level encapsulation processes have already been demonstrated, using silicon dioxide (SiO A promising process to increase encapsulation-stability is the use of epitaxial polysilicon as cap layer and oxide for sealing The limitation in design freedom with the above processes is related to the use of SiO The acceleration sensor structure consists of a movable seismic mass with electrodes attached to springs and embedded between fixed electrodes ( The acceleration sensors had various designs to investigate the stability of the cap layer. We used either a central pillar or different barrel-vault-like structures. Designs without any support were also realised. The basic process sequence was (1) sequential deposition and patterning of the buried interconnect layer, the bottom sacrificial layer, the functional MEMS layer, the top sacrificial layer and the cap layer, (2) followed by the selective etching of the sacrificial layers and (3) the sealing of the device by a thick PECVD-oxide-layer ( The functional structure of the accelerometer was made in the Bosch standard process flow featuring a 10 The description of the encapsulation process starts at the point where the accelerometer structure was already patterned but not released. First the sensor structure was conformally covered by a 200 The sacrificial layer surface was planarised by CMP ( The silicon cap layer was made by epitaxial growth on a polysilicon seed layer and was planarised by CMP to enable further lithography steps. The silicon cap layer had a final thickness of 20 The top sacrificial layer was removed by a fast and selective etching with ClF After the wafer-processing and the electrical characterisation on wafer-level individual chips were separated by means of standard dicing. Several chips were mounted in chip-carriers and wire-bonded to an application specific integrated circuit (ASIC) located also in the chip carrier. Finally, the packaging was completed by plastic moulding, applying an injection pressure of 90 The sensor systems were electrically characterised. The sensitivity was determined for various accelerations at three temperatures (−40, 20 and 105 In The main advantages of the presented process flow is a significantly reduced area consumption for sealing of the devices in comparison with wafer-level techniques using a second cap wafer. Furthermore, the chip height is reduced by 50%. The use of silicon as sacrificial layer and ClF In addition, the process flow consists of only CMOS compatible process sequences. Therefore the integration of a read-out circuit onto the sensor chip is possible. This possibility together with our results on system-level packaging makes the production of ever smaller and cheaper sensors feasible. A new wafer level encapsulation technique for MEMS devices was demonstrated using thick polysilicon layers for forming the functional, sacrificial and cap layers. The sacrificial etching was done by gaseous etching with ClF The Sumicap project is carried out within the framework of the Information Societies Technology (IST) program of the European Commission under contract number IST-1999-10620. The authors would like to thank the staff at IMS Chips, Stuttgart for their help with essential process steps.