Purpose
                  This study measured the diagnostic performance characteristics and reliability of 2-dimensional (2DCT) and 3-dimensional (3DCT) computed tomography images and modeling of coronoid fractures.
               
                  Method
                  The treating surgeon and first assistant evaluated 28 fractures for fracture type, specific characteristics, and proposed treatment. The observers evaluated the fractures 4 times: first based upon 2DCT computed images and radiographs; second with the addition of 3DCT images; third with the addition of 3D models; and finally based upon intra-operative exposure, which was considered the reference standard.
               
                  Results
                  The diagnostic performance characteristics did not improve with more sophisticate imaging and models. The addition of 3DCT reconstructions improved the inter-observer reliability for fracture classification, characteristics, and proposed treatment.
               
                  Conclusion
                  More sophisticated images and modeling improved reliability but not accuracy when characterizing coronoid fractures.The coronoid process is key to the stability and long-term function of the elbow. This study evaluated the diagnostic performance characteristics of 3DCT images and 3D models in a prospective cohort study using operative findings and treatment as the reference standard for fracture type, characteristics, and treatment. Specifically, we tested the null hypothesis that there is no difference in diagnostic performance characteristics between 2D images, 3DCT images, and 3D models. In secondary analyses, the agreement of the classification, characterization, proposed, and additional treatment of these fractures between the surgeon and first assistant was assessed. Patients with a coronoid fracture having operative treatment in 2 hospitals were invited to enroll in this prospective cohort study. Informed consent was obtained from all patients. The Human Research Committee approved the protocol. The inclusion criteria were: (1) coronoid fracture; (2) elective surgical treatment; (3) sufficient quality of the 2D images to make 3DCT images and models; and (4) age 18 years or older. Exclusion criteria were pregnant women and patients unable to give informed consent. Twenty-eight patients were enrolled. There were 16 (57%) men and 12 (43%) women with an average age of 51 year (range, 23-89 years). Two (7%) patients had an isolated coronoid fracture and 26 (93%) patients had a coronoid fracture with additional fractures: 14 patients had terrible triad injury of the elbow; 9 with a posterior olecranon fracture-dislocation (1 with a concomitant lateral condyle fracture); 2 with radial head fracture-dislocation; and 1 with a concomitant distal humerus fracture. Twenty-two fractures involved the left upper extremity and 6 the right. Because the CT images were obtained as part of patient care rather than research several different CT scanners were used (up to 140 kV and 500-700 mAs) with different slice thickness between 0.64 and 1.25 mm. The 3DCT scans and 3D physical model constructions were made from DICOM (Digital Imaging and Communications in Medicine) files. The models were made by Medical Modeling LLC (Golden, CO, USA). The treating surgeon and the first assistant classified each coronoid fracture based on the fracture classification of O’Driscoll et al Each observer proposed treatment in the following categories: (1) nonsurgical management; (2) open reduction and internal fixation (ORIF) through a lateral exposure; (3) ORIF through a medial exposure; and (4) ORIF through the olecranon fracture. In addition to the proposed treatment, the observers were asked whether they agreed or disagreed with each of the 2 following statements: (1) some of the fracture fragments cannot be reliably repaired with screws and will require small wires, sutures, or another technique; and (2) the fracture fixation will be tenuous and should be protected with a hinged external fixator. The observers evaluated the fractures 4 times: First based upon 2D CT images and radiographs; second with the addition of 3DCT images; third with the addition of 3D models; and finally based upon intra-operative exposure, which was considered the reference standard. There were 7 separate attending observers and 22 resident or fellow observers. According to a post-hoc power analysis 27 fractures provide 80% power (α = 0.05, β = 0.20) to detect a difference in diagnostic characteristics between 2 imaging modalities using McNemar’s test. Sensitivity and specificity were calculated using standard formulas with the intra-operative findings of the attending surgeon as the reference standard. The operative exposure was always sufficient to characterize the fracture. Ninety-five percent confidence intervals (CI) were calculated according to Wilson score interval based on the procedure outlined by E. B. Wilson in 1927. The kappa coefficient (κ) was applied to measure the inter-observer agreement for the 28 patients with two observers with respect to the fracture classification, fracture characteristics and the treatment proposal for each modality. There were no significant differences in sensitivity or specificity for diagnosis of fracture characteristics, proposed treatment, or additional treatment with the addition of 3DCT reconstructions or 3D models ( Three-dimensional CT images improved the interobserver agreement of fracture classification; 4 of the 5 fracture characteristics (anteromedial facet fracture, tip of the coronoid fracture, impacted articular fragments, and the elbow is subluxated/dislocated or concentrically located); 1 of the 4 proposed treatments (ORIF through an olecranon exposure); and 1 of the 2 additional treatment options ( The addition of 3D models further improved the inter-observer agreement of 2 fracture characteristics (fracture of the tip of the coronoid and presence of impacted articular fragments); 1 proposed treatment option (ORIF through an olecranon exposure); and 1 additional treatment compared with 3DCT images ( Three-dimensional CT reconstructions and models improved reliability but not accuracy, compared to intra-operative evaluation in this study. Reliability improved from slight to fair for fracture classification and from fair to moderate for fracture characteristics. In our opinion, these findings indicate that more sophisticate imaging alone will not improve reliability and accuracy. It is important to note that this study did not address whether 3D imaging or modeling improved outcomes—a necessary step before one can determine if the added costs are justified. Our results are comparable with the results of Doornberg et al who found that the addition of 3D images had limited influence on diagnostic performance characteristics for the recognition of specific fracture characteristics. The strengths of this study lie in the multicenter prospective study design with enough power. Furthermore, the intra-operative view as the reference standard is the most reliable standard available to compare with the image modalities. There are also shortcomings to keep in mind. First, because the physical models take time to make and mail to us, some evaluations were made after surgery, meaning that some evaluations were retrospective causing recall bias. Second, the experience of the first and second observer was quite different, since the first observer is a trained and experienced surgeon and the second observer is a resident or fellow. We measured interobserver variability alone because it is always greater than intraobserver variability and for logistical reasons. Finally, the study was likely underpowered for many comparisons. In this study of coronoid fractures, 3D reconstructions improved reliability for fracture classification, characteristics, proposed treatment, and additional treatment to some degree, but not the diagnostic performance characteristics. None of the authors received payments or other benefits or a commitment or agreement to provide such benefits from a commercial entity. No commercial entity paid or directed, or agreed to pay or direct, any benefits to any research fund, foundation, educational institution, or other charitable or nonprofit organization with which the authors are affiliated or associated. 3D models were provided for free by Medical Modeling, Inc, Golden, CO, USA.