W–25%Cu composite powder was produced via thermochemical procedure. Copper nitrate and sodium tungstate salts were used as Cu and W containing precursors, respectively. Aqueous solutions of these salts were reacted under several different pH conditions. It was found that the products of all stages involving Cu2WO4(OH)2 and CuWO4·2H2O as raw precipitates, CuWO4−x
                     , CuO, and WO3 as calcined powders, and W–Cu reduced composite powders possessed similar compositions in different pH conditions. But changing the reaction pH in the range of 3–13 was found to markedly influence the microstructure of the products. At low and medium pH precipitates were in the form of large monolithic agglomerates while in high pH smaller cotton like agglomerates were formed. At low and medium pH conditions simple ion replacement was found to be dominant mechanism of precipitation while in high pH Cu(NH3)4
                     2+ complex ion was formed and ligand exchange was the dominant mechanism of precipitation.W–Cu composites have been widely used for application such as electrical contacts, arc resistant electrodes, microwave packages, heavy duty electrical contacts, microelectronics devices, heat sinks materials for high density integrated circuits, electro-discharge machining, etc. Their eligibility to serve as such a variety of applications is due to their enhanced mechanical and physical properties, good arc erosion resistance, remarkable thermal and electrical conductivity, and high ability of microwave absorption The aqueous solutions of prepared salts were made separately by solving each salt in 100 Three sets of aqueous solutions of copper nitrate and sodium tungstate were prepared separately. Each set included both 0.59 In the next step, different amounts of aqueous ammonia were added to the copper nitrate solutions of the three sets as below: 25, 3, and 0 Copper nitrate solutions were then added to the sodium tungstate solutions in all of the three sets. The result of this mixing was not similar in all of the sets. Sets B and C formed a sudden light green bushy mass of precipitates while in set A no precipitation occurred right after mixing. All three sets were then stirred on a heater up to 90 Dried, calcined, and reduced powders were all analyzed by X-ray diffractometry (Jeol 8030) to detect the produced phases. The microstructure and morphology of the powders and also their homogeneity were studied by scanning electron microscope (SEM, Jeol JSM-6360). Final shape and size of the reduced powders were studied via transmission electron microscope (TEM, Jeol 2010). Solving copper nitrate in distilled water leads to the formation of NO Addition of aqueous ammonia to the copper nitrate solution can produce different products depending on the amount of ammonia addition. When ammonia is added to water it forms NH In higher amounts of ammonia addition, due to high pH of the solution, copper hydroxide is solved and the following reaction takes place  In set B, due to little ammonia addition presence of Cu(H In set A with high amount of ammonia addition, there are only tetra ammine di-aqua copper(II) ions and no Cu(H    Looking toward this composite from a homogeneity view point, homogeneousness of the products is discussible in two respects: (1) composition and (2) distribution. From the first stand point, it is important to achieve the predicted composition of W–25%Cu throughout the powder. While in the second standpoint it is important to provide a uniform distribution of the powder elements and to avoid their segregation. In this regard, powders of sets B and C have not met the “composition homogeneity” condition. But powders of set A have reached that composition due to the completion of the precipitation reaction as mentioned earlier. On the other hand, homogeneity in distribution respect starts from the very beginning stages of the synthesis. According to the composition of the raw precipitates, both compounds (CuWO In this work, a thermochemical method called homogeneous co-precipitation was used to produce the nanocomposite W–25%Cu powder. The pH of the reaction media showed to have crucial effect on the mechanism of formation of the precipitates and the microstructure of the final products. At low pH levels a simple replacement reaction produced the precipitates. But at pH levels high enough, the ligand exchange reaction of tetra ammine di-aqua copper(II) formed the precipitates. At low pH levels the reaction was fast and consequently the precipitates were in the form of large monolithic agglomerates and a great amount of precursors did not take part in reaction which means high loss and low accuracy in final composition of the products. In contrast, at high pH levels the precipitates formed gradually and took the form of small cotton like spongy agglomerates and the amount of the un-reacted precursors were negligible. Low pH levels led in final large W particles and large Cu agglomerates while, high pH levels brought about fine dispersed W and Cu particles. The authors gratefully acknowledge the Collaborations of the Material science & Energy Research Center, Iran, Karaj (MERC) for the laboratory facilities and also thank the staff of the hydrometallurgy Lab of Iran University of Science & Technology (IUST).