Tantalite ore from Mozambique was digested using molten ammonium bifluoride (NH4HF2) as an alternative to hydrofluoric acid. Niobium and tantalum were extracted from the water-leached filtrate using 1- and 2-octanol as extractants. The main process variables are time, temperature and the bifluoride-to-ore mass ratio, for the bifluoride treatment step, along with the sulphuric acid concentration of the aqueous filtrate, and the solvent-extraction contact time. The optimum parameters obtained for the bifluoride treatment were a reaction time of 3h, a reaction temperature of 250°C, and a tantalite-to-bifluoride mass ratio of 1:30. Under these conditions, up to 97.24% of Nb and 98.66% of Ta were recovered. Introduction of sulphuric acid (H2SO4) into the aqueous phase increases the extraction of Nb and Ta with octanol. It is shown that a 5M to 6M sulphuric acid concentration results in good extraction of tantalum. An acid concentration higher than 5M must be used for efficient extraction of niobium. A contact time of 10min between the feed solution and the solvent is required. McCabe–Thiele equilibrium diagrams constructed from the experimental data suggest that two and three extraction stages are sufficient for almost complete extraction of Ta and Nb respectively, at optimum extraction conditions.The principal minerals of niobium (Nb) and tantalum (Ta) are columbite and tantalite, (Fe,Mn)(Nb,Ta) Tantalite ore is found in Australia, Canada, Brazil, Southern Africa, Nigeria and Central African countries such as the Democratic Republic of Congo, Rwanda, Uganda, Gabon and Burundi. Pegmatites continue to be the largest source of tantalum. The Greenbushes pegmatite near Perth in Western Australia is one of the world's largest resources, and is mined by the Australian company Sons of Gwalia. The firm alone accounts for over 75% of world production capacity and it is the world's largest producer of tantalum ( The unique properties of niobium and tantalum have resulted in their increased usage in electronics, optics, mechanical, aerospace, nuclear and other modern industries. Tantalum and niobium are also used widely, in the form of metals and alloys, in the process industry, vacuum technology, chemical machinery, surgical devices, and in the automotive industry ( Niobium–tantalum ores can be decomposed or digested by alkali fusion at elevated temperature, or leaching with mineral acids. At present, most minerals containing niobium and tantalum are decomposed by concentrated hydrofluoric acid ( However, this approach is only appropriate for higher-grade niobium–tantalum ore ( According to our analysis, the tantalite used in this study is of a higher grade, and can only be decomposed by hydrofluoric acid, HF, or mixture of hydrofluoric acid and sulphuric acid, HF and H Using ammonium bifluoride as an alternative to hydrofluoric acid, the leaching process is performed with water and large amounts of impurities are precipitated in the form of insoluble compounds that can be separated from the solution by filtration. The leach liquor prepared in this way shows consistent concentrations of Ta and Nb. The most important property of the solution is its low acidity. This can be treated by liquid–liquid extraction using both collective and selective methods after an appropriate acidity adjustment ( In previous work by The objectives of this investigation were to study the possibility of using ammonium bifluoride as an alternative to hydrofluoric acid for Mozambican tantalite and to determine the optimum conditions of extraction and separation of tantalum and niobium using octanol as extractant. The tantalite ore was mined in Mozambique, and supplied by Thuthuka Group Ltd, South Africa. All chemical reagents employed were of analytical grade. Deionized water was used in all aqueous preparations. Ammonium bifluoride, sulphuric acid, 1-octanol and 2-octanol were obtained from Merck Chemicals (Pty) Ltd and used without further purification. All ICP standards (Ta, Nb, Fe, Ti, Mg, Si and Zr) were obtained from Merck. The following instruments were used for analysis: a Thermo ARL9400XP spectrometer for X-ray fluorescence (XRF); a PANalytical X'Pert Pro diffractometer for X-ray diffractometry (XRD); and a Spectro Arcos model inductively coupled plasma optical emission spectrometer (ICP-OES) for the elemental analysis of the aqueous solutions. In this process an initial mixture of molten ammonium bifluoride and tantalite ore was prepared. The reaction, based on equal concentrations of Ta and Nb in the concentrate, can be represented as ( All experiments were conducted batch-wise. For each experiment, ammonium bifluoride was first charged into the reactor and heated up to melting. The tantalite ore sample was then added in the required amount. The mixture was then heated to the required temperature and maintained there for the required time. After the treatment period, the soluble components were leached with water and the insoluble components separated by filtration. The liquid sample was analyzed by ICP-OES to determine the content of niobium, tantalum, iron, titanium, etc. The filtrate was then used for the extraction of Nb and Ta after adjustment of the acidity of the original solution. This study investigates the following variables affecting the recovery of Nb and Ta: digestion time and temperature, and the tantalite-to-ammonium bifluoride mass ratio. The extraction of Nb and Ta was carried out using the organic solvents 1-octanol or 2-octanol. Equal volumes of organic solvent and filtrate from the leaching process, after adjustment of the acidity of the latter, were contacted in a separating funnel and agitated together for a desired time. The two phases were then separated and the aqueous phase was analyzed by ICP-OES, while the concentration of the organic phase was inferred from a mass balance. The distribution coefficient was then determined along with the extraction efficiency. The distribution coefficient α is expressed by: For practical purposes, as in industrial applications, it is often more popular to use the percentage extraction, %E, sometimes called the extraction factor ( The effectiveness of separation is usually expressed by means of the separation factor, or separation coefficient ( Separation factors of greater than one indicate that the two metals can be separated. This does not, however, give an indication of the ease of separation or the number of stages which may be required ( The mineralogical analysis of the sample was carried out by X-ray fluorescence and X-ray diffraction analyses. The results of the XRF analysis are shown in The effect of temperature and time on the percentage recovery of Nb and Ta was studied at temperatures between 200 A set of experiments was carried out to examine the effect of the tantalite-to-ammonium bifluoride mass ratio. The experimental conditions were kept constant as mentioned before while varying the tantalite-to-ammonium bifluoride ratio between 1:20 and 1:50. The results are illustrated in The effect of contact time on the extraction efficiency of Nb and Ta by 2-octanol was studied over the time range of 2 to 15  Extraction of Nb and Ta with octanol increases considerably upon the introduction of sulphuric acid into the aqueous phase. It can be seen that the extraction of both tantalum and niobium with 2-octanol is almost similar to extraction with 1-octanol, confirming other published results ( The extraction of tantalum and niobium experiments were carried out by mixing 30  The 2-octanol results in McCabe–Thiele diagrams were constructed in order to determine the number of stages needed on a mixer–settler to reach the desired separation. The diagram was constructed assuming optimal operating conditions, as determined above. From the McCabe–Thiele diagram for Ta, The McCabe–Thiele diagram for Nb in This investigation confirms that ammonium bifluoride can be used as an alternative to hydrofluoric acid in the extraction and separation of niobium and tantalum. The optimum digestion conditions were determined to be: a tantalite-to-bifluoride mass ratio of 1:30; a reaction temperature of 250 The extraction of both niobium and tantalum improved considerably with the introduction of sulphuric acid into the feed solution. For nearly complete extraction of tantalum and niobium with 2-octanol at 6