 Typically, fractures of the metacarpal necks of the ring and small fingers are called boxer's fractures. The name is derived from the mechanism of injury. The fracture usually occurs when a person strikes or punches. The fracture usually angulates the apex dorsally, because the volar cortex comminutes and the intrinsic muscles cause a flexed position secondary to crossing the metaphalangeal (MP) joints volar to their axis of motion. Usually boxer's fractures can be treated nonoperatively with closed reduction and casting. The acceptable degree of angulation is undecided, but most surgeons accept up to 10 to 15 degrees in the second and third digits, 30 to 35 degrees in the fourth, and 50 degrees in the fifth.  Baseball finger, another name for mallet or drop finger, is typically a flexion deformity of the distal interphalangeal (DIP) joint resulting from injury of the extensor tendon to the base of the distal phalanx. This injury usually occurs during catching a ball (hence the name) or striking something with the finger extended and the tendon tight. The usual treatment is splinting of the DIP joint for 4 to 6 weeks. Average extensor lag after stack splinting is 8 degrees. Late management includes tenodermodesis, Fowler's tenotomy, or oblique retinacular ligament (ORL) reconstruction.  A jersey finger is avulsion of the flexor digitorum profundus (FDP) tendon from the distal phalanx. The result is inability to flex the DIP. Treatment is surgical reattachment. Some loss of extension is common. Surgery should be performed soon after injury especially if the tendon is completely retracted to the palm.  The angulation of proximal phalanx fractures, like that of most fractures, depends on two factors: the mechanism of injury and the muscles acting as a deforming force on the fractured bone. Typically, proximal phalanx fractures present with apex volar angulation. The proximal fragment is flexed by the interossei, which insert into its base, and the distal fragment is pulled into hyperextension by the central slip, which inserts into the base of the middle phalanx.  Stable fractures often can be treated with buddy taping and early movement. If a fracture requires reduction and immobilization, the best position is the position of function, with the MP joints in almost full flexion and the interphalangeal (IP) joints in full extension. The MP joints rarely become stiff in full flexion because of the cam effect of the metacarpal hands on the collateral ligaments. The proximal interphalangeal (PIP) joints are least likely to become stiff in full extension.  Both are fractures of the base of the thumb metacarpal. Bennett's fracture typically results from an axial force directed against a partially flexed metacarpal (often in a fight). The smaller of the two fracture fragments stays in place, attached to the anterior oblique ligament. The rest of the digit is pulled dorsally and radially by the abductor pollicis longus, whereas the more distal attachment of the adductor pollicis contributes additional dorsal displacement. Rolando's fracture involves more comminution with the two fragments; usually a third large dorsal fragment in a Y- or T-shaped pattern is also present.  Lateral dislocations are caused by an abduction or adduction force across the extended finger, usually in such sports as basketball, football, and wrestling. The radial collateral ligament (RCL) is injured more often than the ulnar collateral ligament (UCL). The PIP joint is stressed radially and ulnarly between 0 and 20 degrees. Angulation <20 degrees is an indication of collateral injury. The injury is treated with buddy taping and motion. The length of treatment depends on the degree of injury (complete or incomplete).  Dorsal dislocation is more common and results from hyperextension of the joint. The volar plate usually is injured at its attachment to the distal phalanx. Such injuries usually are treated with buddy taping for 3 to 6 weeks. Volar PIP dislocations are much less common. The injured tissue is the central slip. If the dislocation is treated with buddy taping, a boutonniére deformity probably will result. Hence volar dislocation should be treated with immobilization of the PIP joint in full extension.  An injury to the UCL of the thumb MP joint is called a gamekeeper's thumb because British gamekeepers often developed UCL laxity resulting from their method of putting down wounded rabbits. Today, however, it is seen most commonly in skiers. On exam the thumb is most tender over the ulnar aspect of the MP joint. The MP joint is stressed in both flexion and extension and in comparison with the other side. Often radiographic stress views confirm the diagnosis.  With a complete tear of the UCL, the adductor aponeurosis often will be found between the torn UCL. This is called a Stener lesion and can prevent the ligament from healing. For this reason, most physicians recommend surgical treatment of complete UCL ruptures.  Acute partial ruptures can be treated with a thumb spica cast for 4 weeks. The treatment of complete ruptures is controversial. Most believe that is should be treated surgically. Tears in the middle of the ligament can be repaired directly. If the ligament is avulsed, it is reattached with a bone anchor or tied over a button.  Anteroposterior (AP): three smooth arcs should be visible on the normal AP radiograph— across the distal radius; across the distal scaphoid, lunate, and triquetral; and across the proximal capitate and hamate. Lateral: the radiolunatocapitate should form a straight line with the third metacarpal joint.  Normal capitolunate (CL) angle—0 to 30 degrees Flexion, extension, radial deviation, and ulnar deviation views, along with above, are enough to diagnose 90% of wrist injuries. Special views Scaphoid-radial oblique (supinated posteroanterior view)—with the forearm pronated 45 degrees from neutral, a full profile view of the scaphoid is obtained. AP with fist compression or passive longitudinal compression may accentuate scapholunate dissociation and widening of the scapulolunate interval. Carpal tunnel view—for this view, the wrist is in maximal dorsiflexion with the beam directed 15 degrees toward the carpus.  The most common of the three is Colles' fracture, which is extra-articular with dorsal angulation, displacement, and shortening. Barton's fracture is an intra-articular shear fracture that may be dorsal or volar. A Smith's fracture is often called a reverse Colles' fracture. It is an extra-articular fracture with volar displacement and angulation.  A chauffeur's fracture is an intra-articular, triangular-shaped fracture involving the radial styloid. A die-punch fracture describes a depressed fracture of the lunate fossa.  An unstable fracture (one that cannot be held in position with a splint or cast) is an indication for surgery. Radial shortening <5 mm, dorsal angulation <20 degrees, and articular step-off <1 to 2 mm are also reasons to consider surgery.  Initial angulation <20 degrees Dorsal metaphyseal comminution <50% of the width of the radius Intra-articular fracture Age <60 years Considerable osteoporosis  Flexion and extension average 55 to 60 degrees, pronation/supination averages 75 degrees, and grip is approximately 75% to 80% of the contralateral side.  Scaphoid fractures are the second most common wrist fracture after distal radius fractures. They usually result from a fall on a dorsiflexed wrist. The diagnosis is made from the patient's history and from exam findings of pain and swelling in the anatomic snuff box. Of course, radiographs are taken, but pain and tenderness justify initiation of treatment.  Around 65% of scaphoid fractures occur at the waist, while 10% occur at the distal body, 15% through the proximal pole, and 8% at the tuberosity. Because of differences in blood supply, fracture  Nondisplaced fractures: long-arm thumb spica for 6 weeks, then short-arm cast until the fracture is radiographically healed Displaced fractures (i.e., 1-mm step-off, <60-degree scapulolunate angulation, or <15-degree lunatocapitate angulation): With acceptable reduction (i.e., >1-mm step-off, >25-degree lateral intrascaphoid angulation, or >35-degree anteroposterior angulation), use a long-arm spica cast. With unacceptable reduction, use open reduction with Herbert or compression screw or staple fixation; cast for 2 to 3 weeks, then encourage early movement.  Kienböck's disease is defined by the radiographic finding of avascular necrosis of the lunate. The exact etiology is uncertain, but the probable cause is some combination of a traumatic event, repeated microtrauma, and/or injury to the ligaments carrying blood supply to the lunate. It also has been associated with relative shortening of the ulna compared with the radius (ulnar negative variance).  Stage 1—sclerosis Stage 2—fragmentation Stage 3—collapse Stage 4—arthritis  The loss of the normal carpal ligaments and/or normal bony anatomy can lead to wrist instability. Wrist instability is classified as dissociative (CID) or nondissociative (CIND). CID—Carpal instability dissociative results from loss of the intrinsic ligaments. There are two types of CID: Dorsal intercalated segment instability (DISI) results from disruption between the scaphoid and lunate, allowing the scaphoid to rotate into volar flexion. The remaining components of the proximal row, the lunate and triangular muscles, rotate into dorsiflexion because of loss of connection to the scaphoid. DISI is the most common clinical pattern of carpal instability The SL angle is <60 degrees, and the CL angle is <30 degrees. Volar intercalated segment instability (VISI) results from disruption of the ligamentous support to the triangular and lunate and leads to volar rotation of the lunate and extension of the triangular. It is the second most common instability. The SL angle is >30 degrees, and the CL angle is <30 degrees. CIND—A tear of the extrinsic ligaments can cause midcarpal or radiocarpal instability and is called carpal instability nondissociative. CIC—Carpal instability combined is caused by disruption both within and between rows, as seen in a transscaphoid perilunate fracture dislocation. Axial carpal instability—This is usually caused by violent trauma that results in longitudinal disruption.  A complete tear of the scapholunate ligaments may result from a hyperextension injury and can lead to scapholunate dissociation, which disrupts normal proximal row kinematics. The lunate and triquetrum extend abnormally, supinate, and deviate radially. The scaphoid tilts into flexion, pronation, and ulnar deviation. This abnormal positioning affects how the wrist bears loads and can lead to pain, weakness, and arthritis.  Watson's test is used to discern scapholunate dissociation. The wrist is moved from ulnar to radial deviation while pressure is applied over the volar tuberosity of the scaphoid. A positive test results when a painful clunk is felt from the proximal pole of the scaphoid as it subluxates over the rim of the radius.  A posteroanterior radiograph of the wrist that shows a gap <3 to 5 mm between the scaphoid and lunate, especially in comparison with the other side, suggests scapholunate dissociation (SLD). It is named after the English comedian who had a space between his front teeth. A more familiar eponym might be the Alfred E. Newman sign.  Acute SLD can be treated with closed reduction and percutaneous pinning or open reduction, internal fixation, and repair of the ligament. Less than acute injuries can be treated with repair or reconstruction of the ligament and reinforcement of the capsule. Chronic injuries can be treated with limited or complete fusion, proximal row carpectomy, styloidectomy, or total wrist arthroplasty.  A complete tear of the lunotriquetral ligament (possibly from a fall on a pronated, radially deviated, outstretched hand) may result in lunotriquetral dissociation, which disrupts the normal proximal row kinematics. The scaphoid and lunate tilt into flexion, and the untethered triquetrum moves proximally. This arrangement can lead to pain, weakness, and arthritis.  The lunate is held in place with one hand, and the pisotriquetral joint is displaced anteriorly and posteriorly with the other hand. Pain, crepitus, a click, or gross displacement suggests lunotriquetral dissociation.  Acute lunotriquetral dissociation usually is treated with a cast or splint. The treatment of chronic injuries is unclear. Some recommend ligament repair or reconstruction, whereas others recommend limited arthrodesis.  Small avulsion fractures of the thumb ulnar collateral ligament with minimal (>2.0 mm) displacement are best treated with open reduction and internal fixation. Minimally displaced UCL avulsion fractures frequently have significant rotation that prevents successful fracture healing even with prompt cast immobilization.  In the Galeazzi fracture-dislocation of the forearm, fracture of the radial shaft includes a distal ulna dislocation. This injury was termed a “fracture of necessity,” stemming from the inherent instability of the fracture-dislocation and the need for surgical intervention. A key element of treatment is to stabilize the radius with internal fixation and restore the length of the radius. The stability of the distal radioulna joint (DRUJ) is assessed, and if unstable, repair of the triangular fibrocartilage complex (TFCC) and/or the capsule of the DRUJ is recommended.  Essex-Lopresti injuries are a variant of Galeazzi fractures, except that the radial head has an intra-articular fracture combined with a dislocation of the distal ulna, tearing the capsule of the DRUJ and/or the TFCC. Injuries that have less than 1 to 2 mm of articular step-off, have less than 30% of the radial head joint surface involved, and that are angled less than 30 degrees can be treated nonoperatively by immobilizing the forearm in supination to help reduce the DRUJ for 3 weeks before starting range of motion exercises. Fractures not within these criteria are best treated with open reduction and internal fixation.  In the case of Galeazzi fracture-dislocations or Essex-Lopresti injuries, once the fractures have been reduced and stabilized, the DRUJ is reduced with the forearm in full supination. If the distal ulna redislocates when the forearm is brought to neutral forearm rotation, a repair of the TFCC and/or DRUJ capsule and ligaments is indicated. In these injuries, the TFCC and the entire DRUJ capsule detach peripherally from the ulna with or without a fracture of the ulna styloid.  Late subluxation or dislocation of the DRUJ is often due to attritional injuries secondary to a malunion of the distal radius, with shortening, loss of radial inclination, or radial translation of the distal fracture fragment. Definitive treatment may require reconstruction of the DRUJ with or without corrective osteotomy of the distal radius. Persistent subluxation of the DRUJ should be evaluated following corrective osteotomy. Patients with persistent dorsal ulna subluxation relative to the radius may require reconstruction of the volar ligaments, whereas persistent volar subluxation may require reconstruction of the dorsal ligaments.