A comparative analysis of electrochemical cells containing fluidized-bed electrodes (FBEs) is made. The influence of the arrangement of the working space on the manner of particle movement and distribution of polarization inside of the FBE is taken into account. The configuration of the FBE working space is chosen in accordance with the hydrodynamic and electrochemical processes taking place in the FBE. Reactors of high capacity are designed on the basis of the principle of spout fluidization. Some examples of their application in hydrometallurgical processes are shown.Fluidized-bed electrochemical reactors (FBERs) are attractive for their capacity and operability in many fields of electrochemical technology, especially in the treatment of dilute or complicated solutions During the 1970–1990 a number of reactors using fluidized-bed electrodes (FBEs) were designed and tested. These known designs are compared with the cells developed by the team of Ukrainian designers in current work. Two methods of fluidizing agent supply, namely, uniform and jet fluidization, are available in hydrodynamics. Uniform fluidization was widely used in the design of the first cells employing FBEs. FBERs with electrode chambers located vertically, similar to devices for other mass transfer processes, have been widely investigated in pilot-plant reactors Unfortunately, polarization studies followed design activities. It was shown The concept of an electrolyser with uniform fluidization of the FBE was almost fully employed in the project of the AKZO company The common design fault was caused by the use of the principle of uniform fluidization of dispersed material. All the mentioned designs used a flow predistributor in the form of a stack of grids or porous plate placed in the bottom of The transition from the principle of uniform fluidization to jet supply of the electrolyte into the working chamber has become the main progress in FBE reactors design. A design of the electrolysers was proposed The development of reactors with inclined chambers An FBE design was also proposed with fluidization by means of gas bubbles supplied through the bottom of the device Current research and design work is based on the well-known fact, that the electrochemical behaviour of FBEs is determined by the distribution of the electrochemical process rate along the lines of the electrical current. The latter is determined by the mechanism of charge transfer in the discontinuous conducting phase of the FBE, and is influenced by the hydrodynamic parameters of the system In a comparative investigation of FBE using uniform and jet fluidization, we have shown To prove this, the electrode potentials of the discontinuous metal phase were measured by means of a composite probe consisting of a Pt sphere with an attached Luggin capillary of the reference electrode The important point is that the mass transfer rate in FBE does not depend on the flow velocity, and the polarization distribution is determined by the conductivity of the discontinuous metal phase of the FBE So in the design of a laboratory-scale cell one is limited only by the flow velocity required to maintain the desired bed expansion. On this basic we have avoided the faults of the described design The comparative characteristics of the flow velocity vector and of the polarization distribution in the FBE depending on the configuration of working space, arrangement of both the current collectors and flow predistributors and the primary trajectories of particle movement are given in The information obtained on the character of the particles movement and on the polarization distribution in the bulk of the FBE can be used to create a reactor of a large specific capacity. It is necessary to take into account that, with increase of the dimensions of the chamber, the large-scale circulation of the flow will occur With reference to the FBE it means, that with the use of the spout structure for the fluidization the peripheral part of the working chamber should be tilted from the vertical. The contradictions between manner of circulation and the optimum polarization distribution for the FBE of large size along the lines of electrolyte flow appear because of excessive expansion of the reactor space along the lines of electrical current. Difficulties arise in the design of filterpress devices; their bipolar connection becomes complicated. Such a design is valid only up to a cell length of less than 400 Therefore, for further stages of scaling-up of the reactor, we have developed an electrolysis module of large capacity employing an FBE. The following requirements were taken into account. The creation of FBE of Maximum simplification of the design in order to create a multichamber device with a filterpress assembly and bipolar connection for the electrical current. The opportunity to employ of particles of any density, shape and size. This cell was used in pilot-plant runs for Ni refining and deep purification of the electrolyte. Special attention was paid to the design of the flow predistributor of the electrolyte in the FBER. A number of attempts have been made to average the electrolyte flow velocity in the working chamber of electrolyzers We have proposed an original flow predistributor, providing variable hydrodynamic resistance. The predistributor is in the form of a fluidized-bed, bent from the top by means of mesh covers. The material the predistributor should meet the following requirements: Concurrence of the hydrodynamic characteristics of fluidization with those for the particles used in the beds, which do not vary in the weight. A greater fluidization critical velocity of the material of the predistributor than the fluidization critical velocity of the In such a flow predistributor, the supply of electrolyte provides fluidization of a granulated material with variable hydrodynamic resistance, in the cavities of the predistributor chambers. At the optimum conditions of work, the fluidized-bed in the chamber presents minimal resistance to the flow. However, as it has a considerably larger hydrodynamic resistance than the stack of grids, such a bed provides averaging of the flow velocity. In the case of reduction in the amount of particles in any part of the reactor volume, causing a changes of electrolyte flow conditions in the working chamber of the electrolyser and a break in the jets in the appropriate point of the predistributor, particles of filler are pressed at this point into the upper cover, thus sharply reducing its section. The velocity of the electrolyte supply decreases here, and the non-uniformity of the electrolyte supply in the working chamber is eliminated. The proposed design was used in cells both with uniform and jet fluidization with particles of different density and shape. The height of a recirculating fluidized-bed is determined by the angle of release of the jet We propose to distribute the conditions of jet fluidization over the whole volume of the working chamber of the eletrolyser employing an FBE. To reach this goal, a number of planes of an insulating material were arranged in the volume of the cathodic chamber to shift the nucleus of the spout in the direction of the diaphragm ( In optimum conditions, the shifting plane 4 was placed 20–50 The reformed spout takes the electrode material upward, where part deviates to the diaphragm, and part, by means of the shifting plane 4, is lowered onto the current collector. Thus a cascade of coherent spouting beds is formed in the working chamber ensuring optimum conditions of agitation of the FBE material. Particles of various sizes form different contours of primary circulation. The initial metal particles of small size, added from the dosator at the top of the FBER, grow in size during electrolysis; they are shifted to lower levels of circulation, according to size, and then can be removed from the chamber through the unloading unit at the base. Thus, the opportunity for the automation of electrodeposition processes using the FBER is realized. Under anodic dissolution of the dispersed material a reduction in weight and particle size occurs. This requires the permanent regulation of the electrolyte inlet velocity. The addition of fresh portions of material requires an increase in flow velocity, that promotes increased escape of anodic sludges, and lowers the concentration of the components separated in the sludge. The disorder in fluidization in the anodic chamber leads to salt and sludge passivation of the anodic current collector, resulting in local burns and an increase in the voltage drop. For essential simplification of the anodic process, a reduction of the electric power required and an increase in the degree of anodic sludge beneficiation we propose to replace fluidization in the anodic chamber of the reactor by pulsed agitation of the dispersed material. The pulse provides intensive agitation of the material, escape of particles less than 0.05 The top of the anodic bed is to be settled 30–50 The tests of nickel refining using the FBER were carried out at the ‘Severonickel’ Enterprise, Russia. The cell was made up of a block of four FBERs, assembled in a unit of bipolar type, containing a titanium cathode and three anode bipolar current collectors. The electrode spaces were divided by anion-exchange membranes MA-41. The height of the cell was 2120 Cathodic nickel particles of 1.6 Active nickel powder could represent a promising material to be refined, allowing the elimination of production end refining of nickel compact anodes. Therefore, this system has interesting industrial applications. The pulsed agitation of dispersed anodes produces beneficiated anodic sludges and replacement of the saturated solution. The current through the etectrolyser is 360 The anodic current efficiency, calculated from the change of C The cathodic current efficiency was within the limits of 70–90%, with the lower values observed for cells of large thickness and under conditions of aeration of the solutions, which promoted the enhancement of the side process of the reduction of oxygen dissolved in the electrolyte. For cells of small thickness in the absence of aeration, the current efficiency always exceeded 80%. The voltage drop between the cathode and the anode in cells of small thickness changed from 3.5–5 The results obtained show the reliability of the FBER in nickel refining and give the opportunity for automation of particles loading and unloading, pH control and stabilization of the electrolyte flow velocity through the cell. This cell was also used in pilot-plant tests for deep purification of a nickel electrolyte from impurity ions of electropositive metals at Noril’sk Mining Metallurgical Plant, Russia. The productivity of the device (overall dimensions 1000 It was shown that the most economical operation is suitable for the treatment of solutions at the last stage of deep purification, and high current densities allow the effective purification of raw solutions. At the same time, with intensive aeration of a solution, it was impossible to estimate quantitatively the degree of purification of the solution flom copper ions, since the latter are also dissolved by means of oxidation by the dissolved oxygen. From an initial contents of 1.5 It was proposed to switch the polarity of the electrodes, with the aim to produce only a solution (in the anode chamber), enriched by Pb and Cu. This solution should be directed to the removal of impurities by means of extraction. This avoided need to load granules from the cell, which in turn allowed the amount of Ni–Pb–Cu alloy directed for raw refining to be reduced. We have solved the problem of the design of a cell of high capacity taking into account the manner of FBE particle movement. The design contains a cascade of coherent spouting beds in the working chamber of the FBE. To avoid large-scale fluctuations of the bed a flow predistributor with the properties of an alternate hydraulic resistor was designed. Different industrial reactors with fluidized-beds of glass particles, carbon and ion-exchange materials (particles of low density) and metal particles for hydrometallurgy, metal electrodeposition, plating waste treatment and electrosynthesis can be produced if attention is paid to appropriate design considerations.