Eddy current separation (ECS) is a process used throughout the scrap recycling industry for sorting nonferrous metals from other nonmetallic fluff. The mechanism is based on the principle that a time-varying magnetic field will induce electrical current to flow throughout the body of a conductive particle. This current then reacts to the applied magnetic field by exhibiting a pronounced force of deflection, thereby separating the materials. The process is remarkably efficient and environmentally friendly, making it essential to the growth and sustainability of the metal recycling industry. In this review, we aim to summarize the available literature on eddy current separators for recovery of nonferrous metals. Although several different designs of eddy current separators have been examined through the years, the most common in use today remains the belt-driven rotary drum design. Limitations of the belt-driven rotary drum design are discussed as well as potential new designs and new applications for eddy current separators.Metals play an integral role in modern society. In 2017 alone, the apparent U.S. consumption of iron and steel reached 100 million metric tons ( With the depletion of high-grade ores and an increasing global demand, we are faced with two possible solutions: (1) improve our current extraction methods of low-grade virgin ore deposits, or (2) develop and integrate new recycling technologies within the existing value chain. Due to the relative technological maturity of the mining industry, however, the first solution is likely to expect only incremental improvements in the foreseeable future. In contrast, recycling is a comparatively young industry with tremendous potential for growth and technological innovation. This is also evident from consistent economic growth that the recycling industry has demonstrated. For example, the U.S. metal scrap recycling industry has increased by 37% from $77 billion in 2010 to $106 billion in 2015 ( Of all the materials used in society, metals have the greatest recycling potential. Not only are metals relatively easy to recover from municipal waste, but their physical properties do not degrade over time like other materials (e.g., plastics and paper). Recycling also requires significantly less energy than mining, since materials generally need only to be melted rather than processed from raw mineral deposits. For many common commodity metals (i.e., Al, Cu, Fe and steel), these savings can typically reach as high as 70% or more ( Based on U.S. Geological Survey data from 2015, the United States recycled approximately 58.3 Mt of the metals ( In order to effectively recycle scrap metal, it must first be separated from other materials (e.g., polymers/plastics, glass, fibrous materials, construction materials, etc.), as well as other dissimilar metals (e.g., ferrous from nonferrous). This process is arguably one of the most important cost barriers to the entire industry, as it depends highly on the availability of technology as well as the composition of a particular stream. Similar to mineral processing, the first step is usually some physical size reduction via chopping, shredding, crushing, etc. After size reduction, various physical separation methods can be used to separate the mixture based on properties of the material. This is accomplished by exploiting differences in physical properties of various materials such as density, magnetism, and electrical conductivity. A metal shredder plant generally generates three fractions, commonly referred to as the Ferrous, Heavy Fraction (HF), and Light Fraction (LF). The Ferrous mainly consists of iron and steel products, and is separated by magnetic separators after shredding. The HF consists of mainly of nonferrous metals, alloys, and nonmetallic materials. The LF is mainly dirt/fluff with a small metal fraction (less than 5%) and is recovered by screening and air suction. Automotive Shredder Residue (ASR) is a combination of HF and LF, and annually generates approximately five million tons worldwide, which is about 5% of the global industrial waste ( Refining of the HF requires the further use of separation methods/technologies to acquire an enriched product. Sometimes to achieve a desired quality fraction, even further size reduction may be required. Although nonmetallic materials are generally still within the HF, these can be removed by density separation methods. For smaller particles (< 0.5 mm) in the LF, froth flotation can be utilized to further recover engineered polymers of value. Ferrous scrap metal is that which contains iron, and is generally removed first is scrap sorting. Examples of some common ferrous metal scrap include alloy steel, carbon steel, cast and wrought iron. It is worth noting that a common misnomer is to associate Magnetic separation is a process that extracts ferromagnetic materials through the use of powerful, permanent magnets. The basic principle has been also used since the mid-1800s in mineral processing for removal or tramp iron or iron ore beneficiation. It is also used to remove strongly ferromagnetic impurities from non-metallic ore (e.g. quartz and feldspar). A review by After magnetic separation has removed the bulk ferrous fraction from a scrap material stream, the most common processing step to occur next is eddy current separation (ECS). The mechanism works by exposing conductive, nonferrous particles to a time-varying magnetic field, which in turn gives rise to electrical currents throughout their volumes ( In most commercial designs, the time-varying magnetic field is achieved by rotating a cylindrical array of permanent magnets with alternating polarity ( The application of ECS technology offers a robust method to separate a nonferrous fraction with high recovery; however, existing ECS designs are limited by particle geometry. Although eddy current phenomenon was discovered well over a hundred years ago and is used in the design of electric motors, dynamos, and transformers, for example, there still exist knowledge gaps in the fundamental understanding of eddy currents. In regards to eddy-current separators, many developments and U.S. patents were granted in the 1960s. Further developments where contributed by Schloemann, Forssberg, Rem, and Zhang from the late 1970s to the 1990s. Eddy current separation has historically been overlooked as a means of separating nonferrous metals from a mixture of other materials. The designs of these separators have only made incremental advancements in metal fraction separations, while new designs of eddy current separators are stagnant. This is a result of a technical understanding of the separation mechanism. The available literature on the subject is still in development. Reviews on the technical applications of eddy current separators have been published by Although the basic principle of eddy current separation has been well known for decades, the underlying theory that governs it is notoriously complex. An excellent text to review the formulation of electromagnetic fields in materials is that by In practice, it is almost always appropriate to assume that the system is operating in a sinusoidal steady state with angular frequency ω; or if not, then it can at least be expressed as a superposition of sinusoidal steady states over a spectrum of many distinct frequencies. In either case, the time derivative is typically replaced with When a conductive particle like aluminum or copper is placed somewhere inside of The greatest mathematical complication arises from the fact that Once a solution for If the magnetic field profile is approximately linear, we can then calculate Using the above formulation, ( In Once the net force has been calculated, it becomes possible to predict the kinematic trajectory of a metal particle as it travels through the magnetic field profile. This is accomplished by simply discretizing Newton’s laws of motion wherein the continuous-valued derivatives are replaced with finite-difference expressions in time. For example, the change in velocity If one so desires, it is also possible to account for the spin and orientation of the metal particle. This can often be a significant source of extra deflection if the particle must push against the flooring beneath it before rotating. We begin by calculating the net, time-averaged torque vector using As we saw with the force calculations, it is often possible to treat the magnetic field profile as nearly uniform with only a slight linear gradient. In this scenario, the net torque simplifies greatly into Once the torque has been calculated, it is then possible to apply a similar discretization to the angular velocity and angle orientation. This method has served as the basis for many well-known studies in eddy current separation, including ( Despite the variety of research and commercial ECSs, all of the current ECS companies offer minor variations of the conventional rotary-drum type of separator (i.e., mechanical movement of permanent magnets). This type of separator has established itself as the default in this industry. The design ( Quality metrics used to quantify a separation are recovery ( Generally ECS are effective at recovering nonferrous metals out of nonmetallic fluff in most separations. Moreover, these systems have high throughput (t/h) and are generally reliable. There is a wide range of sizes and prices for the systems offered by ECS manufacturers. Some manufacturers sell complete systems while others provide parts to recyclers and/or equipment manufacturers who offer turnkey systems. Although robust, ECS rotary-drum type separators have inherent limitations. An inability to throw awkward geometries (e.g., wires, thin foils/coupons) is one limitation. For example, copper wires do not throw well. Moreover, printed circuit boards contain an appreciable amount of nonferrous metals; however, they fail to throw properly due to their makeup. Also, heavy low-conductivity materials do no throw well. Generally, metal recycling plants use other methods to recover these types of materials, but is not the subject of this work (e.g., optical sorters and density separation). In all of these ECSs, the magnetic flux density and frequency are determined by the design of the rotor; namely, by the number of poles and strength of the permanent magnets inside the drum and its rotational speed. Common ECS designs also struggle with small particles (<1 mm), which require high excitation frequencies (kHz-MHz) before they will throw. To overcome this, manufacturers typically increase the number poles (e.g., 32 poles are common). However, there is a limit on this due to a reduced B-field. The more common designs use barium ferrite magnets, which work well to separate Al beverage cans from trash. For high tonnage applications with maximum recovery, separators use rotors with big blocks of strong long-life rare earth magnets to achieve over 5 kG (0.5 T) at the surface of the conveyor belt. The field depth determines how thick the scrap layer over the belt can be without deteriorating the separation efficiency. The first record of observing eddy currents, which was called “rotatory” magnetism, and the fact that most nonferrous conductive bodies could be magnetized, was reported by François Arago in 1824 ( The concept of the alternating magnetic field eddy-current separator was introduced by In 1913, ( A concentrator exploiting the rolling action imparted to metal particles by a rotating magnetic field had earlier been patented by In the 1970s, Vanderbilt University (   Schloemann and Reiner reported on two types of inclined plane separators in 1979 ( In 1979 (   In the 1970s and 80s, the Raytheon Research Division, USA, made developments in the area of permanent magnetic field separators. Two types of system were investigated: an inclined table or ramp separator which consisted of an array of permanent magnets with alternating polarities mounted under an aluminum or stainless steel sheet; and a rotary drum separator that can be simply envisaged as a ramp separator rolled into a drum formation ( In 1988, the vertical eddy current separator (VECS) was introduced by A paper by A study published in 1991 by    In 1997, ( Rotating-disc eddy-current separators were initially developed by the Delft University of Technology group in the late 1980s ( Saveliev’s patent in 1998 ( Rem et al. published a series of papers in 1997–1998 ( In a series of papers from 1998 to 1999, In 2001, ( Another new design was proposed by  In the same year, ( Also in 2002, A new design where the particles are separated in liquid medium (room temperature water) using a rotary drum was examined by In 2004, a study by Also in 2004,   In 2015     From about the late 1990s to present, Rajamani and coworkers ( Advantages of the EDX™ system include minimal mechanically moving parts, a system that can operate at higher excitation frequencies (up to 50 kHz), and low energy demand ( With a similar configuration, ( Having reviewed the different types of eddy-current separators (ECS) described in the scientific and technical literature for the last 130 some years, in this section we aim to discuss future challenges and potential directions for development in ECS research. The design and performance of the rotating belted-drum type eddy current separators have been improved substantially in the last ten years, primarily due to advances in magnet materials and magnet configurations, as well as a better understanding of the separation mechanisms ( Because most recycling streams are roughly sized, randomly shaped, and have variable material composition, laboratory testing is needed for the manufacturer to determine the best-suited machine and range of settings for a given separation. Factors that influence separation and parameters that manufacturers normally optimize are outlined in Current eddy current separators are primarily used to separate metallic aluminum components from recycle streams. An area in where ECS has gained considerable use is in automotive shredder residue (ASR) aluminum recovery ( Alxxx series alloys ( Zorba and Twitch (Al, Cu, Ni, Brass and Al automobile scrap) ( Photovoltaic materials ( Lithium-ion battery materials (Li/Co/Ni/Mn oxides, Cu, Al); Recovery of rare earth elements; may be possible. Separation based on materials that have relatively large differences in conductivity appears to be easily achievable with this technique. On the other hand, separation of materials with relatively close conductivities presents a challenge. Moreover, it is not just also the differences in conductivity, but the absolute magnitude of the conductivity. A higher excitation frequency of the magnet will be required to achieve effective separation of less conducting particles. Despite the advancements made in ECS designs and developed models, there still remain some basic and applied questions in ECS that have yet to be resolved. For example, how much influence does humidity or dust/coating on metallic particle influence induced eddy currents ( In this review we have made an attempt to summarize the current available literature on eddy current separators for recovery of nonferrous metals from waste streams. Many technological breakthroughs have enabled the industrial scale use of such systems in metal scrap sorting and recycling scenarios. However, there still remains knowledge gaps in the fundamental understanding the of separation mechanism. Moreover, the ability to model such systems remains a technical challenge with substantial room for improvement. Current limitations in design (i.e., rotary belt drum ECS) limit the broader applications of this technology, and its full potential has yet to be fully realized. Future developments of this technology will potentially have large impacts on the metal scrap and recycling industries. YRS would like to acknowledge support provided by the U.S. Department of Energy, Office of Science, Energy Efficiency & Renewable Energy, Sunshot Initiative. This publication was developed under an appointment to the Energy Efficiency and Renewable Energy (EERE) Research Participation Program, administered for the U.S. Department of Energy (DOE) by the Oak Ridge Institute for Science and Education (ORISE). ORISE is managed by ORAU under DOE contract number DE-SC0014664. This document has not been formally reviewed by DOE. The views and conclusions contained in this document are those of the authors and should not be interpreted as necessarily representing the official policies, either expressed or implied, of DOE, or ORAU/ORISE. DOE and ORAU/ORISE do not endorse any products or commercial services mentioned in this publication. JRN and RKR would like to acknowledge support provided by the United States Advanced Research Project Agency-Energy (ARPA-E) METALS Program under cooperative agreement grant DE-AR0000411. Contributions by Harini Naidu and Pamela Bogust are also acknowledged.