Ankle injuries, especially malleolar fractures, are quite common. The outcome of their treatment depends on the correct identification of the mechanism of injury and subsequent realignment of the ankle fracture with appropriate fixation. The diagnosis of an ankle fracture can be made on the initial radiographs and when there is only one break of the ring of the ankle mortice, without significant displacement, then non-operative treatment can be appropriate. A double break of the ankle mortice ring with displacement and tibiofibular disruption requires open reduction and internal fixation. Whatever technique is used it should result in a stable fixation and complete congruency of the ankle joint mortice and should allow early rehabilitation.
                  Pronation or type C Weber ankle fractures and pilon fractures are associated with a lower outcome score whilst supination-eversion fractures of the Lauge-Hansen classification are characterised by less displacement and fewer complications.Ankle fractures were described by Sir Pervical Pott in 1768, as fibular fractures with deltoid disruption. The treatment as well as biomechanics of ankle fractures have remained a problem, in spite of the publications of numerous classifications and papers. The ultimate goal in the treatment of ankle fractures is to obtain an anatomical position of the ankle mortice and a stable, mobile and painless ankle joint. Ankle injuries are very common and may involve ligamentous and boney structures. The ankle is a modified hinge joint which consists of three bones (tibia, fibula and talus) and the ligaments which bind these bones as a unit. The stability of the talocrural–ankle joint is achieved by osseous elements and by the strong ligamentous support. The lateral collateral ligament consists of three components: anterior talofibular ligament (ATFL), calcaneofibular ligament (CFL) posterior talofibular ligament (PTFL), while the medial deltoid ligament consists of a superficial and a deep, stronger portion and which is in the main a medial stabilizer of the ankle joint. The distal end of the fibula lies against the tibial groove, held together by a complex of distal tibiofibular ligaments and is called a syndesmosis. This complex consists of a group of ligaments—anteroinferior and posteroinferior tibiofibular ligament and the strongest one, the interosseous ligament which is the thickest part of interosseous membrane. Around the ankle joint lie 11 tendons as well as neurovascular elements. Ligaments and tendons which surround the ankle joint provide stability as well as coupled motion in the sagittal plane and less so in the frontal plane. Ankle movements range from 15° to 32° of dorsiflexion to 15–30° of plantarflexion. The ankle is a weight-bearing joint which can withstand forces of up to five times body weight during walking and running. Thus, ankle injuries which decrease the tibiotalar contact area result in an increase of contact pressure, a painful joint and increased degeneration. The role of the different ankle structures has been widely studied and the conclusion is that the primary stabiliser of the ankle joint is the lateral fibular complex with the talus. Ankle ligament injuries are frequent (mostly the anterior talofibular ligament) and when they are associated with ankle fractures the time for healing is prolonged. Thus, if the pain persists a long time after fracture healing, it could be due to joint instability, reactive synovitis or nerve compression. Occult ankle injuries (radiographically hardly visible) such as osteochondral or chondral fractures may cause pain. It is then advisable to use magnetic resonance imaging (MRI). As a result of decades of research into ankle fractures there are many classifications involving the mechanism of injury as well as correlation with fracture patterns. The most common classifications are those of Lauge-Hansen and Weber. Nowadays the most accepted classification is the generic one made by Lauge-Hansen in 1948. It was based on experimental, clinical and radiographic findings and demonstrates that the fracture type depends on the position of the foot and the direction of the force at the moment of injury. The terms of Lauge-Hansen's classification, which is basically a cadaveric study, are nowadays somewhat modified for semantic reasons. Eversion of the foot is changed to the term external rotation, emphasising the key mechanism of the ankle fracture which is excessive rotation and the position of the talus in the ankle mortice, at the time of injury. The Danis-Weber classification is based on the level of the lateral/fibular fracture, the level of the tibiofibular syndesmotic disruption and potential talar (ankle) instability. In the type A fracture there is a transverse fibular fracture below the joint line, with the intact syndesmosis and this fracture type corresponds to the supination-adduction fracture type of Lauge-Hansen. Type B fracture involves a fracture at the level of the ankle joint line, with a partial syndesmotic injury. It corresponds with the supination-eversion injury of Lauge-Hansen classification. Type C is the fibular fracture proximal to the tibiofibular joint with associated disruption of the syndesmosis. Here two subtypes of fractures are recognised: a diaphyseal one ( Weber ignored the medial side of the ankle joint and emphasized the fibula and tibiofibular syndesmosis. The importance of any classification lies in its ability to be applied in clinical practice. It must denote which structure is damaged and which must be repaired, even when it is not seen on X-ray (ligamentous lesions). Last, but not least in their importance, are ankle sprains which are the most common ankle injuries, but they are not included strictly in the text about ankle fractures. Most ankle sprains are the result of foot inversion and injury is located at the lateral ligament complex. Most, including the grade III, can be treated by cast immobilization. The external-rotatation (eversion) fractures are the most frequent, The diagnosis of ankle fractures is established by history, clinical and radiological examination. The The The The initial X-ray includes at least three projections: anterior–posterior, lateral, and mortice view, with the foot in internal rotation of 15°. Occasionally stress radiographs for lateral or medial instability may be necessary. Three-dimensional computed tomography (3DCT) for pilon fractures is useful. On radiographs the following parameters are evaluated Medial joint space is less than 4 Interosseous clear space is less than 5 Overlap between anterior tibial tubercule and fibula is at least 10 Talocrural angle (normal is 83°±4°). Talar tilt (0°, with a tolerance of 5° difference between two ankle joints). Tibiotalar line both on AP and lateral radiographs must pass through the centre of the tibia and the centre of the talus. After reduction the results are evaluated on a control X-ray and acceptable results are up to 2 During follow-up radiological arthritic changes should be recorded. The outcome result should be quantitative and presented in a scoring system. Although there are numerous scoring systems we have had good experience with the Petrone system The treatment of ankle fractures can be conservative or operative and depends on the fracture type, the state of the circulation and skin condition, the general condition of patient and the possibility of numerous complications. Important rules in the treatment of the ankle fractures are as follows: Fractures and fracture/dislocations should be reduced as soon as possible, in casualty, because gross displacement can lead to the impairment of the peripheral circulation, neurapraxia and ischaemic loss of skin. All articular surfaces must be anatomically reconstructed, because any incongruity may lead to post-traumatic arthritis. Reduction of the fracture must be maintained during the healing period but excessive external cast immobilisation has deleterious effects on cartilage. Motion of the ankle should be instituted early in order to prevent and minimise the undesirable effects of immobilisation, e.g. atrophy, contracture, synovial adhesions, cartilage degeneration, vascular changes with oedema. Whether the treatment of ankle fractures is closed or open, a successful outcome depends also on the state and the management of the soft tissues and skin. Any abrasion after the period of 12–14 Some studies suggest that closed reduction with cast immobilisation should be reserved for non-displaced, stable fractures, anatomically reduced fractures and for patients with poor medical condition. On the other hand, unstable fractures or fractures with displacement should be treated surgically. In closed reduction of the ankle fracture the reduction is obtained by reversing the mechanism of injury. In view of the swelling and possibility of redisplacement a second X-ray should be taken at 48 The general principle in the treatment of ankle fractures is to stabilise the disruption of the so called ankle ring. Displaced ankle fractures may be treated by open reduction if anatomic reduction cannot be achieved by closed means or if it is impossible to maintain the reduction.    The outcome after the operative or non-operative treatment (according to Pugh In the supination-eversion type of fractures (type A Weber) there is no great difference between operative and non-operative treatment, but for the pronation type of fractures (type C) the outcome is better in the operative group. Results of ankle fracture treatment suggest that the poorest results, after non-operative treatment, are found in group C (pronation-eversion and pronation-abduction injuries). In our series most of pronation type fractures were surgically treated while type A (SE) can be well treated by closed reduction and cast immobilisation. From the surgical point of view it is important to describe the main principles of operative treatment for certain fracture types (from open ankle fractures to mono-, bi- and trimalleolar fractures and pilon fractures).  Type I—Clean wound—laceration less than 1 Type II—Laceration>1 Type IIIa—Extensive soft tissue lacerations or flaps but adequate soft tissue coverage of bone. Type IIIb—Extensive soft tissue damage with bone exposure. Type IIIc—Open fracture with vascular injury requiring repair. At the initial examination a wound swab should be sent for culture, the wound should be covered, tetanus prophylaxis and antibiotics should be administered. In Types II and III fractures aminoglygosides are given as well. The surgical treatment of open ankle fractures is carried out in three stages. Irrigation and debridement of the wound. Internal or external fixation of the fracture. Soft tissue evaluation and closure or coverage of the skin defects. The closure of the wound is postponed for 48–72     The fracture reduction is secured by a five to six hole semitubular plate placed on the posterolateral border of the fibula. Sometimes the distal part of the plate must be bent. In a high fibular fracture with comminution a stronger IC-DCP plate is needed to obtain stability. The medial malleolus is fixed with two screws.   With syndesmosis disruption the fibula must be reduced and transfixed either by a transfixion screw or in the case of comminution or osteroporotic bone, the screw is placed through the semitubular plate ( In neglected cases of tibiofibular disruption a fibular osteotomy proximal to the joint line can be performed. The distal fragment is pulled distally with internal rotation. A bone graft is added and it is fixed with a plate.    The AO classification of pilon fractures is based upon the severity of comminution and displacement. The best visualisation of pilon fractures can be obtained by three-dimensional computed tomography ( According to Yablon, if a pilon fracture involves less than 20% of the articular surface, or displacement is less than 2 Following classical internal fixation (by AO principles), high complication rates have been reported in over 40%. External fixation deals with comminuted fractures by bridging the ankle joint leading to the rigid fixation of both the fracture site and the ankle joint. This kind of external fixation is only temporary. Now there are methods of dynamic joint fixation with minimal internal fixation which allows movement of the ankle and encourages regeneration of joint cartilage ( However, external fixation may be only temporary and can be followed by delayed internal fixation and bone grafting of the metaphyseal defect. More recently arthroscopy of the ankle can be performed after 48–72 Complications of ankle fractures, treated either operatively or non-operatively, are numerous and include malunion, non-union, distal tibial synostosis, infection, wound dehiscence, arthritis, algodystrophy, deep venous thrombosis, embolism and compartment syndrome. This is more common than non-union and leads to pain and arthritis of the ankle joint. The main cause of ankle malunion is failure of the fibular reduction with shortening and rotation of the fibula which results in lateral talar displacement. Sometimes the residual talar instability may cause pain and later arthritis. Thus most authors advocate fibular oseotomy, distal advancement and derotation with bone graft and plate fixation. On the other hand, malunion of the medial malleolus is less common and occurs after an incomplete reduction. There is a narrowing of the anterior ankle joint which results in talus impingement on the medial malleolar margin. In such painful conditions an osteotomy of the medial malleolus through the initial fracture line is performed with correction of its position and fixation. This occurs most frequently at the medial malleolus after closed reduction ( This is more frequent radiologically than one may expect and occurs in up to 30%. This occurs after a fibular fracture or neglected tibiofibular disruption. At the site of a major soft injury new bone formation occurs ( This is characterised by a tibiofibular diastasis. In most cases operative treatment is necessary. After open reduction and internal fixation infection occurs in about 1% of patients. (a) In the case of a superficial infection, only wound care and appropriate antibiotics are needed. (b) In the case of a deep ankle infection, if the fixation device is loose it must be removed and the fracture is stabilised by an external fixator. If the fracture site is secure, the fixation device is left in place until after fraction union (12). The antibiotic treatment is maintained for another 4–6 weeks. This generally occurs over the lateral aspect of the ankle joint due to the lack of subcutaneous tissue. After fixation with a plate it is sometimes very difficult to close the wound. The only therapeutic possibility is elevation of the extremity on an overhead frame which will ensure physiologic drainage. Pillow elevation is insufficient. This is a special problem with a four times greater infection rate, even in patients treated non-operatively. There is a two to seven times greater complication rate than operated ankle fractures in patients without diabetes. This can occur after ankle fractures. This is an important complication which can commonly occur in the ankle and foot. The main causes are bleeding and oedema or externally applied pressure from a tight plaster cast, which compromises the microcirculation. The normal compartment pressure is usually less than 10 Another complication after ankle fracture is algodystrophy which may occur even after a minor injury. The condition is characterised by a constant dull aching pain. As well as oedema the range of ankle movement is decreased and stiffness is present in the late phase of this disease. Treatment consists of physical procedures, antidepressive, adrenergic or anticonvulsive drugs. Ca blockers are helpful with a long duration of action. Other factors can have an influence on the outcome: e.g. subtalar sprains, misdiagnosed tendon injuries around the ankle, osteochondral or synovial lesions which may be found during arthrosocopy. Statistically significant factors, which have been verified my multivariate analysis, influence the final outcome include: age of the patient (younger patients have better results), type of the fracture (pronation type has a worse outcome), certain radiological parameters such as talocrural angle, talar subluxation, exact anatomical reduction (without tibiofibular diastasis) and size of the posterior malleolus (