Grinding processing consumes a lot of energy in mineral processing, but it is a low-efficiency process in which only approximately 1% of the total energy is used to reduce the actual particle size. Therefore, an efficient operation in the grinding process increases the competitiveness of the production and is an essential for enhancing the energy efficiency of the entire mineral processing procedure.
                  Therefore, the study will focus on to finding a different method to predicting the particle size distribution of the ball mill, by using the PBM which reflects the actual size distributions of ground product and the DEM which can understand the internal particle behavior in the mill chamber. First, the grinding parameters were calculated by applying size distributions of ground product under various conditions to PBM and the behaviors of the particles inside the ball mill obtained through DEM were analyzed to predict the distribution of the impact energy used for grinding. Next, the relational expression between the grinding rate parameter and the normal force applied to the grinding materials was derived. Using the relational expression derived from this study, it was confirmed that the size distributions in other conditions can be predicted.Mineral processing is not a single process but a complex process that combines several processes such as grinding, classification, and sorting. In this process, the most amount of energy is consumed in the grinding process, which reduces the particle size of the ore and liberates the target minerals Operating the grinding equipment under optimum conditions can contribute significantly to the improvement of the energy efficiency of the grinding process. The setting up of the grinding equipment under the optimum conditions in an actual operation is costly and time consuming; however, modeling can be used to reduce this consumption. Therefore, research on modeling methods has been conducted for a long time and has been developed to the third generation. In the first generation, the grinding modeling comprised a method of representing the relational expression between the grinding energy and particle size. Rittinger, Kick, and Bond theory were used, but the important factors for predicting the grinding experiment were not considered in these methods, and thus, there is a limit to the achievable precision of the grinding experiment prediction. The population balance model (PBM), which is a second-generation grinding model, is a method of simulating the particle size of the grinding product under various conditions for a specific rate of breakage ( In 1992, Mishra In order to overcome this problem, the studies were conducted recently to predict the particle size by analyzing the collision energy of particles using DEM and PBM by Wang Therefore, the study will focus on to finding a different method to predicting the particle size distribution of the ball mill, by using the PBM which reflects the actual size distributions of ground product and the DEM which can understand the internal particle behavior in the mill chamber. First, the grinding parameters were calculated by applying size distributions of ground product under various conditions to PBM and the behaviors of the particles inside the ball mill obtained through DEM were analyzed to predict the distribution of the impact energy used for grinding. Next, the relational expression between the grinding rate parameter and the normal force applied to the grinding materials was derived. Using the relational expression derived from this study, it was confirmed that the size distributions in other conditions can be predicted. In this study, the PBM is used as a mathematical grinding model. This model consists of two functions: the specific rates of breakage and a primary breakage distribution. The specific rate of breakage is a value that indicates the probability that the particles are ground owing to the grinding energy applied, and the materials having a higher hardness has a smaller grinding probability. In addition, even if the same materials is used, the value varies depending on the size, which can be expressed as shown in Eq. A primary breakage distribution is a value that indicates the particle-size distribution produced by grinding. The weight fraction of the particles generated in the particle-size interval It is possible to simulate the particle-size distribution with respect to an arbitrary grinding time by solving the time series of the mass balance equation, such as that in Eq. To solve the solution of the mass balance equation shown in Eq. DEM is a computer modeling technique used to simulate the behavior of particles using the forces generated by the collision of particles as a result of the fully elastic model proposed by Hertz. Inter-particle forces at the contact point have both elastic and non-elastic characteristics. Thus, it is possible to represent the contact model by a set of parallel connections consisting of a spring and a dashpot. The contact force between the particles can be split into a normal component  If The materials used in this experiment was a 20–40-mm limestone materials collected from Kangwon Material Co. located in Gangwon-do Jeongseon. The main chemical composition was confirmed by X-ray fluorescence (XRF) analysis and is shown in At present, Korea is classified into high-grade limestone with 52% or more of CaO content, 52–53% with middle-grade limestone, and less than 52% low-grade limestone. The materials used in this experiment comprised 43.39% CaO, and it was found that it was a low-grade limestone. In addition, it was confirmed that the sum of chemical components except CaO (43.39%), MgO (10.55%) was less than 1%. Therefore, it was judged that there was no gangue mineral other than dolomite which is the main component of MgO. An X-ray diffraction (XRD) analysis was performed to confirm the mineralogical characteristics of the materials. Similar to what was predicted by XRF analysis, it was confirmed that most of the major peaks consisted of calcite (CaCO In this study, to determine the grinding parameters of the specific rates of breakage and a primary breakage distribution, the Mill used in the grinding experiment was made of perspex materials and can be seen in The grinding media used in this study were steel materials with a diameter of 2.54 cm. The ball and grinding materials filling are factors that greatly influence the grinding rate. A proper setting of the filling is an important factor for increasing the grinding efficiency. The previous paper reported that it is generally known that the optimum grinding rate is achieved under the condition of 30–40% of ball loading The simulation was performed using the EDEM an analysis program that is dedicated to particle dynamics using DEM, a third-generation grinding modeling technique. The physical parameters (Poisson’s ratio, Yonug’s Modulus) of the equipment and the grinding materials were used to confirm the internal behavior of the particle and energy distribution. The parameters of the materials used in the simulation are shown in The experiment was performed according to the grinding test conditions described above, and There exist experimental methods and inversion methods for determining grinding parameters such as a, α, φ, β, and γ from the particle size of the ground product. The experimental method consists of the first-order plot and the BII method, and on using this method, the parameters of the specific rates of breakage and a primary breakage distribution can be obtained. The first-order plot proceeds by grinding a materials of a single particle size for several grinding times and then proceeds to sieving. In this case, the ratio of the remaining grinding particles is obtained by the slope of the semi-log scale with respect to the grinding time. However, this method has a disadvantage owing to which it is difficult to logically interpret when the graph does not have the form of a linear function. In the BII method, the particle-size distribution of the ground product is obtained through grinding for a short period of time in which no secondary grinding occurs. However, the BII method also requires experimental conditions that do not cause secondary grinding, and experimental errors may occur. In this study, we used the simplex method, a nonlinear programming approach of the inversion method, to determine the grinding parameters. When using the inversion method, it is possible to generate a large error by determining five grinding parameters at a time because each grinding parameter can have several solutions through interaction. However, the parameters φ, β, and γ, which are the parameters of the grinding distribution, and α, which is the parameter of the specific rates of breakage have inherent characteristics based on the grinding materials. This characteristics have been confirmed according to the empirical equations which predict how first-order The subscript T refers to the laboratory test mill conditions and results. C1, C2 and C3 are respectively related to mill and ball diameter. Also, C4 and C5 are related to ball and powder loading level.   In general, the ball mill is ground by the impact energy applied to the materials owing to the dropping of the grinding media that is moved upward by the rotation of the mill. The normal force applied to the materials by the grinding media were calculated using the EDEM and can be seen from The results of the force applied to the grinding materials were compared with the grinding parameter  Using the derived relational expression, the particle size distribution of the grinding materials with different grinding conditions was estimated using the relation derived from the comparison of the grinding parameter In this study, the study will focus on to finding a different method to predicting the particle size distribution of the ball mill by combining the force obtained from DEM and the specific rates of breakage parameter obtained through PBM. The specific rates of breakage and a primary breakage distribution of the grinding parameters, except for The energy distribution was confirmed by the normal force applied to the grinding materials by the grinding media. The calculated force values were found to be larger for the condition wherein the lifter had a length of 1 cm than that in the case of a lifter of length 2 cm. The normal force decreased gradually with progression from 1 cm-4 lifters to 2 cm-12 lifters condition, which shows the identical tendency as the particle size distribution obtained from the grinding test. Based on the results of the force obtained on using the DEM and the specific rate of breakage parameter The relationship between the grinding rate parameter and the normal force applied to the grinding material was derived. Therefore, using the relationship derived from this study, it was confirm that the size distributions in various condition can be predicted using the derived relation. This subject is supported by the