The scope for using KSCN solutions in the field of gold leaching from chemical preparation products of hard arsenopyrite concentrates is shown. More than 95% gold is recovered in weak acidic solutions (pH=2–5) at KSCN concentration 0.4 mol/L. The thiocyanate complexes are recovered on carbon adsorbents (BAU, UC, LKAU-4) as well as on ion exchangers (AV-17-10P, AP-100). The gold recovery degree is 99.2–99.8%. The desorption of gold from ion exchangers can be done by thiocarbamide solutions in H2SO4 at room temperature, and from carbon adsorbents by basic thiocarbamide solutions at ∼150 °C.The problems of gold recovery from hard coaly sulphide concentrates are discussed in our works In the present investigation, we have used the gold-containing products after the chemical preparation of arsenopyrite concentrates. The contents of iron sulphides and carbon-containing compounds in these products were about 0.1–0.2%, the gold content was ∼110 g/t. The leaching was accomplished in thermostatted reactors with vigorous mixing and predefined parameters: certain concentrations of KSCN, Na weight ratios of solid to liquid phase 1:10—1:20; process temperature 20±1 °C. The process of leaching continued for 3—5 h. After that, the analysis of gold was carried out: the contents of gold in solutions were determined by atomic absorption method (AAS-30, Germany), and the solid residues were analyzed in solutions obtained after the decomposition of samples in acids mixture (molar ratio HCl/HNO The analysis data were used for the calculation of the gold leaching rate from the chemically prepared products: the amounts of gold recovered from the samples were at first expressed as metal amount per ton of the product (g Au/t), and then as gold contents recovered per unit time ( The gold concentration from the solutions after the leaching was carried out on ion exchangers and on carbon adsorbents. Their physical–chemical and sorption characteristics are summarized in The sorption properties of the sorbents were determined under batch experiment conditions. The distribution coefficients ( The equilibrium time for the sorption of gold from the thiocyanate solutions was 8 h. The molar ratio of the sorbent mass to the volume of the contacting solution was 1:5–1:500. The gold concentration in solutions was determined by atomic absorption method, and the contents of gold in the carbon adsorbents were calculated from the difference between the initial and equilibrium concentrations of gold in solutions. Gold contents in the ion exchangers were determined analogously. Moreover, the quantities of ion exchangers were ashed for 1 h at 550–600 °C and then dissolved in the mixture of HCl+HNO The initial form of the sorbents was chloride and sodium on anion and polyfunctional resins. The gold desorption was carried out by thiocarbamide solutions in H All experiments were repeated three or four times. The experimental error for all experiments did not exceed 6%. The Au–SCN We have compared the rates of gold leaching by solutions of different complex-forming reactants. This leaching was carried out for the products of chemical preparation of arsenopyrite concentrates in nitric acid solutions (this preparation is described by It can be seen from The dissolution rate of gold from product in the thiosulphate solution is lower than in KSCN solution The gold leaching in the cyanide solutions proceeds much slower in comparison with the sulphur-containing reactants We have found that 89–93% recovery degree of gold from product can be reached in the weak acidic KSCN solutions (0.4 mol/L) in 4–5 h. Using a more basic medium, the gold dissolution rate decreases Therefore, the thiocyanate gold leaching from the chemically prepared arsenopyrite concentrates should be used in weak acidic medium (pH<5) and at KSCN concentration 0.1–0.4 mol/L. We have obtained leach solutions containing up to 17.9–24.1 mg/L gold (without recycling). pH values of these solutions were 1.8–3.4, the concentration of iron(III) was up to 0.5 g/L and the contents of other elements were below 1 mg/L.  It can also be noted from the experimental data shown in The organic ion exchangers AV-17-10P, AP-100 and ANKF-5, which we also have used for the sorption of gold in our investigations, have a porous structure. Among them, AV-17-10P possesses the best sorption characteristics It is known We have investigated the gold desorption from ion exchangers and carbon adsorbents by 3–11% thiocarbamide solutions in 3–4% H Therefore, the carbon adsorbents as well as anion exchangers AV-17-10P and AP-100 can be recommended for the recovery of gold thiocyanate complexes. The gold leaching from products of chemical preparation of hard arsenopyrite concentrates by KSCN solutions was studied. It was shown that more than 95% gold recovery is achieved using weak acidic solutions (pH=2–5). The KSCN concentration is 0.4 mol/L. The rate of gold leaching was compared for the different complex-forming reactants: thiocarbamide in H The gold can be recovered from the thiocyanate solutions by sorption on carbon adsorbents and on ion exchangers. The complete desorption of gold was carried out on ion exchangers by sulphuric acid thiocarbamide solutions at the room temperature and on carbon adsorbents by basic thiocarbamide solutions at ∼150 °C.