Emergency department (ED) ultrasound is quickly becoming 1 of the fastest growing and most promising areas of emergency medicine, yet research still lags behind emergency physician use. In our ED, many physicians are already using ultrasound to assist in the reduction of distal radius fractures, despite the small number of published studies supporting its use by emergency physicians. Our primary objective of this study was to determine if ED ultrasound-guided distal radius fracture reductions have better radiologic outcomes than standard closed reduction. Secondarily, we investigated whether ED ultrasound-guidance reduced the overall treatment time and need for repeat reductions. We performed a randomized, single-blinded study of adult patients who presented to the ED between December 10 Participating emergency physicians were trained in the intervention of ultrasound-guidance via 20 minutes of bedside teaching. An additional 4-minute online instructional video was available to physicians throughout the study. Once a patient was enrolled in the study, they were randomized to either ultrasound-guidance (intervention) or standard (control) closed reduction of the distal radius fracture. Post-reduction radiographs were obtained in both groups. Data was collected, compiled in a spreadsheet, and analysed in a blinded fashion. Adequacy of reduction was determined by dorsal tilt < 15°, radial shortening < 4 mm, and radial inclination > 10°. Of the 47 patients enrolled in the study, 27 were randomized to ultrasound-guidance and 20 to standard closed-reduction. Groups were similar in terms of age, sex, fracture comminution, intra-articular extension, and association of ulna fracture. There were a greater proportion of standard reductions performed by attendings as opposed to residents (65% standard, 29.6% ultrasound; P=0.02). In 3 cases, patients were assigned to the standard closed reduction group, but were reduced under ultrasound guidance. In 2 of these cases, the use of ultrasound did not alter the reduction. Using an intention-to-treat analysis, we found no difference in the adequacy of the reduction between the groups (adequate in 90% standard, 92.6% ultrasound; P = 1.00). There was also no difference in the actual reduction time (mean +/− SD: 13.2 +/− 6.6 mins standard, 14.5 +/− 6.4 mins ultrasound; P = 0.49) or the need to repeat the reduction in the ED (only 1 patient in the standard group). Additionally, it was observed that there was no difference in the number of patients subsequently requiring operative fracture repair (25% standard, 29.6% ultrasound; P = 1.00). There is no difference in the adequacy of closed distal radius fracture reductions when using ultrasound-guidance versus standard closed technique. The use of ultrasound does not significantly increase the time required for the reduction.