Organic marine waste was treated by both chemical and biological method to supplement it as nitrogen source in the growth media of sulfate reducing bacteria (SRB), and the resulting extracts were termed as marine waste extract (MWE) and Lactobacillus fermented MWE, respectively. Because of higher nitrogen content and other micro-nutrients, MWE could support higher sulfate reduction (83%) as compared to Lactobacillus fermented MWE (71%). The study further demonstrated that when compared to each optimized single process parameters (pH, MWE and sulfate concentration), optimization of multiple parameters based on Box-Behnken design and response surface methodology improved SRB growth and sulfate reduction by 5–6% and 10–11%, respectively. The experimentally optimized process parameters (1500 mg/L sulfate, pH 7.5 and 20% v/v MWE) resulted in 98% sulfate reduction which was close to the values derived from the theoretical model. This study highlights the use of MWE to improve the treatment of sulfate and metal rich wastewater.Mining and extraction industries generate wastewaters which are often acidic in nature and rich in sulfate and metals ( Sulfate reducing bacteria (SRB) mediated passive remediation is one of the potential alternative and widely practiced technologies used for the treatment of metal and sulfate rich wastewater ( The activity of SRB depends on the availability of nutrients, specially, carbon and nitrogen sources ( Very few reports are available on use of marine waste extract (MWE) as potential nitrogen source for growth of SRB ( Fermentation of shrimp and crab wastes with lactic acid bacteria results in deproteinization ( Different process parameters such as pH, sulfate and nitrogen concentration influence the treatment performance as they effect the growth of SRB ( In the previous study, the bacterial mixed culture grown in SRB growth medium supplemented with MWE was found to contain 96% SRB population (  The marine wastes were collected from different locations along the eastern seashore of Digha (West Bengal, India). The wastes were converted to 40 mesh size according to the procedure mentioned in the previous work ( To analyze the nutritional quality, MWE and Both the media were prepared with deionized water, boiled and subsequently cooled under a continuous flow of nitrogen to remove the dissolved oxygen. The initial pH of the media was maintained at 7.2 by the addition of 0.1 N NaOH. Finally, the media were autoclaved at 103.4 KPa (15 lbs inch Improvement of biological sulfate reduction was observed by optimizing various process parameters such as sulfate concentration, pH and MWE concentration. The study was conducted in 300 mL serum bottle containing 250 mL media inside anaerobic chamber (Thermo scientific, model 1029) which was filled with 85% N Multiple parameter optimization was performed to study the maximum sulfate reduction. This was achieved using Box-Behnken model and a response surface methodology (RSM) was generated using MINITAB15 software ( In the optimization process, the cumulative effect of three different parameters was studied. The variables were sulfate concentration (X  The interactions between the selected independent variables were inferred using Response Surface Methodology (RSM). MINITAB15 was used to generate 3D surface plot which clearly exhibited the effect of response variables on any two dependent variables. Optimum process parameters were determined by C-code which was developed using simple genetic algorithm. It was expected that the optimized process parameters would give maximum sulfate reduction assuming that the response variables were related to independent variable according to equation Sulfate reduction study was performed in batch mode using MWE as nitrogen source under optimized parameters. The experiment was conducted in 1L batch reactor with 800 mL working volume. The microbial samples were analyzed using fluorescence in-situ hybridization (FISH) technique. The method to perform FISH was obtained from The cells were observed using an epifluorescence microscope (Carl Zeiss, Germany, AXIO scope, A1) equipped with filter set 49 (excitation wavelength 365 nm) and filter set 09 (excitation wavelength 45–490 nm) to visualize the cells stained with DAPI and FITC, respectively. Several microscopic fields containing 30–40 cells were considered for counting. If the fields contained an excessive number of microbial cells, the samples were diluted. Samples from all the batch experiments were collected inside the anaerobic chamber and filtered using 0.2 μm membrane filters before analysis. TOC analyzer (O.I. Analytical, Model 1030) was used for measuring TOC by persulfate oxidation method ( pK′ indicates the dissociation constant for H Microbial samples were taken from the optimized batch cultures of both the single stage and multiple parameter optimization studies. The samples were subjected to FISH study. The nutritional characteristics of The nutritional characterization of MWE and its supplemented growth medium was conducted by Sulfate reduction measured in the presence of MWE and During the initial stage of batch experiments, particularly up to 120 h, the The In the previous section, we discussed about the ability of MWE to support better SRB growth and sulfate reduction. Therefore, MWE was supplemented as a nitrogen source in SRB growth medium for single parameter optimization. The parameters investigated in the optimization study were sulfate concentration, pH and MWE concentration. In the first set of the batch experiments, effect of sulfate concentrations was investigated in the range of 500–3000 mg/L with an increment of 500 mg/L. The highest sulfate reduction (88%) was achieved in the presence 1500 mg/L sulfate, a further increase in sulfate concentration resulted in decrease of the sulfate reduction. Similar trend of sulfate reduction was reported by With the increase in sulfate concentration to 1500 mg/L, subsequent decrease in COD/sulfate ratios to 3.7 was observed ( The pH was maintained in the range of 2.5–9.5 in the different growth media. On increasing the pH upto 7.5, sulfate reduction increased to the maximum value (87%). Further increase in pH resulted in the decrease in sulfate reduction ( It is reported that at low pH, the higher energy consumption for proton pumping across the cell membrane could have resulted in the inhibition of growth of SRB, and altered the microbial community structure ( In addition to this, free ammonia could also play a key role in the inhibition of SRB growth at high pH ( Effect of initial MWE concentration was studied at increasing concentration from 5 to 40 % (v/v) with an increment of 5% (v/v). The sulfate reduction increased when MWE concentration was increased from 5% to 20%. Maximum sulfate reduction (88%) was found at 20% MWE concentration. Further increase in MWE concentration above this range inhibited sulfate reduction ( It is reported that increase in nitrogen content resulted in the improvement of SRB activity and sulfate reduction ( The process parameters studied during the single parameter optimization were used to design multiple parameter optimizations using a three factor Box-Behnken design. Box-Behnken design helped in revealing the effect of independent variables such as sulfate concentration, pH and MWE concentration on sulfate reduction. Design of matrix and experimental results are presented in The R Regression model based response surface curves were generated using Minitab software ( The response surface plot with respect to sulfate concentration and pH is presented in Result as in Response surface curve of pH and MWE concentration on sulfate reduction is presented in Thus, the optimized process parameters for maximum sulfate reduction were 1500 mg/L sulfate concentration, pH 7.5 and 10% (v/v) MWE concentration. The resulting sulfate reduction in this combination was 98%. The mathematical model based on equation In the FISH study the microbial cells stained by both DAPI and SRB385 were counted as SRB. The cells stained with DAPI exhibited blue fluorescence. Whereas, green fluorescence were exhibited by cells stained with SRB385. At optimized condition the microbial population was dominated by SRB ( The results of the study have the following implications. In the comparison of performances between the two extracts, MWE has mostly TKN while Further, multiple optimization of the parameters in the treatment process provides better result than single parameter based optimization, where one controls one parameter at a time, keeping the others more or less fixed. This result implicates that such studies should have multiple parameter control to get the best results, in the reported case, with the healthy SRB community. The work describes the performance of two extracts from marine waste. In SRB growth medium supplemented with MWE, SRB population was 86% which yielded 83% sulfate reduction. The same values for SRB growth medium supplemented with The author gratefully acknowledge the