Manganese from high tenor cobalt electrolyte solution was selectively removed using modified di-(2-ethylhexyl) phosphoric acid (D2EHPA). In this study, D2EHPA was converted to Co-D2EHPA and process parameters such as pH, organic concentration, O/A ratio, kinetics etc. were investigated. Results showed that a significant amount of manganese can be extracted using Co-D2EHPA for the optimum processing of cobalt electrolyte solution at equilibrium pH~3.5 and an O/A ratio of 1. The McCabe–Thiele diagram, constructed from the extraction study of manganese showed that 100% manganese can be extracted through four stages using an O/A ratio of 0.65. From the stripping study, it was found that 100% manganese can be stripped from the loaded organic using 0.4M H2SO4 in a single contact.In base metal hydrometallurgical refining industries, typically a cobalt electrolyte solution is generated as a by-product solution. In the case of nickel sulphide ore or concentrate leaching processes the electrolyte is often associated with manganese. The manganese is carried over from the leach solution into the separated cobalt electrolyte stream. Over time manganese can build up in processing circuits. It was found that the cobalt electrolyte solution generated at Vale's Hydrometallurgical Demonstration Plant in Argentia, Canada, contains high tenor cobalt (~ Despite numerous studies on the subject, there is yet to be an accepted technology for the separation of manganese from cobalt containing leach solutions. From the literature search, it was found that the removal of manganese from cobalt electrolyte solution was usually carried out by oxidative precipitation, followed by solid/liquid separation to obtain a purified cobalt electrolyte solution. However, the precipitation method did not sufficiently separate manganese from cobalt. The separation of manganese by solvent extraction method has been studied by many researchers. Several researchers found that D2EHPA is good for the removal of manganese from nickel–cobalt leach solution ( In the present study, a new concept was applied to remove manganese using modified D2EHPA after converting its functional group with Co During extraction only Co Manganese could be selectively removed at pH 3–4 without losing any cobalt through co-extraction. In the extraction experiment of this study, the aqueous feed was the real plant solution (hereinafter referred to as “cobalt electrolyte solution”) collected from the Vale's demonstration plant at Argentia, Newfoundland, Canada. The organic extractant, di-(2-ethylhexyl) phosphoric acid (D2EHPA), used in this study was purchased from Alfa Aesar. The organic solution was prepared by diluting the extractant in Escaid 110, which is a commercial aliphatic kerosene donated by Univar Canada Ltd., and 1-decanol was used as the phase modifier. To convert the functional group of D2EHPA with cobalt ions, a synthetic aqueous solution was prepared by dissolving cobalt sulphate heptahydrate (CoSO In the screening tests, some other extractants such as Cyanex 301, Cyanex 923, Cyanex 272, Acorga M5774, Acorga M5640 and Acorga M5510 were also examined but none were found suitable for manganese separation. Sulphuric acid solution (ACS grade) was used in the stripping study. The concentrations of manganese and cobalt in the feed electrolyte solution were determined using Perkin Elmer ELAN DRCII ICP-MS (Inductively Coupled Plasma Mass Spectrophotometer). The concentration of the cobalt electrolyte solution was not constant throughout the experiment and varied with respect to the time of use from the stock. The calculations for the concentrations of metals after extractions were done based on the metal concentrations in the respective feed solution. The pH of the aqueous solution was found to be about 3 and measured by a 5 Star Orion pH meter (coupled with the Orion 927005MD Star ATC temperature probe) at room temperature. The pH meter was calibrated with a buffer solution of a standard pH before its use in each experiment. Unless otherwise stated, all the tests (extraction and stripping) were conducted in a programmable air bath shaker (Innova-43 Incubator Shaker from New Brunswick Scientific) to control the temperature, time and shaking speed of the mixtures. The shaking speed was maintained at 300 During solvent extraction, to measure the equilibrium distribution of metals between the aqueous and organic phases, equal volumes of the two phases of known concentrations were shaken. Once equilibrium was reached, the phases were separated in a separatory funnel. A centrifuge (Eppendorf Model: 5810) was used to remove any trace amount of emulsified organic from the aqueous raffinate. After separation of the two phases, the metal concentration in the raffinate was measured by ICP-MS (Model: Elan DRCII). The metal concentration in the organic phase was calculated from the difference in metal concentrations in the aqueous feed and the raffinate solution. During cobalt preloading into D2EHPA, it was visually observed that, with the increase of loading of cobalt, the viscosity of the organic phase became high. In this study, no third phase formation was found during any of the extraction experiments. Co-D2EHPA was prepared by pre-loading cobalt ion (Co After the stripping of manganese, the barren organic will be preloaded with cobalt before it is used for manganese extraction. From the economical and practical point of view, in a real integrated plant, this preloading will be carried out using the purified cobalt electrolyte solution from the plant that contains about 90 The screening tests were initially carried out with different kinds of extractant to find a suitable extractant for the selective extraction of manganese from the cobalt electrolyte solution. In the screening tests, D2EHPA was found to be the most suitable extractant for manganese compared to: Cyanex 301, Cyanex 923, Cyanex 272, Acorga M5774, Acorga M5640 and Acorga M5510. However, only 24% manganese was extracted from the cobalt electrolyte solution by 20 In this study, Co-D2EHPA, was used in the solvent extraction process for the extraction of manganese from the cobalt electrolyte solution. During the extraction phase, the pH was varied from 3.5 to 5.5 using 0.75   Separation factor is an important consideration for the selective separation of metals which is significantly dominated by the equilibrium pH as found from this study. The effect of equilibrium pH on the separation factors of manganese and cobalt found in this study are shown in A preliminary kinetic study was investigated to predict the degree of separation in the solvent extraction process with time. The experiments were conducted using magnetically stirred 25 It is important to make a decision regarding the staging requirements, as it is directly related to the cost of operation and maintenance. The McCabe–Thiele diagram helps to set the number of extraction stages needed in a mixer–settler for the extraction of manganese from the cobalt electrolyte solution. The McCabe–Thiele diagram ( In this study, the equilibrium isotherm was obtained at pH In the present study, sulphuric acid solutions with various concentrations (0.02 In a batch experiment of this study, 20 A solvent extraction method has been examined to separate manganese from a cobalt electrolyte solution. In this method, manganese was separated from the solution containing a large amount of cobalt using modified D2EHPA. The functional group of D2EHPA was converted to Co-D2EHPA by introducing Co Financial supports from the