The International Biohydrometallurgy Symposium 2009 (IBS-09) was the 18th event of highly successful meetings where basic scientists and industrial experts meet to exchange experimental results and ideas about this interdisciplinary field. The locations of the international symposia circulate between different geographic regions. Following the symposium in Frankfurt, we were very pleased to organize IBS-09 in the nice city of Bariloche-Argentina in September 13–17, 2009. This symposium focused on three different aspects of biohydrometallurgy, microbial ecology, which is the key to answering central questions not only about the diversity and behavior of microorganisms in commercial operations but also about possible applications of extremophiles in biohydrometallurgy metal recovery bioprocesses, including basic and applied studies on bioleaching, biooxidation and bioflotation. Large space was given to interfacial studies contributing to the understanding of the interaction between surfaces and microorganisms in those processes remediation of mining activities and environmental protection connected with mining and mining industries. More than 225 papers were presented either as lectures, full oral presentations or poster presentations. Among them, the Scientific Committee selected the most interesting contributions for this special issue of Hydrometallurgy. These papers are extended and updated versions of those presented in the Conference and they have been reviewed to the highest international standards. Some of the papers, corresponding to the lectures during the Conference, give a glance about the actual state of knowledge and report the key challenges in the next future into the specific field. As in the Conference, the papers belong to different topics: Microbial Ecology, Mineral Processing, Microbiology, Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Bioremediation, Environmental Protection and New Materials. We would like to thank the authors and reviewers for their excellent work. We wish to acknowledge the National Organizing Committee and the Scientific Committee for their great efforts. Thanks are also due to all the Scientific Organizations and sponsorships which made IBS-2009 possible.