In 1877, G.K. Gilbert reasoned that the rate at which bedrock is converted to soil reaches a maximum under an optimal soil depth that facilitates contact between bedrock and water such that freeze–thaw and chemical weathering are maximised. In doing so, he outlined the functional dependence of soil production (bedrock weathering) on local soil depth. However, the concept of a soil production function does not appear to have been utilised until well into the following century when Carson and Kirkby (Carson, M.A., Kirkby, M.J., 1972. Hillslope Form and Process. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, 475 pp) expressed it as a notional relationship. They also noted that at depths less than optimum, instability exists that will either drive soil depth to the optimal weathering depth or to zero depth. More recent work has also described a declining exponential soil production function in which the highest rate is at zero soil depth. Despite dealing with a fundamental issue in soil science, viz. soil formation, the soil production concept has been applied mostly to landscape evolution studies. The situation is ripe for its use in soil science and developments in techniques such as cosmogenic nuclides will assist this. One theme that has gained considerable attention over the past decade and especially the last 5 years has been a forced discussion on defining an appropriate soil production function (SPF), i.e. the relationship between soil production and soil depth. The demand for this stems from a need to incorporate soil production into models of slope development and thus landscape evolution. Not surprisingly the impetus for this has come from geomorphologists and geologists. Yet the issue is of considerable interest to soil science since it is an attempt to tie soil formation back to the landscape and thus incorporate the weathering of rock and the movement of particles to and from the developing soil material. It is, therefore, germane to pedogenesis. Considered at a more pragmatic level, the notion of soil tolerance levels depends on knowing the rate of soil production which is known at best in general terms and mostly for depositional sites rather than upland soils. The purpose of this note is to discuss the origin of the SPF and trace its path through the earth sciences. In what was to become a landmark study in the earth sciences, These ideas suggest freeze–thaw and solutional processes, together or separately, produce soil only when soil is present. When a regolith cover is lacking, the water essential to both processes is unavailable and soil production stalls. At depths beyond which soil production is maximised (hereafter Thereafter the idea of a SPF appears to have disappeared from mainstream geological texts including those dealing with soil. It is difficult to suggest why this occurred as there are a myriad of possible reasons. But it is intriguing to examine the accounts of three American geologists that one might assume to have been aware of Gilbert's writings as they were contemporaries and had a stated interest in soils: Nathaniel Southgate Shaler, George P. Merrill and William Morris Davis. An early account by This may be a reference to transport versus supply limitations. Even though Shaler clearly distinguished between soil mantles that had or had not been affected by recent glaciations there is little discussion on what controls the supply and rate of movement i.e. the basis of soil production might be recognized but not its controls. Subsequently a more forthright statement appeared in a popularist text directed at conservation ( This statement more clearly recognizes a weathering limited system and a humped type weathering relationship but again there is no indication as to whether any of this was derived from the influence of Gilbert or arose independently. In contrast to Shaler's generalised accounts This statement amplifies a previous one, also in Part III, that “The decomposing forces early lose their active principles and become quite inert at depths comparatively insignificant” p. 151. These statements would seem to imply that Merrill has recognized both humped and inverse SPFs. What is in less doubt is that Merrill viewed soil production as a weathering driven phenomenon that operated slowly: “Nevertheless, it is the slow process of superficial weathering that we owe a very large share of the apparent rock decomposition and incidental soil formation.” p. 151. Davis' work on landscape evolution also developed during this period. It was Davis seems to acknowledge that soil production is inversely proportional to soil depth and is also dependent on the degree of comminution of the weathering particles. However, there is no direct reference to Gilbert on this issue, and given that Davis was not averse to openly publishing contrary comments it might be assumed that this part of the From this limited treatment we conclude that Within the domains of soil science the closest inklings came from C.C. Nikiforoff. He argued that soil weathering could reach a steady state via dynamic equilibrium where the level of inputs matched outputs but the system remained in a state of perpetual flux ( In qualitative examinations of weathering and transport on slopes, both A decade or so after  Until the measurement of small quantities of terrestrial Numeric modelling by A remaining challenge is to test the applicability of the existing two SPFs and as yet unknown forms to different kinds of situations. The declining exponential function to date has worked best under steady state landscape conditions and is most convincing where soil thickness changes with curvature. There is also an immediate need to quantify the SPF in field sites that exhibit a humped function, probably utilising TCN. Such sites might display a potential morphologic signature of a humped SPF (i.e. outcrop and few if any local soil depths with 0 An aim of this paper was to highlight the importance of the SPF to the soil science community. We hope that this will be achieved. The recent work on this theme, largely driven by studies in landscape evolution, also represents an emerging research theme in soil science. This challenge is being taken up. Thus, We thank Mike Kirkby for source papers and Bob Anderson, John Chappell, Manny Gabet, Darryl Granger and Jonathon Phillips for discussion on general ideas on soil production, and Ron Paton for discussion on the early history of soil science. We also thank Ronald Amundson and Alex McBratney for helpful comments. We also acknowledge the latter for encouragement to write this paper. Gilbert had a distinguished career in the US Geological Survey. A brief account of this is provided by Gilbert is honoured today in two ways: via an annual meeting and via a prize. The