Pierre Gy’s theory for the sampling of particulate materials is widely applied and taught. A crucial part of Gy’s theory deals with the estimation, prediction and minimization of the variance of the Fundamental Sampling Error using a formula that is known as “Gy’s formula”. Experimental evidence, however, supports the conclusion that Gy’s formula is inaccurate.Pierre Gy’s Theory of Sampling ( Gy’s TOS provides a prediction for the value of the variance of the Fundamental Sampling Error, Var(FSE), based on the properties of the population from which the sample is taken and the sample mass: Eq. Eq. Eq. Substituting the definitions of When the population is not thoroughly mixed prior to sampling, Gy’s TOS prescribes that an additional relative variance component, Var(GSE) must be added besides Var(FSE) to get the variance of the total sampling error (TSE): Eq.  In this section, three recent experimental studies are discussed: (i) a study by A critical experimental test of Eq. This experiment was recently performed for the first time ( Repeating the experiment with a different type of mixer, a Vrieco Nauta Mixer supplied by Hosokawa Micron BV Doetinchem (type 020-FFC-50) resulted in a similar outcome: In a case study of sampling pistachio nuts for aflatoxins ( A further analysis by Recently, results for applying the Duplicate Sampling Analysis (DSA) method and the Heterogeneity Test (HT) on broken ore from three gold mines (Mponeng mine, Kloof mine and Lily mine) were reported ( Detailed descriptions of both the DSA method and the HT can be found in The DSA method obtains an estimate of Var(FSE) Using the reported data ( In Experimental evidence supports the conclusion that Gy’s formula does not provide an accurate prediction of the variance of the Fundamental Sampling Error. The TOS can be generalized by taking into account dependencies between particle selections ( This work was performed as part of a project supported by the Three thought-experiments are described in which a population consisting of two kinds of particles (5000 white particles and 5000 black particles) is sampled. Each particle has a particle mass of 1.0 As a first step, we perform the thought-experiment using independent particle selection as in Gy’s model. Each particle is independently subjected to a probabilistic process whereby the particle is either selected (with probability 0.1) or not selected (with probability 0.9). After subjecting all particles in the population to these probabilistic selections, a sample is obtained. The average number of particles in a sample using this sampling process will be (5000 We now modify the above thought-experiment. Suppose the 5000 black particles and 5000 white particles are separated: the black particles are put in Heap A; the white particle in Heap B. A first particle is selected either from Heap A (with probability 0.5) or from Heap B (with probability 0.5). All next particles are selected in the same way: either from Heap A (with probability 0.5) or from Heap B (with probability 0.5). The sampling process stops when a sample of 1000 particles has thus been formed. Using a computer the above-described thought-experiment was performed. It was repeated 10 Finally, the above thought-experiment is modified so that dependent particle selections are obtained. Again the 5000 black particles and 5000 white particles are separated: the black particles are put in Heap A; the white particle in Heap B. A first particle is again selected either from Heap A (with probability 0.5) or from Heap B (with probability 0.5). All next particles are selected using the following modification of the previous thought-experiment: if the previous particle was taken from Heap A, the next particle will be taken either from Heap A (with a probability 0.2) or from Heap B (with probability 0.8). Conversely, if the previous particle was taken from Heap B, the next particle will be taken either from Heap A (with probability 0.8) or from Heap B (with probability 0.2). The sampling process stops when a sample of 1000 particles has thus been formed. This modification of thought-experiment II will increase the average frequency of switching between heaps (which will lead to a reduction of the sampling variance as demonstrated below). It is noted that this process is a representation of dependent particle selections, as opposed to independent particle selections. The selection of a particle depends on the kind (black or white) of the previously selected particle. Using a computer the above-described thought-experiment was performed. It was repeated 10 Although these thought-experiments clearly show that dependent particle selections indeed can have a significant influence on the magnitude of the sampling variance, practical sampling will generally not consist of separate selections of individual particles. Rather, sampling is generally incremental, where increments can easily contain 10 The data given in this appendix are derived from an experiment that is similar to the experiment described by Results of the second Zr experiment: