Cogrinding copper oxide (CuO) with sulphur and flotation of the ground sample are conducted to improve the floatability of the oxide. It has been found that recovery of the ground oxide by flotation has increased with an increase in grinding time and rotational speed. A suite of analytical methods including X-ray diffraction, scanning electron microscopy, X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS) and zeta-potential measurement have been performed to characterize the ground sample. XPS analysis and zeta-potential measurement, particularly have confirmed the chemical adsorption and bonding of sulphur on the surface of CuO.The widely used metals exist in waste in a vast amount after the use. In the cases of non-ferrous metal such as Cu, Pb and Zn in Japan, for example, amounts as high as 10–30% of their annual output have been discarded in various types of waste. Recycling these metals from wastes is highly required from the point of environmental resource preservation and sustainable development. Since the states of metals in the wastes are rarely in the sulphide form but are oxides and oxidized compounds besides metal itself, it is necessary to deal with the oxides. We have conducted basic research on the transformation of oxides into sulphides by cogrinding with sulphur and iron powders The developed method offers an alternative for the processing of some oxides when sulphidized state is preferred. However, when a flotation separation, a widely used method for sulphide minerals, was attempted to the synthetic sulphides, the obtained recovery was not satisfactory due to the difficulty in dispersing the sample which usually exhibits in a state of heavy agglomeration. Therefore, the traditionally used flotation process for separating and recovering sulphide minerals could not be easily applied to the sulphides obtained from oxides by a mechanically induced solid-state reaction. In our research results, it is interesting to note the difference in the sulphidization of various oxides. Oxides of non-ferrous metals such as copper, lead and zinc have been transformed into sulphides by the solid-state reaction. However, grinding of other oxides such as TiO This paper reports the floatability of CuO by flotation after cogrinding with sulphur with SiO All the used samples: oxides (CuO, SiO Then, a flotation operation was conducted for the ground samples. Potassium butylxanthate from Dowa Mining Company, Japan was used as collector in a concentration of 41 The ground samples and the separated samples by flotation were characterized by X-ray diffraction (XRD, Rigaku Giegerflex, Cu Kα, Japan). Morphology of the sample was observed by a scanning electron microscope (SEM, Hitachi, S-4100, Japan). X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS, PHI 5600 ESCA system, Ulvac-Phi Inc., Japan) was conducted to obtain chemical binding information for sulphur on the oxide surface. Zeta-potential measurement (Zetasizer Nano, Malvern, UK) was performed to investigate the changes in surface properties of both CuO and SiO       There is a need to investigate the effects of this technology for the industrial waste. With sulphur rather than sulfides A new approach has been tried to coat sulphur on the surface of CuO sample by cogrinding under mild conditions. Flotation operation has been performed on the ground sample. The following conclusion can be made. The floatability of the treated CuO has been improved with the progress in the mechanochemical treatment. Compared with SiO