The propagation and attenuation laws of blast-induced shock wave in coal and rock are always one of the key research topics in geophysics and geotechnical engineering. When a blast-induced shock wave propagates in a single medium, it will be attenuated by geometric spreading. Simultaneously, because of the plasticity, non-linear and viscous damping actions of the coal and rock materials, etc., the energy of shock wave will be rapidly attenuated. But when a shock wave propagates in a layered seam, undergoing the coal and rock surface refraction and reflection process, the energy loss level is consistent with the surface characteristics, the coal and rock wave impedance of both sides of surface, the propagation direction, and the surface angle. In summary, blast-induced shock wave propagation in coal and rock materials is a very complicated question, which still cannot be interpreted by a unified expression in theory. Previous research focusses mainly on blast-induced shock wave propagation and attenuation laws in different media, as well as the stability and safety evaluation of buildings on surface. For example, AK et al. As a consequence of the above, blast-induced shock wave propagation and attenuation laws in different mechanical characteristics of coal and rock media have been researched by extensive experiments in detail, especially, the correlation between the PPV and the main frequency spectrum of MS signals has been discussed fruitfully, the foundation on evaluating the stability and safety of surface buildings induced by blasting has been established. However, for three-component signals of blast-induced shock wave, the propagation and attenuation laws in coal and rock media and the frequency spectrum evolution laws still lack field experimental studies. By a total of about 180 three-component recordings, the three-component signals propagation and attenuation, and frequency spectrum evolution rules of blast-induced shock waves were studied under the guidance of KZ-1 MS monitoring system developed by China's State Seismological Bureau, in the headentry drilling process of 7206 working face in Sanhejian Coal Mine (SCM) located in Xuzhou city, and the relationship between the main frequency spectrum and the stress concentration of coal and rock materials were revealed as well in this paper. The KZ-1 MS monitoring system was developed by the institute of geophysics, China's State Seimological Bureau. There are twelve seismometers installed in the whole mining area, ten of them were arranged underground, the other two seismometers named Meiqizhan and Luxinzhuang were installed in two ground-based deep boreholes, with hole depths of 228 and 229 SCM is one of the most serious rockburst coal mines in China. The first rockburst hazard happened in 7110 working face headentry in 1991. The destructive rockburst has taken place more than 25 times till now. Especially, a rockburst hazard happened in 7204-3 working face on December 6, 1998, which destroyed 500 The field experimental study was conducted in the headentry of 7206 working face, while the average elevation of 7206 working face headentry is −840 A 5 The blast-induced shock wave propagation process is extremely complex. There are many factors that influenced the wave energy loss, such as propagation distance, ray path, medium mechanic property, rock joints, etc. According to the small-scale coal and rock materials, based on the measured data by tests, combined the correlation between the seismometers and explosive source, the energy attenuation differences in three-component signals between the transverse and bed-parallel propagations were presented. So-called transverse propagation, which is the single-component wave goes through a number of interfaces among the coal and rock layers from explosive source to seismometers, when each wave passes an interface, accompanied by reflection, refraction and diffraction processes, the energy of wave will rapidly attenuate. That single-component wave does not go through the interfaces among the coal and rock layers from explosive source to seismometers is so-called bed-parallel propagation, and the wave spreads in a single coal or rock layer. Compared to transverse propagation, the energy loss is less. To study the energy and frequency attenuation differences between the transverse and bed-parallel propagation of the three-component signals of blast-induced shock wave, the amplitude-time curves of three-component signals must be collected by tests, then, the three-component characteristics of the explosive source signals can be revealed. So, we decided to collect the explosive source shock wave with the nearest 1# seismometer in the initial driving of the headentry. As seen from In order to reveal the propagation and attenuation laws of three-component signals of the blast-induced shock wave in coal and rock medium, the attenuation laws of transverse and bed-parallel propagation in the far zone were measured, based on the propagation distance change of explosive source to 1#, 3# and 4# seismometers in the process of 7206 headentry driving. Test 1: we drilled 5 blast holes in the headentry of 7206 working face on October 6, 2008, the total charge weight was 15 From the figures above, with transverse and bed-parallel propagation of three-component signals of shock wave, the high-frequency components rapidly attenuated, and spectrum moved to low-frequency band. Because of the different attenuation indexes of transverse and bed-parallel propagations, when the horizontal propagation distance increase was about 3.5 times, the energy attenuation was nearly 5 times ( Test 2: we drilled 6 blast holes in the headentry of 7206 working face on October 16, 2008, the total charge weight was 15 From the figures above, according to the horizontal-directional energy of 3# and 4# seismometers, when the horizontal propagation distance increase was about 1.67 times, the energy attenuation was nearly 2 times ( As a consequence of the above, when blast-induced shock wave propagates in coal and rock media, with increase in propagation distance, the high-frequency components rapidly attenuate, and the main frequency distribution is 0–60  From the above figure it was found that the higher the frequency of blast-induced shock wave signal was, the bigger the attenuation coefficient of amplitude spectrum was. For the horizontal-directional shock wave signals, when the main frequency was higher than 60 Tests process: (1) we drilled 6 blast holes in the headentry of 7206 working face on October 19, 2008, the total charge weight was 15 From the figures above, the main frequency distribution is about 0−50 To verify the relation between frequency spectrum distribution and the mechanic characteristics of the coal and rock materials after explosion, drilling bits volume of different locations in head-on was measured before and after every explosion. On October 20, the measured drilling bits volume not only has not been reduced, but also shows a gradual upward trend after explosion, which illustrates that blasting does not reduce the stress concentration of the coal and rock materials; thus the accumulated elastic energy cannot be released, and the relief result is not obvious. On October 30, the measured drilling bits volume rapidly reduces after explosion, especially when drilling depth is 4 As a consequence of the above, when 100–200 In conclusion, it was also found that the more loose and broken coal and rock material was, the more obvious shock wave energy attenuation was. In the rockburst dangerous areas, the deep-hole relieve-shot was adopted as a main method to reduce the strength and integrity of coal and rock material, so its absorption capacity for the residual energy of rockburst shock wave was raised, the stress peak position will move to deep, thereby the rockburst danger can be weakened and reduced. By the normal production explosion in the period of headentry drilling of 7206 working face in SCM, the propagation and attenuation laws of blast-induced shock wave were studied by experiments in field, especially the relationship between the frequency spectrum distribution and the stress concentration of coal and rock materials after explosion was revealed. The main conclusions were as follows: The horizontal and vertical energies and frequency distribution of nearby explosion source shock wave are approximately equal. The main frequency distribution is about 0–70 When the blast-induced shock wave propagates in coal and rock media, the high-frequency components rapidly attenuate with increase in propagation distance, and the main frequency distribution is about 0–60 The higher the frequency of shock wave signal is, the bigger the energy attenuation coefficient is. For horizontal shock wave signals, when the main frequency is higher than 60 When 100–200 First, we are grateful to the editor and two unknown referees for suggestions which improved the quality of this note. Second, we wish to acknowledge the collaborative funding support from the