Bischofite is a by-product of the non-metallic mining industry. It has been evaluated as phase change material in thermal energy storage, but it shows little cycling stability, therefore in this paper the mixture of bischofite with an additive was studied. Since polyethylene glycol (PEG) is a PCM itself, in this paper PEG (with different molecular weights) is used as additive in a PCM (bischofite) to improve its thermal behaviour. Results show that adding 5% PEG 2000 to bischofite gives a more cycling stable PCM without affecting its melting temperature neither decreasing significantly its heat of fusion. This research shows that mixing an inorganic PCM with an organic additive can be a good option to improve the thermal performance of the PCM.The use of fossil fuels and coal as main source of energy to produce electricity in northern Chile and also the non-existent production of hydropower water resources is a serious environmental impact, generating an urge to find substitutes towards sustainable energy sources. The high-energy consumption of this part of the country is directly related to the mining and industrial processes, which require continuous operation of energy. This is why renewable resources can be an alternative, as a complement to the main sources of energy Bischofite is a mineral that precipitates in the evaporation ponds during the potassium chloride production process in Salar de Atacama (north of Chile) Moreover, MgCl In a previous paper the authors characterized bischofite as inorganic PCM Poly(ethylene glycol) (PEG) has been used as organic PCM by itself A PCM needs to be stable after a number of repeated melting/freezing cycles known as cycling stability The aim of this paper is adding PEG to bischofite to improve its cycling stability during heating and cooling cycles, improving the cycling performance of the mixture when applied as phase change material. The main novelty of this paper is the use of PEG as additive to improve cycling stability of PCMs and not as PCM itself. This paper also shows the advantage of using an organic material to improve the properties of an inorganic PCM. The bischofite used in this research had a composition of about 95% MgCl Bischofite was analyzed alone and with 5% w/w of the three different molecular weight PEGs ( Thermal stability analysis was determined with TGA/DSC METTLER TOLEDO, in a temperature range of 25–130 Some thermophysical properties available in literature for PEG of different molecular weights used are shown in As indicated in The results of the melting temperatures in all mixtures of bischofite with PEG’s are similar (around 98  The results of TGA (thermal stability) are shown in They show that the samples are thermally stable. With a detailed analysis four curves can be seen. The most unstable curve corresponds to bischofite, with a loss weight of 0.4% with respect to the initial weight, probably due to humidify absorbed by sample during its manipulation; the other three samples do not show differences because none of them lost mass, reaching 130 The cycling stability of samples was studied during 30 heating and cooling cycles. In Curves are stables during cycles, with similar melting temperatures reaching after 30 heating cycles. Especially, for bischofite For samples I, II, III and IV, melting temperatures were: for 10th cycle, 100.9 The cooling cycles are shown in For samples I, II and IV, freezing temperatures present fluctuating values during the tests. The This effect was observed in previous work and described in The mixture which presents the best behavior from the point of view of heating and cooling stability cycles, with the crystallization temperature remaining constant, is bischofite with 5% PEG 2 The summary of the cycling stability measurements, including standard deviation is presented in One of the disadvantages that bischofite presented was the subcooling of 37 Although the addition of PEG 2 The potential for use a material as PCM is determine mainly because of its values of heat of fusion (>100 Even though it is difficult to estimate the price of these mixtures with the data available up to now if PCM are applied for TES, it is possible to determine the advantages over synthetic salts, linking the prices of these materials with the thermal properties determined in this study for bischofite and for other salt hydrates reported in previous studies The Thermophysical properties for mixtures of bischofite with three different PEG (PEG 600, PEG 2 As expected, the addition of PEG 2 The authors would like to acknowledge the collaboration of the company SALMAG. The authors acknowledge to FONDECYT (grant N° 1120422), CONICYT/FONDAP N° 15110019, and the Education Ministry of Chile Grant PMI ANT 1201 for the financial support. This work was partially funded by the Spanish project ENE2011-22722. Dr. Luisa F. Cabeza would like to acknowledge the Generalitat de Catalunya for the quality recognition 2014-SGR-123. Andrea Gutierrez would like to acknowledge for her doctorate scholarships to the Education Ministry of Chile (ANT 1106) and CONICYT/PAI N°7813110010.