Investigation of high temperature cracking of tungsten polycide films on quartz reveals that the average thermal expansion mismatch stress and process-related local stress due to the interfacial roughening and voids may be major factors generating cracks in tungsten silicide. The silicide reaction and silicon crystallization at high temperature are responsible for interfacial roughening in silicon-rich silicide (WSi
                        x>2.3)and local voids in tungsten-rich silicide (WSi
                        x<2.3): high temperature annealing of silicon-rich silicide on a-Si/quartz allows silicon growth into the silicide, resulting in the interfacial roughening and thus increasing the local stress near the tips of silicon intrusion; tungsten-rich silicide on a-Si/quartz produces interfacial voids during high temperature annealing, which initiates crack propagation on cooling.The high temperature polycrystalline silicon (polysilicon) TFT (thin film transistor) process has advantages over the low temperature process in terms of the simplicity and reproducibility of the polysilicon film formation. In addition, the high temperature treatment produces the enlarged grains with fewer defects, leading to higher mobilities and thus facilitating its application to HDTV LCDs with integrated drivers In this work, we have studied the effect of polysilicon buffer layers on the cracking of tungsten polysilicide films on quartz in terms of the thermal stress reduction and the silicide reaction. The variation of tungsten silicide stress was measured as functions of polysilicon thickness and stoichiometry of tungsten silicide to explore the dependence of the cracking on the tensile stress. In addition, cross-sectional TEM was employed to identify the presence of polysilicon affecting the interfacial roughness. From this result, it was suggested that the silicide reaction affected by the presence of polysilicon was critical to the cracking of silicide film. The effects of various experimental variables on the cracking of tungsten polycide on 1.1-mm thick quartz substrates during high temperature annealing were examined. The variables included the thickness of the polysilicon buffer layer, the stoichiometry of the tungsten silicide film, and the annealing temperature. Amorphous silicon films ranging in thickness from 0 to 500 nm were deposited on a quartz substrate by thermal decomposition of disilane (Si Polycide structures (WSi  Investigation of the dependence of thermal stresses in tungsten silicide films (150 nm) on poly-Si(250 nm)/quartz after heat treatment at 1000°C on the Si/W ratio of the silicide, reveals that the thermal stress of 2.1 GPa in the WSi Substituting values of Young's modulus of 300 GPa, Poisson's ratio of 0.3,   We have investigated the effects of variables such as annealing temperature, the stoichiometry of tungsten silicide, and a-Si thickness on the cracking of tungsten polycide on quartz. The thermal stress arising from the difference in the thermal expansion coefficient of quartz and tungsten silicide contributes to the crack generation. In addition, the presence of an a-Si buffer layer allows high temperature local growth of silicon into the tungsten silicide layer, leading to interfacial roughening and thus accentuating the thermal stress near the tips of the boundaries between silicide and polysilicon. This explains the decreased critical thickness with increasing polysilicon thickness. Additionally, the flux of silicon into the silicon-deficient tungsten silicide at high temperature leaves local voids at the interface. The local voids cause deviation from the average thermal stress, and thus driving crack formation. Consequently, it can be concluded that in addition to the macroscopic average thermal stress, process-related local stress play an important role in creating cracks in polycide on quartz during high temperature annealing.