A rapid fingerprint method was developed for investigating and inferring geographical origin of Chinese propolis by using high performance liquid chromatography–ultraviolet detection (HPLC–UV). 120 samples were analyzed from 17 different locations of 10 provinces of China in this study. In the HPLC chromatograms, eight major compounds were identified as flavonoids, including rutin, myricetin, quercetin, kaempferol, apigenin, pinocembrine, chrysin and galangin. Both correlation coefficient of similarity in chromatograms and relative peak areas of characteristic compounds were calculated for quantitative expression of the HPLC fingerprints. Our results revealed that the presence or absence of specific peaks and similarity evaluation in simulative mean chromatograms among different regions could efficiently identify and distinguish Chinese propolis from different geographical origins.Chinese propolis is a sticky, brownish resinous material that honeybees collect from leaf buds and cracks in the bark of various plants. The honeybee uses it to strengthen the borders of combs as the building material; what is more, it is regarded as the “chemical weapon” of bees against pathogen microorganisms ( Flavonoids are a type of polyphenolic compounds that contain a C6–C3–C6 configuration, including flavone, flavonal, flavanone, flavanonal and isoflavone, and so on ( Many different methods have been developed for determination of flavonoids in different plants and its relevant products, including bamboo leaves ( Although there were different approaches to the analysis of flavonoids, few methods about fingerprint analysis of flavonoids have been reported for propolis in different regions of China. Fingerprint technique is an effective tool for the quality control of multi-component herbal medicines and has been widely accepted as a useful means for the evaluation and quality control of herbal materials. In the past decade, the chromatographic fingerprint established by HPLC, TLC, GC, and CE, etc. has been recognized as rapid and reliable means for the identification and qualification of herbal medicines ( Propolis from the different or the same regions of China differs in their composition because of the local plants of many kinds, and it is difficult to identify the specified floral origin of certain propolis. The aim of this study was to develop a convenient HPLC–UV fingerprint method to be used for characterizing the eight major flavonoids in Chinese propolis of different regions. Then, the fingerprint model could reflect regional traceability of Chinese propolis and it will be beneficial to further confirm the quality of Chinese propolis. In this method, the propolis was extracted with ethanol and methanol by ultrasound-assisted extraction technique and created a universal process to establish HPLC–UV fingerprint, which is applicable on Chinese propolis. Eight flavonoids including rutin, myricetin, quercetin, kaempferol, apigenin, pinocembrine, chrysin and galangin were obtained from the Sigma–Aldrich (St. Louis, MO, USA). Methanol is the HPLC grade reagents (DIMA Technology Inc., Richmond, USA). Phosphoric acid belongs to guaranteed reagent grade (Beijing chemical reagent company, Beijing, PRC). Deionized water obtained from a Milli-Q water system (Millipore, Bedford, MA, USA). Ethanol (95%, Analytical reagent grade) was purchased from Beijing chemical reagent company. Stock standard solutions were prepared within the range 0.1–0.8 The Dionex high performance liquid chromatography system consisting of a P680 quaternary pump, UVD170U UV–VIS Detector and PDA-100 detector, ASI-100 automated sample injector and thermostated column compartment was used for quantitative analysis. The data were acquired and processed by Chromeleon About 120 raw propolis samples were collected by local beekeepers (accompanied by our researcher) of different regions of China and kept at 2–8 The crude propolis powders were obtained after comminution and filtration (40 meshes). Powder 5.0 The assay linearity was determined by analysis of six different concentrations of the standard solutions. The standard curves were obtained by plotting peak area ( The injection precision was determined by replicate injection of the same sample solution for five times in a day. The sample stability test precision was determined with one sample during seven days. The repeatability was assessed by analyzing five independently prepared samples of propolis samples. During this period, the solution was stored at room temperature. Data analysis was performed by professional fingerprint software named “ The chromatographic conditions were optimized to obtain chromatograms with a good resolution of adjacent peaks. Different mobile phase compositions were optimized: formic acid, acetic acid and phosphoric acid were added to the aqueous phase of mobile phase to enhance the resolution, restrain the ionization of flavonoids and eliminate the peak tailing of target compounds. As a result, mobile phases containing phosphoric acid were selected. Mobile phase with methanol has a satisfactory resolution and stable baseline. To acquire better selectivity and higher efficiency, eluent pH over the range of 2.0–5.0 was tested and different concentrations of phosphoric acid in the aqueous phase were also investigated. In the end, the mobile phase consisting of methanol and 0.4% phosphoric acid (pH 3.0) were chosen for the determination of eight flavonoids in Chinese propolis. On the ultraviolet spectra with chromatograms of HPLC–UV of eight flavonoids in propolis and reference standards, maximum absorbance values around 280 In order to obtain optimal extraction efficiency, extraction solvents and extraction time were investigated. Various solvents including methanol, ethanol, glycerol, petroleum ether, chloroform, ethyl acetate and acetone were tested for the extraction of raw propolis sample. Ethanol was particularly suitable to obtain dewaxed propolis extracts ( The regression equation, correlation coefficient, linear response range, and detection limit of rutin, myricetin, quercetin, kaempferol, apigenin, pinocembrine, chrysin and galangin are All raw propolis samples were analyzed using the established extraction method under the above HPLC conditions. Each sample was analyzed in triplicate to determine the mean contents of eight major flavonoids in Chinese propolis samples. The results showed that no significant difference was found for mean contents of eight major flavonoids of the studied samples among different provinces of China. The content of 8 major flavonoids in the same province ranges (w/w) were 0.079–0.728% (Rutin), 0.189–0.745% (Myricetin), 0.027–0.542% (Quercetin), 0.171–0.736% (Kaempferol), 0.132–0.474% (Apigenin), 1.024–3.956% (Pinocembrine), 0.338–3.597% (Chrysin) and 0.871–7.057% (Galangin), respectively. The significant variability might be caused by different and mixed botanical origin in various samples of the same province. Propolis has been used widely in folk medicine for many years, and there is substantial evidence to indicate that propolis has antiseptic, antifungal, antibacterial, antiviral, anti-inflammatory and antioxidant properties ( There are various plant species in different provinces and regions of China because of vast territory and abundant resources in China. Hence, a piece of propolis usually comes from various plants and it is difficult to ascertain the detail botanical origin. The geographical traceability of Chinese propolis became more and more necessary. About 120 samples of raw propolis collected from different regions of China were analyzed with the above extraction method and HPLC condition. The results indicated that their chromatographic patterns were generally consistent with its origin although the quantity and absorption intensity of peaks was different. The peaks in HPLC chromatograms were identified based on retention time and UV adsorption spectra comparison. In these HPLC fingerprints, 29 peaks were chosen in Chinese propolis samples and were presented in a relatively high content ( The relative standard deviation (RSD) of RRT and RPA found were not exceeding 0.27% and 2.96% for injection precision, respectively. The relative standard deviation of RRT and RPA were below 0.39% and 3.75% for sample stability test, respectively. The RSD of RRT and RPA found were less than 0.58 and 2.89% for five independent samples respectively. The similarity of these results with those from the repeatability and the injection precision indicate that the sample remained stable when the solution was stored at room temperature. The differences of Chinese propolis from the different provinces and regions were further studied. The 120 samples were collected from 17 different locations in northeast, north China, central plain, northwest, east China and central-south China of China. All these samples were evaluated by the established HPLC fingerprint test procedure. Chromatograms of adjacent provinces or various regions of the same province were shown in a sole fingerprint for legible observation and comparison. The similarity of each province propolis samples to their simulative mean chromatogram ranged from 0.793 The similarity of each Beijing and Hebei province sample chromatogram to their simulative mean chromatogram were 0.951 For Jilin province samples, the similarity of each chromatogram to their simulative mean chromatogram was 0.846 For Hubei province and Yunnan province propolis samples, the similarity of each Hubei province and Yunnan province sample chromatogram to their simulative mean chromatogram were 0.962 For Henan province and Shanxi province propolis samples, the similarity of each Henan province and Shanxi province sample chromatogram to their simulative mean chromatogram were 0.940 Shandong province and Jiangsu province has rich plant resources. The similarity of each Shandong province and Jiangsu province sample chromatogram to their simulative mean chromatogram were 0.928 The unique climate of arid or moist, warm or cold in turn resulted in the specific botanical subspecies of Gansu province in northwest China. The similarity of each chromatogram to their simulative mean chromatogram was 0.901 In this study, the HPLC fingerprint of Chinese propolis was successfully established for the first time. About 120 propolis samples from different provinces of China were identified and distinguished by the chromatographic fingerprint in combination with similarity analysis. The results of our study showed that no significant difference was found for mean contents of eight major flavonoids among the studied samples in different provinces of China. For the similarity analysis by using “ The fingerprinting analysis combining similarity evaluation is a novel, valid and rapid method for the geographical origin of Chinese propolis. The advantage of using chromatographic profiles for geographical origin of propolis is that it is often unnecessary to know the individual components that make up the fingerprint (