A detailed understanding regarding rapidly synthesized Cu2ZnSnS4 (CZTS) nanocrystal processing parameters, their correct phase identification, size and shape analysis, and optoelectronic performance evaluation are essential in order to produce high quality nanocrystals. The structural and optical properties were investigated using X-ray diffraction, Raman spectroscopy, UV–vis spectroscopy, atomic force microscopy, and transmission electron microscopy (TEM). Wavenumber shift and broadening of Raman linewidth indicate reduction in CZTS crystal dimension and subsequent occurrence of phonon confinement. An asymmetric Raman peak broadening was also observed when the duration of synthesis was reduced from 18min to 8min. In-depth investigation, based on weighted Lorentzian contributions, suggests that the sizes of CZTS crystals are more uniform when synthesis duration is longer. Optical characterization results indicate ‘occurrence of quantum confinement effect’ which was corroborated by TEM observation. Electrical and photoelectrochemical characterization suggest utility of these nanocrystals for photovoltaic applications.Overall synthesis time is one of the important factors responsible for viability of manufacturing. Any cutting edge synthesis approach which saves time reduces manufacturing cost and increases productivity. One synthesis technique which is promising for rapid production of functional materials is microwave processing Microwave assisted reactions are fast because of efficient materials heating. Microwave (MW) irradiation causes alignment of dipoles or ions in the electric field Copper(II) acetate (99.999%) (0.5 X-ray diffraction scans were recorded using a Philips X'Pert XRD diffractometer with Cu Kα radiation over the  There is a possibility that the broad peak makes it difficult to detect ZnS and SnS. However, our annealed CZTS films did not show ZnS and SnS peaks. It is very interesting to note that appropriate mixture of copper tin sulfide (CTS), zinc sulfide, and tin sulfide nanocrystals can be used to produce high quality CZT(S A Raman spectrum of CZTS nanocrystals synthesized using conventional solvothermal approach, is compared with spectrum of microwave grown CZTS nanocrystals in   In most of the cases pure-wurtzite type CZTS nanocrystals show a strong Raman peak centered at wavenumber ∼333 A preliminary investigation has been conducted in order to explore the kinetics of CZTS formation. MW synthesis of precursors was carried out for different durations (3, 8, 13, and 18 For a standard deviation smaller than one third of mean size, intensity can be written as Eq. Second term in Eq. The measured and simulated Raman spectra (for Transmission microscopy results (low magnification) of CZTS nanocrystals are presented in The growth kinetics of this material is not fully known. However, it has been reported that reaction temperature plays an important role in growth Energy band gap (see After purification steps these colloidal nanoparticles were coated on FTO substrate which was subsequently annealed in argon. It was observed that after annealing there is a significant improvement in adhesion and grains become larger. An AFM 3-D rendering is shown in The electrical performance of microwave grown CZTS nanocrystals has been studied. A comparison of Average photoelectrochemical current response (shown in In conclusion, detailed investigation of rapidly synthesized CZTS nanocyrstals was conducted using XRD, Raman spectroscopy, transmission electron microscopy, UV–vis spectroscopy, atomic force microscopy, and using a photoelectrochemical cell. It was observed that Raman peak for microwave assisted CZTS nanocrystal is narrower compared to that synthesized from routine solvothermal process. Our results suggest that formation of CZTS phase starts after ∼8 The authors want to thank Yakun Zhu for help in doing AFM imaging.