The complex structure of biomass materials can be studied by means of a number of different techniques. Of which, chemical isolation of macromolecular biomass ingredients such as lignin, hemicellulose, and cellulose, and then characterization of each isolated ingredient has been a common practice. However, the isolated individual ingredients have always been regarded as pure materials, and so far potential inorganic impurities resulting from the parent biomass have not been considered. Accordingly, this paper focuses on the determination of inorganics, if any, in the isolated parts of biomass. For this, two different biomass species such as hybrid poplar wood and apricot stones have been subjected to sequential isolation procedures of ASTM D1105, Wise’s Chlorite Method, and van Soest’s Method. The isolated holocellulose (hemicellulose+cellulose), lignin, and extractives-free bulk were then characterized mineralogically by X-ray Diffraction (XRD) and X-ray Fluorescence (XRF) techniques, and the results were compared with those for the parent biomass species. It was found that the isolated holocelluloses and lignins are not just ash-free and they have ash contents up to 2.2% and 4.0%, respectively. Also, various minerals including potassium chloride, several phosphate minerals, and alumina silicates were found to survive after chemical treatments applied during isolation. In addition, several heavy metals were also detected. These results reveal that minerals cannot be eliminated entirely because of the natures of the chemicals used, and they unavoidably remain in the isolated macromolecules.Characterization of biomass structure mostly relies on distribution of the macromolecular ingredients in biomass such as hemicellulose, cellulose, and lignin. Indeed, these ingredients usually account for the major part of the organic fragment although they are often accompanied by some other organics such as starch, proteins, triglycerides, lipids. Hence, the term of “lignocellulosic” is frequently used for many types of biomass species. Besides, all of hemicellulose, cellulose, and lignin are comprised of C, H, and O in different ratios and consequently, configurations of their molecules are highly different from each other. Several forms of celluloses (C Kumar et al. Thus, a number of projects have been carried out to specify the individual effects of these macromolecular ingredients during specific processes. For this, mostly model compounds purchased from commercial market have been used instead of using isolated real ingredients from the targeted biomass The striking feature for these studies is that such model compounds are not fully organic, and some inorganics are also involved Besides, it is possible to find elemental compositions of ashes in some studies. Sharma and Hajaligol These inorganics should not be only regarded as impurity but also their complex effects including catalytic activities must be taken into account. It is known that certain elements (such as Ca, K, Na, Mg, and Fe) exert a significant catalytic effect, and even a small amount of them is capable of altering pyrolysis behavior to a large extent Inorganic compounds decrease both the temperature of onset of decomposition and maximum weight loss. Minerals also catalyze the depolymerization reaction producing macromolecules, and accelerate the secondary degradation of these macromolecules to produce smaller molecules through lowering the activation energy Heavy metals also have been reported to show catalytic effects to upgrade the pyrolysis liquids from biomass As to the composition of ash in these model compounds, there is a lack of information in literature. Namely, the mineralogical phases were not given, and only the elemental analysis results have been presented. Since, quantitative/qualitative investigations of the inorganic phases on these compounds have not been properly investigated so far, this paper deals with the characterization of the inorganic structure of these macromolecular ingredients isolated from biomasses such as hybrid poplar and apricot stone by analytical methods. Hybrid poplar and apricot stones are the biomass species used in this study, and they were provided from forestry/agricultural industries in Turkey. The reason for the choice of these biomasses is that hybrid poplar is a holocellulose-rich biomass while apricot stone is poor in holocellulose and very rich in extractives, being so different in terms of the fuel characteristics. At the sample preparation stage, the biomasses were not dried in an oven to avoid any modification in their original structure due to thermal treatment; instead they were allowed to stay in open containers at laboratory for two weeks to obtain air-dried samples. Then, air-dried samples were milled to reduce the particle size to lower than 0.25 Macromolecular ingredients in biomass such as holocellulose, and lignin as well as the extractives-free bulk (extracted sample) were isolated chemically from the parent biomass samples using the following analytical procedures. First, the standard test method of ASTM D1105 was applied to the parent biomass materials to obtain the extractives-free bulk. That is, extractable – organics and – some inorganics were removed through extraction with solutions of benzene and ethyl alcohol. For this purpose, 10 On the other hand, isolation of either holocellulose or lignin is carried out on this extracted bulk in the subsequent experiments in which it is further treated with other chemicals. Namely, the mixtures of NaClO Mineralogical investigations were performed using XRD and XRF techniques. XRD experiments of the parent biomass materials as well as their ingredients were carried out using Panalytical – X’Pert Pro PW 3040/60 model device with X-ray source of 3 Isolation tests revealed that the contents of extractives, holocellulose, and lignin in hybrid poplar are 5.4, 74.2, and 20.4  The data given in Consequently, the extracted bulk from which both holocellulose and lignin are isolated bear more than half of the inorganics found in the parent samples. In other words, a procedure which is capable of eliminating all of the inorganics during the first extraction process would have provided inorganics-free feedstock for the subsequent isolation steps. In contrast to the decreasing trend in ash contents, the variations in the contents of volatiles and fixed carbon as well as the gross calorific values were not so regular, and they varied in irregular way. Holocellulose contents isolated from both biomasses have comparable contents of volatiles and ash that they changed in narrow ranges of 75.0–75.2% and 1.6–2.2%, respectively. On the other hand, the proximate analysis results of the isolated lignins changed in wider ranges in general compared to those for holocellulose, except for the fixed carbon content that changes between 26.1% and 27.8%. Indeed, the highest fixed carbon contents were determined for isolated lignins. If a non-oxidative conversion process such as pyrolysis is applied to biomass, the holocellulose content contributes to the formation of volatiles, while the lignin content favors the formation of pyrolytic char which is a consequence of fixed carbon The list of the mineral phases found by XRD technique can be seen in Effects of benzene–ethyl alcohol extraction on the existing mineral phases of hybrid poplar can be explained in such a way that potassium chloride could be remained in the biomass after the extraction process, while phosphate containing minerals subjected to variations in their structures. Meanwhile, a new phase that contains ammonium–aluminum–hydroxide–carbonate formed. Since potent reagents were employed during each isolation stage, the inorganic phases detected for holocellulose and lignin showed considerable changes. Namely, magnesium–hydoxide–chloride formed as a result of interaction with NaClO The parent apricot stone was found to have mainly phosphate containing inorganic phases such as potassium–aluminum–iron–phosphate and magnesium phosphate. In contrast to the results obtained from hybrid poplar, phosphate minerals could not be found in the treated ingredients. This indicates that similar minerals in different types of biomass species may behave in different manner. These unexpected characteristics may be attributed to the complex structure and the high number of organic/inorganic participants in these biomass materials. On the other hand, formation of chloride- and sulfate-minerals owing to NaClO XRF results are tabulated in Comparison of the concentrations of the elements in the parent biomass species indicated that calcium is the most abundant element for hybrid poplar, while apricot stone is very rich in potassium. Jenkins et al. Iron was determined as one of the major elements for both parent biomasses and their ingredients. The applied analytical methods resulted in such increases in the iron concentrations for both the extracted bulk and the isolated ingredients that the highest values were found in the case of isolated holocelluloses irrespective of the sort of biomass. The presences of chromium, nickel, and zinc were found as minor elements in the parent samples, while molybdenum, zirconium, strontium, lead, and copper were also detected in lower concentrations. Similarly, Hu et al. The concentrations of the inorganics in the isolated holocellulose and lignin are particularly of importance in terms of the basis of the present study. From this point of view, the concentrations of calcium, iron, nickel, chromium, and zinc either exceeded 100 As to the inorganics found in isolated lignins, it can be seen that the elements that are abundant in holocellulose are also the unavoidable elements; iron, calcium and chromium are by far the most abundant ones. It can be concluded that not only commercial model compounds but also the real ingredients of biomass unavoidably contain inorganic phases. In addition to the common inorganics such as calcium, potassium, magnesium, sodium; some other elements even heavy metals can be found in the isolated ingredients. It was also found out that the isolation processes lead to some variations in the mineral phases and some new minerals form. All in all, this study showed that the isolated ingredients contain no ignorable inorganics in different forms. That is, several mineral phases which are compounds of potassium, calcium, magnesium, silicon, and aluminum in association with phosphates and chlorides were detected not only in the parent biomass materials but also in their extracted bulks from benzene–ethanol treatment as well as isolated holocellulose and lignin. The extracted bulk, from which the further isolation steps are performed, can be regarded as the source of the inorganics found in the isolated holocellulose and lignin. If the extraction step would have removed the inorganics completely, then the subsequent isolation steps would have implemented using inorganics-free feedstock, and consequently the existence of the minerals would not have been detected. Another important outcome of this paper is to reveal the fact that the isolation methods that have been employed to determine the contents of the macromolecular ingredients have an intrinsic weakness that is resulted from the presence of the inorganics found in the parent biomass.