This work focuses on analysing the collection process in flotation by means of a simultaneous time-resolved measurement of particle and bubble trajectories. We introduced a new method that determined the probability of collision and attachment using a 3D particle-tracking method with high temporal resolution (1000 fps) and spatial (
                        
                           0.03
                        
                      mm/pixel) resolution in a dense particle flow (
                        
                           5000
                        
                      particles/ml). A 4D particle image tracking device with three high-speed cameras recorded the three-phase flow in a rectangular bubble column (2 mm, bubble chain). Particles made of fluorescent polystyrene were employed so that particles appeared bright and bubbles dark on the captured images. An attachment occurred if the trajectory of a particle coincided with that of a bubble. The recovery was calculated based on the number of particles attached to a bubble compared to the total number of particles within a reference volume. With this method, the true flotation depending on the particle diameter (
                        
                           30
                           –
                           100
                        
                      
                        
                           μ
                        
                     m) was investigated and the results compared with an existing model of the bubble-particle collection microprocess.Froth flotation is the most important and widely used process for separating valuable minerals (e.g. copper sulphides, galena or scheelite) from the gangue within the ores. Hydrophobized particles attach to a gas bubble and rise to the surface of the flotation cell to form a froth phase that overflows as a mineral-rich concentrate. The efficiency of flotation is controlled by surface chemistry in the nano-scale to rupture liquid films between bubbles and particles and hydrodynamics in the macro-scale of the flow field within a flotation cell. The maximum recovery is limited to a small range of particle sizes between 20 and 100 The theoretical models describe the recovery rate as a first-order rate equation with a kinetic constant A direct way to measure the recovery rate in defined hydrodynamic conditions would be very helpful to verify these models and to advance our understanding of fine particle flotation. Amongst other methods, previous research groups have used a sampling tube below the pulp interface to collect loaded bubbles ( To measure the bubble and particle trajectories simultaneously and quantify the interaction between the particles and bubbles, we applied an optical 3D particle tracking velocimetry (PTV) with a high temporal resolution, a so-called 4D PTV. This new approach enables a non-invasive measurement of the collection recovery in the pulp zone of a flotation cell. Recent developments in the field of PTV have allowed this technique to be applied to a flow with a higher number of particles (up to 5000 particles/ml) and thus a higher mass fraction of the solid phase. Milestones in this development have been a time-resolved tomographic particle image velocimetry ( To generate a simple model flow to prove our method, the experimental setup of a bubble column was adapted from The properties of the bubble chain are summarized in Polystyrene (PS) particles (microParticles GmbH, Berlin, Germany) with an incorporated fluorescent dye (red-fluorescent: Ex/Em 530 nm/607 nm) were used as model particles. The diameter of the particles was monodispersed with values of When changing the particle diameter, a higher mass fraction of PS was added. For our measurements, we used a 4D PTV system (LaVision, Göttingen, Germany), as seen in For our application, we adopted this technique as follows ( To calculate the collection zone recovery The image processing algorithm for masking out the bubbles was inspired by In the next step, the trajectories were calculated separately for each phase within the software DaVis 8.4 (LaVision, Göttingen, Germany). For the particle tracks, the Shake-the-box algorithm was used. This algorithm computes the Lagrangian tracks of particles by predicting the particle trajectory based on preceding time steps. Uncertainties between the predicted and actual positions are corrected by varying the predicted position in space (‘shaking’) until it matches the actual position. Newly entering particles are triangulated by an iterative reconstruction ( Simultaneously, the midpoints of the bubbles were used to calculate the bubble trajectory with the 3D PTV algorithm developed by Both algorithms provided results in the form of a trajectory. A trajectory consisted of the respective position To quantify the interaction between the particles and bubbles, the shape of each object was approximated and their trajectories were combined again. Particles were described as points, whereas the bubble shape was estimated as a rotated oblate spheroid defined by its center point  The particle concentration The challenge was now to determine the number of attached particles The distance between the bubble surface and particle center is shorter than The radial component of the particle velocity The particle trajectory contains at least three track points. The system boundary was a thin layer around the bubble surface with a maximum distance The term Criterion (ii) compared the radial component of the relative velocity Consequently, the radial velocity component Theoretically, criterion (ii) was fulfilled if the radial component of the particle’s relative velocity Finally, if a particle met all three criteria, it was classified as attached. The ratio between the sum of the attached particles and the number of bubbles equaled Recovery is a quantitative measure of the interaction between particles and bubbles. The capacity to observe and analyze this process with our method is shown in To develop a mathematical model to predict the flotation rate, many research groups (e.g. It is obvious that most particles underwent collision and attachment at the rear surface of the bubble. These findings are in contrast to the literature (e.g. The bubble wake was analyzed and classified by One aim of the development of our novel method is to measure the collection zone recovery and to verify existing recovery models. Therefore,  This paper presents the first application of 4D PTV to measure the collection zone recovery based on the particle trajectories in three dimensions and at high temporal resolution. We applied the method to a simplified model of a three-phase flow consisting of polystyrene particles, an air bubble chain and deionized water with a chemical solution to enhance the hydrophobicity of the particles. The solid phase is initially limited to PTV tracer particles due to their fluorescent color. The traditional application for PTV is tracking individual tracer particles over time to gain information about the liquid phase velocity. They have low inertia and follow the fluid motion nearly perfectly ( The influence of the particle size on the recovery rate was compared between experimental data obtained by 4D PTV and the analytical model developed by The authors would like to acknowledge the financial support provided by the