An element is presented for the free vibration analysis of composite plates. The element is capable of representing high orders of displacement using very few degrees of freedom. Hierarchy in the orders of deflection, rotation, moment and shear has been preserved in the element through scrupulous choice of field variables. The effect of rotary inertia has been considered through an innovative scheme for inclusion into mass lumping procedures. Performance of the element has been tested in a wide range of problems which indicate that free vibration analysis of plates with the help of the present element can reach a high level of accuracy at reduced computation cost, compared to standard elements in literature.Laminated composite plates are being increasingly used in the construction, automotive, marine and aerodynamic industry due to the high stiffness and strength-to-weight ratios, long fatigue life, resistance to corrosion, and the flexibility in design that these materials offer. A true understanding of their dynamic behaviour primarily requires the natural frequencies to be determined accurately. Finite element method is considered the most versatile and efficient tool for analysis of laminated composite structures. While classical laminated plate theories are too simple and inadequate for the analysis of composites, higher order or 3D continuum theories often have a complicated formulation and are computationally expensive. The elements based on Reissner–Mindlin’s theory provides a balance between these, and is the most preferred solution to composite plate bending problems, when through-thickness stress and strains are not deemed to be so important. There has been a wide literature on the theoretical and applicative aspects of composite plates. A survey by Zhang and Yang The element presented in this paper has an arbitrary triangular shape with seven nodes in the initial stage — three at the vertices, three at the mid-sides, and a seventh node at the centroid of the element (see The key concept lies in choosing the rotations due to shear, Following the general convention in plate bending, the middle plane of the plate, In addition to the above, the following general assumptions are also made. The material of the plate follows Hooke’s Law. The transverse displacement of the plate is small compared to its thickness. The transverse normal stress is negligible compared to the in-plane normal stress. The present element is a displacement-based formulation in accordance with RMT. The field variables are all displacement components ( Though Thus the nodal variables may be expressed as: Differentiation of [P The six external nodes contain five degrees of freedom each, Now, the values of area coordinates for the different nodes of the element may be substituted in This may be easily inverted to get the unknown coefficients The generalised strain vector {ε} may be defined in terms of the field variables as follows:    and The constitutive relation for laminated composites may be expressed as The field variables as defined in To eliminate the degrees of freedom associated with the internal node of an element, the stiffness matrix The mass matrix of an element may be derived in the consistent form following standard procedure Condensation of the mass matrix, so as to conform to the condensed stiffness matrix obtained above in Alternatively, lumped mass matrix where all non-diagonal elements are zero, is known to be accurate enough and computationally much more efficient The present section proposes two new mass lumping schemes that can be incorporated at chosen nodes. The mass matrices are essentially derived from the diagonals of a consistent mass matrix of the element. The first procedure considers only mass contributions of the in-plane and transverse degrees of freedom at the boundary nodes, while the second includes contributions of the corresponding rotational degrees of freedom too.  m  and The technique is somewhat similar to the lumping scheme proposed by Hinton et al. Though the mass of the plate is quite well distributed in this scheme, the diagonals associated with the rotational terms The nature and dimension of such deviation is illustrated in the numerical examples in  The actual performance accomplished by the proposed lumping scheme, taking into account the inertia terms, has been studied in Numerical examples of vibration of laminated composite plates having different shapes, boundary conditions, fibre orientations or some internal discontinuities have been worked out in this section. Three sets of numerical data have been used in the examples to represent the properties of different composite materials. Material    Except in  and In In the first A simply supported cross ply (0/90/90/0) square laminate shown in Comparison has been made with the fundamental frequencies of Reddy and Chao A cross-ply skew-symmetric (0/90) Performance of the present element has been assessed by calculating two percentage errors (ϵ In the second example a simply supported rectangular laminate with angle ply Cross ply (0/90/0) square laminates having different combination of clamped, simply supported, and free boundary conditions are studied in this example. Thickness ratio ( The problem of a simply supported, angle ply A cantilever right triangular plate as shown in A simply supported square laminate has been considered having a concentrated mass of magnitude (i) half of, (ii) equal to, and (iii) double that of the plate, located at the plate centre. The study has been made for cross ply (0/90) and angle ply An element for the free vibration analysis of laminated composite plates has been presented in this paper. The element is triangular in shape containing three nodes at the vertices and three at the mid-sides, with five usual degrees of freedom at each node. The rotations due to shear ( The research work reported here was primarily carried out in a phase supported by the Council of Scientific and Industrial Research, India, through grant no. 8/3(29)/99-EMR-I (SPS). The support is being duly acknowledged.