Uniform and highly doped nitrogen carbon nanofibers (N-CNFs) have been produced by electrospinning of solution mixture that contains polyacrylonitrile, polyaniline and graphene and followed by annealing at 1200°C. The NiO catalyst was loaded onto N-CNFs by chemical precipitation of Ni(OH)2 and treating at 400°C. The physicochemical characterizations show that the N-CNFs have an average diameter of 250nm with nitrogen-doping level of 17wt. % and BET surface area of 440m2
                     g−1. The NiO catalyst with particle size of 7.0 to 8.0nm was uniformly loaded over the surface of the carbon nanofibers. The electrocatalytic activity of NiO/N-CNFs hybrid for methanol oxidation reaction in basic medium has been investigated by cyclic voltammetry and chronoamperometry techniques. The results show that the NiO/N-CNFs catalyst has superior specific and mass activities for methanol oxidation over the other nickel based catalysts. In addition negative shift in the methanol oxidation potential was observed which relies on the loading amount of NiO/N-CNFs catalyst. The highly doped nitrogen carbon nanofibers electrode based on polyacrylonitrile, polyaniline and graphene composite could be considered as a promising candidate to act as a catalyst support material.Direct methanol fuel is a class of proton-exchange fuel cells and it offers many advantages over its hydrogen counterparts such as relatively low cost and the methanol fuel is easier to transport In addition more interest directed to develop novel carbon support to achieve high catalytic activity and better fuel cell performance. The durability and activity of catalysts were both dependent upon the nature of used carbon support. Many characteristics such as degree of metal dispersion, metal-support interaction and electronic properties of metals rely on the nature of carbon support Electrospinning is the technology of forming fibres with sub-micron to hundreds of nanometres in diameter, through splitting the jet and their elongations in an applied field of electrostatic potential Very recently we report the synthesis of highly doped nitrogen (about 17.0 Polyacrylonitrile with an average molecular weight of about 150,000 The electrospinning solution mixture was prepared by dissolving 20 Carbon nanofibers were achieved through two steps; firstly stabilization by annealing at 200 The C, H and N contents of prepared carbon nanofibers were determined using PerkinElmer 2400 Series II CHNS/O elemental analyser and the thermogravimetric analysis was carried out using a TA Instrument (Q500 TGA) using a platinum cell in air atmosphere. The ICP-OES analysis has been used to determine the actual loading of Ni in the prepared catalyst using ICP-OES (Thermo-6000 I CAP Series, UK). The characterization of crystal structure and grain size of NiO/N-CNFs catalyst was achieved by X-ray diffraction using CuK Gamry Interface 1000 Potentiostate/Galvanostate/ZRA was used to measure the electrocatalytic activity of prepared NiO/CNFs catalyst. All the measurements were performed in 6.0  The XRD pattern for NiO/N-CNF catalyst is shown in  The chemical composition of N-CNF and NiO/N-CNFs nanocomposite as determined by CHN and EDX are reported in The results for CHN analysis of the CNFs before and after carbonization process show that the content of hydrogen and nitrogen has been significantly decreased within the transformation process from polymeric electrospun fibers to carbon fibers. This could be explained as a result of fixation and carbonization process and formation of carbon fibers. The EDX analysis for NiO/N-CNFs evidently confirms that carbon, nitrogen, oxygen and nickel are forming the main components of the NiO/N-CNF catalyst. The C content of 64.68  Before examine the electrocatalytic activity of the NiO/N-CNFs catalyst for methanol oxidation, the electrochemical behavior of NiO/N-CNFs catalyst was investigated in KOH by loading of 4.0 The CV of NiO catalyst in KOH shows a quasi-reversible redox process with peak separation of 150 Nickel is known to have oxidation states of Ni(0), Ni(II), Ni(III), and Ni(IV). In alkaline media Based on this mechanism and in presence of methanol there is an increase in Ni(OH) We have investigated the NiO/N-CFNs catalyst loading effect on the methanol oxidation reaction.   In order to further evaluate the long-term activity and stability of the NiO/N-CNFs catalyst for methanol electro-oxidation, long-term chronoamperometric measurements were also performed at different oxidation potentials in 6.0 For similar time at constant potential of 600 Highly nitrogen doped and porous carbon nanofibers have been obtained by electrospinning of polyacrylonitrile, polyaniline and graphene solution mixture followed by annealing at 1200 The authors extend their appreciation to the Deanship of Scientific Research at King Saud University for funding the work through the research group project number (RG-1435-010).