Presence of basic calcium phosphate in knee joints of osteoarthritis patients could be prevented by inhibiting tissue non-specific alkaline phosphatase (TNAP) activity. Levamisole or the L stereoisomer of tetramisole (a known TNAP inhibitor) has been used as a treatment for curing rheumatoid arthritis but its therapeutical use is limited due to side effects. We report the synthesis and the TNAP inhibition property of benzo[b]thiophene derivatives, among which benzothiopheno-tetramisole and benzothiopheno-2,3-dehydrotetramisole, which could be involved in a drug therapy for osteoarthritis. Two water soluble racemic benzothiopheno-tetramisole and -2,3-dehydrotetramisole with apparent inhibition constants K
                     i
                     =85±6μM and 135±3μM (n
                     =3) comparable to that of enantiomeric levamisole 93±4μM were found. Several novel derivatives showed more pronounced inhibition properties towards intestinal alkaline phosphatase than TNAP.Calcium-containing crystals are present in synovial fluid extracted from the knee joints of up to 70% of osteoarthritis patients, indicating that pathological calcification occurs in the majority of osteoarthritis. The synthetic chemistry used for the preparation of the benzothiophene derivatives Finally, 2-aryl-3-methylamino-benzo[ Benzo[ The library of benzothiophene compounds Although 2-aryl-benzo[ Whatever the nature of the phenolic or amino moieties incorporated in the benzo[ As well as for the most promising compounds DMSO is very often used as solvent for water- insoluble drugs and in several human therapeutic situations. As levamisole, Although porcine kidney TNAP activity is usually measured at alkaline pH as to screen putative inhibitors ( Some benzothiophene derivatives showed more pronounced inhibition properties towards BIAP than porcine kidney TNAP. Such compounds may have a clinical application, since the intestinal type of alkaline phosphatase increased in the urine of patients with renal disease. Reactants and solvents were supplied by Aldrich, Acros, Lancaster, Alfa Aeser and Fluka and purchased at the highest commercial quality and used without further purification. Porcine kidney tissue non-specific alkaline phosphatase (TNAP), bovine intestinal alkaline phosphatase (BIAP) and levamisole hydrochloride were purchased from Sigma and used without further purification. All reactions were carried out under an argon atmosphere with dry solvents under anhydrous conditions, unless otherwise stated. NMR spectra were recorded on a Bruker DPX-300 ( DAST (3.08 Eluent: cyclohexane. Yield: 75%. Eluent: cyclohexane/AcOEt (8:2). Yield: 62%. NaBH Eluent: cyclohexane/AcOEt (9:1). Yield: 78%. Eluent: cyclohexane/AcOEt (7:3). Yield: 100%. Pyridine (1.26 Eluent: cyclohexane/AcOEt (9:1). Yield: 85%. Eluent: cyclohexane/AcOEt (7:3). Yield: 95%. Compound NaCN (0.195 Benzo[ To a mixture of To a solution of Compound 2-Aminothiazoline (11.8 To a mixture of To a solution of A solution of To screen putative inhibitors, activity of BIAP as well as that of porcine kidney TNAP were measured in 25 From the screening test, the best benzothiophene inhibitor was selected. Its activity was measured in 25 To determine the inhibition constant We thank Dr. John Carew for the English correction. Ms. Lina Li was a recipient of a scholarship awarded by the China-France Doctoral College.