The poor flotation efficiency of low-rank coal in the flotation process is due to the large and rich pore structure on its surface. In this study, the changes in the pore structure before and after pore compression pretreatment were analyzed by a scanning electron microscope and Brunauer–Emmett–Teller analysis. The effects on the flotation were then evaluated by analyzing the results of collector adsorption experiments and flotation kinetics tests. After pore compression, the pore state on low-rank coal surface was from open to half-closed and then closed. Further, the pore volume, specific surface area, and average pore diameter of the particles decreased from 0.02497 to 0.01214 cm3/g, 17.383 to 5.006 m2/g, and 9.6992 to 5.7466 nm, respectively. In addition, the adsorption rate of the collectors improved and the equilibrium adsorption time of n-dodecane decreased from 436 s to 250 s, whereas the adsorption rate of water decreased with the porosity of the coal after pore compression. Meanwhile, according to the flotation results, the maximum clean coal yield (74.44%) was obtained within 400 MPa of pressure pretreatment using n-dodecane as a collector; this value is 20.46% points higher than that of raw coal flotation using n-hexane as the collector. Furthermore, it was also found that a collector with too high a viscosity or too short a carbon chain causes the total cumulative yield of the low-rank coal to decrease. It is anticipated that the results of this work can provide guidance in low-rank coal flotation applications.Froth flotation is an effective separation method for fine coal upgrading that depends on the hydrophobicity difference between coal and gangue minerals To this end, numerous studies have focused on techniques and methods to improve the flotation performance of low-rank coal, and several new collectors and surfactants have been identified as beneficial in this regard In terms of the effects of the pore structure on the flotation of low-rank coal, Androutsopoulos et al. To fundamentally explain the structure of the pore and its influence on the flotation of low-rank coal, it is necessary to study the morphology and structure of the pore and examine the collector adsorption on the surface. For this purpose, an innovative and practical method called pore compression was proposed and used to modify the low-rank coal pore and enhance flotation. In the present study, long-flame coal with relatively high porosity was selected for pore compression. SEM images and Brunauer–Emmett–Teller (BET) analysis were employed to examine the properties of the pore structure before and after pore compression. The number and size of the pores in low-rank coal can affect the wetting or adsorption of the collector during the flotation process. Therefore, a collector adsorption experiment was also conducted to obtain a quantitative interpretation of the flotation response of the coal before and after pore compression. It is anticipated that the results of the present work can provide guidance in low-rank coal flotation engineering. Long-flame coal samples of low-rank coal were collected from the Daliuta Coal Preparation in Shenmu city, Shan’xi Province, China. Raw coal samples were screened to obtain fractions of −0.5 mm. Then, pore compression was applied to the coal using mechanical pressure via a TAW-2000 hydraulic machine to obtain coal samples with different porosities. Two different pressures were applied, specifically, 200 and 400 MPa, to create two different sets of samples, and the coal was subjected to compression for a period of 10 min. To determine the pore morphologies of the coal samples before and after pore compression, SEM images were obtained using a SEM (Quanta TM250, FEI, USA). According to the process detailed by Gui et al. BET experiments using a specific surface area/pore analyzer (BEL, Japan) were employed to identify the pore structure, including the pore volume (PV), specific surface area (SSA), pore size distribution (PSD), and average pore diameter (APD), of the coal samples before and after pore compression. The operating procedure for the BET measurements was as follows: Approximately 0.2500 g of a long flame coal sample was placed into the sample tube and then degassed in the adsorption system at 120 °C for 4 h under a vacuum of 1.0 × 10 The degree of porosity significantly affects the adsorption of the collectors. In the present work, a K100 tensiometer (KRUSS, Germany) was used to measure the adsorption behavior between the coal samples and water/collectors (n-hexane, n-dodecane, diesel oil). In these tests, filter paper was used to cover the bottom of the Washburn tube so that 2.000 g of coal particles would not fall out after it were placed in the tube. Then, an identical force was applied to compress each sample to the same compaction height to ensure the accuracy and repeatability of the tests. Next, the Washburn tube was placed in the hook of the tensiometer and the sample table was steadily lowered near the solid sample manually. During this time, the distance between the bottom of the tube and the collector in a glass beaker was approximately 2 mm. When the bottom of the Washburn tube was close to the collector, the lowering of the Washburn tube was stopped immediately and the Tensiometer K100 began to record the mass change of the tube for a total of 2000 s at 4 s intervals. All the experiments were conducted at 20 °C and the measured wicking mass values presented in this paper are the average values. The characteristics of the water/collector liquids at 20 °C are listed in All flotation kinetics experiments were carried out in an XRDIII 0.5 L laboratory flotation machine. In the flotation tests, n-hexane, n-dodecane, and diesel oil were used as collectors and 2-octanol was used as a frother. In each test, 40 g of long flame coal was mixed with 0.5 L water in the flotation cell and agitated for 2 min. Then, the desired mass of collector and frother were gradually added into the pulp. The conditioning periods for the collector and frother were 2 and 1 min, respectively. Next, air was introduced into the pulp and froth samples were collected for another 3 min. Four flotation concentration products (C1, C2, C3, and C4) were collected after 30, 60, 120, and 180 s, sequentially. The experimental conditions were as follows: the pulp concentration was 80 g/L, the collector dosage was 4000 g/t, the 2-octanol dosage was 1000 g/t, the impeller rotation speed was 1800 rpm, and the air flow rate was 0.20 m A size analysis of the coal samples was conducted with a set of standard sieves with mesh sizes of 0.250, 0.125, 0.074, and 0.045 mm, and the results are shown in The pore structure characteristics of the coal surface considerably influence the wetting and adsorption of collectors, and thus, the flotation recovery The changes in the pore structure, as represented by the PV, SSA, and APD measurements of the coal particles, are listed in According to Poiseuille’s Law and the Washburn equation, the wicking equation on the tensiometer K100 can be expressed as follows Assuming the geometric factor of the Washburn tube is Assuming that for one type of coal sample, If the slope of line The results of water/collector adsorption tests on the raw coal, as shown in  As shown in The flotation results for the coal samples before and after pore compression under different collectors are shown in In terms of the results for the same coal sample under different collectors, taking raw coal as an example, the total combustible yield was as follows: n-dodecane (66.45%) > diesel oil (61.00%) > n-hexane (44.10%). The total combustible yield of the raw coal with diesel oil as a collector was worse than that of n-dodecane owing to the high viscosity of the diesel oil In terms of the flotation results for different coal samples under the same collector, for example n-dodecane, the total combustible yield was as follows: 400 MPa coal (74.44%) > 200 MPa coal (70.06%) > raw coal (66.45%). This was thought to be due to the reduction in the number and size of fractures/pores and an increase in the floatability of the coal samples after pore compression, which is in line with the SEM analysis, and the BET measurements. In this study, the effect of pore structure on collector adsorption and flotation of low-rank coal was investigated. The pore structure of low-rank coal samples was changed under different mechanical pressures—specifically, 200 MPa and 400 MPa. The number and size of the pore structures before and after compression were estimated using both SEM analysis and BET analysis, and the water/collector adsorption of low-rank coal before and after pore compression was evaluated via the K100. The results indicated that as the pore compression strength increased, the pore state on the low-rank coal surface was from open to half-closed and then closed. The PV, SSA, and APD of the particles decreased from 0.02497 to 0.01214 cm This research was supported by “the Fundamental Research Funds for the Central Universities” (2018BSCXA14) and “Postgraduate Research & Practice Innovation Program of Jiangsu Province” (KYCX18_1933), for which the authors express their appreciation.