Nanostructures of narrow band-gap semiconductiors such as PbS provide a large scope for band-gap engineering as strong quantum confinement effects can alter the bulk band-gap value all the way from 0.41 to 2.3 eV, rendering the material transparent in most of the visible range of the electromagnetic spectrum. This paper discusses the preparation and characterization of polymer-based PbS nanostructures showing large characteristic blue shift in optical absorption. Enhancement in electrical resistivity is observed as a result of quantum confinement. This material is found to exhibit strong thermal lens effects, which is utilized to achieve optical limiting at low laser power levels.Semiconductor nanocrystallites are known to exhibit unique size-dependent optical properties, which render them attractive from the viewpoint of integrated photonic devices. Quantum confinement effects are particularly important if the crystallite dimension is less than a critical size known as the exciton Bohr radius of the material Semiconductor nanocrystals in a transparent matrix have attracted recent interest due to their potential in applications in nonlinear optics such as photonic switching Earlier work from our laboratory on polymer-based CdS nanoclusters in the regime of strong confinement had resulted in new findings on exciton confinement effects on optical absorption and fluorescence, photoacoustic response The host matrix for the PbS quantum dots in the present work is Nafion, a cation-exchange polymer available commercially in the form of transparent sheets. These sheets have good mechanical strength, chemical inertness and temperature stability and are widely used in humidity sensors and proton exchange membrane in fuel cells. Nafion contains nanopores in its structure, which facilitate easy formation of nanoclusters. It consists of a fluorocarbon backbone and an interconnected ionic cluster Nafion 117 films of thickness 18 μm are cleaned in boiling nitric acid and then repeatedly washed with boiling water until the pH of the water bath becomes neutral. The dried films are immersed in a 0.1 M lead acetate trihydrate solution for varying amounts of time and ultrasonically agitated to clean the surface. Samples designated A, B and C are obtained after immersion times of 24, 12 and 1 h, respectively. After ammonia passivation, films are finally exposed to hydrogen sulfide gas and dried under vacuum. X-ray diffraction (XRD) is carried out using Shimadzu Horizontal Diffractometer using Cu-Kα radiation ( The XRD pattern for bulk PbS and representative samples A and B containing PbS quantum dots are shown in   Electrical conduction in Nafion membrane is known to be by way of the Grothus mechanism of proton transport Thermal lens effect was observed on passing a low power cw helium–neon laser beam through sample C and is studied using the z scan geometry. In both z scan and optical limiting experiments, a laser beam is passed through the sample, and hence, the sample is required to be sufficiently transparent to allow a beam of detectable intensity to pass through the sample. This is possible in semiconductor nanostructures only if the optical cut-off is sufficiently blue-shifted from the wavelength of the laser wavelength used, 632 nm in the present work. The optical absorption spectra The defocusing nature of the sample is dependent on the aperture size and the focal length of the condensing lens used in the optical module. The threshold for limiting is found to be 6 mW. The output remains constant at about 4 mW even when the input is close to 8 mW. Earlier work on CdS In summary, PbS quantum dots in the regime of strong quantum confinement are synthesized and stabilized in Nafion polymer with a wide range of cluster sizes, by a simple room temperature ion-exchange technique. The signature blue shift observed in optical absorption spectra of the samples is quite large compared to the bulk value, in agreement with the predictions of the tight binding approximation. An increase in electrical resisitivity is obtained in the case of films with extremely small PbS nanoparticles. Temperature dependence of the refractive index in these materials leads to self-defocusing effect as measured from the z scan experiment. This is utilized to demonstrate the use of the material for optical limiting applications at low powers. The authors acknowledge the help provided by Ms. Kaladevi Sendhil in the z scan and optical limiting experiments, financial assistance from Government of India and the valuable suggestions provided by the reviewer of the paper.