Goethite is a major constituent in ferruginous soils in a lateritic nickel deposit on the Koniambo massif in New Caledonia, and dehydroxylation of nickeliferous goethite may occur naturally due to fire and during the processing of lateritic Ni ore. Goethite started to alter to hematite in 2 h of heating at 230–250 °C and had completely altered to hematite at 340 °C and higher temperatures. For most heated samples the rate of dissolution of Fe in 1 M HCl followed the cube root equation with a single straight line describing the data, however for samples where both goethite and hematite were present the data did not conform to this equation. There was an approximately 7 fold increase in the rate of dissolution for samples heated to 340 °C which can be accounted for by the increase in surface area (2-fold) due to the development of micropores and the increase of structural defects in poorly ordered hematite structures (protohematite and hydrohematite) (3.5-fold) formed by partial dehydroxylation of goethite. For heated samples Ni, Cr, Al, Co and Mn showed congruent dissolution with iron indicating uniform incorporation of these metals in the structures of the iron oxides and complete retention of these metals in crystals during the goethite to hematite transition. V and Cu showed only partial dissolution (i.e. noncongruent dissolution) indicating that some V and Cu may be associated with another less soluble mineral (e.g. ilmenite).Nickel laterites are soils that form as a result of prolonged weathering under leaching conditions of ultramafic rocks consisting of nickeliferous ferro-magnesian minerals (olivine, pyroxene and amphibole). Prolonged and deep weathering is often associated with the dissection of the regolith by uplift and erosion. The upper portion of these soils is composed mostly of iron oxides with the dominant mineral being goethite with lesser hematite and maghemite. Nickel and other metals are associated with these iron oxide minerals ( There have been numerous studies on the association of metals with iron oxides (particularly goethite) based mainly on synthetic samples with relatively little data on natural samples. Iron oxides in laterites are quite poorly ordered with nanometric crystal sizes and large surface areas. These properties may result in extensive absorption, incorporation and fixation of ions from soil solution ( Most research on non-ideal iron oxides has been directed to the substitution of Al Dehydroxylation of goethite to hematite (in oxidising conditions) occurs due to heating, and is the basis of some manufacturing processes. This topotactic transformation also occurs in nature due to natural and managed forest and grassland fires ( Thus, the dehydroxylation of goethite may be a far more complex process than earlier authors perceived. The effects of these transformations on the location and solubility of substituted metals in goethite and hematite have received little attention. It is postulated that during progressive dehydroxylation of goethite some of the associated metals may not be compatible with the various hematite-like structures and may be ejected from the lattice into the abundant voids or onto the crystal surface. In these accessible locations they will be much more easily dissolved by acid solutions including those existing in soils and in the rhizosphere in particular ( Nine ferruginous soils were collected from a lateritic nickel deposit on the ultramafic rocks of the Koniambo massif in the Northern Province of New Caledonia ( Approximately 3 g sub-samples of 52 °C dried soil was heated to 230, 250, 270, 290, 300, 320, 340, 400, 500 and 600 °C for 2 h in a furnace. Soil was placed in a ceramic crucible that had previously been dried at 400 °C then cooled to air temperature. The samples were placed in the furnace that was already pre-heated to the desired temperature (i.e. shock heating), to simulate the effect of a sudden wood fire on the soil surface or an industrial calcination. After the 2 h heating period, soils were weighed and XRD patterns were obtained. The surface area of the heated soil was measured using a Macrometrics Gemini 2375 instrument with a Vac Prep 601 and followed the B.E.T. method with N X-ray diffraction (XRD) data were obtained using a Philips PW 1830 X-ray diffractometer with Cu target tube and diffracted beam monochromator. XRD patterns were determined for the range 4–60° 2 Transmission electron microscopy (TEM) specimens were prepared by ultrasonically dispersing the sample in water and then a drop of the very dilute suspension was placed onto a carbon coated grid and left to dry. The TEM studies were performed on a JEOL 300 FEG electron microscope operated at 300 kV. Exactly 200 mg of unheated soil and soil heated to various temperatures were shaken at 400 cycles/min in 200 ml of 1 M HCl in a 500 ml plastic bottle in a controlled environmental shaker at 40 XRD patterns of the 15 soil samples show that goethite and hematite were the major minerals present, with minor amounts of maghemite and quartz ( Crystal size (mean coherent scattering length-MCL) for goethite and hematite in sample 2NP was calculated from XRD line broadening for each temperature ( There was a decrease in the MCL 110 (14.7 to 12.5 nm) and 111 (19.8 to 14.3 nm) with increasing heating temperature (52–250 °C) until all the goethite had transformed into hematite (600 °C). Hematite MCL 110 (14.3 to 17.6 nm) and 104 (7.2 to 11.9 nm) increased with increasing heating temperature. Goethite 2NP lost about 8% weight on heating at 200 °C, which was probably absorbed water. There was a approximately 8% loss of weight as water due to loss of structural OH on heating for 2 h at 600 °C ( The surface area of the goethite was 74 m TEM showed that goethite consisted of a mixture of acicular/lathlike and anhedral isodimensional platy crystals ( As the crystallinity of hematite increased for higher heating temperatures and it was possible to resolve hematite lattice spacings of 2.65 Å (100) ( Iron dissolution versus time graphs ( Weight of sample or amount of Fe at time Initial weight of sample or amount of Fe Dissolution rate constant. For pure goethite or hematite samples values of r Where the diversity of minerals in a sample prevents dissolution from following the cube root law such as for dissolution of a mixed hematite and goethite material the kinetics may be better described by the modified Nernst equation ( Initial amount of Fe Amount of Fe dissolved (time Constant characteristic of the structure of the solid phase Dissolution rate constant. When the modified Nernst equation was applied to dissolution data ( In the present study á from the modified Nernst equation ranged from 0.84–1.45 and k.10 Mixed goethite and hematite samples resulting from partial dehydroxylation of goethite dissolved more rapidly than corresponding pure goethite and hematite samples (up to 7 times faster). This was reflected by a 7-fold increase in the dissolution rate constant ( An examination of the congruency of metal dissolution as goethite dissolves can provide information regarding the distribution of metal substituents within crystals ( For 52 °C heated 2NP near congruent dissolution occurred for Fe and Ni ( The slope of the congruency of dissolution graph (Ni versus Fe) decreased from ∼ The slopes of the congruency of dissolution graphs for Mn, Cr, V and Cu versus Fe are mostly less than one ( Goethite was the major mineral present in New Caledonian nickel laterite. Dehydroxylation altered goethite to hematite, and resulted in the formation of an irregular pore system, which disappeared on further heating to 600 °C. The increase in cube root law dissolution rate constant due to heating is partly a consequence of the increase in surface area due to the development of micropores during the formation of hydrohematite and protohematite. The presence of structural defects in hematite in partly dehydroxylated samples is also partly responsible for the increase in dissolution rate. Acid dissolution investigations indicated that Ni, Cr, Al, Co and Mn showed near congruent dissolution with iron indicating that these metals are nearly uniformly incorporated in the structures of goethite and hematite. With increasing heating temperature dissolution became incongruent with substituted metals becoming relatively more abundant in the interior of hematite crystals. V and Cu showed partial dissolution with iron indicating only some V and Cu are incorporated in the structure of goethite and hematite. It is postulated that on heating by bush fires Ni would become more concentrated toward the centre of the neoformed hematite crystals and less available to soil biota. These results also have implications for mineral processing of nickel laterites via hydrometallurgy. The authors would like to thank Mr. Michael Smirk for his analytical assistance and the staff of the Department of Soil Science and Plant Nutrition, UWA. We are also grateful for the assistance and support from the team in New Caledonia. Our thanks also extends to the staff at the Centre of Microscopy and Microanalysis (CMM) at UWA for their support.