A novel hydrometallurgical process for recovering Zn from ZnS in alkaline solution via chemical conversion with PbCO3 was developed in this work. The S originally present in ZnS can be converted into PbS, while the Zn can be converted into Na2Zn(OH)4 in the alkaline solution in the presence of PbCO3. And then, the Pb in PbS deposited in the leach residues can be converted into PbCO3 again in the Na2CO3 solution. It was found that over 90% of Zn can be extracted from ZnS when the leaching process is operated in 6 mol/L NaOH solution at 90 °C with PbCO3 as additive, and over 95% of PbS in the leach residues can be converted into PbCO3 by stirring the leach residues in Na2CO3 solution with air bubble at a temperature of 80 °C. The leaching solution can be used to produce metallic zinc powder by electrowinning after chemical separation of impurities.Since 2001 world zinc consumption has grown annually by 3.6% in 2002, 3.9% in 2003, 7.2% in 2004 and 3.6% in 2005 (Brook Hunt, June 2006). Currently, most of zinc is produced from zinc sulfides ores because the sulfides can easily be separated from gangue and concentrated by conventional flotation techniques. Oxidized zinc ores, such as smithsonite (ZnCO In our previous work, a cost-effective alkaline leaching and electrowinning process for the extraction of zinc and lead from the oxidized zinc ore was developed ( However, the oxidized zinc ores usually co-existed with sphalerite which cannot be leached by NaOH solution under atmospheric pressure. In the conventional method of extracting zinc from sphalerite, the ore is roasted at 850–950 °C, leached the resultant zinc oxides with sulfuric acid solution, purified the leaching solution by a complex flowsheet, and then electrowon the zinc flake in the purified sulfuric acid solution. The obstacle for this process is the generation and emission of SO Methods based on direct leaching of sphalerite under hydrothermal conditions have been given considerable attention ( Hydrometallurgical treatment of metal sulfide minerals by chemical conversion process has been proposed, such as the conversion of PbS in galena into PbCO The objectives of this work are to develop a novel hydrometallurgical process for recovering Zn from ZnS in alkaline solution via chemical conversion with lead compounds. The S originally present in ZnS can be converted into PbS, while Zn can be converted into Na All the chemicals used were of analytical grade. Leaching tests were carried out in a flask placed on a thermostatically controlled magnetic stirrer. To a 200 ml sodium hydroxide solution, zinc sulfide and lead compound was added and then leached at constant temperature of 60–100 °C. The volume was kept constant by adding water. After the leaching operation was terminated, the slurry was filtered and the zinc and lead contents in the filtrate were analyzed by titration with EDTA. The leaching efficiencies of zinc were calculated according to the following equation: The leach residue was thoroughly washed with NaOH solution and water, and then dried. For the conversion tests, a given quantity of leaching residues and catalysts such as ferrous and cupric ions was added into a flask containing Na The following leaching tests were carried out at 90 °C, NaOH concentration of 5 mol/L, phase ratios (v/w) of 25:1, and leaching time of 120 min, otherwise indicated elsewhere. Only 0.1% zinc can be leached in the absence of lead compounds (PbO), as shown in It was found that PbS phase predominated in the leaching residue as shown in the XRD pattern, indicating that most of the S in the ZnS had been converted into PbS ( The zinc extraction increased with the increase of sodium hydroxide concentrations and 94% of zinc can be leached at over 8 mol/L NaOH solution, as shown in The effect of temperature on the zinc extraction at NaOH concentration of 6 mol/L was shown in The effect of phase ratios on the zinc extraction was shown in The effect of leaching time on the zinc extraction was shown in Leaching tests were also carried out with Pb(NO The lead sulfide formed thus in leaching residue should be recycled. Much work has been done on the conversion of galena to lead carbonate in ammonium or sodium carbonate solution ( The solubility product constant of ZnS and PbS is 2 The experimental results of leaching of Zn from ZnS via conversion by lead compound were in agreement with the theoretical results calculated by reaction stoichiometry as shown in The conversion of PbS into PbCO The Δ A flowsheet was suggested for an alkaline hydrometallurgical process for zinc sulfide ores on the results of this work as shown in NaOH losses in the whole process are estimated to be around 100 g per kg of Zn from titration analysis. The presence and leaching of silicates, carbonates and phosphates in the ores would increase the loss of NaOH. The Pb/ZnS molar ratio of 0.9:1is needed for chemical conversion of ZnS, and around 99% of Pb in PbS deposited in the leach residues can be recycled. Hence, the Pb  The zinc in zinc sulfide can be extracted in NaOH solution with lead carbonate as additive, and the lead sulfide in the leach residues can be converted to lead carbonate by reacting with sodium carbonate solution using air as the oxidizing agent, and then the lead can be recycled in the whole process by dissolving the lead carbonate in NaOH solution. Over 90% of zinc can be extracted from the zinc sulfide, and over 95% of lead sulfide in leach residues can be converted. A new cleaner hydrometallurgical flowsheet for recovering zinc from sphalerite ores was proposed.