Coronoid fractures can be challenging to understand and treat. There are five common patterns of coronoid fractures, modified from the Regan Morrey classification: tip fractures, mid transverse fractures, basal fractures, anteromedial oblique fractures and anterolateral oblique fractures. Specific tools to understand the fracture pattern and associated injuries, and to develop a treatment plan, are presented.Interest in the classification and management of coronoid fractures has increased recently, in part due to better understanding of the role of the coronoid in providing stability to the elbow and improved awareness of its importance. Concomitantly, there has been an increase in the frequency of surgical management of these fractures, in part related to improved understanding of the coronoid's significance and in part related to improved implants. In 1989, Regan and Morrey published on a series of 37 coronoid fractures. The coronoid process extends medially and proximally from the ulna, with several facets, which serve to deepen the articular cup in which the distal humerus rests. The radial head and coronoid serve as a bony constraint to subluxation of the elbow; the coronoid in particular protects against varus instability of the elbow. Regan and Morrey proposed a classification system based upon the lateral plain radiographs Type I fractures are typically a shear fracture of the tip; previously they have been described as an avulsion fracture, however, the capsular insertion is 5–6 mm distal to the coronoid tip so does not exert an avulsion force, hence the mechanism is essentially a shearing one. This is the most common fracture type and is usually found in conjunction with posterolateral instability or dislocation. Type II fractures are often seen in association with a “terrible triad” fracture dislocation, whereas type III fractures represent significant trauma to the elbow and are often comminuted. With review of 2D and 3D fracture patterns, obliquity of fracture lines can be better appreciated and as a consequence two additional fracture types have been recognized. O'Driscoll recognized an anteromedial coronoid fracture pattern and thereby understood the importance of the anteromedial facet of the coronoid to buttress the elbow and provide stability to resist varus posteromedial forces. In addition to an anteromedial oblique fracture pattern, an anterolateral fracture pattern has been identified. Based upon the improved understanding of coronoid fractures and availability of CT scans, our group reviewed 52 consecutive elbow CT scans to evaluate fracture morphology and proposed a modification to the Regan Morrey classification. Essentially, the first three types (tip, mid transverse, and basal type) correspond to the Regan Morrey classification (I, II, III); however, this modification takes into account the oblique fracture patterns (anteromedial oblique fractures and an anterolateral oblique type) Routine plain films are examined, pre and post reduction in the setting of a dislocation. If there is a radial head fracture in the context of an elbow dislocation, there should be careful scrutiny as a coronoid fracture is often present. This is commonly just a tip fracture, but larger fractures might indicate instability, which can be problematic if unaddressed. In the setting of increased energy of injury and comminuted fractures, it can be difficult to discern the origins of some of these fractures. In such a setting, a CT scan with 2 and 3D reconstructions can be invaluable to understand the fracture pattern and to develop a treatment plan. Treatment by fracture type and instability pattern is described; Tip and anterolateral fractures are the most common types of coronoid fractures, typically occurring in the setting of posterolateral rotatory instability and elbow dislocation, and sometimes in the setting of a radial head fracture and/or “terrible triad” injury. Most tip fractures are treated nonoperatively, provided the elbow is stable and there are no other injuries mandating treatment. Over-immobilization is deleterious, provided a stable arc of motion is obtained; thus the patient is allowed to mobilize early within that stable arc of motion. Surgical treatment of these fractures is only undertaken if the radial head fracture needs stabilization or if gross instability is present. Small fractures without concomitant injury (or with non/minimally displaced radial head fractures) and/or those in which the elbow is stable following reduction may be amenable to nonoperative management, and may in some cases be treated as a simple elbow dislocation. If the radial head fracture is approached laterally, and a sizeable tip or anterolateral fracture is present (>5 mm) then surgical stabilization of the coronoid fracture can be performed. Commonly, headless, cannulated screws are passed up into the fragment from the dorsal surface of the ulna with aid of fluoroscopy and a targeted drill guide, such as an ACL guide. Although small fracture fragments have been sutured to the rest of the coronoid, the end result of stabilization of fracture fragments with suture is probably minimal, and they may often be ignored or excised provided that the elbow is stable. Anteromedial coronoid fractures result from axial loading and a varus posteromedial rotatory force. The LUCL injury allows the elbow to rotate and collapse into varus, forcing the anteromedial coronoid into the medial trochlea and causing a “collapsed coronoid” injury to the anteromedial coronoid. The radial head is typically spared. Radiographically the elbow may have a deceptively benign appearance. The fracture fragments may appear small and insignificant. However, on the PA or AP views of the elbow, asymmetry of the joint space with widening laterally and narrowing medially can be a clue to this injury; this represents a partial subluxation of the joint. Operative treatment includes an examination under anaesthesia and fluoroscopy to confirm the direction and pattern of instability. Surgical management involves fixation of the anteromedial fracture and addressing the lateral instability with repair of the collateral ligament. Occasionally fragments are too small and comminuted for fixation and in these circumstances a static fixator may be applied to resist varus forces and allow the coronoid to heal. The elbow may be approached with either a single posterior incision with elevation of flaps medially and laterally or via two separate incisions on the medial and lateral sides (authors' preference). On the medial side the ulnar nerve is identified and protected. It is decompressed but left in situ. The coronoid is approached via the “floor of the cubital tunnel”, and from distal working to proximal ( If the fracture is of sufficient size without substantial comminution, fixation can be achieved by screws from dorsal to anterior; a plate may be used as a buttress in the setting of comminution. Following rigid fixation of the coronoid, stability is again assessed under fluoroscopy. Rarely, if the elbow is stable, the LUCL may not need to be repaired. However, if there is any suspicion of subluxation, a low threshold to address the LUCL is maintained. A second lateral incision may be made and Kocher's interval exposed. Typically the LUCL avulses off the lateral epicondyle; it may be sutured and repaired to the lateral epicondyle with bony tunnels or suture anchors. Following fixation the elbow is again put through its range of movement and gently stressed under fluoroscopy. If there is any residual instability it is better to apply a static external fixation to augment the fixation rather than risk recurrent or residual instability. These fractures involve the majority or all of the coronoid process. The fracture line begins dorsally behind, and includes the sublime tubercle. The plane then extends laterally into the lesser sigmoid notch. These are often high-energy injuries and are associated with transolecranon fractures. Basal coronoid fractures probably result from a direct axial load without the varus or valgus rotatory forces that result in lesser fractures coupled with a dislocation. The energy of injury is usually absorbed by the bony fracture, with less soft tissue disruption than posteromedial or posterolateral rotatory injuries; thus repair of the bony injuries alone is likely to restore stability to the elbow. If there is an associated radial head fracture, this is rigidly fixed or replaced; if it is replaced, after excision of the radial head and before implantation of the prosthesis there is a window to facilitate reduction of the coronoid. However, most commonly, the basal fracture will require a separate medial exposure as described in the anteromedial fracture section. When fixing these fractures, attention is paid to elevation and reduction and fixation of central impacted fragments to restore the anterior restraint to the humerus and restoration of the sublime tubercle fragment containing the MCL insertion. Fixation is typically obtained by small screws or plate and screw constructs, or some combination of the two. If there is an associated transolecranon injury, the fracture may be repaired, gaining access through the olecranon fracture. The proximal olecranon fragment is retracted proximally, exposing the coronoid and allowing for fixation, usually with small headless or buried headed screws ( Rehabilitation of the elbow postoperatively depends upon stability obtained intraoperatively. Stability should not be sacrificed by prematurely mobilizing the elbow; however, a goal of surgery is to achieve stable fixation so that early mobilization is safe. Little information is available regarding the outcomes of coronoid fractures treated with or without surgical fixation. This is related to the fact that these injuries typically exist in a complex with other elbow pathology; in part due to the variable fracture patterns and variable associated injuries that exist; and also due to the relatively recent recognition of the importance of the coronoid. Regan and Morrey The increased appreciation of the role of the coronoid process has led to a better understanding of the patterns of coronoid fracture that can occur, extending the Regan Morrey classification that is widely used. Furthermore, it is generally accepted that the role of the coronoid in elbow stability can best be maintained by surgical fixation of all but the most simple fracture patterns, which should be performed in a way that allows early range of motion to avoid the otherwise almost inevitable risk of stiffness and a poor outcome.