Experimental investigations on the motion trajectory of solid particles inside the hydrocyclone have been successfully carried out by using a high-speed motion analyzer to track the particle movement. For each single particle, the motion trajectory is featured with stochastic characteristic; however, for the overall samples of particles, their motions hold the statistical property. The initial position of particles at the entrance of hydrocyclone heavily affects the motion trajectory of particles inside hydrocyclone and consequently the separation performance. An inlet with pre-sedimentation effect should be very helpful for the separation inside hydrocyclones. The results in this study are valuable for understanding the stochastic and statistical behaviors of particle motion in the separation process inside hydrocyclones, and provide some valuable information for finding some effective way to improve the separation performance in the hydrocyclone.Hydrocyclones are getting more and more interest from various industries, because of their obvious advantages such as simple structure, large capacity, low cost and small volume. Beside a large amount of applications in mineral processing, hydrocyclone separation technique has gotten numerous applications recently in environmental engineering Although the geometric structure of a hydrocyclone is simple, the motion of particles inside the hydrocyclone is very complicated. To understand the separation behavior of hydrocyclones and to obtain a theoretical foundation for structure optimization and efficiency improvement of hydrocyclones, it is essential to make the motion of particles in the hydrocyclones as clear as possible. Therefore many investigations have been made on the motion of solid particles in hydrocyclones previously. Almost all previous experimental works on the motion of solid particles in hydrocyclones have made by adopting an Euler method, The objective of this study is to understand the stochastic and statistical behaviors of the motion of solid particles in the hydrocyclone by adopting a Lagrange method. The investigation was experimentally carried out by using a high-speed motion analyzer (HSMA) system to track the motion trajectory of solid particles inside hydrocyclones. The stochastic and statistical characteristics of the motion of solid particles in the hydrocyclone were analyzed according to the measured motion trajectory of solid particles. The experimental results in this study are valuable for understanding the separation process in the hydrocyclone. The hydrocyclone was made of transparent Perspex and polished. The geometric parameters of the hydrocyclone were designed according to Rietema's optimum geometry for separation A high-speed motion analyzer (HSMA) system was used to track the motion trajectory of solid particles inside the hydrocyclone. It is composed of a high-speed camera, a data processor, a video recorder, a monitor and a computer. When solid particles were fed into the hydrocyclone, a movie of the solid motion was taken by the high-speed camera. Then, the movie was transformed into frames. The motion trajectory of solid particles in the hydrocyclone was obtained by plotting the position of particles at different times, as shown in The liquid phase was water. To be captured by the fast camera, the solid particles should be easy to be found in the water, To study the effect of the initial position of particles at the inlet of hydrocyclone on the particle motion inside the hydrocyclone, we injected the particles into hydrocyclone from three different positions of the inlet section, as shown in With injecting particles from the fixed position point 1, particles with diameters of 700, 800 and 900  In In To study the effect of the injection position on the motion trajectory of solid particles inside the hydrocyclone, the particle size was fixed as 800 When the particles were injected into the hydrocyclone from different positions, some of them were discharged out from the underflow orifice, while some were discharged from the vortex finder. The statistical percentages of particles entering underflow and overflow when they were injected into the hydrocyclone at different positions are listed in  As shown in     The experimental results showed that, even though the particle size and initial position at the entrance of hydrocyclone are the same, the motion trajectories of particles inside the hydrocyclone are still different and random. The point is different from some previous hypothesis and presumes used in the numerical simulation. Although the motion trajectory of every particle is random, and the chance for a single particle being separated into the underflow is stochastic; for the whole involved particles, they hold statistical characteristics for their motions. Statistical analysis of our experiment results (listed in Experimental investigations on the motion trajectory of solid particles inside the hydrocyclone have been successfully carried out by using a high-speed motion analyzer. For each single particle, the motion trajectory is featured with stochastic characteristic; however, for the overall samples of particles, their motions hold the statistical property. The initial position of particles at the entrance of hydrocyclone heavily affects the motion trajectory of particles inside hydrocyclone and consequently the separation performance. An inlet with pre-sedimentation effect should be very helpful for the separation inside hydrocyclones. The results in this study are valuable for understanding the stochastic and statistical behaviors of particle motion in the separation process inside hydrocyclones, and from which we can find some effective way to improve the separation performance in the hydrocyclone, e.g., designing the inlet pipe with pre-sedimentation effects could be very helpful for the separation inside hydrocyclones. This work was supported by the National Natural Science Foundation of China (20376049). The authors thank the Chinese Academy of Engineering Physics for the instrument support.