The chemical composition of sugar beet roots makes this raw material an attractive feedstock for ethanol fermentation. In the manufacture of sugar from this crop, various intermediates, by-products, and wastes are generated, which can be used for the production of energy and other value-added products, such as biofuels. In this chapter, the current processes for the conversion of the sugary juices (raw, thin, and thick juices), molasses and sugar beet pulp into bioethanol are described. In addition, the economics of sugar beet ethanol and the principal strategies proposed for increasing bioethanol yields are described.Celluclast 1.5L Novozyme 188 Pectinase Celluclast 1.5L Celluclast 1.5L Pectinase Xylanase B-Glucosidase Celluclast 1.5L Novozymes 43L Viscozyme L The chemical composition of sugar beet roots makes this raw material an attractive feedstock for ethanol fermentation. In the manufacture of sugar from this crop, various intermediates, by-products, and wastes are generated, which can be used for the production of energy and other value-added products, such as biofuels. In this chapter, the current processes for the conversion of the sugary juices (raw, thin, and thick juices), molasses and sugar beet pulp into bioethanol are described and analyzed. In addition, the economics of sugar beet ethanol and the principal strategies proposed for increasing bioethanol yields are described. Sugar crops are those crops cultivated primarily for the manufacture of sugar and secondarily for the production of alcohol (food and nonfood) and ethanol. There are two main sugar crops: sugar beets ( One considerable disadvantage facing most sugar beet–growing countries is the very short growing season. Given the relatively short period of time during which sugar beets are harvested and available for processing, a beet sugar factory operates on average only 90 days a year. The sugar beet seeds are sown in spring and harvested in the autumn or early winter. However, an advantage over sugarcane is that its cultivation requires approximately four times less water. Also, sugar Sugar beet is an annual crop, propagated by the seed of the flowers. In 2014, 269,714,066 tons of sugar beet was produced worldwide, with an estimated harvested area of 4,471,580 ha and a calculated yield of 603,174 kg/ha. The largest producing countries of sugar beet in terms of tons are France, Russia, Germany, and the United States ( It becomes clear from the The Russian Federation has made a determined push into the sugar market. Its production has tripled in the past decade when it grew by almost 12% a year. However, the sugar yields are 45% lower than that of Europe. This fact is mainly due to inadequate agricultural technology (cultivars, crop management, and machinery) and constrained access to investments ( The sugar extraction rate depends on the sugar content of the sugar beet at the moment of its arrival in the processing plant. European norms define the sugar beet as marketable if it contains 14% sugar or more. For example, one ton of standard sugar beet with a sugar content of 16% processed at a sugar plant with an efficiency of 82.5% would yield 130 kg of sugar ( Contrary to cereals, pulses, and root crops, the main component of sugar crops is not starch but simple monosaccharides (glucose and fructose) and particularly disaccharides (sucrose or saccharose). The protein and fat contents are negligible. Sugar is the prime component that gives value to the sugar beet crop and the by-products generated in its extraction (pulp and molasses) give a benefit up to 10% of the value of the sugar. The root of the beet, called taproot, is composed of 75% water and 25% dry matter. The dry matter comprises about 5% pulp and sugars represent 75% of the total dry matter. The pulp is insoluble in water and is composed of cellulose, hemicellulose, lignin, and pectin. The sugar content in sugar beet can vary from 12% to 20%. The chemical composition of sugar beet roots makes this raw material an attractive feedstock for ethanol fermentation. Bioethanol is primarily produced in the world from sugarcane, sugar beet, corn, and starch, although the preparation process from sugar beets is relatively simple compared to starchy materials. In order to obtain the highest yield from sugar beet several factors must be considered, such as the breeding and variety of the roots, the location of cultivation or sodium, phosphorous, and potassium (NPK) levels of soil ( Recent studies have demonstrated that the effectiveness of ethanol fermentation depends on not only the saccharose content of sugar beet, but also its relationships with other components of the dry matter. High sugar beet yield has significant effect on ethanol yield. The impurities, such as potassium, nitrogen, and sodium, have a negative effect on efficiency of the fermentation process because they could act as inhibitors of ethanologenic yeast, In the manufacture of sugar from sugar beet, from harvest until the final stage of the factory production process, various by-products and wastes are generated. Most of these products can be used as renewable feedstocks for the production of energy, and other value-added products, using different processes. Leaves, which are separated in the harvesting process, are partially used for animal feed. In some countries, mainly in Europe, they are also used with potato for the production of methane ( In the factory production process, after the operations of extraction, purification, evaporation, and crystallization the three major by-products generated are beet pulp, lime sludge, and molasses. One ton of sugar beet yields 160 kg of sugar, 500 kg of wet pulp, and 38 kg of molasses ( Pectin can be successfully extracted from sugar beet pulp and used as food additives. As an advantage from the pectin extracted from other sources, it exhibits superior emulsifying properties and contains ample amount of soluble dietary fiber, which is crucial in functional and health foods ( The juice extracted from the sugar beet contains the sugar as well as impurities (mineral salts), which are removed by adding milk of lime and carbon dioxide and then filtering. Lime sludge is the filter cake formed during filtration of calcium carbonate precipitate in the calco-carbonic purification process of sugar beet juice. It contains primarily precipitated calcium carbonate as well as minerals and organic materials removed in juice purification. This sludge stored in lagoons and disposed as solid waste is utilized for amending the soil in agriculture, as raw material in the cement production, or for the production of paper ( Finally, molasses constitutes the latest by-product generated in sugar production from sugar beet. It is the high viscous and colored runoff syrup from the crystallization step. Sugar beet molasses contain 23%–26% water, 47%–48% sugar, 9%–14% minerals (Mg, Mn, Al, Fe, and Zn), and 8%–12% nitrogenous compounds (amino acids, proteins, etc.) ( Several by-products of the sugar beet industry, formed by sugar solutions of different types and concentrations, can be used to produce biofuels, that is, bioethanol ( The utilization of the juices for a specific product depends on multiple factors, among them, the cost of both the by-product to be processed and the final product are limiting. Due to the bioethanol price in the market must be low, in order to be competitive with conventional fuels, it could be more profitable using sugars for other purposes. However, biofuel production Sugar beet roots are mechanically harvested, taking the bulb from the soil and ripping the leaves off. The detached stalks and leaves are usually kept on the field and roots are quickly transported to the extraction plants by different ways, depending on the distance (truck, train, or ship) ( The extraction plants are provided with large outdoor areas where roots can be stored in big piles once they arrive from plantations. Due to the optimal date of harvesting is concentrated into a short time; farmers have to collect the whole harvest in a few days and later the raw material is processed in the plant ( Previously, bulbs are washed with a pressurized water jet to remove the sand, dust, threads, and remaining leaves. The washing sludge is decanted in order to reuse the water. Several conveyer belts lead the tubers inside the plant while the washing water is drained ( Juice extraction is performed in stainless steel tanks where cossettes are mixed with hot water. This operation is usually carried out in continuous and countercurrent mode. Tanks, called diffusers, are placed horizontally and can have tens of meters in length and a diameter from 0.5 to 1 m ( Hot water (55°C–75°C) is fed to the diffuser at the cossettes output, flowing in the opposite direction to the solid, while a progressive sugar extraction is performed ( The solid–liquid ratio (SLR) in the diffusers is usually 1:2 w/w and the residence time for the solids can range from 1 to 2 h. As a result, the output stream contains a sugar concentration around 10% to 15% w/w. This sugar output stream is called “raw juice.” Frequently, several food preservatives and antibacterials (e.g., sulfur dioxide) are added to this juice in order to prevent microbial contaminations ( The generated pulp (95% humidity) is discharged and subsequently pressed to recover the retained juice, reducing humidity to 70%. After that, the pressed cossettes can be extruded through holes of 0.5 cm, in order to produce little cylindrical bars of cossettes of around 5-cm length and 0.5-cm diameter. These bars are dried in a continuous industrial oven to a final humidity lower than 10%, which allows their preservation. As it was previously stated, this residue is actually considered a by-product in the sugar industry, which is sold as livestock feed ( Raw juice, besides containing sugar (principally sucrose), also includes many other substances extracted from the root, which hinder the later sugar crystallization and reduce the crystals The most common purification treatment of raw juice is called calco-carbonic treatment ( After the carbonation step, a clean juice, free of nonsugar impurities, which is called “thin juice” is obtained. It is concentrated to 60% w/w sugar content by multieffect evaporators, producing a final output stream called “thick juice” ( Finally, crystals are dried in continuous rotary dryers and sieved in continuous vibrators sieves. Different sizes are packaged depending on the market requirements. The diagram of the whole process to produce white sugar from sugar beet is shown in The raw juice, thin juice, thick juice (intermediates), and molasses (liquid by-product) can be used for bioethanol production. Raw juice has a sugar content of 10%–15% w/w and other solved substances, like proteins, organic acids, pectin, inorganic salts, depending on the extraction conditions ( Thin juice contains approximately the same amount of sugar than raw juice, but not other extracted substances from the root ( As thick juice has a sugar concentration much higher than thin juice, it cannot be directly fermented and the prior dilution with water or a nutrient solution is required ( As was previously mentioned, given sugar beet pulp composition, rich in cellulose, hemicellulose and pectin, it can be used as raw material for bioethanol production. In general, the process involves three main steps: generation of fermentable sugars (hydrolysis); fermentation of simple sugars to ethanol; and separation and purification of ethanol ( Pretreatment and hydrolysis steps become the bottleneck of this process. Many pretreatment processes are described in literature for lignocellulosic material, but few have been applied to sugar beet pulp. It can be carried out chemically or enzymatically, though the last one is preferred to be more environmentally friendly. Pretreatments stand out to facilitate hydrolysis in order to obtain higher concentrations of fermentable sugars and, as a result, higher bioethanol yield ( In general, pretreatments produce different effects on the cellulose, hemicellulose, and lignin fractions ( Mechanical comminution consists of the particle size reduction of the biomass and, in spite of its advantages; it is the most frequent pretreatment of sugar beet pulp. The fact of reducing solid particle size increases specific surface area and, subsequently, the accessibility of polymeric sugars to the enzymes ( Acid pretreatment is most commonly used for lignocellulosic materials, which is based on hemicellulose solubilization, improving cellulose accessibility to the enzymes ( Several acids can be used for this pretreatment: sulfuric acid, hydrochloric acid, peracetic acid, nitric acid, or phosphoric acid. However, the most common ones employed for sugar beet pulp are sulfuric acid ( There are two different procedures to implement the diluted acid pretreatment: at moderate temperature (Tª <160°C) or at higher temperature (Tª >160°C) ( Liquid hot water is a pretreatment that does not employ any catalyst or chemical, being a more environmentally friendly technology ( Ultrasound pretreatment consists on using an acoustic wave at high frequency in order to extract hemicelluloses, cellulose, and lignin, obtaining higher hydrolysis yields ( During the hydrolysis process, cellulose and hemicellulose present in sugar beet pulp is required to be converted into simple sugars, which are fermented to bioethanol. As it was previously mentioned, hydrolysis can be carried out chemically or enzymatically ( Acid hydrolysis can be performed with diluted acid at high temperatures or with concentrate acid at low temperatures. Mostly, acids employed are sulfuric acid, hydrochloric acid, nitric acid, trifluoracetic acid, or phosphoric acid ( On the other hand, enzymatic hydrolysis uses specific enzymes to hydrolyze the polymeric sugars. In this way, it is a more effective process, which lets it work at lower temperatures and produces fewer inhibitors. For these reasons, it is the most frequent method described in literature for this purpose. Enzymes used for sugar beet pulp hydrolysis depend on their composition, rich in cellulose, As is well known, bioethanol can be produced from different raw materials classified in three types: sugars, starches, and lignocelluloses ( Starchy and lignocellulosic materials must be previously converted into sugars by acid or enzymatic hydrolysis. Therefore, for this type of material the processing to obtain sugars to be fermented to ethanol (second-generation bioethanol) is more complicated ( As previously mentioned, given the high content of fermentable sugars in sugar beet processing by-products (molasses) and intermediates (raw, thin, and thick juice), they represent interesting raw materials for ethanol production ( For ethanol fermentation, Given raw juice composition (described in a previous section), it can be used after pH adjustment for ethanol fermentation without nutrients additions. Moreover, it has a low price compared to the other sugar beet intermediates because fewer transforming steps are required, and its low inorganic salts content favors the fermentation ( Thin juice also represents a good candidate for ethanol fermentation given its high concentration of sugar; however, it does not show other extracted substances from the root ( Thick juice shows a sugar concentration much higher than thin juice. For this reason, it cannot be directly fermented and the prior dilution with water or a nutrient solution is required ( Raw and thick juices show sufficient nutrients to support ethanol fermentation ( Molasses are also used for ethanol production, being previously diluted to the required sugar concentration and pH adjustment ( Ethanol production from raw juice is higher than from thin and thick juices and molasses. Studies of Generally, the use of a particular juice or any other stream in the sugar industry for bioethanol production is conditioned by the cost of the raw material and the cost of the conditioning steps that are required prior the fermentation. Usually, the cheaper the raw material (per unit of sugar content), the more expensive the conditioning steps, and vice versa. Thus the optimum overall cost of first-generation bioethanol tends to be on using either raw juice or molasses. Sugar beet pulp represents the main by-product of sugar refining industry ( Sugar beet pulp has been also used as support to immobilize Biofuels results from life-cycle assessments (LCA) show large variability, as a consequence of biofuels chains and methodologies diversity used to estimate inventory data. Moreover, impact categories are affected by soil types, management practices, climatic conditions, and so on ( For LCA of ethanol from sugar beet, the whole process can be divided in three steps: cultivation of sugar beet, transportation, and bioethanol plant. According to a study carried out by Bioethanol represents an attractive alternative to be used as biofuel, compared with higher petrol prices due to high crude oil prices ( Compared to gasoline, ethanol from sugar beet has a lower environmental impact for global warming, ozone layer depletion, abiotic depletion, and photochemical oxidation categories ( Ethanol from sugar beet shows good water productivity if it is compared with lignocellulosic material. In fact, it is known to be relatively water efficient ( Sugar beet leaves show a high concentration of nitrogen, thus they are responsible of high N In general, compared to other agricultural feedstocks, sugar beets show good environmental performance as raw material to produce ethanol in most indicators, which is the result of high yields of this crop ( The investment cost of ethanol production from sugar beets would be determined by the base capacity of the unit, the cost of equipment, the requirement for the workforce, the cost of first and auxiliary matters, electrical energy and steam, maintenance cost, and so on ( The main strategies proposed for increasing bioethanol production from sugar beet juices and their by-products are focused on the fermentation stage. This is because other stages in bioethanol production are difficult to modify for several reasons: first, juices production (the extraction of juices from the sugar beet) is integrated into the sugar industry and it is a very optimized and profitable process. Therefore, it is not easy to introduce changes into the process diagram without affecting the economic success of the extraction plant. In consequence, the bioethanol industry must exploit sugary juices and other by-products from the way they are produced by the sugar industry ( Focusing, therefore, in the fermentation stage, bioethanol production can be improved in two ways: (1) by the development of the fermentative capacity of the microorganisms ( The principal way to improve the fermentative capacity of microorganisms is based on genetic engineering. The strategies used in this area are aimed to the development of microorganisms able to ferment simultaneously several types of sugars; to eliminate the synthesis of other metabolites that are in competition with ethanol production; and to adapt the growth and production to different hard conditions (lack of nutrients, high salts concentration, pH, or temperature extremes, etc.) ( Other strategy for increasing the fermentative capacity is the use of several microorganisms simultaneously (coculturing), where highly specialized strains in a type of sugar are used successively or simultaneously for ethanol production ( Regarding to the fermentative process implementation, there are two ways of improvement: (1) the fermentation in continuous mode, via the microorganism immobilization ( Sugar beet pulp can also be used for bioethanol production. However, the polysaccharides, the main component of this waste product, must be first hydrolyzed into more simple sugars that can be later fermented to ethanol. This process From the beginning of the biofuels development, most of bioethanol has been produced from crops, such as corn (North America), sugarcane (South America), or sugar beet (Europe). This is due to the high implantation of these crops in those areas, the massive exploitation of the crops in a cost-effective way, and the ease of retrieval fermentable sugars by a water extraction. However, when the use of the crops for food purposes has entered in conflict with its use for a fuel production, this strategy has been questioned. The bioethanol production is therefore moving progressively to a second-generation bioethanol (from residues) production, so that the food resources can be protected. In this sense, one of the sugar beet by-products that could have more future perspectives for bioethanol production is sugar beet pulp. The first generation bioethanol, raw juice, is an interesting feedstock for bioethanol production, given its low purchase price and its high bioethanol yields. For this reason, the development of industrial scale plants could be highly supported. The authors thank “Ministerio de Economía, Industria y Competitividad,” “Agencia Estatal de Investigación (AEI), and ”Fondo Europeo de Desarrollo Regional (FEDER)” for the financial support of this study (CTM2016-79071-R).