Traditional methods for the recovery of gold from electronic scrap by hydrometallurgy were cyanidation followed by adsorption on activated carbon or cementation onto zinc dust and by electrowinning. In our studies, a static batch electrochemical reactor operating in an electrogenerative mode was used in gold recovery from cyanide solutions. A spontaneous chemical reaction will take place in the reactor and generate an external flow of current. In this present work, a static batch cell with an improved design using three-dimensional cathodes namely porous graphite and reticulated vitreous carbon (RVC) and two-dimensional cathode materials, copper and stainless steel plates were coupled with a zinc anode. The electrogenerative system was demonstrated and the performance of the system using various cathode materials for gold recovery was evaluated. The system resulted in more than 90% gold being recovered within 3h of operation. Activated RVC serves as a superior cathode material having the highest recovery rate with more than 99% of gold being recovered in 1h of operation. The morphology of gold deposits on various cathode materials was also investigated.Gold is a precious metal well known for its singular beauty. Besides its wide application as decorative gold plating in jewelry industries, electrodeposited gold is extremely important in electronic technology owing to the following special properties: high conductivity, high corrosion resistance and low porosity. The most popular electrolytes for gold plating that meet the strict specifications of electroplating are the cyanide-based gold plating baths. Besides that, cyanide leaching processes have also been used by the mining industry for over 100 years in the extraction of noble metals. Cyanide is also the most established leachant in extracting gold from electronic scrap ( The leaching of gold with alkaline sodium cyanide will typically produce very dilute solutions containing 0.5–10 An ideal solution to this problem would be an electrogenerative system which has the ability to recover precious metals without any external supply of energy. In the electrogenerative process, an electrochemical reaction takes place spontaneously in a divided cell where a more noble metal of high purity is deposited at the cathode and a less noble metal anode is oxidized generating an external flow of current. Neither is electrical energy consumed except for the power required for electrolyte circulation nor precipitating agents needed for the process compared to conventional metal recovery technologies that involve pH adjustment and precipitation. Steps such as pre-concentration, precipitation and filtration are eliminated thereby reducing operational costs. The electrogenerative system has been investigated over the past three decades ( In this paper, we present a galvanic static batch system with various cathode materials coupled with zinc which was designed for the recovery of gold from cyanide solutions. The galvanic reaction in the static batch reactor can be represented by the equations ( The overall positive cell potential indicates that the reaction is spontaneous. In metal recovery dealing with dilute solutions, three-dimensional carbon porous materials serve as perfect electrode materials owing to these following properties: large specific area, high porosity, chemical inertness, good electrical conductivity, good fluid permeability and mechanical resistance. These allow operations with a low current density at the electrode–electrolyte interface, but with a relatively high current per unit of cell volume ( The schematic diagram of the static batch cell is shown in The catholyte was prepared from KAu(CN) For polarization experiments, three replicate polarization curves were recorded to ensure reproducibility. The system was initially loaded with maximum resistance. After the initial open circuit cell voltage was read, the resistance was gradually decreased by adjusting the variable resistance of a decade resistance box (model 1051, Time Electronic Ltd.). The cell is allowed to equilibrate and at the end of 3 The simple batch cell was short circuited and solution samples were withdrawn periodically to determine the Au(I) concentration in order to monitor the performance of the system in terms of percentage of gold recovered. The determination of Au(I) concentration was carried out by atomic absorption spectroscopy (Perkin Elmer 3100). As a test of reproducibility, a particular experimental run was performed three times. Surface morphology of the gold deposit was visualized by scanning electron microscopy (SEM) (Leo Supra 50 VP). The sodium cyanide salt is readily soluble in water producing cyanide ions and metal cations. The cyanide ions will hydrolyze in water to produce molecular hydrogen cyanide according to Eq. Three main cathodic reactions are likely to occur in the catholyte compartment which contains the alkaline gold cyanide solutions. The reactions are gold deposition (Eq. (2)), oxygen reduction (Eq. According to Eq. (2), the equilibrium potential for the gold deposition reaction is strongly dependent on both cyanide ion and gold cyanide complex concentrations and this is shown in At the anode, the most preferable reactions are the formation of zinc cyanide (Eq. (1)) followed by cyanide oxidation (Eq. The reactions that occur in the anolyte and catholyte compartments are spontaneous and self-driven. The negative free Gibbs energy is used to drive an electrochemical cell to produce a relatively pure form of gold metal on the cathode together with the by-product of direct current. By using this electrogenerative technique, the potential control is achieved by choosing the right anode rather than regulating the voltage as in the electrowinning technique. Several polarization curves of the system have been obtained in order to study the performance of the electrogenerative cell with different cathodes. The cathode potential observed is plotted vs. current densities which were calculated based on the geometric area of the electrode in contact with solution. It can be seen from The effect of cathode pretreatment using a Shipley-type solution for RVC and porous graphite are illustrated in The open circuit voltages (OCV) for different cathodes are shown in A series of experiments were conducted by short circuiting the electrogenerative cell to study gold recovery from cyanide solutions with different cathodes. The initial pH of both anolyte and catholyte solutions was 11.0 but it increased to 11.5 after experiments were carried out. This increase in pH in the anolyte and catholyte solutions was due to the side reactions such as cyanide oxidation and water reduction, respectively. The percentages of gold recoveries vs. time with different substrates are shown in A model of the concentration–time relationship for two-dimensional electrodes has been proposed by Activated RVC is the most suitable cathode material in this electrogenerative system. There are additional advantages of vitreous carbon electrode such as a relatively high chemical and electrochemical stability, high value of electrode area per unit electrode volume, After gold deposition from 500 The use of various cathode materials for the galvanic recovery of gold from 500 This study was supported by research grants provided by the Academy of Science Malaysia and Nippon Sheet Glass Foundation.