The mathematical model was established to determine the diameter of inhibition zone of the walnut extract on the twelve bacterial species. Type of extraction, concentration, and pathogens were taken as input variables. Two models were used with the aim of designing this system. One of them was developed with artificial neural networks (ANN), and the other was formed with multiple linear regression (MLR). Four common training algorithms were used. Levenberg–Marquardt (LM), Bayesian regulation (BR), scaled conjugate gradient (SCG) and resilient back propagation (RP) were investigated, and the algorithms were compared. Root mean squared error and correlation coefficient were evaluated as performance criteria. When these criteria were analyzed, ANN showed high prediction performance, while MLR showed low prediction performance. As a result, it is seen that when the different input values are provided to the system developed with ANN, the most accurate inhibition zone (IZ) estimates were obtained. The results of this study could offer new perspectives, particularly in the field of microbiology, because these could be applied to other type of extraction, concentrations, and pathogens, without resorting to experiments.Provides a loss function of the second degree It emphasizes greater errors than the small ones Measure of uncertainty in predicting Compared to MAE, it is more sensitive to the presence of false data Walnut ( The crushing process of walnut kernel revealed some results that the break cell walls and expose the matrix to enzymes, oxygen, and mild heat. Consequently, many chemical and enzymatic processes take place ( Walnuts have been studied with regard to the determination of During the last years, artificial neural network (ANN) offer real advantages over conventional modeling. ANN solve problems in which the analytical methods are difficult to apply, and their results have to be in a specific interval ( As a native application in Turkey for strengthening immunity and protection from disease, the extract obtained from the intact walnut kernel in cold and hot conditions is consumed. The present study was designed to investigate the antimicrobial effect of this aqueous extract. Additionally, we revealed the change in the antimicrobial effect of crushed walnut kernel aqueous extract obtained under the same conditions. The other objective is to establish a mathematical model that enables us to determine the diameter of inhibition zone of the walnut extract on the twelve bacterial species. Moreover, this model makes possible us to define the inhibitory zone for different values of the type of extraction, concentration, and pathogens, which are not included in the database used in this model. The other objective is to confirm the ANN and multiple linear regression (MLR) in comparison with other observed results obtained experimentally. Walnut kernels were obtained from Amasya in Turkey. The kernels were removed manually from the walnuts just before extraction. In this study, four different extracts were derived from the walnut kernels as intact and crushed at room temperature (23 ± 1 °C) for 24 h and 50 °C for 2 h, respectively (W1 = intact at room temperature for 24 h, W2 = crushed at room temperature for 24 h, W3 = intact at 50 °C for 2 h, W4 = crushed at 50 °C for 2 h). Intact samples were obtained by laboratory type grinders for 1 min at maximal speed (particle sizes < 212 μm). Samples of walnut kernel extract divided into smaller aliquots and frozen at −20 °C until use. Two grams of ground intact and crushed walnut kernels was weighed into a screw-capped vial, and water at 25 °C was added to adjust the exact solvent to solid ratio of 100 ml/g. After 18 h of extraction in the dark, the samples were centrifuged (NÜVE, 800R, Turkey) at 4100 rpm for 15 min. The samples filtered from Whatman No.1 filter paper and then vaporized at 50 °C using a rotary evaporator (BÜCHI, Rotavapor R-200, Swiss) and used as a stock solution for all analyses. The antibacterial activity of the extracts against All microorganisms were grown at 37 °C for18 h in nutrient broth. Sterile nutrient agar or malt extract agar at 45 °C was poured into Petri dishes (9 cm in diameter). When the agar was solidified, equidistant wells (5 mm in diameter) were cut from the agar. A solution of each of the samples (50 μl) was transferred to the wells. Absolute hexane was used as a control. The inoculated plates were incubated at 36 °C for 24 h for bacterial strains. Antimicrobial activity was evaluated by measuring the zone of inhibition against the test organisms. The diameters of these zones were measured in millimeters. The primary aim of this study is to design an expert model that will predict inhibition zone. The design of the model consists of three stages which are (1) obtaining data (2) arranging data for more accurate results (3) improving ANN and MLR models and continue the training and testing process (4) making statistical analysis and determining the model that makes the most accurate predictive, respectively as shown In this study, three effective variables on available data were chosen as the independent variables of our study. The selected variables were required to be able to be forecasted with high accuracy in a specified forecasting horizon. Therefore, three variables as input for this study type of extraction (TE), concentration (C) and pathogens (P) were determined for prediction of the inhibition zone (IZ). Consequently, 192 research data were used in this study. Feed-Forward Neural Network (FFNN) is one of the models that have a wide range of application fields of ANN ( In this study, three variables TE, C, P were used, and IZ was used as target parameters, these variables were introduced to ANN as input and output. Therefore, 192 datasets were used in the model. Theoretical studies show that the only hidden layer is sufficient to solve many nonlinear problems ( In theory, many functions are used as activation functions. But in practice, a small number of functions are used as activation functions. These are log-sigmoid (logsig), hyperbolic tangent sigmoid (tansig), sine or cosine and linear (purelin) functions ( In the training process of the neural network, the network's weights are initialized with random numbers in the interval of −1 to +1 and is changed iteratively to minimize the total error between the experimental output values and the predicted values by using a suitable training algorithm. In practice, all optimization algorithms suffer from local optimum points, and there is no existing algorithm that will guarantee the global optimum for solving non-linear problems ( There are several training algorithms for training the network and updating the weights. However, it is necessary to make trials to find the most suitable ones. In this study, four common training algorithms were used. Levenberg–Marquardt (LM), Bayesian regulation (BR), scaled conjugate gradient (SCG) and resilient back propagation (RP) were investigated, and the algorithms were compared by looking at the prediction error of each network and found to be appropriate for predicting IZ ( Data normalization is done before starting the training process to facilitate network learning ( One of the significant problems of ANN is network overload. In this case, the network is trained. However, this situation can become harder when there are invisible examples. An early stopping technique is used when this condition is encountered ( The total available data are divided into three sets to implement the early stopping technique. These are a training set, a validation set, and a test set. The training set is used to develop ANN model; the validation set is used to determine the stopping point of the training process to avoid the overloading problem. The test set is used to measure the predictive ability of the model ( In MLR method, which was first introduced by Francis Galton in the late 19th century. Multivariate regression attempts to model the relationship between two or more independent variables and a dependent variable by fitting a linear equation to observed data ( Since the observed values for y vary about their means μ Formally, the model for Multivariate regression, given n observations, is Eq. In this study, three independent variables TE, C, P for 192 datasets were used. The IZ was considered as a dependent variable. Therefore, 192 datasets were employed in modeling. Then using 70% of total datasets (134 datasets), constant coefficients of regression equation have been computed in such a way that the summation of square errors is minimized. Then, the prediction was performed on remaining 30% of datasets (58 datasets). To assess the performance of the forecast, the difference between the predicted values and the experimental values should be examined. The following equation (Eq. Root Mean Absolute Error (RMSE): RMSE values close to zero also denote good performance on the part of the model. A brief description of the advantages and disadvantages of the accuracy mentioned above measures is given in The antibacterial effects of W In this research, TE, C, P were determined as independent variables and IZ was assigned as the dependent variable. Firstly, the correlation coefficients were calculated to analyze the linear relationship between each independent variable and a dependent variable. The effect of each independent variable on the dependent variable was evaluated. The correlation coefficients values are negative and positive ( After examining the relationships between dependent variables and independent variables, MLR and ANN models were designed, and their performances were compared. It is well known that ANN model, being a highly nonlinear approximator. The main advantage of using ANN is flexible learning algorithm, ability to model nonlinear relationships, fast learning algorithm and high error tolerance. These advantages will lead to more sophisticated applications of ANN in food science. In this study, four layers network structure was used to make the most accurate prediction of IZ. The model was designed to have one input, two hidden layers, and one output layer, with different numbers of neurons in each hidden layer. In the developed network structures, two different activation functions and four different training algorithms were used. RMSE, an accuracy measure for measuring network performance, was calculated for each network. According to All data are divided into three parts to implement these methods. These are training, validation and test data. The training set was used to determine the best-predicted model by changing the net weights. The control points were used to determine the early stop point, and the test data was used to measure the predictive performance of the network. The distribution graph is used as a useful tool to show the relationship between two variables and to show the correlation coefficient (  Regression is a statistical method used to determine and model relations between variables, and one of the most important assumptions of MLR models is to assume that the relationship between the dependent variable and the independent variable is linear. Initially, total data was divided by 70% and 30% to make a statistical prediction with MLR model. The statistical coefficients of the MLR model were calculated using the independent and dependent variables in the 70% division as shown in the following formula. IZ = 0.382 − (0,.34 ∗ EF) + (0.490 ∗ C) − (0, The 30% independent variables were presented as inputs to the MLR model, and the predicted values were obtained as output. The errors and correlation values between the experimental values and the predicted values are 0.355044 for RMSE and 0.7762 for R.   When Numerous study revealed that neural network models showed good agreement with experimental data for microbial growth ( This study aims to develop an expert system by designing the ANN and MLR models. Therefore, the predictive performances of MLR and ANN on IZ were examined. Statistical analyses were performed on the obtained data, and the results also exhibited that when studying with nonlinear variables, a good correlation was observed between the values predicted by the equation and those obtained experimentally. ANN shows better adaptability and prediction performance than MLR. Consequently, time savings can be achieved by obtaining predictions that are closest to the experimental data with an expert system using a model developed with ANN. These results offer new perspectives, particularly in the field of microbiology, since they could be applied to other type of extraction, concentrations, and pathogens, without resorting to experiments.