Open die extrusion (ODE) has been done on AISI 1020 steel, commercial purity aluminium and commercial purity titanium, in both direct and inverted modes. It was found that inverted extrusion requires lesser forces than direct extrusion. Limit strains are more for the former than for the later as measured experimentally and as calculated theoretically. Theoretical limit strains are lesser than experimental ones in both the case of rods and tubes. ODE is only for shorter components due to unsupported billet and interference from buckling. It is also only for smaller strains due to interference from upsetting of unsupported billet above the die rather than extrusion through the die.surface area of deformation zone final area of cross section initial area of cross section specific heat inner diameter of billet outer diameter of billet inner diameter of extrude outer diameter of extrude force die friction force ideal force mandrel friction force shear force strength coefficient strain hardening experiment punch pressure yield stress time interval of extrusion velocity of ram volume of deformation zone semi-die angle 0.95 strain limit strain Coloumb friction coefficient mean flow stress = stress normal to inclined face in the deformation zone of die density Open die extrusion (ODE) is done without container as against conventional extrusion, which is done with container Compression test, ring compression test and extrusion tests have been carried out on annealed AISI 1020 steel, commercial purity aluminium and commercial purity titanium. Two HCHCr cylindrical pieces were used as upper and lower platens, and workpieces of diameter 25 Rings of outer diameter 24 The experimental set up for direct open die extrusion test for rod and tube are shown in The experimental set up for inverted open die extrusion test for rod and tube are shown in The results of compression and ring compression tests are shown in The results of open die extrusion are shown in From this table following results are evident: (i) theoretical limit strains are less than experimental limit strains in all cases; (ii) limit strains for rod are more than that of tube; (iii) limit strains for inverted open die extrusion are more than that for direct open die extrusion. The reason for the first result is temperature rise in the deformation zone. The second result is due to additional mandrel friction force. The third result is due to the dynamic situation that exists during inverted extrusion, i.e., die is moving in one direction (downwards) and billet is flowing in opposite direction (upwards) in the inverted case while the die is stationary in the direct case. Due to this die frictional force is less in the former than in the later. Inverted open die extrusion requires lesser forces compared with direct open die extrusion. Limit strains are more for the former than for the later. Shorter components can be produced with good quality. Consumption of lubricant is less. Tooling required is less complex compared with conventional extrusion.   