The granites of South-West England are a potential source of lithium which is generally found within the mica mineral, zinnwaldite. It is mainly found in the central and western end of the St. Austell granite. When kaolin extraction occurs in these areas a mica-rich waste product is produced which is currently disposed of in tailings storage facilities. In this study a tailings sample containing 0.84% Li2O was upgraded by a combination of froth flotation, using dodecylamine as the collector, and wet high intensity magnetic separation (WHIMS) to 2.07% Li2O. The concentrate was then roasted with various additives, including limestone, gypsum and sodium sulphate, over a range of temperatures. The resulting products were then pulverised before being leached with water at 85°C. Analysis of these products by XRD revealed that the water-soluble sulphates, KLiSO4 and Li2KNa(SO4)2, were produced under specific conditions. A maximum lithium extraction of approximately 84% was obtained using gypsum at 1050°C. Sodium sulphate produced a superior lithium extraction of up to 97% at 850°C. In all cases iron extraction was very low.
                  Preliminary tests on the leach solution obtained by using sodium sulphate as an additive have shown that a Li2CO3 product with a purity of >90% could be produced by precipitation with sodium carbonate although more work is required to reach the industrial target of >99%.Lithium is important for a number of uses, including production of batteries, glass and ceramics. It is also used in the production of aluminium, preparation of greases, rubbers, alloys and pharmaceuticals. In 2008 lithium battery production represented 70% of the total rechargeable battery market ( The primary source of lithium is from continental brines which typically contain 0.06–0.15% Li followed by pegmatites. The principal lithium minerals from pegmatite, with their theoretical maximum lithium content, are shown in Most of the lithium minerals from pegmatite are used for glass and ceramic production. Lithium chemicals, such as lithium carbonate, are normally produced from brines because of the lower costs involved. China does however produce some lithium carbonate using imported spodumene as a feed stock. In a future scenario in which brine deposits could not meet the demand for lithium carbonate the deficit would have to be made up by increasing the use of lithium minerals from pegmatite. Zinnwaldite is one mineral that could be exploited as a lithium source in the future. The high iron content of the mineral combined with the relatively low Li The processing of lithium minerals from pegmatites involves both comminution and physical separation techniques such as gravity concentration, froth flotation and magnetic separation ( The lithium potential of the St. Austell granite, situated in Cornwall (UK) was investigated by the British Geological Survey ( Previous studies have mentioned the physical separation of waste materials to produce a mica concentrate. In this study we have investigated the efficiency of froth flotation and magnetic separation for separation of both lithium and rubidium from the hydrocyclone underflow. Where possible we have linked mineralogy with separator performance. Following production of a lithium–mica concentrate the effectiveness of the roast/water leach procedure has been investigated using the reagent systems considered by The material used in this test work was obtained from Goonvean Ltd., St. Austell, UK. The sample was collected from the underflow of a group of 250 The hydrocyclone underflow was further classified using a 50 Semi-quantitative information on the mineralogy of the feed, separation products and new materials formed on roasting were produced by X-ray diffraction (XRD) using a Siemens Diffractometer D5000. X-ray fluorescence (XRF), using a Bruker S4 Pioneer, with the boric jacket preparation method was used for elemental analysis of solid samples. Quantitative elemental analysis of specific mineral grains was undertaken using a JEOL JAX-8200 electron microprobe. Atomic absorption spectrometry (AAS), using a Unicam SP 9 spectrometer, was used for the determination of lithium and rubidium. AAS analysis was performed on a solution produced by digesting the solid sample in a mixture of perchloric and hydrofluoric acid in a PTFE beaker, followed by evaporation until a solid residue remained. The residue was then dissolved in a solution of hydrochloric and boric acid, diluted and then analysed. The elemental analysis (from XRF and AAS) and XRD data were combined to predict the mineral composition of the feed sample which is shown in In order to help understand what reactions were occurring during roasting, thermal analysis was carried out using a Stanton Redcroft STA 780. The instrument provides simultaneous thermo-gravimetric (TG) and differential thermal analysis (DTA) data which can be used to identify exothermic and endothermic reactions that occurred during the roasting stage. The DTA analysis was conducted with samples of 8 The mica fraction from the de-slimed hydrocyclone underflow was initially concentrated using froth flotation. The use of wet high intensity magnetic separation (WHIMS) was then investigated as a means of separating the individual mica minerals. A schematic of the overall separation process is shown in Flotation was conducted in a Denver D-12 laboratory flotation machine equipped with a 3.5 Analysis of flotation results did not indicate a significant link between iron recovery and grade for both pH and collector dosage over the variable range tested. In order to produce a bulk magnetic product for further work a series of flotation tests were performed using 500 In order to determine the variation in composition by size a sample of the concentrate was screened at 150, 125, 106, 90, 75, 63 and 53 It can be seen from The mica flotation concentrate was subjected to wet high intensity magnetic separation (WHIMS) using a batch Rapid Magnetic Ltd. separator using a matrix with a 1 The recoveries of the three components are almost identical suggesting that they are all present within the same mineral. The performance of the separator was then determined as a function of particle size as shown in Similar trends were observed for iron and rubidium recoveries as a function of size and magnetic field strength. At 1.95T the Li Following these initial tests it was decided to maximise lithium recovery to the magnetic fraction by operating a three stage separation at the maximum field strength of 1.95 Microprobe analysis indicated that two main mica minerals were present in the magnetic separation products; zinnwaldite and muscovite. The composition of both minerals was quite variable but the two minerals were quite distinct when considering SiO It can be seen that the muscovite contains 0–0.6% Li In preparation for the roasting process the paramagnetic mica concentrate was pulverised in a Tema mill with a tungsten carbide pot for 3 In the experiments with limestone the ratio of paramagnetic mica concentrate to limestone was 5:2. For both gypsum and sodium sulphate the weight ratio was 2:1 for the roasting temperature optimisation. The roasting temperatures ranged from 250 to 1100 The roasted products were pulverised before leaching using 3 The influence of roasting temperature on lithium, rubidium and iron extraction is shown in With these experiments the good lithium and rubidium leach extraction achieved by The influence of roasting temperature, using gypsum as the reactant, on lithium extraction is shown in XRD profiles of the paramagnetic mica and the mica–gypsum mixtures roasted at 800 The effect of the paramagnetic mica:gypsum ratio on lithium and rubidium extraction efficiency was then investigated at 1050 A further experiment was carried out using the mica flotation concentrate (i.e. prior to magnetic separation. Using a mica:gypsum weight ratio of 2:1 and a roasting temperature of 1050 The influence of roasting temperature on lithium, rubidium and iron extraction efficiency, using sodium sulphate as the reactant, is shown in The endothermic effect at about 200 XRD analysis of the product of roasting at 750 The effect of the mica:sodium sulphate weight ratio on lithium extraction is shown in The flotation of the micaceous residue produced a Li The extraction efficiency achieved with limestone was relatively poor and has been linked to the formation of eucryptite. Lithium extraction following roasting with gypsum at 1050 In this experimental work analytical grade reagents were used. Bulk commodities, with higher impurity levels, would be required on an industrial scale. This work has identified additives that could be used to produce water-soluble lithium compounds on roasting. The precipitation process ideally requires a lithium concentration of at least 9 Given the annual resources available, the Li The conclusions from this research can be summarised as follows: Froth flotation using dodecylamine upgraded the micaceous feed from 0.84 to 1.45% Li Further upgrading of the flotation concentrate by WHIMS produced a 2.07% Li Microprobe measurements on individual zinnwaldite grains gave calculated Li Roasting of the zinnwaldite concentrate with limestone did not produce the desired lithium and rubidium extraction found by Roasting of the zinnwaldite concentrate with both gypsum and sodium sulphate produced maximum lithium extractions of 84% and 90% respectively. Rubidium extraction was much lower at 14% and 23% respectively. The soluble lithium species KLiSO The temperature at which the water-soluble species formed could be linked to an endothermic peak from the DTA analysis. This occurred at 900 The lower cost of gypsum suggests this may be the most attractive additive despite the higher operating temperature required. Synthetic gypsum, produced by flue gas desulphurisation is a relatively attractive material given its low cost and reasonable purity. Further work needs to be done to determine how impurities in the mica and in the additives influence the precipitation and ultimate lithium carbonate concentration. The authors wish to thank the Goonvean Ltd., UK, for supplying the china clay waste samples and the Commonwealth Scholarship Commission for the sponsorship provided.