Recovery of both sulfuric acid and zinc from the spent zinc bleed stream(SZBS) generated during the electrowinning of zinc in the zinc refineries using tris-(2-ethylhexyl) amine (TEHA) dissolved in kerosene has been investigated in detail. Extraction was studied under various experimental conditions such as concentration of TEHA in the organic phase and temperature, concentration of acid and zinc present in the initial aqueous feed, temperature of extraction, equilibrium time. Increasing the experimental temperature led to a decrease in the extraction of acid. The extraction behaviour of zinc present in the spent liquor was examined under the optimized conditions for its co-extraction with the acid. It was found that in the sulphate medium, zinc is not extracted along with the acid and the raffinate can be used for the preparation of zinc oxide. Thus under the optimised conditions acid extraction was found to be 182 g/L of H2SO4 with 75% TEHA in 3–5 min of phase contact. Extraction increases with the increase in O/A ratio and was found to be about 94% at O/A of 5 with the initial feed concentration of 173.5 g/L of sulphuric acid. After extraction process, stripping was performed to recover the loaded acid and regenerate the solvent for recycling. Resultant regenerated organic phases can be reused in succeeding extraction step with the yield ranging from 94.8% to 99.7% depending on composition of the initial feed solution. Effect of temperature was studied at 30, 45 and 60 °C. The effect of the number of extraction and stripping stages and the volume phase ratios in extraction and stripping upon sulphuric acid recovery is discussed.Most operating zinc refineries use precipitation methods for zinc purification, followed by metal recovery by EW. In such processes there usually is a gradual build-up of acid and metals such as zinc and traces of other metals and it is necessary to bleed the electrolyte to control the composition. Several studies have looked at the use of SX for the recovery of both sulphuric acid and zinc from this bleed stream ( Extraction of sulfuric acid with tri- Solvating reagents such as Cyanex 923 has proved its effectiveness in the separation of hazardous metals and mineral acids from various types of aqueous solutions ( 10 L of spent zinc electrolyte was collected from an electroplating industry and the chemical analysis of this waste solution is given in The organic reagent used for the recovery of acid in this study was Tris 2-ethylhexyl amine (TEHA) procured from Sigma–Aldrich and was used for the extraction studies without further purification. TEHA is a tertiary amine with a molecular formula as [CH Chemical analysis of the SZBS before and after acid extraction, in the solutions were done volumetrically by standard methods as mentioned in Acid extraction from spent zinc bleed stream (SZBS) was done by 75% TEHA in kerosene. Loading capacity of the solvent for the acid from SZBS containing 173.5 g/L of sulphuric acid and 86.96 g/L of Zn, was performed at 30 °C, 45 °C and 60 °C by repeated contact method at O/A ratio of 1:1. The organic and aqueous solutions were contacted for a period of 5 min to ensure complete extraction in a separatory funnel. The mixture was then left for phase separation and the acid loaded organic phase was separated from the aqueous phase containing un-extracted acid along with the zinc. The same organic was shaken again with the fresh aqueous feed till the organic is completely loaded with the acid, which is indicated by the chemical analysis of the aqueous phase after each contact. Various other parameters such as mixing time, O/A ratio, mixing temperature, aqueous and organic concentration etc. were optimised for maximum acid extraction by TEHA. After the extraction of acid by the organic phase stripping was performed by hot distilled water to recover the loaded acid. The raffinate generated during the extraction stage can be used for the preparation of pure zinc oxide. Sulphuric acid extraction from spent zinc bleed stream containing 173.5 g/L acid and 86.96 g/L Zn along with traces of Ni was performed with different concentration of TEHA. Extraction rate was studied by shaking aqueous phases containing 173.5 g/L acid with the organic phase for different time intervals up to 10 min. The two phases were then allowed to separate and analysed for the amount of acid and zinc taken up by the organic phase. It was found that 5 min of shaking is required for the equilibrium to reach at 30 °C with a loading of 56.88% of acid in a single contact. Beyond which the percent extraction remains constant. Extraction of zinc was negligible in sulphate medium. Hence in all the further experiments, shaking time in all the experiments was maintained at 5 min to ensure complete extraction. The same aqueous phase was given contact with different concentration of TEHA and the results are represented in Thus the extraction of sulphuric acid by TEHA can be written as: Similar observations were made by Acid extraction experiments were performed at different temperatures ranging from 30 to 60 °C from an aqueous feed containing 173.5 g/L acid and 86.96 g/L of zinc with 75% TEHA. Results are represented in Where Thus the thermodynamic parameters given in To extract maximum amount of acid from SZBS, the aqueous feed was contacted with the organic feed in different ratio. Thus, TEHA was found to be a very effective extractant for extraction of sulphuric acid from a source containing very high acid. Therefore, a detailed stripping study was carried out for its application for acid extraction. Stripping experiments were carried out using the acid loaded organic with 182 g Stripping of acid from the acid loaded solvents of different concentration was carried out with distilled water and is represented in Stripping experiments were performed at different 0/A ratio. Plot of 0/A vs H To get a concentrated acid which could be recycled back in to the system, same aqueous feed was contacted with the fresh loaded organic. The concentration of stripped acid increases with increase in the number of contacts and about 161.7 g/L acid is regenerated in 6 contacts ( Solvent extraction of sulfuric acid from the spent zinc bleed stream was carried out using TEHA. The extraction of H The authors wish to thank the Director, National Metallurgical Laboratory, for his kind permission to publish this paper.