The interaction of polysaccharide with talc has been investigated through adsorption, flotation, and electrokinetic measurements. The adsorption densities are independent of pH and the isotherms exhibit Langmuirian behavior. The order of adsorption density of several polysaccharides investigated in the paper onto talc is CMC>CMS>dextrin. Pretreatment of talc with EDTA (ethylenediaminetetraacetic acid), leaching and calcinations result in a decrease in the adsorption density, highlighting the importance of metallic magnesium sites for the adsorption process. An increase in the surface face-to-edge ratio leads to increase in adsorption density. The flotation recoveries are independent of pH. CMC exhibit best depressant ability, followed by CMS and then dextrin among the three depressants, complementing the adsorption results. However, polysaccharide depressant ability is reduced in the case of leached and calcined talc sample in comparison to that on talc. Electrokinetic measurements portray conformational rearrangements of macromolecules with the loading, resulting in the shift of the shear plane, further away from the interface. The adsorption process is governed by hydrogen bonding as well as chemical interaction between the polysaccharides and the surface metal hydroxide groups of talc. The best depressant activity of CMC may be attributed to its more favorable carboxyl groups as opposed to the hydroxyl groups of dextrin, apart from its higher molecular weight.Depressants play an important role in effecting selective separation of minerals from ores by flotation. Polysaccharides and their derivatives are effective depressants for talc and other magnesia-bearing minerals. There are numerous reports, In spite of a large number of studies conducted in the past, the mechanism of adsorption of polysaccharides on talc is not yet well understood. In the present investigation, three natural polysaccharide derivatives, namely, CMC, CMS and dextrin, having different functional groups and molecular weight have been compared with respect to their adsorption, electrokinetic and flotation behaviors on talc. Possible mechanisms of adsorption are discussed. The pure talc sample was obtained from Haicheng, Liaoning, China. Mineralogical and X-ray powder diffraction data confirmed that the talc sample was of high purity with trace amounts of calcite. The sample was dry ground using a porcelain ball mill at a speed of 60 Calcined talc was prepared by calcinations of talc at 1000 Leached talc was prepared by leaching pure talc in solution at pH The samples of CMC (carboxymethyl cellulose), CMS (carboxymethyl starch) and white dextrin used in the study were obtained from Tianjing Kermil Chemical Reagents Development Centre, Tianjing, China. The molecular weights of CMC, CMS and white dextrin were determined by high-performance liquid chromatography (HPLC) to be 5.02 Potassium nitrate was used to maintain the ionic strength and nitric acid and potassium hydroxide were used as pH modifiers. All the reagents used in this study were of analytical grade. Deionized double distilled water was used for all tests. Preliminary kinetic experiments indicated that within 15 Single mineral flotation tests were carried out in a micro-flotation cell. The mineral suspension was prepared by adding 2.0 Zeta potential measurements on talc with and without polysaccharide were carried out using a zeta plus zeta potentialmeter. Potassium nitrate was used to maintain the ionic strength at 10 Detailed adsorption experiments have been carried out to study the effect of pH, particle size, sample weight, temperature, and calcination on the adsorption densities of CMC, CMS and dextrin onto talc. The adsorption isotherms of dextrin, CMS and CMC onto talc are depicted in The effects of pH on the adsorption densities of CMC, CMS and dextrin onto talc are portrayed in In order to ascertain whether the lattice magnesium ions present in the talc matrix are involved in the interaction process with CMC, a few experiments were carried out on talc samples pretreated with the complexing agent EDTA. It is interesting to note that there is a decrease in the adsorption density of CMC onto EDTA-treated talc in the entire pH range investigated. The importance of metallic magnesium sites in enhancing the adsorption density is clearly borne out. In considering the effect of particle size on adsorption, it is pertinent to recall the structure of talc. Talc crystals are comprised of two-dimensional sheet structures consisting of two layers of silica tetrahedral held together with brucite Mg(OH). The atoms within the layers are held together by ionic bonds, while oxygen–oxygen interlayer atoms are held only by weak residual forces ( Consequently, when talc particles are broken, two different surfaces are formed, one resulting from the easy cleavage of the layers, called “faces” and the other arising from the rupture of the ionic bonds within the layers, termed “edges”. The adsorption densities of polysaccharide onto talc as a function of pH for three different particle sizes namely, (−150 The effects of temperature as well as of pH on the adsorption densities of polysaccharide onto talc are shown in The effect of pH, on the adsorption density of CMC for calcined talc samples is shown in As anticipated, a concomitant decrease in the adsorption density of CMC for these leached and calcined sample is observed as shown in The effect of pH on the floatability of talc in the absence and presence of polysaccharide is shown in The effect of pH on the flotation recovery of talc that has been either calcined or leached is shown in However, in the case of leached talc sample, there is a significant decrease in the natural floatability in the presence of CMC. A comparison of the depressant ability of CMC with respect to unleached talc ( The effect of polysaccharide concentration on talc flotation is depicted in The zeta potential of talc particles as a function of pH in the absence and presence of different concentrations of CMS is shown in From Zeta potential measurements on talc particles in the absence and presence of different concentrations of CMC showed a similar behavior and the results have been reported in an earlier communication ( Based on the studies carried out at the talc–solution interface and in the bulk solution, the possible mechanisms of adsorption of dextrin, CMS and CMC onto talc can be explained as follows: Polysaccharide could directly interact with the hydroxyiated talc surface by hydrogen bonding, especially at alkaline pH values. At alkaline pH values, the metal hydroxide precipitate on the talc faces could interact with water molecules through hydrogen bonding. The adsorption process could also be brought about by chemical interaction with the magnesium ions released, particularly at acidic pH. In this study, the three polysaccharides chosen, namely, dextrin, CMC and CMS, have shown different adsorbabilities onto talc and consequently exhibit differences in the magnitude of depressant action. The higher adsorption density and better depressant action of CMC and CMS may be attributed to the more favorable carboxyl groups, apart from the differences in their molecular weights, The various adsorption tests with different particle sizes have significantly revealed that greater adsorption takes place on the hydrophobic faces to the edges with metallic magnesium sites contributing to enhanced adsorption. Thus it is not the hydrophobicity of the matrix of talc but the metallic sites of talc that contribute to enhanced adsorption. From the results of this investigation, the following conclusions can be drawn: Adsorption measurements indicate that the adsorption densities of CMC, CMS and dextrin onto talc are independent of pH and the adsorption isotherms follow Langmuirian behavior. Adsorption densities of CMC onto talc is highest, followed by CMS, then dextrin. due to higher molecular weight and favorable carboxyl groups of CMC and CMS compared to dextrin. The samples subjected to calcinations exhibit decreased adsorption density attesting to the contribution of the brucite structure of talc surface in enhancing the adsorption process. A marginal decrease in adsorption density is observed at acidic pH in the case of leached talc sample due to loss of magnesium sites. Talc sample initially subjected to leaching at acidic pH, followed by calcinations showed a pronounced decrease in the adsorption density of CMC reinforcing the importance of magnesium sites and brucite structure in accentuating the adsorption process. Adsorption densities decrease with decrease in particle size, due to decrease in the surface face-to-edge ratio in the finer fractions. Floatability of talc is depressed to a greater extent by CMC compared to dextrin and is independent of pH, complementing the adsorption results. Electrokinetic experiments show that the macromolecules become fully extended with the loading at the talc surface driving the shear plane further away from the interface. The adsorption mechanisms are postulated to be governed by hydrogen bonding and chemical interaction. The authors acknowledge the support of the Yunnan Sheng Science Foundation (Grant # 2003UDBEA00C020 for the study of increase recovery of nickel at Jinping).