Low temperature processes for Ohmic contacts to n-type 4H-SiC substrates were studied using Cu/Si/Cu multilayer structures as a function of post-annealing and metal deposition conditions. The contact structures were prepared by RF sputtering and electron-beam evaporation on top of the Si face of n-type SiC substrates with doping level of 1.1×1019 cm−3. The deposited metal thickness was monitored during the deposition, and the ratio of the Cu and Si was varied in the experiment. A two-step annealing technology was performed for decreasing of oxidation problems occurred during high temperature processes. The first step of the annealing was long time process at low temperatures for the intermixing of Si and Cu, while the formation of Cu-silicide phases was achieved at elevated temperatures as the second step. The contact formed after the two-step annealing at 500 °C for 600 s and 850 °C for 60 s demonstrated the lowest specific contact resistivity of 1.2×10−6 Ω cm2. The interface between the metal contact and the SiC substrate was observed by transmission electron microscopy, and the interface turned out to have regular distribution of silicide grains with smooth morphology.Silicon carbide (SiC) is a promising semiconductor material for future high-power and high-frequency electronic devices SiC wafers used in this study were n-type 4H-SiC substrates with a doping level of 1.1×10 The relationships between the applied voltage and electric current ( The TEM cross-section for the annealed sample is shown in Cu/Si/Cu multilayer structures were studied as an Ohmic contact on n-type 4H-SiC substrates in order to get lower contact resistance and higher thermal stability. The metal thicknesses were ranged as 60 nm for Cu and 40 nm for Si. TLM patterns of the multilayer structures were made on the SiC substrate by a lift-off photolithography for measurements of electrical This work is supported by the Ministry of Science and Technology of Korea through the Proton Accelerator User Program (No. M102KS010001-02K1901-01810) of the Proton Engineering R and D Project from the Nuclear R and D Program and by the 21th Century Frontier R and D Program.