Thirty-three humeral nailings were carried out using the Russell–Taylor nail. Twenty-two acute fractures and one non-union united, gave an overall union rate of 70%.
                  Eighteen patients (56%) experienced pain in the shoulder or at the fracture site. Thirteen patients (41%) had poor shoulder function. Only 17 (51%) of the patients were satisfied with the outcome. Fourteen patients (42%) needed further surgery.
                  We conclude that antegrade intamedullary nailing of humeral shaft fractures leads to a substantial risk of non-union and impairment of shoulder function. There was no significant correlation between fracture comminution and fracture healing in our study.Conservative management of humeral shaft fractures has a high rate of success. Stewart and Hundley We used statically locked Russell–Taylor nails, inserted in an antegrade fashion. The nail is available in 7, 8 and 9 mm diameters. Nails of 8 or 9 mm were used in our patients. All nailings were carried out by one of five senior surgeons. The patient was positioned supine on a radiolucent table. The ipsilateral shoulder was pulled to the edge of the table and the head turned to the contralateral side. Reduction of the fracture was confirmed with an image intensifier. Rotational alignment was obtained by placing the shoulder in the anatomical position and rotating the distal fragment such that the arm and hand pointing towards the ceiling, with the elbow flexed 90°. The entry portal was made using a 2 cm longitudinal incision from the most lateral point of the acromion centred over the greater tuberosity. The rotator cuff was split in a longitudinal fashion. Using the curved awl, the entry portal was established just medial to the tip of the greater tuberosity and confirmed with image intensification. The guide rod was inserted and advanced into the centre of the distal fragment until the tip was 1–2 cm proximal to the olecranon fossa. Containment of the rod was confirmed by internal and external rotation of the humerus. The canal was reamed 1 mm larger than the chosen nail. The nail was inserted until its tip lay 1.5–2 cm proximal to the olecranon fossa. Proximal and distal locking was carried out. After surgery, a sling was used in adduction. Two days post-surgery, active and active/assisted movements of the shoulder and elbow were started. In isolated fractures, patients were discharged home on the third day and reviewed in the clinic fortnightly. The notes and radiographs of all the patients were reviewed. The range of motion of shoulder and elbow were measured using a goniometer. We used a visual analogue scale Bridging callus formation A total of 33 nailings were carried out. Out of 33 fractures, 27 were acute and 6 were non-unions. Twenty-two acute fractures and one non-union united, giving an overall union rate of 70% ( The average follow up was 17.6 months (range, 3–36 months). Eighteen patients experienced pain in the shoulder or at the fracture site. Thirteen patients had poor shoulder function. Only 17 patients were satisfied with the outcome. Fourteen patients needed further surgery. Six required exchange nailing for non-union, and only two of them united. Five required removal of nails for proximal nail protrusion or shoulder pain. One patient with ipsilateral fractures had a broken distal locking screw revised, which lead to successful union. All three open fractures treated with intramedullary nailing progressed to non-union. Two of them were treated with exchange nailing, but remained un-united. Further surgery was contraindicated in the third patient because of poor general health. Only one patient in the non-union group went on to union and five required further surgery. There was one postoperative radial nerve palsy, which recovered within 3 months. There were no infections. Most fractures of the humeral shaft can be managed conservatively. Internal fixation is commonly used when there is soft tissue damage, multiple trauma, persistent malalignment, non-union or pathological fractures. We had an overall union rate in acute fractures of 81%. Our union rate in non-unions was low at 16%. There is a divergence of opinion in the literature to date on the value of intramedullary nailing in humeral shaft fractures. Crolla et al. Ikpeme et al. Ingman et al. Rommens et al. On the other hand, Hems and Bhullar Flinkkila et al. The results in our series have led us to modify our practice and to reduce our indications for nailing. These indications are now: poly-trauma patients; failure of closed management, i.e. a trial of conservative management in closed fractures. In open fractures and non-unions, the union rate was too low to continue with this method of treatment. We recommend plating and bone grafting as the method of choice for non-unions and open fractures. The shoulder problems were due to a combination of problems with prominent screws and nails as well as impingement symptoms, which persisted in some cases even after the removal of the metalwork. We agree with Rommens et al. that retrograde nailing is probably the best way to avoid shoulder problems. However, fracture propagation at the distal hole is a concern, as are problems with the axillary nerve with proximal locking using the retrograde technique. The union rate was higher in this study in AO Type ‘B’ (10/12) but comparable in Type ‘A’ (10/16) and Type ‘C’ (3/5). The majority of the fractures that went on to non-union were those involving the middle third of the diaphysis. Our study did not find comminution as a significant risk factor for non-union in diaphysial fractures of humerus. Antegrade locked intramedullary nailing is associated with a high rate of complications. It should be used with extreme caution in non-unions and isolated fractures. There was no significant correlation between fracture comminution and fracture healing in our study. However, as the number of patients is small, further studies would be needed to clarify the role of comminution in humeral shaft fracture healing. We recommend that intramedullary nailing in humeral shaft fractures should be used in selected cases.