Volumes IV and V of FICS will deal with colloids and, by way of introduction, we shall adopt the same procedure as in Rivers discharging in seas tend to form shorter deltas than do those flowing out into a lake. In the Royal Institution in London visitors can see a liquid which looks like claret, but which is really a colloidal solution of gold, prepared halfway through the nineteenth century by Michael Faraday. Children and adults are attracted and intrigued by the beautiful changing colour patterns of soap bubbles. Many paints are interesting fluids: if applied by a brush or by spraying, they behave like liquids, but after application they no longer do so (or, at least, they should not!). Very long ago the Egyptians were able to prepare ink of finely divided soot in water, although carbon itself is insoluble in water. Several dyes that are insoluble in water dissolve very well after the addition of surfactants. Under some conditions turbid emulsions, stabilized by a surfactant, become transparent following the addition of a second surfactant. As early as 1200 – 1300 BC people living in what is now Israel and Palestine were able to make glasses with a silvery appearance. Even moderate cooks manage to prepare quasi-solid edible products by adding only a few percent of gelatin to warm mixtures, followed by cooling. Many porous soils have the propensity of salt-sieving, meaning that if seawater is percolated through them, the salt is withheld so that potable water emerges. These ten illustrations may serve as an introduction to the scope and phenomenological wealth of colloid science and its applications. Let us briefly review the respective backgrounds, thereby profiting from the general knowledge already obtained from Volume I and the interfacial science of Volumes II and III.  The Dutch can give a telling illustration. In the Netherlands there is a branch of the River Rhine, called the IJssel. Until the 1930s it debouched into a sea, the Zuiderzee (“Southern Sea”) which was salty because it had an open connection to the North Sea. However, the Dutch have the national habit of reclaiming land from the sea, and as part of their activities the connection between the Zuiderzee and the North sea was severed by a long dike. As a result, the salinity dropped and the IJssel delta became more extended. Since then the Zuiderzee has been renamed the “IJsselmeer” (IJssel lake). Colloidal solutions ( The ruby, wine-like colour is a consequence of light absorption at a specific wavelength range of the spectrum. Larger particles tend to be more bluish (and less stable, as students of colloid science know by experience). An additional property of sols is their strong lateral scattering of light. This phenomenon is nowadays known as the When gold sols are electrocratic they can be coagulated by salt addition; when they are sterically stabilized they are (much better) salt-resilient. Colours in soap films result from light diffraction and from the fact that the refractive index depends on the wavelength of the light. Light reflected from one side interferes with that from the other. Changing colours imply changes of thickness. On bubbles one can see that large patches of film of given thickness are moving with respect to those of other thicknesses. From the order of the colours one can even estimate the thickness as a function of time, and in this way follow the The paint example takes us to the realm of As early as 4000–300 B.C. Egyptians were able to write on papyrus with red and black ink, of which the latter appears less perishable over the centuries. There are various ways in which polymers can affect the stability of colloids. The above-mentioned case of stabilization is called Although hydrophobic dyes are insoluble in water, they do dissolve in the hydrocarbon core of micelles. This process is called The disappearance of turbidity suggests that a true solution is formed (or an The silvery appearance of glass beads was achieved under the cross-fertilization of Syrian and Egyptian culture. The Syrians had a strong glass industry whereas the Egyptians were experienced in making faience. The silvery appearance was probably caused by colloidal silver Solidified gelatin solutions in water are examples of Salt sieving is a process occurring in dense porous plugs of charged particles. The phenomenon can be explained on the basis of the negative adsorption of electrolytes by charged colloids (the The ten examples given above introduce us not only to the fascinating richness and multifarious appearance of colloids, but also call for systematic treatment. We see that common features recur (for example, the effect of particle interaction in sedimentation, sol stability, and rheology) but sometimes manifest themselves in different ways (disjoining pressures across free- or wetting films are of the same nature as those between particles). To understand this, it helps to recognize common roots between different phenomena. However, one must be continually aware of the complexity of applied colloid science - compare the problems faced by our pre-historic artists and These considerations more or less define the tasks set for Volumes IV and V; to give a systematic treatment of the fundamentals of colloid science, with an eye open for applications. For various reasons, it is not easy - and perhaps not necessary - to give a simple and comprehensive definition of a According to this definition, polymer coils in solution are counted as colloids; a claim that most polymer chemists feel as trespassing. We shall not consider polymers as colloids but do treat them in volume V, mainly because of their relevance for steric stabilization. To the lower particle size, in recent years the terms Regarding nomenclature, one should be aware of the fact that, in recent literature, colloidal phenomena are sometimes described under terms such as  A  A A With respect to their stability in the thermodynamic sense colloids can be sub-divided into two groups.   Sols belonging to the former category cannot be made by simply mixing the material to be dispersed and the liquid. A detour is needed and we shall devote an entire chapter to it ( Sols belonging to category (ii) can be made simply by mixing the ingredients. The Gibbs energy of this process is negative. Examples of hydrophobic colloids are:- all inorganic sols, thin films, and (macro-) emulsions; examples of hydrophilic sols include several biocolloids, association colloids, and micro-emulsions. It should be noted that the terms ‘hydrophobic’ and ‘hydrophilic’ have meanings This list of definitions is not complete. We shall, of course, use all the definitions already given in previous volumes and introduce new ones where needed in specific chapters. There are several ways of condensing into two Volumes the rich variety that colloid science has to offer; each of these involves choices about what to include and what to exclude. The style of FICS requires a deductive approach, rather than a treatment by kind of system. In a deductive treatment one would choose an initial discussion of principles (such as particle interaction) and typical methods (such as light scattering and rheology), and applying all of this to specific systems in later chapters. On the other hand, a system-oriented approach would call for a discussion of each kind of colloid (hydrophobic sols, association colloids, etc.) and, in passing, considering all applied techniques and their typical properties. Both procedures have their merits and drawbacks. We shall take a kind of hybrid route, in which a number of principles of wide relevance will be treated as such whereas some systems with special characteristics will be allocated to separate chapters. More specifically, in the present Volume we shall emphasize ‘particulate’ colloids (lyophobic colloids in which particles can be distinguished), treating relevant properties such as preparation, characterization (size distribution, surface properties), interaction between pairs of particles (electrostatic, and other contributions to the disjoining pressure), with consequences for the kinetics and dynamics ( In designing these Volumes, a certain restraint must be applied to the degree of complexity to be covered. Among items to be omitted one could think of the fine-tuning of particle interaction models, mixtures of colloids, mixtures of surfactants in association colloids, and polymer-surfactant Interactions. These, and other multi-component interactions lead to a plethora of, sometimes exhilaratingly complex, phenomena, that are abundant in colloid science. We shall also de-emphasize liquid Colloid science has a relatively long history. Although prehistoric man applied colloidal know-how many thousands of years ago, the cradle of colloid science dates to halfway through the nineteenth century, which is still long before the existence of molecules was irrefutably established. In retrospect, people such as Selmi The discovery of the colloidal state prompted the development of a number of physical techniques. Besides electrokinetics we may mention the discovery of the The quest for a comprehensive theory to account for the stability of hydrophobic colloids dominated the nineteen twenties to -forties and culminated in the development of the now well-known DLVO theory, named after Deryagin and Landau, and Verwey and Overbeek, who developed it independently during the second world war The other two contributions to pair interaction, steric- and solvent-structure interactions entered quantification in the later half of the twentieth century. Theory for the effect of polymers on colloid stability was initiated by Scheutjens and Fleer Modern colloid science has profited greatly from the development of well-defined model colloids and new physical techniques. Special mention must be made of the surface force apparatus, which allows direct measurement of the forces between two surfaces. It was particularly Israelachvili and his co-workers  All of this and much more, will be discussed in the coming Volumes.