Currently, natural polymer based hydrogels has attracted great attention of orthopedic surgeons for application in bone tissue engineering. With this aim, osteoinductive capacity of Gum Tragacanth (GT) based hydrogel was compared to collagen hydrogel and tissue culture plate (TCPS). For this purpose, adipose-derived mesenchymal stem cells (AT-MSCs) was cultured on the hydrogels and TCPS and after investigating the biocompatibility of hydrogels using MTT assay, osteoinductivity of hydrogels were evaluated using pan osteogenic markers such as Alizarin red staining, alkaline phosphatase (ALP) activity, calcium content and osteo-related genes. Increasing proliferation trend of AT-MSCs on GT hydrogel demonstrated that TG has no-cytotoxicity and can even be better than the other groups i.e., highest proliferation at day 5. GT hydrogel displayed highest ALP activity and mineralization when compared to the collagen hydrogel and TCPS. Relative gene expression levels have demonstrated that highest expression of Runx2, osteonectin and osteocalcin in the cells cultured GT hydrogel but the expression of collagen type-1 remains constant in hydrogels. Above results demonstrate that GT hydrogel could be an appropriate scaffold for accelerating and supporting the adhesion, proliferation and osteogenic differentiation of stem cells which further can be used for orthopedic applications.The healing of the bone loss and damages caused by accidents and a variety of diseases have become one of the biggest problems of hospitals and clinics all over the world. Common surgical treatments for this are bone allograft and autograft Hydrogels are one of the most feasible substrate that has been used as scaffold in tissue engineering as well as in drug delivery Gum Tragacanth (GT) is an anionic carbohydrate with three characteristic such as naturally occurring complex, branched and heterogeneous polysaccharide In the present study, we cultured adipose derived MSCs (AT-MSCs) on GT hydrogel and its osteoconductivity potential was investigated using ALP activity, calcium content assay and the expression of bone related gene markers. The aim of this work is provide alternative to bone substitute. Ribbon type of GT (from Isfahanian Astragalus gossypinus) was purchased from local herbal market (Tehran, Iran). GT hydrogel preparation was carried out according to the protocol reported by Fattahi et al. Scanning electron microscope (SEM, S-4500; Hitachi, Japan) was used to hydrogels morphological study. After hydrogel fabrication, they were lyophilized, fixed on a brass stub, and sputter coated with gold and then were examined at an accelerating voltage of 20 kV. MTT assay was used to biocompatibility evaluation of hydrogels and also viability of MSCs seeded on hydrogels in comparison with TCPS. Stem cells were seeded with a cell density of 5 × 10 AT-MSCs were purchased from the cell bank of Stem Cell Technology Research Center. These stem cells were isolated and characterized previously Passage 3 AT-MSCs were seeded on the tragacanth and collagen hydrogels and TCPS as control under the basal medium (DMEM with 10% FBS) overnight for attachment. For osteogenic differentiation induction, medium was removed and DMEM supplemented with 10% FBS, 3 mM β-glycerophosphate, 50 μg/mL ascorbic acid and 10 Alizarin red staining was used to evaluate the calcium deposited by differentiated cells after the period of study. All samples were fixed in cold 4% paraformaldehyde for 20 min at 4 °C after removed the medium and washed with PBS respectively. Then 2% Alizarin red S at pH 7.2 (Sigma) was added to the samples for staining. After 10 min incubation at room temperature, the samples were washed with PBS two times and studied by invert light microscopy. Then morphology of stained cells was quantified by image j software ( To alkaline phosphatase (ALP) activity measurement, total protein was extracted from differentiated stem cells in all groups at 7, 14 and 21 days after osteogenic induction using 200 μL of RIPA lysis buffer. Then lysate was centrifuged at 15,000 RPM at 4 °C for 15 min to sedimentation of cell debris. Supernatants were collected and ALP activity was measured using Pars Azmoon ALP activity kit (Iran) and the enzyme activity level (IU) was normalized against the total protein which measured by Pars Azmoon total protein kit (Iran). To measure the amount of calcium deposited on all groups Cresolphthalein Complex one method was used. Medium was removed and after washing by PBS, 0.6 N HCL (Merck) was added to the hydrogels for homogenization followed by shaking for 4 h on ice. After that Pars Azmoon calcium content kit (Iran) reagent was added to the calcium solutions and the optical density of samples was measured at 570 nm in a micro-plate reader (BioTek Instruments, USA). Real-Time RT-PCR was used to the evaluation of the four important bone-related genes expression such as runt-related transcription factor 2 (Runx2), collagen type one (Col-1), Osteocalcin and Osteonectin at 7, 14 and 21 days after initiate osteogenic differentiation process. RNeasy kit (Qiagen, Germantown, MD) was used to the total RNA extraction according to manufacturer's protocol. Synthesize complementary strands was also carried out using RevertAid First Strand cDNA synthesis kit (Fermentas, Burlington, Ontario, Canada). Parameters that used to the PCR procedure were included denaturation at 95 °C for 3 min, then 40 cycles at 95 °C for 20 s, annealing at 60 °C for 30 s, and elongation at 72 °C for 30 s. Real-Time RT-PCR was performed using SYBR Premix Ex Taq (Takara, Japan). Rotor Gene 6000 (Corbett, Concorde, NSW, and Australia) was used to the gene expression levels quantification. All primer sequences were used in PCR and Real-Time RT-PCR procedures are displayed in All experiments were conducted for three times. Data were reported as the mean ± standard deviation (SD). One-way analysis of variance (ANOVA) was used to compare the results. A p-value of less than 0.05 was considered statistically significant. All statistical analyses were conducted with SPSS software (SPSS, Chicago, IL, USA). Tragacanth ribbons were showed in MTT assay was used to the evaluation of the hydrogels biocompatibility in comparison to the TCPS as control ( After the period of study, Alizarin red staining was used as quantitative analysis for calcium deposited and mineralized matrix in all groups ( In addition to the Alizarin red staining, ALP activity and calcium content assay were performed for evaluating the osteoinductivity of all samples. As shown in To confirm further the osteogenic-inductive property of AT-MSCs cultured on TCPS and collagen and TG hydrogel, bone-related genes expression analysis were carried out through real-time RT-PCR ( Collagen type 1 was another important gene that evaluated in this study and as showed not significantly difference observed at day 7 between al groups but at days 14 and 21 it expression significantly increased in collagen and TG hydrogels compared to the TCPS. Osteonectin expression differences in all groups at day 7 were not significant, but at day 14 significantly highest expression was detected in TG hydrogel group compared to the other groups. Although, expression of osteonectin was increased significantly in hydrogels in comparison to the TCPS at day 21 but it expression was not significant between hydrogels. Significantly highest expression of osteocalcin at days 7, 14 and 21 was observed in TG hydrogel group compared to the other groups. Several characteristics properties such as physical, mass transport, and the biological interaction attract more attentions of orthopedic surgeons and tissue engineering scientists Finally, TG as plant resource could be an interesting candidate for application in bone tissue engineering and regenerative medicine; however more detailed study is needed and There is no conflict of interest in this article. This work was supported by a research grant from