It is highly difficult to remove phosphorus from high phosphorus oolitic hematite by the usual dressing process. Acid leaching is an effective method for the dephosphorization of high phosphorus oolitic hematite. The acid leaching experiments were conducted to study the effect of acid concentration, temperature, leaching time, solid-liquid (S/L) ratio and the stirring speed on the dephosphorization of the high phosphorus oolitic hematite. The results demonstrate that hydrochloric acid is the best selection for leaching acid for the dephosphorization, and treatment of the sample in 0.2mol/L hydrochloric acid at 298K for 10min with the S/L ratio of 0.03g/mL and a stirring speed of 300rpm is optimum. Thus, the dephosphorization can reach 90% with <0.18% iron loss. We also investigated the hydrochloric acid leaching kinetics. There were two distinct stages in the leaching process for dephosphorization, and the kinetics of both stages followed a shrinking core model. The apparent activation energy for leaching in leaching stage one (initial 10min) and stage two (10–60min) was estimated to be 2.51kJ/mol and 5.59kJ/mol, respectively. The results demonstrated that leaching of the two stages was controlled by acid diffusion through the solid product layer. The leaching with iron dissolution was mostly controlled by chemical reaction between Fe2O3 and acid.The Ningxiang type oolitic hematite, which is widely distributed in Hubei, Hunan, Sichuan, Guizhou and other regions, is one of the largest reserves of sedimentary iron ore in China. The iron ore reserves of 3.72 Acid leaching, a more effective dephosphorization method ( In this work, a series of experiments investigated the effects of leaching time, leaching temperature, acid concentration, solid-liquid (S/L) ratio and stirring speed on the dephosphorization by the optimal acid, and the leaching kinetics for the dephosphorization and iron dissolution was also investigated. The blocks of high phosphorus oolitic hematite ores from western Hubei province, China, were used as raw materials. The raw ore was crushed by a twin roll crusher (PG, Zibo Bo-speed Transmission Machinery Co., Ltd.). After crushing the raw ore powder was planetary ball milled (QM-4F, Nanjing Nanda Instrument) to fine powder, then the fine powder was screened into the desired size by a mechanical vibration sieve. In this experiment, raw ore powder in the range of 0.096–0.120 The ore sample was put in a 250 The dephosphorization (η) and iron loss (ε) can be defined as follows: The samples were leached by HCl, H   Acid leaching experiments were carried out under the condition of the S/L ratio of 0.03 Although the temperatures were different, the changing trend of dephosphorization is similar as leaching time increase. The dephosphorization increases rapidly during the first 10 The iron loss increases from 0.18% to 0.71% at 10 Acid leaching experiments were carried out under the condition of 0.2  Based on the above results, leaching experiments were carried out with 0.2 From The chemical composition of the ore sample after HCl leaching under the optimal condition is shown in The XRD analysis shows that the raw ore consists mainly of hematite, quartz, and a small amount of apatite ( The microstructure of the polished cross-section of oolitic hematite before and after the leaching process was observed using the SEM-EDS.  Most of the earlier studies on dephosphorization by acid leaching were conducted to study the effect of time, temperature, acid concentration, etc. ( In the present work, the leaching process and kinetics analysis were studied in detail. The HCl leaching kinetics was investigated under the optimum acidity (0.2 To interpret the results of dephosphorization and the iron dissolution during the HCl leaching process, the kinetics has been assessed on the basis of the shrinking core model (SCM) ( Transport of the reactant through the solution to the surface of the solid (H Reaction on the surface between the reactant and the solid. Formation of the products on the surface layer of the reaction zone and their transport from the interface into the bulk of the solution. The overall leaching process may be controlled by intrinsic chemical reaction or by external mass transfer. The following expressions ( To determine the kinetic parameters and control step of the dephosphorization and iron dissolution during the HCl leaching investigated in this study, the shrinking core model was tested at various temperatures from 298 Dephosphorization( When the SCM in which the rate-controlled step is the film diffusion control through the ash or product layer, Eq. From the slopes of the straight lines ( Generally, Among the three acids (HCl, H The optimum acid leaching dephosphorization conditions are 0.2 Kinetics analysis showed that leaching of dephosphorization was controlled by acid diffusion through the solid product layer. The leaching of iron dissolution was mostly controlled by chemical reaction between Fe This work is financially supported by the