Introduction
                  To investigate potential predictors of implant failure following fixation of proximal femoral fractures with a fracture of the lateral femoral wall.
               
                  Materials and methods
                  Medical records of 99 adult patients who had operative treatment for a proximal femoral fracture with a fracture of the lateral femoral wall between May 2004 and April 2015 were retrospectively analysed to determine factors associated with implant failure. Patients underwent routine surgical procedures for implantation of extramedullary or intramedullary devices. Potential predictors were age, gender, body mass index, comorbidities, type of fracture, reduction method, status of greater and lesser trochanters, course of the lateral fracture line, and presence/absence of a free bone fragment at the junction of the greater trochanter and lateral femoral wall.
               
                  Results
                  Ten (10%) implant failures were identified. Univariate analysis identified a free bone fragment at the junction of the greater trochanter and lateral femoral wall (odds ratio [OR], 21.25; 95% confidence interval [CI], 4.31–104.67; p < 0.001) and a transverse fracture line across the lateral femoral wall (primary or iatrogenic) (OR, 5.36; 95% CI, 1.29–22.30; p = 0.021) as factors associated with implant failure. Using a multivariate model, only a free bone fragment at the junction of the greater trochanter and lateral femoral wall (OR, 16.05; 95% CI, 3.06–84.23; p = 0.001) was a risk factor for implant failure.
               
                  Conclusions
                  A free bone fragment at the junction of the greater trochanter and lateral femoral wall and a transverse fracture line across the lateral femoral wall are predictors of implant failure in proximal femoral fractures with a fracture of the lateral femoral wall. Integrity of the lateral femoral wall correlates with prognosis of proximal femoral fracture. Lateral femoral wall reconstruction may be required for effective treatment of proximal femoral fractures with a fracture of the lateral femoral wall.Proximal femoral fractures are becoming increasingly common as the population ages, and are usually treated surgically by internal fixation. Prognostic factors for postoperative outcomes in patients with unstable proximal femoral fractures include the biomechanical complexity of the fracture, the unique pattern of the fracture, operative methods, and patients’ clinical characteristics. In particular, implant failure remains a problem for unstable fractures, despite improved techniques and various implant modifications [ The integrity of the lateral femoral wall has been identified as a prognostic factor in the healing of unstable pertrochanteric fractures treated with a compression hip screw or a dynamic hip screw [ The purpose of this study was to identify the factors that predict implant failure following internal fixation of proximal femoral fractures with a fracture of the lateral femoral wall, and to determine which fracture pattern is particularly vulnerable to implant failure. The medical records of adult patients who underwent surgery for proximal femoral fractures involving a fracture of the lateral femoral wall at our institution between May 2004 and April 2015 were retrospectively reviewed. These cases were selected from 821 consecutive patients who were admitted to our hospital after sustaining a proximal femoral fracture during the same period. For this type of study, formal ethical approval and consent were not required. The inclusion criterion was a proximal femoral fracture with a fracture of the lateral femoral wall. Exclusion criteria were: 1) pathological fracture, delayed fracture, stress fracture, or periprosthetic fracture, or 2) <2 years follow-up postoperatively. For the purpose of this study, the extent of the lateral femoral wall was defined according to the following parameters: 1) the superior extent, vastus lateralis ridge; 2) the inferior extent, intersection between the lateral femoral cortex and a line drawn at a tangent to the inferior femoral neck [ Patient demographics and clinical characteristics were recorded, including: age at the time of operation, gender, body mass index (BMI; weight [kg]/height [m Four experienced orthopedic surgeons performed all of the surgeries. Spinal anesthesia or general anesthesia was used. Reduction and internal fixation were performed with the patients in a supine position on a fracture table using an image intensifier. Preoperatively, a single dose of cefuroxime (1.5 g) was administered intravenously. Patients then underwent routine surgical procedures for implantation of extramedullary or intramedullary devices ( Radiographs were obtained preoperatively and postoperatively to evaluate the status of the greater and lesser trochanters. These images were also used to classify the fractures preoperatively and postoperatively according to the AO/OTA classification. Fractures between the lower border of the lesser trochanter, and 5 cm distal to this border, were defined as subtrochanteric. Free bone fragments at the junction of the greater trochanter and lateral femoral wall were noted, defined by the presence of 1) a visible vastus lateralis ridge on the free bone fragment, which indicated that the bone fragment was located at the junction of the greater trochanter and lateral femoral wall; and 2) bright lines around the free bone fragment on radiographs or CT scans, which indicated that the bone fragment was floating above the femur ( The course of lateral femoral wall fracture lines were assessed based on radiography or 3D-CT scans. Several pathways were visualised, including: 1) a fracture line that passed along the border (superior, inferior, or anterior) of the lateral femoral wall, 2) a fracture line that crossed the lateral femoral wall longitudinally, 3) a fracture line that split the lateral femoral wall obliquely, or 4) a fracture line that crossed the lateral femoral wall transversely (across the real or hypothetical blade entry point). Iatrogenic lateral wall fracture was identified postoperatively on radiography as: 1) a minor bone defect at the blade entry point, or 2) a new transverse fracture line at the blade entry point ( Implant failure was defined as any condition that necessitated revision surgery, including: 1) subsequent fracture around the implant, 2) helical blade, sliding hip screw, or lag screw cut-out, 3) progressive fracture displacement, 4) fracture non-union, 5) implant or screw breakage, or 6) lateral protrusion of the helical blade, sliding hip screw, or lag screw. All statistical analyses were performed using STATA version 13.1. All variables were evaluated with unconditional univariate logistic regression analysis. All variables with Overall, 99 of the 115 fractures reviewed met the inclusion criteria for the study. Included patients had a mean age of 70.4 years (range, 21 to 90 years), and there were 42 males and 57 females. The majority of injuries resulted from a low energy fall, 15 patients were involved in a traffic accident, 3 patients fell from a height, and 2 patients fell during skiing. Of these 99 fractures, there were 7 31-A1, 14 31-A2, 70 31-A3 and 8 31-A3 fractures with subtrochanteric components. Mean follow-up time was 39.1 months (range, 24–101 months). There were 11 revision surgeries (11%), for which the mean follow-up was 6.3 months (range: 1 to 18 months). Of these, one patient had an additional fall and in the remaining ten patients (10%), there were ten implant failures: three patients had proximal screw breakage, three patients had screw cut-out, one patient had distal screw breakage, two patients had fracture non-union, and one patient had lateral protrusion of the helical blade ( Initial univariate analysis identified a free bone fragment at the junction of the greater trochanter and lateral femoral wall (odds ratio [OR], 21.25; 95% confidence interval [CI], 4.31–104.67; After controlling for confounding variables using multivariable analysis, only a free bone fragment at the junction of the greater trochanter and lateral femoral wall was identified as a risk factor for implant failure ( Evidence suggests that the tip-apex distance and an unstable fracture increases the risk of failure after internal fixation of intertrochanteric fractures [ Although there is consensus that integrity of the lateral femoral wall is an important predictor of implant failure in intertrochanteric fractures, the area of the proximal femur that constitutes the lateral wall has not been clearly defined. Gotfried [ To the author’s knowledge, there are no published definitions of the anterior and posterior extent of the lateral femoral wall. Most classifications of proximal femoral fractures are based on radiography alone. But a CT scan, including 3-D images generated by VRT, may be an efficient tool to examine the morphology of proximal femoral fractures, and consequently lateral femoral wall fractures, in more detail [ A lateral femoral wall fracture makes the reduction and fixation of a proximal femoral fracture difficult. When intramedullary fixation is used, the blade or screw is inserted through the lateral femoral wall. The blade may insert through the fracture line of the lateral femoral wall when a lateral femoral wall fracture preexists, leading to the separation of the fracture fragment, and thus an unsatisfactory reduction. Also, an iatrogenic fracture may result from inserting a helical blade or a screw, and there may be loss of the lateral buttress of the proximal fracture fragment. A helical blade will not provide stable fixation through a fractured lateral femoral wall. Therefore, the risk of implant failure arises. There is currently no consensus on the optimal implant for use in a proximal femoral fracture with a fracture of the lateral femoral wall. A prospective randomized study showed that the proximal femoral nail (PFN), an intramedullary implant, was associated with a shorter operating time, fewer blood transfusions, shorter hospital stays and fewer implant failures or non-unions compared to a 95° fixed-angle screw-plate when treating intertrochanteric fractures [ Some fracture patterns are susceptible to implant failure. The current study showed that the presence of a free bone fragment at the junction of the greater trochanter and lateral femoral wall is a predictive factor for implant failure in proximal femoral fractures with a fracture of the lateral femoral wall. The free bone fragment was identified based on the presence of a visible vastus lateralis ridge with an X-ray or CT scan, and it was seen to be floating above the femur. Our data showed a clear association between the presence of a free bone fragment and the need for reoperation. In two patients, a non-displaced bone fragment located at the junction of the greater trochanter and lateral femoral wall, and attached to the cortex of the femur, was observed. However, both of these fractures eventually healed. In a cadaveric study, Chang et al. observed a dense fascia on the proximal lateral femoral wall, composed of the insertion of the gluteus medius, the insertion of the gluteus minimus, and the origin of the vastus lateralis [ Proximal femoral fractures in which the fracture lines run transversely from medial to lateral are biomechanically less stable [ This study was associated with some limitations. First, the study design was retrospective, which makes it inherently more susceptible to missing data, bias, and confounding factors compared to a prospective study. Second, some patients in this study did not receive preoperative CT scans. In these cases, the assessment of the lateral femoral wall was entirely dependent on radiography. Additionally, the components that contribute to the stability of the proximal femur are uncertain, and further biomechanical experiments are warranted. In conclusion, this study provides clinical evidence that a free bone fragment at the junction of the greater trochanter and lateral femoral wall, and a transverse fracture line across the lateral femoral wall are predictors of implant failure in proximal femoral fractures with a fracture of lateral femoral wall. Integrity of the lateral femoral wall correlates with prognosis of proximal femoral fracture. CT scan is an efficient tool to identify fracture of the lateral femoral wall. Lateral femoral wall reconstruction may be required for effective treatment of proximal femoral fractures with a fracture of the lateral femoral wall. The authors declare that they have no conflict of interest. The authors thank Hui Wang, for her assistance in statistical analysis. We appreciate the help from editors and anonymous referees for the critical review.