The world-class >4 Moz Wona-Kona gold deposit is hosted within the Paleoproterozoic Birimian Houndé greenstone belt which is the most important gold mineralized belt in the western part of Burkina Faso, with a cumulative reserve of ~11Moz. The mineralization consists of a pervasive silicification with disseminated pyrite–arsenopyrite crosscut by quartz–carbonate veinlets (1 to 10cm wide) forming a vertical, thick (up to 40m) and laterally extensive (5km) northeast trending orebody hosted within a large (200m wide) shear zone of regional extent. Gold occurs in association with 3 generations of pyrite and 2 generations of arsenopyrite. Free gold, interpreted as the last mineralizing event, occurs as late fracture filling in the pervasive silicification zone.The world-class Wona-Kona gold deposit, one of the largest gold deposits in Burkina Faso ( Since 2008, the Wona-Kona gold deposit has produced 1,160,700 Intensive mapping, auger, diamond and reverse circulation drilling, trench sampling and geophysical surveys over the years, have provided a better understanding of the structural control and origin of gold mineralization at the Wona-Kona deposit at property scale. This methodology has been successful for SEMAFO Inc. with the discovery of many other gold deposits in the Mana district: Nyafé (1999), Maoula (2000), Fofina (2010), Fobiri (2010), Yaho (2011: The Wona-Kona gold deposit is located in the Paleoproterozoic Baoulé-Mossi domain of the West African Craton in the northwest branch of the Birimian Houndé greenstone belt (HGB) (western Burkina Faso). The HGB is a north to northeast trending structure comprising a basal unit of tholeiitic basalt and gabbro and interbedded greywacke–siltstone–shale units ( The tectonometamorphic evolution is polycyclic with at least three deformation events; greenschist-facies metamorphism with amphibolite facies assemblages locally occur in contact with some granitoids. The principal deformation imprint of the Eburnean orogenesis (2160–2110 The HGB is intruded by multiple episodes of granitoid intrusions including a tonalite–trondhjemite–granodiorite suite (TTG) and granitic intrusions. Late swarm doleritic and gabbro dykes transect all of the present lithologies and are currently dated at 215 The Wona-Kona gold deposit is situated along the contact between a granodiorite batholith (Wona intrusion) and an assemblage of tholeiitic basalt and volcano-sedimentary rocks. The tholeiitic basalt has an aphanitic texture with various proportions of epidote, chlorite, actinolite and albite. The volcano-sedimentary rocks are constituted by interbedded mafic volcanoclastic rocks and graphitic black shales rich in sulfides. They are crosscut by felsic to intermediate dyke swarms ( The Wona-Kona orebody is hosted along a major northeast trending and steeply dipping shear zone. Three deformation events (D1–D3) can be distinguished. The first deformation (D1) is characterized by a main vertical planar fabric trending NNE–SSW related to the regional shortening associated with the accretion during the D1 Eburnean orogeny. D2 is evident in a S2 fabric with a shallow plunging stretching lineation oriented NE–SW and the geometry of sigmoidal dipping quartz veins indicating dextral shear movement. D3 is characterized by an E–W trending subvertical cleavage (S3) only developed in highly strained rocks like black shales due to their difference in competence and resulting in a strongly deformed unit compared to the rest of the series. Later events, including D3 folding, intense crenulation and quartz veining are suggestive of sinistral shear zones reactivation and are associated with the gold mineralizing processes at the district-scale ( The orebody is recognized along 5 The presence of this assemblage indicates greenschist metamorphic facies conditions during gold mineralization. Nevertheless, contact-related amphibolite facies grades are locally recorded in the basaltic rocks surrounding the Wona intrusion. The gold mineralization within the Wona-Kona deposit occurs within highly strained rocks, within a 200 Three styles of mineralization were identified based on sulfides textures, occurrences and gold grades. The first style is disseminated pyrite occurring in the black shales around the orebody ( Three generations of pyrites and two of arsenopyrites were discriminated in relation to ore styles. They show distinct textural features ( The Wona-Kona gold deposit is described as an orogenic gold deposit formed during the polycyclic ductile–brittle deformation events resulting in multiple mineralization episodes ( This project is part of a larger research program on the Mana District supervised by D. Gaboury (UQAC) since 2007 in collaboration with SEMAFO Inc. We thank