This study was carried out to determine an effective combination of chelators, reductants and free radical scavengers for enhancing color stability and minimizing lipid oxidation in muscle foods fortified with n
                     −3 fatty acids. Chelators (sodium tripolyphosphate, STPP; sodium citrate, CIT), reductants (sodium erythorbate, ERY) and radical scavengers (butylhydroxyanisole, BHA; mixed tocopherols from two different sources, 30 or 95TOC; rosemary extract, ROSE) were incorporated in various combinations into ground beef (15% fat) with or without n
                     −3 oil fortification (n
                     =8). Individually, STPP and CIT had no significant effect on a* values except day 4, but showed higher a* values when combined with ERY (STPP+ERY and CIT+ERY) (P
                     <0.05). CIT had lower hue angle values than STPP on days 4 and 6, but CIT+ERY showed more discoloration than STPP+ERY (P
                     <0.05). CIT+ERY showed less lipid oxidation than CIT alone (P
                     <0.05), whereas there was no difference between STPP and STPP+ERY. CIT+ERY+ROSE demonstrated higher a* values than CIT+ERY+95TOC on days 4 and 6 (P
                     <0.05); there was no difference between ROSE and 95TOC groups when n
                     −3 oil was incorporated into ground beef patties (P
                     >0.05). The combination of ROSE and ERY appeared to be effective in slowing the decline of a* values. All antioxidant combinations were effective at delaying lipid oxidation when compared to CON or n
                     −3. A combination of CIT, ERY and ROSE was most effective for stabilizing color and delaying lipid oxidation.Skeletal muscle contains a multi-component antioxidant system that controls oxidative reactions in the live animal, and retains some activity in many muscle foods. The endogenous antioxidants of skeletal muscle, classified as lipid-soluble, cytosolic, or enzymatic, provide a level of natural oxidative stability to muscle in vivo ( Exogenous antioxidants can be classified as chelators, reductants or free radical scavengers. Chelators control the activity of prooxidant metals and commonly include citric acid and phosphates ( Free radical scavenging can be accomplished by synthetic phenolic antioxidants, such as butylated hydroxyanisole (BHA), butylated hydroxytoluene (BHT), propyl gallate and tertiary butylhydroquinone (TBHQ). In the US, the application of these antioxidant additives is limited to certain meat products (e.g., dry sausages, fresh ground pork), at 0.01% (w/w) individually, or 0.02% (w/w) in combination based on the fat content of meat products. Tocopherols include four different homologs (α, β, δ and γ) and occur naturally. α-Tocopherol has been reported to be an effective inhibitor of lipid oxidation, and to stabilize oxymyoglobin when delivered by dietary means ( Long chain polyunsaturated Thiobarbituric acid (TBA), ethanol, trichloroacetic acid (TCA), and BHA were obtained from Sigma Chem. Co. (St Louis, MO., USA). Trisodium citrate, and mixed tocopherols (30% powered product, w/w; 95% liquid product, w/w) were obtained from DSM Nutritional Products, Inc. (Belvidere, NJ, USA), and sodium erythorbate was obtained from Continental Seasoning, Inc. (Teaneck, NJ, USA). Rosemary extract was obtained from Kalsec, Inc. (Kalamazoo, MI, USA). Colorimetric values were determined by measurement with a Minolta Chroma Meter (Model CR-200b, Osaka, Japan) and Hue angle was calculated as tan The thiobarbituric acid (TBA) procedure of Eight coarse ground beef chubs (4.52 Raw material and treatment application were similar to Trial 1 except that each chub was divided into eight equally sized batches, each of which was randomly assigned to a treatment. Ground beef was treated with 0.01% BHA (w/w, based on fat content), 0.03% mixed tocopherol (w/w, based on fat content; powdered product; 30TOC), 0.2% rosemary (w/w, ROSE), Raw material and treatment application were similar to Trial 1. Ground beef was treated with ERY (0.1%, w/w) For all trials, the experimental design was a split-plot. For the whole plot, batches within each of eight chubs (blocks) were considered experimental units ( Data were analyzed using the mixed procedure of The results for Several different radical scavengers were incorporated into ground beef patties with and without A significant treatment Dietary Various chelators (sodium tripolyphosphate; sodium citrate), radical scavengers (BHA; mixed tocopherols; rosemary extract), and reductants (sodium erythorbate) were incorporated in various combinations into ground beef (15% fat) with or without This work was supported by the USDA-IFAFS program, and the Storrs Agricultural Experiment Station, University of Connecticut, Storrs, Connecticut.