Background
                  Cut-out failure is one of the most common complications in the Gamma3 nail fixation system. The purpose of this retrospective study was to determine pre-operative or intra-operative risk factors for cut-out failure of lag screws in unstable, intertrochanteric fractures fixed with short Gamma3 nails.
               
                  Methods
                  One hundred and seventy-six patients over 60 years of age, with unstable intertrochanteric fractures (AO/OTA 31-A2, 31-A3) treated with short Gamma3 nails were included in this study. All patients completed a minimum of 1-year follow-up. Analysis of post-operative radiographs included assessment for cut-out failure of lag screw, appropriateness of the entry point, posterior lag screw axis, fracture gaps, posterior displacement of the proximal fragment, and tip-apex distance.
               
                  Results
                  Of the 176 patients in this study, 22 patients were identified with cut-out failure. Multivariate logistic regression analysis revealed that improper entry point in an antero-posterior projection (odds ratio 10.39, 95% confidence interval 1.74–78.4), posterior displacement distance of the proximal fragment in a lateral projection (odds ratio 1.35, 95% confidence interval 1.17–1.59), and female sex (odds ratio 17.14, 95% confidence interval 1.88–876.11) were correlated with cut-out failure.
               
                  Conclusion
                  This study emphasizes the importance of an optimal position of reduction in the lateral projection in reducing the risk of cut-out failure. In addition, sex difference in bone mineral density, proximal femur geometry, and the bone strength in elderly females may explain why female sex is a risk factor.Use of intramedullary nails and a dynamic hip screw system have been the mainstays of fixation implants for intertrochanteric fractures. In our study, we hypothesized that cut-out failure is associated with suboptimal implant position as well as suboptimal fracture reduction. Therefore, this study aimed to identify possible risk factors for cut-out failure of Gamma3 nails in the treatment of unstable intertrochanteric fractures, including suboptimal implant position and fracture reduction. This was a retrospective study in a single medical institution conducted from July 2010 to May 2014, with approval of local institutional board review (IRB number 2015-12-011AC). All intertrochanteric fractures were classified before surgery by attending physicians, according to AO/OTA classification All surgical procedures were performed on a fracture-traction table with the patient in a supine position. Anatomical fracture reduction was defined as smooth Shenton's line and equal fracture gaps along the fracture site in the antero-posterior projection and smooth anterior cortex without translation on the lateral projection; this could be achieved by close reduction in most of the patients. Open reduction with the aid of a bone hook, Hoffmann retractor, or reduction forceps was reserved for failed closed reduction. Wiring was rarely utilized in AO/OTA 31-A2, 31-A3 fractures because of fracture comminution, short oblique or transverse fracture pattern, or poor bone quality. Wiring was performed to aid reduction before nailing in only two patients (1.1%) with long-oblique fracture pattern (AO/OTA 31-A2 in one patient and 31-A3 in the other). Following surgery, all patients were taught to ambulate bearing only partial weight with the aid of crutches or walkers, until there was radiographic evidence of callus formation. All patients were followed after surgery at 2 weeks, 6 weeks, 3 months, 6 months, and 1 year, and then annually. Standard antero-posterior and lateral radiographic projections of the affected hip were obtained to evaluate fracture healing, progressive fracture displacement, and fixation failures. The primary end-point of this study was cut-out failure, defined as upward penetration in the antero-posterior projection, or anterior/posterior penetration of the femoral head in the lateral projection. With regard to radiographic evaluation, AO/OTA classification at the time of injury, improper entry point, posterior lag screw axis, angle between the lag screw and femoral neck axis, fracture gaps, posterior displacement of the proximal fragment, posterior displacement distance of the proximal fragment, and tip-apex distance The proper entry point of the Gamma3 nail system is located at the tip of the greater trochanter or within 5 mm medial to this point, in an antero-posterior radiograph. Any entry point lateral to this point was defined as an improper entry point ( Data were entered and analyzed with PC SAS Version 9.4 (SAS Institute, Cary, NC, USA). Data were represented as mean, range, and standard deviation for continuous variables, or number and percentages for categorical variables. The Fisher's exact test was used to compare differences between the two groups for each discrete variable because one or more of the cells in the contingency table has an expected frequency of less than five. The Student's t-test was used to compare the differences between the groups for each continuous variable. Possible risk factors associated with cut-out failures at a significance level of 0.20 or less were considered in a multivariable logistic regression analysis. Backward variable selection method was employed to choose the ‘best’ model, with the significance test for a risk factor entering and remaining at the significance level of 0.05 in the ‘best’ model. The results were expressed in an adjusted odds ratio with 95% confidence interval. All 176 patients in this study completed a minimum of 12 months of follow-up after surgery. A total of 22 cut-out failures were recorded at a mean time of 16.0 weeks after surgery (range, 2–68) ( Radiographic assessment of the two groups is shown in Analysis of risk factors is shown in The main goal of this study was to identify pre-operative and intra-operative risk factors for cut-out failure following insertion of the Gamma3 nail. Multivariate analysis revealed that improper entry point in the antero-posterior projection, posterior displacement distance of the proximal fragment in the lateral projection, and female sex were independent predictors for cut-out failure. The ideal entry point of the Gamma3 nail is at the tip of or slightly medial to the greater trochanter, which is located posteriorly and laterally to the piriformis fossa. Because fracture lines commonly extend laterally to this point, an improper entry point can arise when the awl is inserted into the fracture gap instead of at the tip of greater trochanter. This can lead to further medialization of the proximal fragment, disruption of Shenton's line during nail insertion, and valgus alignment of the proximal fragment, with a residual medial gap in the antero-posterior projection after compression. Established reduction can be altered during nail insertion into an improper entry point. If a fracture line exists at the entry point, we recommend routine use of a rongeur and a flexible reamer with a ball tipped reaming rod to remove the cortex located anteromedially to the entry point. This step should be repeated until fracture reduction remains unchanged during nail insertion. Ostrum et al. found that an entry point lateral to the tip could lead to angulation and larger gaps. Anteriorly or posteriorly deviated lag screw position has been reported to be another factor for cut-out failure in several fixation devices. In our study, posterior displacement of the proximal fragment represented one of the risk factors for cut-out failure. In a multivariate logistic regression model, every increase of 1 mm in posterior displacement would lead to a 1.35 times increase in risk for cut-out failure. In unstable intertrochanteric fractures, there may be a posterior sagging of proximal fragments. By raising the foot on a fracture-traction table, posterior lifting using closed or open methods might correct this displacement. Tip-apex distance (TAD) has been well-studied as a measurement to predict cut-out failure of peri-trochanteric fractures, with a recommendation for a distance of 25 mm or less. Sex differences have been reported in proximal femur geometry. With increasing age, factors including femoral shaft bowing, cortical thickness, and canal diameter change to different extents. This study has some limitations. First, a high percentage of patients (37.4%) were excluded because of a follow-up duration less than 12 months. Bias associated with missing data could have occurred to weaken the results. In addition, despite the fact that all 113 of the excluded patients were excluded because of a follow-up duration <12 months, it was observed that all of these patients had an uneventful healing progress, without evidence of cut-out during the last visit. Mean follow-up duration for these patients was 17.3 weeks. The incidence of cut-out failure in our cohort (22 out of 289 patients, 7.6%) was still higher than the incidence reported in the literature. In conclusion, we identified few risk factors for cut-out failure of the Gamma3 nail system, including improper entry point, posterior displacement distance of the proximal fragment, and female sex. This study highlighted the importance of optimal fracture reduction and maintenance during the surgical procedure in the lateral projection. In the lateral projection, posterior displacement of the proximal fragment should be well-recognized and avoided during the whole Gamma3 nail fixation surgical procedure.