In the flotation system of Chador Malu iron processing plant (Iran), the apatite is floated with fatty acid based collectors. Sodium silicate is also used as iron oxides depressant. While the phosphorous content of the iron concentrate is reduced at an acceptable level (0.047% P), the silica content (3.5% SiO2) is still higher than the required level.
                  This study aimed to find an effective reagent combination to reduce the silica and phosphorous contents of iron concentrate. Batch flotation tests were carried out to investigate the influence of sodium silicate dosage, modulus and addition of Ca++ ions, on the separation selectivity of phosphorous and siliceous gangue minerals from iron oxides. The feed sample, with 57.20% Fe, 6.42% SiO2 and 0.748% P was mainly composed of haematite and magnetite and the main gangue minerals were apatite and quartz.
                  The results of flotation tests showed that sodium silicate performed better as depressant of iron oxide, but had little effect on silica flotation in the apatite–iron oxide–silica flotation system. It was also found that by using sodium silicate of modulus of 2.5 at a concentration of 800g/t, pH value of 10, and conditioning time of 10min, an effective separation of apatite from iron oxides could be achieved, while the silica removal (<35%) was still poor. Addition of hydrous calcium chloride (CaCl2·2H2O), as a source for Ca++ ions, to the sodium silicate solution enhanced the separation selectivity of quartz and apatite from the iron oxides. Applying a silicate–CaCl2·2H2O mixture with Me/Si ratio of 0.4, resulted in a concentration with acceptable grades of Fe (67%), SiO2 (1.5%), and P (0.034%). In this case, 93.6% of Fe was recovered while 75% of SiO2 and 93.9% of P were also removed.Flotation is usually employed to remove silicate as the main impurities from many ore types, especially iron ores. Iron oxides can be concentrated either by direct flotation, using anionic collectors, or reverse flotation of siliceous gangue with both cationic and anionic collectors Depressants including; sodium silicate, starch, dextrin, guar gum and humic acids play an important role in the reverse flotation of iron ore Sodium silicates have three major species in aqueous solution; including monomeric, polymeric and colloidal species. These are the products of hydrolysis, depending on the pH, concentration and modulus of sodium silicate, and presence of ionic species dissolved in flotation pulp. Research showed that the polymeric sodium silicate has more effect on depression of iron bearing minerals Previous studies often have investigated the depression effect of sodium silicate on phosphate ores (with impurities such as iron oxides and siliceous–calcareous gangue) and iron ores (with apatite or silicate gangue). Few studies have reported the effect of sodium silicate on the flotation behavior of iron ores with both phosphate and silica gangues In this study, attempts were made to enhance the selective separation of silica and apatite from Chador Malu iron ore. The silica content of the feed to flotation circuit of Chador Malu plant has recently increased. The current reverse anionic flotation process of apatite is not capable of reducing the silica content of the iron concentrate to an acceptable level. Several experiments were performed using different types of iron depressants. The influence of sodium silicate (concentration, modulus, conditioning time and pH) on the selectivity of apatite–iron oxides–silica flotation system, was investigates. The addition of cations to sodium silicate solution was also considered to enhance the separation efficiency of silica. The samples were taken from the feed materials of Chador Malu flotation circuit. Chador Malu mine is the second largest iron concentrate producer, located in the central part of Iran. The ore is processed by magnetic and flotation methods. Chador Malu plant processes 3000 The flotation feed is mainly the concentrate of HGMS. Although, due to the high phosphorus content of the magnetic concentrate (MIMS) of the plant, recently a part of this concentrate is also added to the flotation feed. The size and chemical analysis of the feed samples are shown in The results of polish section studies showed that magnetite, hematite and goethite were the main iron minerals and the gangue minerals were mostly silicates (quartz) and apatite. The liberation size for apatite and quartz was around 45 In the flotation circuit of Chador Malu plant, the phosphorous content of the iron concentrate is removed by conventional reverse flotation method. In this circuit, Alke (fatty acid based) Flotation tests on the feed samples of Chador Malu plant, using a Denver flotation machine, were conducted. The solid percentage of the feed was set as 30% and the agitation rate at 1200 In the following section first, the influence of common depressants of iron minerals were compared; then the effects of sodium silicate and its relevant parameters were discussed. Among the common depressants, starch, dextrin and sodium silicate are more effective on iron oxides The results of these tests ( However by increasing the sodium silicate dosage, the concentrate grade was decreased. It can also be seen that sodium silicate could improve the selectivity between apatite and iron oxides, but not between silica and iron oxides. It is believed that starch is not absorbed on the surface of quartz at alkaline pH of the pulp As sodium silicate provides better results on the Chador Malu samples, in the following section, the influence of relevant parameters including: modulus, dosage, conditioning time and the pH of pulp are studied. The depressant dosage is an important factor in the reverse flotation of iron oxides, which affects the iron recovery At the levels of sodium silicate dosage tested, more than 55% of the silica remained in the iron concentrate. A sodium silicate dosage of 700 It is postulated that, at the low dosage of sodium silicate, Ca The effect of pulp pH (at sodium silicate dosage of 800 The results show that sodium silicate effectively depressed the iron oxides in the pH range of 9.5–10, but further increase of the pH to 11.5, did not improve the process. In fact at pH The composition of sodium silicate is expressed as the general form of mNa In general, phosphorus contents in the float part and iron recovery in non-float part (iron concentrate) were relatively high for all sodium silicate modulus tested. Increasing the sodium silicates modulus increased the SiO The effect of conditioning time of sodium silicate solution on the grade and recovery of phosphorus, iron and silica in the flotation of Chador Malu iron ore was also investigate ( It was shown that using sodium silicate at the selected levels of parameters including: dosage of 800 A series of flotation tests on Chador Malu samples were carried out to evaluate the effect of different silicate–metal salts mixtures on the apatite–iron oxides–silica flotation system. Experiments were performed at 800 First, the effect of polyvalent metals addition (as a solution with Me/Si ratio of 0.4) to the sodium silicate solution, on the grade and recovery of iron concentrate was investigated ( The addition of different types of salts to the sodium silicate solution ( In the second step, the effects of silicate–CaCl The results of It can also be observed that ( This study showed that the presence of Ca It can been seen that iron depression decreased with increasing the Me/Si ratio, the effect being more significant for Me/Si ratios of 0.6 and 0.8 ( As previously seen, the floatability of quartz without surface activation with Ca Based on the results, it can be concluded that in the apatite–iron oxide–silica flotation system, the effect of Ca This work was carried out to investigate the effects of key variables of sodium silicate, to produce the required low-silica and -phosphorous iron concentrate at a reasonable recovery form Chador Malu flotation feed. Based on the results the following conclusions can be drawn: Sodium silicate is a better depressant for Chador Malu iron ore flotation, compared to starch, dextrin and their mixtures. Using these depressant, an iron concentrate with high recovery were produced but the phosphorus and silica contents were higher than the required level. By selecting the relevant parameters of sodium silicate including: the modulus of 2.5, dosage of 800 The grade and recovery of silica in iron concentrate obtained for all sodium silicate tests, were above 4% and 60%, respectively. These results indicated that, sodium silicate alone is not an effective depressant in the selective separation of silica from iron oxides in Chador Malu flotation system. The addition of Zn Increasing the Me/Si ratio of silicate–CaCl The authors would like to thank the management and personnel of the