In a number of applications, especially in pharmaceutical drug development, there is often a very small powder quantity available for evaluating the manufacturability of new drugs. However, it is highly desirable to be able to quickly evaluate processing issues, and where possible using the smallest powder quantity. In the present work, a proprietary commercial powder dispersion device (the disperser of Malvern© Morphologi G3) is adapted to evaluate the triboelectric charging tendency. A very small powder quantity (as small as 0.1 mg) is dispersed by a pressure pulse of compressed gas such as air or nitrogen. This causes the particles to become air borne and collide with the containing walls, resulting in dispersion and leading to triboelectric charge transfer between the particles and the walls. In this work, the charging propensity of a number of materials is evaluated and the effect of particle surface functional groups on the tribo-electric charge transfer is analysed. Model materials with a well-defined shape (glass ballotini) but with different silane groups deposited on their surfaces as well as a number of organic crystalline particles (such as aspirin, α-lactose monohydrate and paracetamol) are tested. Following dispersion the particles move immediately to a Faraday cup placed directly underneath the disperser. Therefore, particle charge is measured with no decay. The method can differentiate charging of different polymorphs of the same material, different silane groups on the surfaces of glass ballotini and different crystal morphologies obtained from crystallisation from various solvents.Powders often become triboelectrically charged by particle-particle and particle-surface collisions in various industrial operations, such as pneumatic conveying, comminution and mixing. In the pharmaceutical industry, organic crystals are very prone to triboelectric charging. They usually have a high bulk electrical resistance and therefore, electrostatic charges can accumulate and have adverse effect on flowability, adhesion and segregation, leading to content non-uniformity in formulation, batch failures and manufacturing delays ( There are three main mechanisms by which tribo-electric charging can take place, i.e. electron, ion and material transfer ( A number of methods have been developed to characterise the charging propensity of powders, based on different mechanistic principles (  In this work, the focus is on characterising the triboelectric charging tendency of fine powders by impact using the smallest possible sample quantity. The dispersion unit of Malvern ® Morphologi G3 is used for this purpose. The method is based on the aerodynamic dispersion by a pressure pulse, making the particles airborne and impacting them on the containing walls. This causes charge transfer as the walls are made of materials with different work functions, thereby enabling the charging propensity of the powder and its position in the triboelectric series to be evaluated. The dispersed powder is immediately discharged into a Faraday cage, preventing any charge decay. Recently The dispersion setup is shown in Laboratory compressed air was used for dispersion. Pipes used for connections were anti-static in order to remove the possibility of the pipe becoming electrostatically charged during repeated testing. The operation pressure and injection time of the pressure pulse were controlled using a pressure regulator (SMC, Model 2030-212BLA) and a solenoid valve (SMC, Model VQ21A1). The airflow was filtered (SMC, Model AF20-F02C) to remove particulate impurities like oil droplets and dust particles. The Faraday inner cup was connected to an electrometer (Keithley, Model 6541, USA) which had a resolution of 10 pC, via a low noise BNC cable, whilst the outer cup was earthed. The charge measurement setup is shown in Organic and inorganic particles were used for exploring the potential of the method for assessing the tribocharging propensity. These included aspirin, α-lactose monohydrate, paracetamol, urea, The effect of particle size on triboelectric charging is investigated using the three sieve size cuts of glass ballotini, as a function dispersion pressure. A constant sample volume of about 3 mm The results of triboelectric charging are expressed in absolute value of charge-to-mass ratio as a function of dispersion pressure against stainless steel contacting surfaces, and the average measurement of at least five repeats for each case is shown in The effect of sample volume on triboelectric charging was evaluated by testing glass ballotini of sieve cut 53–63 µm against the stainless steel surface using bulk volumes of 1, 3, 5, 7 and 9 mm A decrease in the charge-to-mass ratio is observed for sample volumes of 7 and 9 mm The charge polarity and magnitude acquired by the particles depend on the work function of the contacting surfaces. In order to evaluate the effect of surface material on triboelectric charging due to dispersion, five different materials (stainless steel, copper, brass, aluminium and PTFE) were used in the construction of the capsule and post-dispersion duct, as shown in The polarity of the charge on the particles is negative for copper, steel, brass and aluminium, and positive for PTFE. The largest level of charge is observed with PTFE, while the highest negative charge is given by the copper capsule. The difference in charging of glass ballotini against different metal surfaces is due to their work function which is generally determined by Photo-Emission Spectroscopy (PES) and Kevin-Zisman method. Metals having a higher work function, i.e. copper (∼5.1 eV) and stainless steel (∼4.67 eV) transfer a greater negative charge compared to brass (∼4.5 eV) and aluminium (∼4.06 eV) ( These results are in good agreement with the work of Triboelectric charging is a surface phenomenon and is strongly influenced by the functional groups exposed on the surface. Glass ballotini (sieve cut: 53–63 µm), coated with different functional groups, have been tested to verify the effect of surface functionalisation on tribo-electrification. The silanisation process is used for this purpose, where the particles surfaces are covered by self-assembling of alkoxysilane molecules ( The glass ballotini covered with –CF3 charge negatively and the magnitude of charge is very high indeed (−1584 nC/g), while the other two surface groups charge positively. The particles coated with –NH2 get a higher amount of charge (537 nC/g) compared to the ones coated with –CH3 (185 nC/g). The trends are consistent with the work of Pharmaceutical industry is particularly vulnerable to particle handling problems created by electrostatic charge as organic crystals are commonly dielectric and retain charges brought about by tribo-electrification, causing segregation and flowability issues during processing. Therefore, the ability to test a small quantity of the drug for charging at the early stages of drug development is highly desirable. The performance of the method for a number of organic crystals has been tested and is reported below. The relationship between the absolute value of the acquired charge, |Q|, and the quantity of the particles, represented by the estimated number of particles, N During the crystallisation process, a number of factors influence the physical and chemical properties of the final product, such as solvent, cooling rate, amount of seeding, etc ( Paracetamol, Metacetamol (a structural isomer of Paracetamol), and mixtures of 98% Paracetamol and 2% Metacetamol by weight, crystallised together by various solvents, were used to quantify the polarity and magnitude of triboelectric charging during dispersion. Scanning Electron Microscope (SEM) images of the crystals are shown in The effect of solvent used for the crystallisation process of urea on its charging propensity has been investigated by testing five samples of urea crystals made from different solvents: ethanol, methanol and isopropyl alcohol. The SEM images of the crystals are shown in All the samples charge negatively; the highest charge to mass ratio is acquired by the sample crystallised in IPA, similar to the case of Paracetamol, while the lowest is by the sample crystallised in methanol. The addition of biuret in the crystallisation process with ethanol seems to reduce drastically the charge pick up and also change the morphology of the crystals. As with the case of Paracetamol, the specific surface area of urea was analysed by BET and also inferred from LDA. The particle size, specific surface area and charging characteristics of urea crystallised from three solvents: ethanol (with and without addition of biuret), methanol and IPA are shown in The effect of crystallisation process conditions on triboelectric charging was further evaluated for Carbamazepine has four anhydrous polymorphs and one dihydrate form, which differ in several physical and chemical properties, such as solubility, stability and hygroscopicity. Two different forms have been tested here in order to assess the difference in contact charging behaviour: dihydrate and anhydrous (P-monoclinic, form III). The results are reported in The potential of using a pulse of pressurised gas to disperse a small powder quantity to assess the triboelectric charging propensity is explored. The technique is highly sensitive; only a small quantity of sample is required (as small as a few microgram), with no charge losses as the powder is directly dispersed into a Faraday cup, and providing rapid testing. The proposed technique can be successfully used to quantify charging propensity of powders having changes, such as different polymorphs, morphology, crystallisation routes and functional surface groups. The authors would like to thank Dr Paul Kippax, Malvern Instruments Ltd, for providing the dispersion capsules and post-dispersion ducts, made of the materials shown in