Extraction behaviour of rare earths, La, Dy and Y, from hydrochloric acid medium by di-nonyl phenyl phosphoric acid (DNPPA) has been investigated over a wide range of experimental conditions such as feed acidity, feed concentration, DNPPA concentration, diluents, temperature, stripping reagents. The slope analysis method indicated the formation of [RE(HA2)3] type of neutral species in the organic phase. The extraction reaction of rare earths with DNPPA was found to be exothermic with ∆H values being −10.6kJ/mol (La), −12.9kJ/mol (Dy) and −17.5kJ/mol (Y). The ∆S values were found to be −42.5 (La), −37.3 (Dy) and −43.0 (Y) J/mol K. The free energy change (∆G) were found to be −2.2 (La), −1.6 (Dy) and −4.5 (Y) KJ/mol at 303K. Stripping of rare earth was >90% from rare earth loaded DNPPA by sulphuric acid (7M) in a single contact at room temperature (303K). Extraction of rare earths in different diluents followed the order: petrofin~dodecane>dichlorobenzene>xylene>chlorobenzene. The extraction efficiency for rare earths by DNPPA increased with increase in atomic number: La<Ce<Pr<Nd<Sm<Eu<Gd<Tb<Dy<HoY<Er<Tm<Lu. Separation factors between these metal ions were calculated and compared with extractants such as di-2-ethylhexyl phosphoric acid (D2EHPA) and 2-ethylhexyl 2-ethylhexyl phosphonic acid (EHEHPA). DNPPA was found to be stable even after 10cycles of repeated extraction/stripping operations.Rare earths (RE) are widely used in phosphor materials, magnetic substances, alloys, catalysts, optoelectronic materials, superconductors, solid oxide fuel cells and in nuclear applications. The high value of these elements depends on their effective separation into high purity compounds. It is generally known that the difficulties encountered in the separation and recovery of rare earths from each other is due to their similar physical and chemical properties. Solvent extraction is one of the major techniques for separation of the rare earth elements. The organophosphorous extractants such as 2-ethylhexyl 2-ethyhexylphosphonic acid (EHEHPA), di-2-ethyl hexyl phosphoric acid (D2EHPA), bis(2,4,4-trimethylpentyl) phosphinic acid (Cyanex 272), tri-n-octyl phosphine oxide (Cyanex 921) and a mixture of four trialkylphosphine oxides: R DNPPA was synthesised in our laboratory by a method described elsewhere ( The extraction experiments were carried out in separatory funnel by equilibrating equal volumes (10 Effect of HCl concentration from 0.5 to 5 The correlation coefficient (r) for regression equations was found to be > DNPPA concentration varied from 0.1 to 0.6 This suggests that three moles of DNPPA dimer are associated with each mole of rare earth extracted in the organic phase. Based on these observations, the stoichiometry of the extracted species in the organic phase was proposed as RE(HA K The effect of temperature was determined by carrying out experiments by varying temperature from 300 The role of diluents is very important in solvent extraction process. The diluents decrease the tendency of emulsification of the extractants and improve their dispersion and coalescence properties. Diluents are used to reduce the viscosity of the extractants. Diluents should have the ability to retain in solution both complexed and uncomplexed extractant, should have low solubility in aqueous phase, high flash point, low volatility, low surface tension and should be stable. In this context, experiments were carried out with 0.2 Additional experiments were carried out at fixed extractant concentration (0.2 The stripping of RE(III) from loaded DNPPA consisting of 1 La, Nd, Gd, Dy and Nd (0.01 In a solvent extraction process the effect of separation of two metals from each other is based on the selectivity of these metals for the organic and aqueous phases. The selectivity is defined by separation factor, which is the ratio of distribution coefficients of the metal ions. The separation of individual rare earths from a mixture of rare earths is a difficult task. The separation factors between any two adjacent rare earths for extractants (D2EHPA, EHEHPA) have been reported to be very low as these are mainly related to the change in basicity of the rare earths which decrease very slowly along the rare earth series. The extraction efficiency for rare earths by DNPPA is in the order La The stability of DNPPA during the extraction and stripping processes was investigated. The aqueous feed solution containing La, Dy and Y, 0.01 The feasibility of using DNPPA as an extractant for RE(III) from chloride medium has been explored. The slope analysis of the extraction data revealed the formation of RE(HA