The reduction of nickel from low-grade nickel laterite ore using a solid-state deoxidisation method was studied. The effects of temperature, time, reductant type and CaO content on the conversion percentage of the total nickel to metallic nickel (α
                     Ni) in the nickel laterite ore reduction process were investigated. The results showed that α
                     Ni was strongly influenced by the reaction temperature in both gas–solid and solid–solid reduction processes, and a higher temperature was more favourable for nickel reduction. Because the reduction mechanism of nickel laterite ore (NiO+CO→CO2
                     +Ni) is indirect, a higher α
                     Ni (>80%) can be obtained by increasing the CO and anthracite content. In the gas–solid reduction process, a longer reaction time favoured nickel reduction, and the conversion percentage decreased when a gaseous reductant was used at 850°C because of phase transformation. In the solid–solid reduction process, the conversion percentage of the total nickel to metallic nickel first increased and then decreased with increasing reduction time and CaO content. In both reduction processes, taenite was found by XRD in the reduced ore because of iron oxide reduction and metallic nickel formation. SEM revealed that the nickel laterite ore was transformed from large granular and sandwich structures to small granular and flocculent structures during the reduction process.In recent years, there has been an increased focus on the utilisation of low-grade nickel laterite ore, along with a growing demand for stainless steel and a declining supply of sulphide ores ( Both pyrometallurgical and hydrometallurgical processes have been applied commercially to recover nickel from nickel laterite ore. Pyrometallurgical techniques are suited to treat saprolite, with processes typically involving drying, calcining, reduction and electric furnace smelting to produce a ferronickel or nickel sulphide matte. The disadvantages of these processes include the requirement of high grade ores and substantial energy input. Hydrometallurgical processes are more applicable to limonite ores and include ammonia–ammonium carbonate leaching, atmospheric leaching with sulphuric acid and high-pressure acid leaching. These processes have the disadvantages of low extraction of nickel and substantial energy and reagent requirements ( Several investigations of nickel oxide or nickel laterite ore reduction have been performed. For example, Krasuk et al. studied the reduction of nickel oxide with CO, Utigard et al. studied the reduction kinetics of Goro nickel oxide using hydrogen and James et al. used X-ray diffraction (XRD) to study nickel oxide reduction by hydrogen. Nickel laterite ore reduction by H In this study, the reduction of nickel from low-grade nickel laterite ore was performed using a solid-state deoxidisation method. Moreover, both gaseous and solid reductants were used, and the effects of the reduction temperature, reduction time, CO content, carbon content and CaO content on the nickel reduction process were examined. The reduction characteristics of nickel from nickel laterite ore were studied on a thermodynamic basis, using the conversion percentage and phase analysis. In the process of the reduction of nickel from nickel laterite ore, the main reactions of nickel oxide to metallic nickel are shown as follows ( The standard Gibbs free energies (Δ In fact, nickel laterite ore is a complex ore, which include NiO, Fe The further reduction of wustite to metallic iron takes place: According to the experimental conditions, the reduction process can be carried out to the reduction The chemical composition of low-grade nickel laterite ore was analysed by chemical analysis. The XRD experiments were performed on a Japan Science D/max-R diffractometer apparatus with Cu Kα radiation ( Nickel laterite ore contains a large amount of water, with a moisture content on a dry basis of up to 50%, in the form of adsorbed and crystallised water. Drying was performed at 650 The reduction of nickel from low-grade nickel laterite ore was performed in a fixed bed apparatus, as shown in The chemical composition of the raw nickel laterite ore is shown in  TG/DSC was used to determine the thermal properties of nickel laterite ore, as shown in  Based on the experimental requirements, the reduction temperature was varied in the range of 600 and 1000 The reduction time had a strong influence on the conversion percentage of the total nickel to metallic nickel, as shown in A mixed gas of CO and CO  The effect of the reaction time on the conversion percentage of the total nickel to metallic nickel is shown in In this experiment, anthracite was selected as the solid reductant and was ground to increase the surface area and promote contact with the ore. As shown in  The XRD pattern of the reduced nickel laterite ore is shown in The SEM images of reduced nickel laterite ore are shown in In this study, the nickel extraction from low-grade nickel laterite ore was performed using a solid-state deoxidisation method. It was shown that an The effects of the reduction temperature, reduction time and CO content on the conversion percentage using a gaseous reductant were investigated. The results showed that the conversion percentage of the total nickel to metallic nickel increased with increasing reaction temperature and time initially, and then remained steady with further increases, but decreased abruptly at a temperature of 850 During the reduction process, taenite [Fe, Ni] was formed, which promoted nickel recovery from nickel laterite ore. The surface morphology of nickel laterite ore was also improved by the reduction process. The project was sponsored by the