The mechanical properties (uniaxial compressive strength and deformation modulus) of frozen tailings are key parameters for the safety assessment of a tailing dam. However, the experimental data on such mechanical properties are limited. In this study, more than sixty tailings samples with four tailings (medium sand, fine sand, silty sand, and silt) were frozen at the temperature of −16°C, and then tested under uniaxial compression in order to investigate their mechanical properties. The effects of four parameters (average particle size, dry density, water content and strain rate) on the uniaxial compressive strength (UCS) and the deformation modulus of frozen tailings were investigated. The test results show that three failure patterns of samples were observed: inclined plane shear failure, lateral tensile failure, and composite failure involving both. Their uniaxial compressive strength is related logarithmically to average particle size, exponentially to dry density, linearly to moisture content, and parabolically to strain rate. On the other hand, their deformation modulus is related logarithmically to average particle size, parabolically to moisture content, exponentially to both dry density and strain rate.Tailings, the byproducts of mineral processing, are special solid wastes. Large-scale mining and mineral processing in China and even in the world inevitably generate huge amounts of tailings. These tailings are to be economically disposed in an environmentally acceptable manner. The tailings impoundments, as one of practical solutions, can dispose of huge masses of tailings and other mineral wastes ( Frozen tailings may have special physical and mechanical properties ( The strength and deformation properties of frozen soils have been investigated. For example, The mechanical properties of frozen soils are important to engineering design and construction in cold regions. China has implemented several huge engineering projects such as the Qinghai-Tibet Railway and the Golmud-Lhasa oil-pipelines, in past decades. These projects were constructed in permanent frozen soil regions of the Qinghai-Tibet Plateau. This sped up the investigations of the mechanical properties of frozen soils ( The tailings, as solid residues, are different from natural soils in terms of formation, particle geometry, and particle size distribution ( The effects of strain rate on the mechanical characteristics of rocks have been widely investigated ( In this study, uniaxial compression tests were carried out in order to thoroughly investigate the mechanical properties of frozen tailings. The tests measured the mechanical behaviors of more than sixty frozen tailings samples at a temperature of − The test tailings were sampled from the processing mill of Lala Copper Mine (Sichuan province, China). The Lala Copper Mine is the biggest open-pit copper mine in southwest China. According to the national technical Code for Geotechnical Engineering of Tailings Embankment (GB50547-2010), the tailings are divided into three classes and seven sub-classes based on their grain size gradations. They are tailings sand (the sub-classes are gravelly sand, coarse sand, medium sand, fine sand, and silty sand), tailings silt (including silts), and tailings clay (the sub-classes are silty clay and clays). In order to investigate the effects of gradations on the mechanical properties of tailings, the original tailings (#5) sampled from this mine site were manually sieved to form four groups of tailings samples based on their grain size gradations. The four groups are medium sand (#4), fine sand (#3), silty sand (#2), and silty clay (#1). Their main physical properties are summarized in The test samples are cylinder-shaped. Each sample is 50 Uniaxial compression tests were performed to investigate the mechanical properties of frozen tailings. The key influential factors that affect the compressive strength and deformation modulus of frozen tailings were explored. Four influential parameters were preliminarily selected as average particle size, dry density, moisture content, and strain rate. The uniaxial compression tests for frozen tailings were carried out using the Japan Shimadzu AG-I25KN electronic precision materials testing machine (see The failure pattern of frozen tailings samples was observed under uniaxial compression. The following three patterns were observed. This failure pattern is shown in This failure pattern is shown in This failure pattern is shown in In the uniaxial compression tests, typical stress-strain (σ-ε) curves of frozen tailings at − This stage occurs at the initial deformation and lasts for a very short time. This stress-strain curve soon bends upwards from the point A with the increase of vertical stress. This stage may be due to initial partial contact and partially melt induced by the temperature difference. This can be ruled out through the extension of the next stage. The stress-strain curve is an approximately straight line. The stress-strain relationship of frozen tailings is of an initial linear elastic property. The axial stress increases continuously with the increase of axial strain, but the stress-strain curve bends downward. The slope of the stress-strain curve gradually decreases. That is, its deformation modulus decays gradually. Finally, the stress reaches its peak compressive strength, σ After the axial stress reaches the peak compressive strength, the sample undergoes the strain softening stage, wherein the stress is gradually decreased with the increase of strain and the slope of the stress-strain curve becomes negative. In this stage, the micro-cracks on the sample surface were observed to penetrate into the internal zone and amalgamated to form larger macro-cracks. Partial fractures occur in the sample along with slippage and, thus, finally cause sample failure. The final strains are between 16% and 23%. The final failure times are between 1.2 The effects of average particle size, dry density, moisture content, and strain rate on uniaxial compressive strength and deformation modulus of the frozen tailings were analyzed. The physical and mechanical properties of a soil are strongly influenced by its particle size distribution. Where σ The effect of dry density of tailings was investigated under a constant strain rate of 0.2/min. For uniaxial compressive strength For deformation modulus Where The moisture content is a key parameter of the physical and mechanical properties of frozen tailings. Tailings are man-made soils that are usually three-phase composites of solid mineral particles, pore water, and pore air. When the soil temperature drops below 0 For uniaxial compressive strength, For the deformation modulus, Strain rate may influence the mechanical properties of frozen tailings. The loading rate-dependence of compressive strength and deformation modulus of frozen tailings was investigated under four strain rates of 0.05, 0.1, 0.15, and 0.2/min. The deformation modulus of frozen tailings is exponentially related to strain rate, as shown in The existence of ice particles has an impact on this property of frozen tailings. With the decrease of strain rate, the ice in frozen tailings, especially the ice at the mineral grain contact points, exhibits slow plastic flow and creep properties. The capacity of frozen tailings restricting external force increases with the increase of strain rate, and the failure patterns of frozen tailings samples change from fragile failure to plastic failure. The failure strain of the frozen tailings is corresponding to the strain at point C (see A series of uniaxial compressive tests were conducted on frozen tailings at a temperature of − (1) Three failure patterns of the tailings samples were observed in the uniaxial compression tests. They are inclined plane shear failure, lateral tensile failure, and composite failure. Further, the average particle size, dry density, and strain rate significantly influence the failure patterns. (2) The stress-strain curves of frozen tailings under uniaxial compression have the following typical deformation stages: linear strain hardening, nonlinear strain hardening, and nonlinear strain softening. During the deformation stage of nonlinear strain hardening, slight slanting and longitudinal micro-cracks were initially observed on the surfaces of samples. The number of these micro-cracks becomes greater with the increase of vertical or axial stress. In the softening stage, the micro-cracks on the sample surface were observed to penetrate into the internal zone and amalgamated to form larger macro-cracks. Partial fractures occur in the sample along with slippage and finally cause the sample failure. (3) Both uniaxial compressive strength and deformation modulus of frozen tailings are closely related to average particle size, dry density, moisture content, and strain rate. It was found that the uniaxial compressive strength of frozen tailings is related logarithmically to average particle size, exponentially to dry density, linearly to moisture content and parabolically to strain rate. The deformation modulus of frozen tailings is related logarithmically to average particle size, exponentially to dry density, parabolically to moisture content, and exponentially to strain rate. The authors are very grateful to Dr. Ryan Madeley and anonymous reviewers for their valuable comments and suggestions. This research was funded by the