Highly porous, 0.1–1.5 mm thick fibrous amorphous silica (FAS) meshes with 500 ± 200 nm fiber diameters were prepared from the precursor fibers made by a high-yield free-surface alternating field electrospinning (AFES) process. A combination of mild thermal and pressure treatment of the fibrous precursor material before the calcination step was used to tailor the mechanical and transport properties of the resulting FAS structures. Compression of the as-spun material determined the resulting porosity, effective fiber diameter, and microarchitecture of the FAS structures when calcined between 600 and 1000 °C. Flexible FAS meshes and membranes revealed the tensile strength and modulus up to 1.4 MPa and 580 MPa, respectively, and Darcy'S permeability coefficient in a range of 1.2 × 10−12–1.6 × 10−11 m2. Taking into consideration the compression-dependent effective fiber diameter, the permeability of compressed FAS membranes fitted the models developed for two-dimensional fibrous layer architectures with partial fiber alignment within the stacked layers.Fibrous materials prepared by electrospinning have been demonstrated as promising membrane materials for many demanding applications in filtration, separation, adsorption, catalytic, and other processes [ Almost all polymeric, inorganic and composite electrospun fibrous materials are prepared from polymeric liquid precursors [ In recent years, many nano- and micro-fibrous inorganic membrane structures have been fabricated for different purposes from electrospun precursors, including ceramic [ Amorphous silica and silica-based fibrous materials account for a large fraction of research on inorganic membranes made from electrospun precursors. For example, Wang et al. [ The fabrication of inorganic fibrous membranes, in particular silica-based, from electrospun precursors faces many challenges associated with the preparation and calcination of precursor materials, control of mechanical and transport properties, structure modification and functionality, as well as with fabrication productivity and cost. Both the evaporation of solvent during the precursor fiber formation and decomposition of the precursor components during calcination affect the microstructure of the final inorganic fibers and can lead to porous fibers and microcracks resulting in a brittle fibrous assembly with low strength. Most precursor materials to prepare fibrous amorphous silica have been made by using a capillary needle direct-current (DC) electrospinning. The process provides good control of the precursor fiber composition, diameter, textural properties, and assemblage but it is very slow [ The current study presents the first results on the mechanical properties and air permeability of highly porous fibrous amorphous silica (FAS) meshes and membranes fabricated from precursor fibrous material prepared by a high-yield free-surface alternating field electrospinning (AFES) process. This electrospinning technique generates dense fibrous flows where the propagating fibers carry almost no electric charge [ The precursor for nanofibrous silica was based on tetraethoxysilane (TEOS, Si(OC The precursor solution was delivered to the fiber-generating electrode of a free surface alternating field electrospinning (AFES) apparatus [ Fourier Transform Infrared (FTIR) spectra of calcined amorphous silica fibers were recorded with Vertex 70 FTIR spectrometer (Bruker Optics) in transmission mode using an average of 32 scans and a resolution of 4 cm X-ray diffraction (XRD) patterns of nanofibrous amorphous silica were obtained using a PANalytical X'Pert Pro MPD diffractometer (Cu Kα tube operated at 40 kV and 45 mA, the Bragg–Brentano geometry, PANalytical X'Celerator detector). Data were acquired over the range of 5–90° 2θ using the step of 0.0167° and dwelling time of 27 s. Crushed samples were pressed into zero-background silicon holders and rotated during the measurements to minimize the possibility of preferred orientation effects. The Scherrer equation [ The fiber diameter, surface morphology, and arrangement in calcined FAS meshes were investigated by scanning electron microscopy (field-emission scanning electron microscope FEI Quanta 650 FE-SEM). SEM imaging was done in secondary electron mode, at an accelerating voltage of 15 kV, electron probe current 2 μA, and a chamber pressure of 1 × 10 Tensile moduli and strength of FAS meshes were determined using a custom made microtensile tester based on DFG35-10 force gauge (1.0 mN resolution, 1 N load cell, Omega Engineering, Inc.) and motorized ThorLab MT1-Z8 precision stage (100 nm minimum step). The data were corrected for the load cell deflection and initial position of the stage. At least 5 specimens were cut from random locations along and across each FAS mesh (~2.5 × 11 cm Porosity of FAS meshes was evaluated according to the formula. Air flow permeability of nanofibrous amorphous silica membranes was determined according to Darcy's law [ The preparation of fibrous assemblies in AFES process differs from traditional constant voltage DC-electrospinning. The propagation of generated precursor fibers in AFES relies on a strong ionic wind phenomenon [ It has been noticed that by applying ~10 kPa pressure to as-spun fibrous precursor meshes they can be compressed to ~12% of their initial thickness. When pressure is removed, the material recovers to ~65% of its initial thickness. It required at least twice as much pressure to obtain the same compression of the 600 °C calcined FAS meshes. However, calcined fibrous meshes recover to 85% of their initial thickness. When the fibrous precursor material was warm-pressed, the compressed meshes showed much smaller thickness recovery when the load was removed. This allowed a series of FAS meshes with mass densities between 0.015 ± 0.004 and 0.22 ± 0.002 g/cm XRD patterns of calcined fibrous material revealed a broad characteristic peak that indicates an amorphous silica structure with the presence of a short-range order in atomic clusters ( SEM analysis of the both non-compressed and compressed FAS meshes ( Uniaxial tensile tests of FAS meshes indicated a strong dependence of the tensile strength on the material density ( The behavior of FAS meshes during the tensile tests is demonstrated in The tensile moduli of FAS meshes were calculated from the linear section of the stress-strain curve to establish the scaling relationship between the modulus and density of the material calcined at different temperatures. Similarly, the tensile strength-density scaling relationship was determined from the experimental stress-strain curves using tensile stress at the failure. The results ( Air transport properties of circular FAS membranes cut from fibrous meshes also strongly depended on the degree of compression of the precursor material. Low-density FAS membranes (porosity above 98.0%) can withstand a maximum pressure gradient Δ Examples of the dependence of air permeability of FAS membranes on the pressure gradient are given in The Darcy's permeability coefficient Combining these two equations and using the experimental maximum To validate the trends observed in The results of this study demonstrate that the highly porous fibrous amorphous silica meshes and membranes with controlled mechanical strength and air permeability can be efficiently prepared from the precursor fibers produced by a high-yield free-surface AFES process. Both the high density of the propagating fibrous flows and fiber bundling can influence the structure of the collected fibrous assemblies and their subsequent processing into the fibrous amorphous silica. It has been shown that the mechanical and transport properties of FAS membranes can be tailored by using a combination of mild thermal and pressure treatment of the precursor fibrous meshes before the calcination step. The degree of the precursor material's compression determines the resulting porosity, effective fiber diameter, and microarchitecture of the calcined FAS meshes and membranes. The 0.1–1.5 mm thick FAS membranes are flexible and tend to compress further under the flow of gas, which results in lower air permeability numbers when the pressure drop across the membrane increases. The latter effect is reduced when the membranes were below 93% porosity. When the porosity-dependent change in effective fiber diameter is considered, the permeability of fabricated membranes follows the models developed for two-dimensional fibrous architectures with some degree of fiber alignment within the stacked layers. The calcination temperature of the FAS membrane seems to have both a moderate effect on the mechanical performance and little effect on air flow permeability. The attained porosity, tensile modulus, strength, and flow permeability numbers of the prepared FAS membranes make them suitable for many microfiltration applications. Furthermore, a combination of the high-yield AFES process with an appropriate intermediate thermal and pressure treatment procedure of as-spun materials can be a promising approach for the fabrication of many porous nano- and micro-fibrous glass, ceramic, and other structures. The authors declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this paper. This work has been supported by the