The present communication reports the main findings of an investigation that has been conducted in order to examine the ductility of both the AISI 4130 and 52100 steel grades, in a wide range of temperatures, spanning from room temperature up to 1250°C, deformed in tension at strain rates of approximately 0.005s−
                     1. The ductility of the investigated alloys has been determined employing two different methodologies. The first one is based on the classical definition of this property, as determined from the reduction in the cross sectional area of the tensile specimen after fracture. The second method, which is proposed in this work, is based on the measurement of the energy under the engineering stress-strain curve and the decomposition of the total deformation energy into the uniform plastic and non-uniform or fracture energy components. Complementary axisymmetric compression tests have also been carried out in the temperature range of 600°Cto 900°C, in order to determine the strain related to the onset of dynamic recrystallization (DRX) at temperatures above 800°C, as well as the strain corresponding to the occurrence of necking at these temperatures. The ductility values determined from both methods are observed to increase from approximately 10–80% when the testing temperature increases from room temperature to 1200°C. Both measurements are also observed to agree up to temperatures of about 600°C. Also, it has been determined that above this temperature, the ductility values derived from the energy criterion are somewhat higher than those computed from the reduction in the cross section area of the specimens. It has been shown that the onset of DRX gives rise to an improvement in the ductility of both steels, which is also related to a significant increase in the strain for the beginning of necking. The advantage of the energy criterion, in comparison with that based on the area reduction after fracture, is discussed.Stroke, mm Force, Work hardening rate, Effective plastic stress, Effective plastic strain, 1 Initial cross section area of the specimen, specimen cross section area just before fracture, Total deformation energy, Homogeneous deformation energy, Ultimate stress, Engineering strain corresponding to ultimate stress, 1 Engineering strain corresponding to fracture, 1 Engineering strain corresponding to fracture (ideal ductile alloy), 1 Yield stress, Hot ductility criterion based on the plastic strain energy, Plastic energy involved in the necking–failure step, Strain increment at fracture (ideal ductile alloy), 1 Modified hot ductility criterion based on the plastic strain energy, Fraction of the specimen gage length at necking, 1 Specimen gage length at necking, Gage length fraction subjected to a non-homogenous deformation, Cone height, Hypothetical gage length at fracture, Steady-state stress value, The AISI 4130 and 52100-type steels are commonly used for manufacturing some industrial products like oil and gas tubes and pipes, tubes for power generation and automotive or rolling stock tubes. Also, these steel grades are employed in the production of seamless tubes, which have many advantages in comparison with the welded ones for the fabrication of heavy hollow industrial components. They also allow a more efficient section design without heat affected zones and therefore, they are less sensitive to induced problems by local corrosion effects. Seamless steel tubes can be manufactured by means of different processes but most of them are produced by employing a cross roll piercing operation with the use of a piercing mandrel for the hot drilling step (Plug rolling mill process), followed by a second forming stage (Pilger rolling process). The advantages and particularities of this process have already been reviewed by different authors In this paper, the flow stress curves of the AISI 4130 and 52100 steels up to 1250  Monotonic uniaxial tensile and axisymmetric compression tests have been performed, employing a Gleeble 3500 thermomechanical system. Concerning the tensile tests, the heating procedure gives rise to a longitudinal thermal gradient, which must be adjusted in order to obtain an appropriate gauge length, where the temperature of the cylindrical samples is kept constant. A short holding time is employed in order to achieve an homogeneous temperature in the testing section of interest. During the hot axisymmetric compression tests the temperature field within the samples can be much better controlled, due to the use of insulated dies. Tests were performed from room temperature up to 1250  Both the engineering and effective stress-strain curves were determined from the stroke The change in the work hardening rate (WH) The first methodology employed for the determination of the hot ductility values was based on the classical concept of the percentage of reduction in area (% RA) of the tensile specimens where The initial cross section area was determined from the mean value of the initial diameter of the specimens. However, given the irregular shape of the final cross section, stereoscopic macroscopic measurements were required in order to determine the final diameter after fracture. The second methodology employed for the computation of the ductility is based on the plastic strain energy determined from the engineering stress-strain curves and corresponds to an original criterion proposed in the present communication. The method is founded on the energy required for the deformation of a tensile specimen and consumed during damage and failure. Such an energy can be readily computed from the numerical integration of each stress-strain curve, determined from the tensile tests. As indicated above, the total energy, with Accordingly, by normalizing the inhomogeneous strain energy ( The change in the average ductility values, computed by means of both criteria, with deformation temperature is shown in Thus, by considering the shape of the ( The expression of the modified energy criterion Thus, Therefore, the hypothetical gage length at fracture can be expressed as:  Previous investigations on the hot ductility of steels have pointed out that at temperatures above 800 In order to validate these results, a number of axisymmetric compression tests were carried out on samples of the AISI 4130 steel at temperatures of 800 and 900 Since large plastic strains were achieved during the compression curves, the steady-state stress value Therefore, it can be concluded that, during hot deformation of steels, above approximately 800 In the present work an original ductility criterion, easy to implement and efficient, has been introduced. This criterion has been applied to a number of stress-strain curves determined from samples of AISI 4130 and 52100 steel grades deformed in a range of temperatures and the derived ductility values have been compared to those obtained from the classical ductility criterion based the reduction in area. The comparison shows that both methods provide similar results up to temperatures of approximately 600 The authors gratefully acknowledge the support of the present research work by the VALLOUREC Research Center France and the International Campus on Safety and Intermodality in Transportation, Nord-Pas-de-Calais Region France, European Community, Regional Delegation for Research and Technology, and the French Ministry of Higher Education and Research.