Zinc and lead recovery from zinc plant residue (ZPR) has been investigated. The residue is discarded as a cake from a Waelz kiln processing zinc–lead carbonate ores. The zinc plant residue containing 11.3% Zn, 24.6% Pb, and 8.3% Fe was blended with H2SO4 and subjected to a process comprising roasting, water leaching, and finally NaCl leaching. The effect of roasting and leaching parameters on the zinc recovery was first studied. About 86% Zn was recovered after roasting at 200 °C for 30 min with an equal weight ratio of H2SO4/ZPR followed by leaching at 25 °C for 60 min with a pulp density of 20% solids. For lead recovery, the residual solid after zinc extraction was subjected to NaCl leaching. At a pulp density of 20 g/L, about 89% Pb was dissolved in 200 g/L NaCl at 25 °C in 10 min.Zinc is primarily produced from sulphidic ores; however, some zinc is produced from oxide-carbonate ores and different secondary resources such as zinc ash, zinc dross, flue dusts of electric arc furnace, leach residues, etc. Pyrometallurgical and hydrometallurgical routes or their combination can be employed for treating secondary materials. The hydrometallurgical processes are regarded as more eco-friendly for treating such materials having a low zinc content ( In the most common hydrometallurgical zinc process, ZnO-rich calcine is first produced from sulphide or oxide-carbonate concentrates and then leached with hot sulphuric acid solution. After liquid/solid separation, the pregnant solution is purified and electrowon for metallic zinc production. In some plants (e.g., Çinkur, Kayseri, Turkey), the zinc leach residue is stockpiled for future lead recovery. These residues are considered as hazardous wastes due to their significant zinc, lead, and cadmium content. In fact, it has been shown that residues left after zinc extraction pose potential environmental risks because they exhibit significant heavy metals solubilization ( Due to the extraction of zinc and formation of insoluble lead sulphate during sulphuric acid leaching, lead is concentrated in this residue. However, a significant part of zinc remains in the form of zinc ferrite (ZnO.Fe Besides the alkaline and acid extraction techniques mentioned above, some pyrometallurgical recovery processes ( In this study, zinc and lead recovery from zinc plant residue (ZPR) obtained from a plant using a Waelz kiln was investigated. For this purpose, optimum conditions for zinc and lead extraction using a two-stage process were determined. In the first stage, ZPR was roasted, after blending with concentrated H Zinc plant residue (ZPR) was obtained from Çinkur Plant located at Kayseri, Turkey. Prior to use in this study, the ZPR sample was washed, homogenized, dried, and sieved to obtain a −74-μm (−200 mesh) fraction. Its mineralogical structure was identified by X-ray diffraction analysis. The ZPR samples were analyzed for zinc, lead, iron, calcium, cadmium, copper, chromium, and cobalt using an atomic absorption spectrometer (Perkin-Elmer, 370) after LiBO Initially, H An appropriate amount of H The effects of various parameters such as roasting temperature (50–900 °C), roasting time (5–240 min), H After water leaching, the secondary zinc plant residue (SZPR) was subjected to NaCl leaching to investigate the recovery of lead. The effects of NaCl concentration (50–300 g/l), SZPR pulp density (5–300 g/L), leaching temperature (25–80 °C), and time (5–120 min) were investigated. All experiments were performed in duplicate and the mean values were considered. Some of the experiments were repeated several times in order to ascertain the reproducibility. The results were found to vary within ±5%. The chemical composition of ZPR is given in The effect of increasing the weight ratio of sulphuric acid/ZPR in the slurry on the extraction of metals from ZPR at 25 °C is shown in  As a result of these preliminary studies, it can concluded that zinc could not be efficiently leached from ZPR or preroasted ZPR by using an ordinary sulphuric acid leaching process and that decomposition of zinc ferrite appears necessary for satisfactory metal recovery. Also, encapsulation of zinc oxide or zinc ferrite in a lead sulphate matrix may be another reason for poor zinc recovery. In order to decompose the ferrite structure and thus obtain high zinc recovery, the ZPR was subjected to roasting after mixing with H As seen from It can be stated that the liquid H It was found that the lead concentrations in all leaching solutions were low due to the limited solubility of lead sulphate. Because lead can be regarded as an impurity in zinc solutions, the low value of lead can be considered as an advantage. On the other hand, the residue obtained from the H As After determining the optimum roasting conditions, the optimum leaching conditions on the recovery of metals from ZPR were investigated. It was found that the recovery of zinc and iron increased to about 85% and 50%, respectively, with a contact time up to 60 min, and thereafter the extraction remained nearly constant. Similarly, the leaching temperature between 25 and 80 °C had no significant effect on the recovery of zinc or the solubility of lead sulphate. Thus, optimum conditions for zinc recovery from ZPR by a process comprising sulphuric acid addition–roasting–water leaching were determined as H The chemical composition of secondary zinc plant residue (SZPR) obtained under optimum conditions of zinc recovery shows that it contains about 30.6% Pb, 1.6% Zn, 4.7% Fe, and 7.3% S. The effects of NaCl concentration and solid/liquid ratio on the recovery of zinc and lead from SZPR were investigated in a set of experiments whose results are given in The reaction between lead sulphate in the SZPR and chloride ions in the solution can be depicted as In the presence of high chloride concentrations, lead chloride subsequently converts to PbCl Leaching times up to 120 min and temperatures up to 80 °C did not influence lead and zinc recoveries significantly. Thus, leaching for 10 min at 25 °C was sufficient for >90% lead recovery. Significant amounts of zinc and lead could be recovered from zinc plant residue (ZPR) by using a two-stage recovery process comprising (1) roasting of the ZPR–H Further investigation is needed on the chemical and mineralogical characterization and stabilization of the final residue before it can be disposed. This study was supported by the Research Foundation of Firat University under Project No. FÜNAF-609 and Turkish Republic Prime Ministry-The State Planning Organisation under Project No. DPT-97K120990.