The attachment of bubbles onto a collecting surface plays a critical role in many industrial processes. Here, the bubble behaviour is crucially influenced by the presence of surface active agents, where the ionic surfactants are the most common agents. The ionic surfactants very often contain contaminants which, even in trace amounts, could unexpectedly influence the bubble adhesion. This work is focused on an experimental study of bubble adhesion onto the hydrophobic surface in solutions of two ionic surface-active agents (DTAB and SDS) of pure and technical grade purity. The diameters of the three-phase contact line together with bubble dynamic contact angles, dynamic surface tension and dynamic drop contact angles are measured. It was observed that the contaminants decrease the ability of bubbles to attach to solid surfaces when compared with the mono-surfactant solution. The influence of contaminants is crucial below the critical micelle concentration of the main surfactant and it may even happen that the capture of bubbles is avoided.Ionic surfactants are the largest group of surfactants used today with more than 75% of total worldwide consumption. Within the anionic group there are sulphate esters, sulfonic acid salts, carboxylate soaps and detergents and phosphoric acid esters. The sulphate ester family is one of the most significant due to the sodium dodecyl sulphate (SDS); the most widely studied and used surfactant. Cationic surfactants are important in cosmetics as antiseptic agents, as fungicides, germicides, fabric softeners and hair conditioners. The sources of hydrophobic groups are mostly natural fatty acids or derivatives from petrochemical compounds; in all cases they contain nitrogen. One of the most studied cationic surfactants is dodecyltrimethylammonium bromide (DTAB). The ionic surfactants used both in industrial applications and in scientific studies, as a rule, contain some admixtures of non-ionic surfactants or other contaminants. The principal organic contaminants are homologous alkyl sulphates, Flotation is a separation method based on the ability of some solids to remain attached to the gas-liquid interface. The attachment of bubbles onto a collecting surface plays a critical role in flotation, which is utilized for the separation of mineral ores, coal or plastic materials. An important aspect of flotation is how the bubbles attach onto the particles and how the surfactants influence the expansion of the three-phase contact line between the bubble and the material for which little is currently known about The paper presents results on the influence of different ionic surfactants on the kinetics of the three phase contact (TPC) line formation on a hydrophobic solid surface. Experiments were carried out in pure and technical grade solutions of cationic Surfactants SDS and DTAB were purchased from Sigma-Aldrich Chemical Company. They were used as received. Pure SDS with declared purity A silanized glass was used as a model hydrophobic surface. The silanization method is based on the covalent attachment of functional organosilanes to silica or glass. Silanes are believed to react with the exposed hydroxyl groups of silanols on the glass surface and, under optimal conditions, they form a uniform monolayer. In our project the common type of silanized glass was used: the Silanization solution I was supplied by Sigma-Aldrich (5% solution of dimethyldichlorosilane in heptane, CAS No. 75-78-5). The glass material (microscopic slides) was cleaned in a boiling mixture of sulphuric acid and hydrogen peroxide (1:1) for 1 The static surface tension was measured at 25 A Cohu monochrome CCD camera with a 752 The experimental measurements were performed in a special glass flotation cell (50 Images were evaluated using the image analysis software NIS-Elements and MatLab software, calculations were performed using the MatLab software. Between 3 and 5 series (of desired bubble size) were generated for each surfactant concentration and each series consisted of 10 measurements. The resulting diameters of the TPC line ( In  Above the CMC, the micelles that are present in the solution have a certain lifetime for break-up. If the micelles are stable entities with long lifetimes, the molecules in the micelles may not be available for adsorption. Consequently, the concentration of molecules diffusing to the interface will be equal to the CMC, regardless of the bulk concentration of the surfactant. When contaminants are present in the solution, the CMC is lower. The increase in surface tension of the unpurified surfactant above CMC could be caused by the solubilisation of dodecanol in SDS micelles and the consequent desorption of dodecanol from the bubble surface. To conclude this part, the significant effect of contaminants on surface tension was confirmed. This effect is dominant for concentrations bellow CMC. The dependence of the advancing contact angle (sessile drop on silanized glass) for solutions of LP-DTAB and LP-SDS as a function of time is illustrated in In pure water for a bubble diameter smaller than 1 When the equilibrium drop and bubble contact angles for identical solutions ( The bubble attachment determines the effectiveness of the bubble-particle interaction process. In our model situation, where a bubble attaches to the horizontal solid surface, the bubble adhesion efficiency could be expressed by the equilibrium contact angle. The efficiency is zero for the zero contact angle and increases to 1 with increasing contact angle. For a stable bubble position, fast adhesion velocity and high contact angles are needed. Here, the close relationship between the time course of the TPC line diameter and the dynamic contact angle is considered Experimental results are illustrated in The process of bubble adhesion in pure water is the fastest. The stable bubble position (expressed as 95% of equilibrium The bubble adhesion is significantly influenced by the presence of contaminants. The period between the bubble creation on the capillary and the final collision takes a few seconds. This period is long enough to allow contaminants to approach the gas-liquid interface and influence the surface tension. In the case of contaminated SDS, the decrease of surface tension due to the SDS presence is fast and the equilibrium is reached within 1 When describing the influence of contaminants on the bubble adhesion onto the hydrophobic surface, we must firstly consider the surfactant concentrations on s-l, s-g and l-g interfaces and secondly the concentration gradients near the moving three-phase interface. The aim of this work is not the theoretical description of these processes at microscale level, but rather the mapping of fields where contaminants significantly affect the behaviour of bubbles and can unexpectedly influence the interaction of bubbles and particles. It can be stated generally that contaminants decrease the bubble adhesion efficiency when compared with mono-surfactant solutions. The contact angle is reduced by 5° to 15° and the TPC expansion is slower. This leads to the lower bubble stability of capture due to the minor contact area. In the range 0.8 CMC to CMC the influence of contaminants is crucial. The ratio The detection of contaminant influence is commonly tricky. The simple measurement of surface tension, e.g. the ring method, could be misleading because the contaminants affect the surface tension after a longer time period. Therefore, the dynamic methods (pendant drop, maximum bubble pressure) are more useful. Also, the comparison of drop contact angles for differently concentrated solutions (below and above CMC) could give a quick guideline. The velocity of TPC line expansion was calculated as In the present work we have analysed the influence of ionic surfactants on dynamics of bubble adhesion onto the hydrophobic surface. Here, the enormous influence of possible contaminants was observed. For pure, mono-component ionic surfactants, we observed a linear dependence between the surfactant concentration and bubble adhesion efficiency, which could be expressed by surface tension, bubble contact angle or the TPC line diameter. The surfactants with lower purity are usually used both in industrial applications and experiments at the pilot level. The most common contaminant is dodecanol. Its concentration in the monolayer reaches a maximum below the CMC and in case of bubble lifetimes longer than few seconds the contaminants are more surface active than the main component. The contaminants generally decrease the bubble adhesion efficiency when compared with the mono-surfactant solution. Their influence is crucial in the range 0.8 CMC to CMC. Here, the surface tension is decreased below the value typical for CMC, the bubble contact angles are likewise lower and the velocity of TPC line expansion slows significantly. It may even happen that the capture of bubbles is avoided. This work was supported by the Ministry of Education, Youth and Sports (project LD 13025). Support from COST action MP1106 is also gratefully acknowledged. The experiments with dynamic surface tension have been performed in the Institute of Chemical Process Fundamentals of the Czech Academy of Science and we thank Dr. Jiří Vejražka for his support.