Ni–Fe base superalloy, Inconel 718, was processed through powder metallurgy (P/M) hot isostatic pressing (HIP) route. In order to balance the strength and ductility, the HIPed material was given the standard heat treatment, viz. solution treatment at 980°C for 1 h/water quenched (WQ) to room temperature and a two-step ageing treatment consisting of 720°C for 8 h/furnace cooling (FC) at 55°C h−1 to 620°C and holding at 620°C for 8 h before air cooling (AC) to room temperature. Optical microscopy and scanning electron microscopy (SEM) studies on the heat treated alloy have shown a homogeneous microstructure with fine grain size (25 μm) along with the presence of prior particle boundary (PPB) networks. Transmission electron microscopy (TEM) on the heat treated material has revealed the presence of oxides, MC carbides and δ-precipitates at the grain boundaries and a uniform precipitation of fine γ″ and γ′ strengthening phases in the matrix. Tensile and stress rupture tests were performed on the heat treated material. While the yield strength (YS) and ultimate tensile strength (UTS) of the HIPed and heat treated alloy at room temperature and 650°C were comparable to those of conventionally processed wrought IN 718, its ductility was lower. The stress rupture life of the HIPed alloy improved marginally due to heat treatment and met the minimum specification requirement of life hours but the rupture ductility was found to be inferior to that of the wrought material. The fractography of the failed samples has revealed the transgranular ductile mode of fracture in the as-solution treated alloy, while intergranular mode of failure with the decohesion of PPBs occurred more predominantly in the aged condition. This change of fracture mode with ageing treatment shows the ductility dependence on the relative strength of the matrix and PPBs. The TEM studies on the deformed alloy have revealed that the brittle oxides and carbides at the prior particle boundaries coupled with the fine γ″ and γ′-precipitates in the matrix are responsible for low ductility at 650°C. The investigations of the present study have led to better understanding of the structure–property relationships in HIP+heat treated alloy 718 and suggest that the standard heat treatment recommended for wrought IN 718 is not suitable for HIPed alloy and has to be modified to realise optimum properties.Inconel 718 is a nickel–iron base superalloy strengthened primarily by ordered body centred tetragonal (BCT) γ″-Ni By use of P/M(HIP) route a near net shaped integral turbine rotor from AISI 304 stainless steel has successfully been developed in our laboratory. The steel in the as-HIPed condition has shown the strength and ductility values much better than that of wrought material. Therefore, the as-HIPed components could be used in the impulse type turbine of liquid propulsion engines of aerospace vehicles. The HIP technology developed for the steel components was found to be ideally suited for producing the integral turbine rotors with the desired properties and substantial cost savings. In view of the above advantages the development of a very similar component from a nickel base superalloy Inconel 718 via HIP route has been undertaken. The integral turbine rotors of alloy 718 are proposed for use in reactive type turbine of space vehicles with short service life but subjected to high temperature and high stresses. Therefore, the material specified for this component is a nickel base superalloy instead of austenitic stainless steel. Before making the full size component the prealloyed powder of IN 718 was consolidated to its near theoretical density by HIPing at 1200 The chemical composition and physical properties of argon atomised alloy 718 powder used in this study are given in The microstructure of the as-HIPed alloy 718 is shown in The HIP+solution treated alloy was given the two-step ageing treatment as per the standard schedule. In order to illustrate the morphological characteristics of the strengthening phases in the fully heat treated alloy, thin foil micrographs were obtained from the matrix. The tensile properties of alloy 718 in the as-HIPed, solution treated and aged conditions at room temperature are given The tensile properties of the aged material evaluated at 650 The stress rupture properties of the as-HIPed and HIP+heat treated materials were evaluated at 650 The fracture surfaces of the solution treated as well as the aged materials were examined in SEM. The solution treated material showed fully dimpled rupture ( To understand the low ductility of the heat treated alloy as compared with the as-HIPed alloy, TEM studies have been carried out on the gauge portion of the tensile samples.  The structure and properties of the HIPed alloy have been reported recently by us elsewhere Wrought products of alloy 718 intended for HS applications at intermediate temperatures ∼650 In order to produce still finer grain size, a direct age (DA) processing technique has, therefore, been established for alloy 718 The precipitates found in the matrix and at the grain boundaries of HIP+heat treated alloy 718 are very similar to those of conventionally processed wrought material; except that that the presence of PPB networks in this alloy. These networks are an undesirable microstructural feature of the HIPed nickel base superalloys and their presence has been attributed to the high oxygen content of the prealloyed powder Solution treatment at 980 Thin foils from the HIP+heat treated alloy were examined by TEM, however, the strengthening precipitates could not easily be resolved in bright field image( The tensile properties of the alloy in the as-HIPed, solution treated and aged conditions were compared to correlate the strength and ductility values with microstructure. The strength values (YS and UTS) of HIPed alloy decreased drastically after solution treatment while there has been a substantial improvement in its ductility ( The drop observed in the ductility of aged material clearly correlates with the fracture mode associated with the failed specimens, which showed the predominance of fracture along the prior particle boundaries ( The stress rupture properties of the alloy showed a marginal improvement in rupture life due to the heat treatment as per the standard schedule ( Hot isostatically pressed Inconel 718 superalloy heat treated as per the AMS 5662 standard schedule for wrought material has shown a homogeneous phase structure with a fine grain size coupled with the PPB networks. The uniform precipitation of γ″ and γ′-phases during heat treatment has resulted in substantial improvement of YS and slight improvement in UTS in HIPed alloy and were found to be better than those of wrought IN 718. However, the presence of brittle oxides and carbides at the PPBs coupled with fine γ″+γ′ precipitates in the matrix have led to a lower ductility. The stress rupture life and ductility of the alloy have also improved marginally after heat treatment and has got the minimum expected life for wrought heat treated IN 718, however, the rupture ductility was found to be much less than the specified value. This suggest that the recommended heat treatment for wrought alloy is not suitable for HIP processed alloy and has to be modified to realise optimum properties. The authors gratefully acknowledge the Defence Research and Development Organisation (DRDO) for providing the financial support for this study. The authors would like to thank Dr D. Banerjee, Director DMRL for his constant encouragement for this study. Thanks are also due to Y.N. Chary, P. Ravinder Rao, P. Raja Rao, John David, Dr K. Satya Parasd and D.G. Deshpande for their technical support in the experimental work.