Ceramic nanoparticles produced by comminution are introduced homogeneously during accumulative roll bonding (ARB) in aluminium AA1050A by airgun spraying from a stabilized aqueous suspension. In the so-produced nanoparticle-reinforced ultrafine-grained material, acceleration of microstructural evolution during the early ARB cycles as well as reduced grain sizes at higher cycles are observed, both caused by additional local straining around the embedded nanoparticles and accompanied by further strengthening. The presented method of nanoparticle application allows homogeneous as well as graded particle distribution. The material used in this study is aluminium of commercial purity ⩾99.5% (equal to AA1050A). Pure aluminium is used here as model material for ARB as solid solution strengthening and the formation of precipitates can be neglected. Before ARB processing the material was recrystallized at 773 The ARB process was carried out using sheets with a size of 300 The spatial distribution of nanoparticles in the finally produced UFG sheet is highly controllable by the applied method. This controllability offers the possibility of functionalization, grading and structuring of the reinforcement material on a small scale. Hence, tailored local material properties can be designed by this method. In this study a homogeneous distribution of particles in the sheet plane was created, while perpendicular to the sheet plane a strongly inhomogeneous distribution is observed (see ARB itself leads to a strengthening of the material by grain refinement. In the following, the additional strengthening by nanoparticles is discussed. Compared to the recrystallized starting material, the ARB process leads to a strengthening by a factor of about 2–4 after eight cycles The contribution of the particles to a volumetric strengthening mechanism following a linear rule of mixture of strength is only relevant at higher volume fractions than present in the materials discussed here. It amounts to 0.35 The microstructural reason for the observed additional strengthening caused by particle reinforcement was found to be related to additional local straining around the ceramic nanoparticles during the ARB process, leading to two effects related to grain refinement (see The observed strengthening effect was found to depend on several process parameters. As demonstrated in Besides the dependence of the reinforcement effect on the particle size, a clear dependence on the particle type is also observed. While, in aqueous suspensions, aluminium oxide leads to a substantial improvement in the ultimate tensile strength, other applied particles, namely ZrO However, peel tests performed according to the method described by Alizadeh and Paydar The observed accelerated grain refinement leading to accelerated strengthening of nanoparticle-reinforced ARB materials as well as reduced grain sizes after a large number of ARB cycles are explained by additional local strain around the finely dispersed, hard nanoparticles in the material. This local strain, combined with redundant shear strain at the sheet surfaces introduced by surface forces during roll bonding Besides the observed considerable additional strengthening effect caused by nanoparticle reinforcement, a new method of controlled and homogeneous nanoparticle distribution during the ARB process is presented which enables the production of functionally graded and tailored materials. 