This paper presents a case for practical application of the GAMM method, which has been developed and published by the authors (Barberá L., Crespo A. and Viveros P.) The GAMM method supports decision-making in the overall maintenance management, through the visualization and graphical analysis of data. In addition, it allows for the identification of anomalous behavior in the equipment analyzed, whether derived from its own operations, maintenance activities, improper use of equipment or even as a result of design errors in the equipment itself. As a basis for analysis, the GAMM method uses a nonparametric estimator of the reliability function using all historical data or, alternatively, part of the history, allowing it to perform an analysis even with limited available data. In the case study developed, GAMM has been used to analyze two slurry pumps in a mining plant located in Chile. Both pumps are part of the same industrial process, which is described in Section 3, and both pumps had a higher failure rate but one more than the other. GAMM identified deficiencies in each of the pumps being studied, thus improving decision-making and problem solving process related to the maintenance of the pumps.
                  Particularly, this work initially provides a description of the GAMM method (Section 1), and, afterwards, it is depicted with special attention the approach to the problem (Section 2). In Section 3, a background of the industrial context is presented. Then, Section 4 shows step by step the application of GAMM method. Finally, results and conclusions are presented in Section 5 where the main improvements obtained are summarized.The development and application of graphic tools that give support and make decisions in the field of operational reliability The GAMM method GAMM method offers practical and relevant information about the effectiveness and efficiency of current maintenance performed to equipment or analyzed system. It is important to mention that this method requires some level of experience in the maintenance area, because there is some implicit qualitative analysis that will depend directly about the interpretation of the quantitative results. With regard to the applicability of this method, it is necessary to clarify that a relatively simple database is required for the diagrams elaboration. GAMM could be applied to any system, considering all variables/data involved and required: cumulative time of intervention, duration of intervention and state of the equipment/system during intervention. To process information, common calculus tools can be used, such as: VBA programming (spreadsheet) that generates a simple algorithm which allows the elaboration of graphics that are part of the support tool presented. This paper presents a real application of GAMM method. In the case study developed, GAMM was used to analyze the existing equipment in a mining plant located in Chile. The detected problem involved two slurry pumps, which form part of the industrial process in the mining plant. Both pumps are part of the same industrial process, which is described in To do this, GAMM method was used considering all available historical data from the database of mining plant itself. GAMM facilitated the process of identifying the root causes of problems and subsequently took the necessary measures to solve them. In mining industry, comminution is a process that is used to reduce the size of an extracted material; it is performed to separate two minerals from each other, or to achieve the optimal size for manipulation of a material. A mineral extracted from a mine inevitably has a wide particle size distribution, in such a situation, the objective of comminution is to reduce the size of the larger fragments down to a uniform small size. Crushing and grinding are the two primary comminution processes. Crushing is normally carried out on ‘run-ofmine' ore, whereas grinding (normally carried out after crushing) may be conducted on dry or slurried material. For the development of the case study, we will use information from a milling plant copper concentrate located in northern Chile, focusing the analysis in the pumping process flow “Slurry” (water+concentrate copper+inert material) to a continuous process of flotation. Specifically, the mining process under consideration in this paper is the transport of slurry from the buffer to hydro-cyclones, which are the previous stage before flotation process. This paper was developed using real information pertaining of this process, which constitutes one of the various operations necessary for the ore purification. In the practical development of this paper, two pumps are considered ( The logic of the processes can be understood by The first process corresponds to the grinding process, which is developed by the main equipment “SAG Mill”, which feeds the accumulation and filtering system “Buffer” with a level of mineral grain size less than ½ This continuous process has as a security mechanism, an alternative to grinding second recirculation line, which is activated in case of failure or the ball mill flotation process “down stream”. The security system is a special flow line (by pass) from the pump “P2” to another parallel line grinding. The case study and application of GAMM are focused on the slurry pump process (P1 and P2), which are essential for the continuity of the process (critical), and are exposed to a high stress job, especially by the transfer characteristics of highly abrasive and corrosive flow, and high solids content and strong acidity. A slurry pump is a rugged heavy duty pump intended for aggressive or abrasive slurry solutions typically found in the mining industry with particles of various sizes. It achieves this by lining the inside of the pump casing as well as the impeller with rubber. Although rubber does eventually wear, the elasticity of its surface allows the hard mineral particles to bounce off thereby reducing what would be otherwise very aggressive erosion. These pumps are used wherever abrasive slurries need to be pumped, especially in the mining industry. The requirement for these types of pumps is typically higher than comparative standard centrifugal pumps. These pumps increase the pressure of liquid and solid particle mixture (aka slurry), through centrifugal force (a rotating impeller) and converts electrical energy into slurry potential and kinetic energy. Slurry pumps are designed to allow the passage of abrasive particles which can be extremely large. Therefore, these pumps need much wider and heavier impellers to accommodate the passage of large particles. Also, they are constructed in special materials to withstand the internal wear caused by the solids. In Historical data required are the following:   Δ Det: state of the equipment/system during the intervention (stopped or not).   When the intervention When the intervention Dispersion diagram: The dispersion diagram Equations: Additionally, GAMM is able to estimate the reliability function, which is calculated using the algorithms based on the nonparametric method of Nelson–Aalen where    Therefore, the estimator of the reliability function (R(t Graphics generation: Considering all variables, the dispersion diagrams are replaced for bubble charts and the GAMM Graphic 1 are generated with the following considerations: the size (diameter) of the bubbles represent the duration of the technical revisions, the color represents the type of maintenance done to the equipment (white—preventative maintenance, gray—corrective maintenance) the outline of each bubble represents the state of the equipment during the revision. Thus, if the bubble has a bold-shaded outline, the value of the variable “Det” is 0, i.e., the revision requires a shutdown of the equipment/system. However, if the bubble has a thin outline, the value of the variable “Det” is 1, i.e., the revision is performed without stopping the machine. The Graphic 2 of GAMM provides further information, from Graphic 1, to show the reliability of the equipment in the instant before the intervention, either corrective or preventive, from Eqs.  Considering the data in The dispersion diagram, as a starting point for any reliability analysis, offers graphic information relative to the tendency of the function The application of the GAMM method integrates a series of variables that are not considered in the rationale of the dispersion diagram previously mentioned Based on the nonparametric method of the Nelson–Aalen Considering all variables, the dispersion diagrams ( Finally, the first GAMM graphic is constructed considering all the features described above ( The comparison of both graphics yields the following information as in Below, Graphic 2 of GAMM ( In pumps P1 and P2, there are no stable reliability values. This means that the data correspond to equipments which have a deficient preventative maintenance plan and/or program. Both pumps show values of reliability that are very changeable over time. Also, it is noted that a large number of corrective interventions are performed during the equipment's periods of high reliability. It is necessary to clarify that Graphic 2 ( GAMM has identified a set of patterns that provide useful information to assist the decision-making process at the operational level. The patterns identified in P1 and P2 are as follows:       One possible cause for the variability observed in the reliability value (Graphic 2, There are also other reasons that may affect the reliability of the equipment, for example, corrective revisions which can be substantially minimized with a program of optimized preventative maintenance, i.e., many of the observed corrective interventions can be a direct result of a poor preventive maintenance program or its poor application. For its part, in P2 a high number of interventions is observed, compared to P1 (Graphic 1, For the analysis, it should be considered the type of equipment analyzed and its operating context. The slurry pumps (P1 and P2) are exposed to a high stress job, especially by the transfer characteristics of highly abrasive and corrosive flow, and high solids content and strong acidity. Moreover, the continuous process under study ( Finally, the GAMM graphics suggest that the possibility that malpractice in the pumps´ operation and/or in the interventions could be another possible cause for the deficiencies listed above. From these assumptions, it is appropriate to perform a study of the existing maintenance program for each pump, which turned out to be the same for both pumps. Learning the maintenance program, analyzing and later identifying possible malpractices were carried out during the operation and maintenance revisions of the slurry pumps (P1 and P2), by those same operators. The existence of poor operational practices is another cause that could provoke the emergence of equipment failures, and those in turn shorten the lifespan and proper functioning of the pumps. For this reason and attending to the hypothesis based on the GAMM method, a qualitative analysis was performed using the information collected on site in different information exchanges with the executive operators of the maintenance and operational tasks. In this way, a collection of malpractices was identified ( Once the information provided by GAMM was compared to the technical information of the pump, the existing maintenance program, and the identified malpractices, we then proceeded by redefining the maintenance program based on the methodology or RCM First of all, an analysis of the different failure modes was made, identifying and prioritizing them according to the frequency or severity of the defect. To do this, we performed a functional analysis of the slurry pumps, a failure mode analysis, and finally, a hierarchical structuring depending on the criticality of its components. In the functional analysis, the equipment was broken down into subsystems, establishing functional relationships between them (functional diagram) and indicating the functions and interactions with operational surroundings. Like the FMECA result, critical subsystems were determined: mechanical seal, inlet and casing liners, PLC control system and shaft coupling, the other subsystems being considered non-critical. On the basis of this ranking for the components of each pump, a new maintenance plan was redefined for each of them. In relation to the proposed objectives, it can be concluded that the application of the GAMM method has determined and graphically characterized the deficiencies of the slurry pump which presented an elevated failure rate, facilitating decision-making and problem solving that has allowed for maximum availability and efficiency in both slurry pumps analyzed. The comparative analysis of the GAMM graphics corresponding to each of the pumps has also determined aspects like: tendency of revisions, deviation in the frequency of preventative revisions, function of reliability, efficiency of the maintenance operations, impact of unavailability, quality of the revisions performed or quality of use and operation of the equipment on the part of the personnel responsible for it. Based on this information, there were a series of hypotheses to search for possible causes of the inefficiency (also other variables were considered such as: equipment in rotation, low quality spare parts or design problems, but all of them were discarded). The final result has been the identification of a combination of existing deficiencies in the operation and maintenance of the slurry pumps (P1 and P2, P1: constant increase in the cumulative number of revisions, an elevated number of corrective revisions (unscheduled) and lower number of interventions than P2. Preventative interventions are also quite time consuming. In addition, the existence of very changeable values of reliability based on time as well as a large number of corrective revisions in periods of high reliability. P2: constant increase in the cumulative number of revisions, higher number of interventions than its counterpart, elevated number of corrective revisions (unscheduled) and existence of very changeable values of reliability based on time as well as a high number of corrective revisions carried out in periods of high reliability. Once the information provided by GAMM is compared to the technical information of the pump, the existing maintenance program and malpractices identified (prior qualitative analysis of the information captured in the field and in different information exchanges with the executive operators of the maintenance and operation tasks) were able to determine the causes of the problems previously identified: Design deficiencies in the maintenance program were detected (frequency and scope). In fact, the same maintenance program was applied to water pumps and slurry pumps, without considering the differences in their operating conditions (input stream). A lack of analysis for the components most critical to the pumps was detected, meaning that there was a maintenance plan for preventive revisions for non-critical parts, unnecessarily affecting the availability of the pumps. One pump (P2) was subjected to a high load during certain time periods, because the security system was a special flow line (by pass) from P2 to another parallel line grinding. This was not considered, the maintenance plan was the same for P1 and P2. The study detected a lack of technical training for personnel responsible for the operation and maintenance of the pumps, and the existence of problems due to inaccessibility of space and necessary tools needed for the execution of revisions (logistical problems). All these factors wasted excessive time dedicated to maintenance tasks. A combination of malpractices was detected, affecting the quality the operation and maintenance work of the pumps. Finally, several measures were adopted to eliminate the causes of the problems previously identified. First, the FMECA analysis (Failure Mode, Effects and Criticality Analysis) and based on the criticality of each subsystem Hierarchization of the components of each slurry pump based on its criticality, i.e., preventive maintenance of critical components, improving the availability of each pump and eliminating unnecessary revisions and thus, the time necessary for them. Full compliance with the new corresponding maintenance program designed for P1 and P2, by those responsible for maintenance, through the development of a specific training program aimed at personnel responsible for operation and maintenance. Development of a new maintenance plan for each pump, P1 and P2, for eliminating the deficiencies in the previous maintenance plan, considering all differences between P1 and P2 (security system) as well as the specific requirements of slurry pumps. Development of a technical formation program for personnel responsible for the maintenance and operation of the pumps, correcting the overall malpractices detected in both the operation and maintenance of the pumps. Elaboration of explanatory technical sheets for each of the preventive maintenance revisions under the maintenance program and implementation of a registry for revisions already performed. Referring to the slurry pumps buffer design, a larger surface inverted-cone type buffer recipient was designed to avoid high intake pressure oscillation. In this case study, GAMM method allowed for the identification of existing deficiencies in each pump under study, supporting the decision-making process and implementation of a new maintenance plan. This research is funded by the Spanish Ministry of Science and Innovation, Project EMAINSYS (DPI2011-22806) “Sistemas Inteligentes de Mantenimiento. Procesos emergentes de E-maintenance para la Sostenibilidad de los Sistemas de Producción”, besides FEDER funds. The research work was performed within the context of iMaPla (Integrated Maintenance Planning), an EU-sponsored project by the Marie Curie Action for International research Staff Exchange Scheme (project acronym PIRSES-GA-2008–230814 iMaPla).