This work presents and discusses the antiwear behaviour of nanoparticle suspensions in a polyalphaolefin (PAO 6). CuO, ZnO and ZrO2 nanoparticles were separately dispersed at 0.5%, 1.0% and 2.0%wt. in PAO 6 using an ultrasonic probe for 2min. AW properties were obtained using a TE53SLIM tribometer with a block-on-ring configuration. Tests were made under a load of 165N, sliding speed of 2m/s and a total distance of 3.066m. Wear surfaces were analysed by scanning electron microscopy (SEM) and energy dispersive spectrometry (EDS) after wear tests. The study led to the following conclusions: all nanoparticle suspensions exhibited reductions in friction and wear compared to the base oil; the suspensions with 0.5% of ZnO and ZrO2 had the best general tribological behaviour, exhibiting high friction and wear reduction values even at low deposition levels on the wear surface; CuO suspensions showed the highest friction coefficient and lowest wear per nanoparticle content of 2%; and the antiwear mechanism of nanoparticulate additive was produced by tribo-sintering.Numerous nanoparticles used as oil additives have been investigated in recent years We recently, studied the influence of CuO, ZnO and ZrO The main properties of the nanoparticles, lubricant and specimens used in the experiments are listed in All test-section components were cleaned ultrasonically with heptane for 3   Friction and wear variations of suspensions as a function of nanoparticles content are related to size, hardness and deposition of nanoparticles on wear surfaces. Friction coefficient values in all tests are for a mixed lubrication regime in which lubricant film thicknesses are between 3 and 25 No chemical elements other than steel components were detected on the wear surface obtained after tests made with pure PAO 6. Although PAO 6  The nanoparticle hardness cited is the bulk hardness, but due to the well-established Hall–Petch relationship (abbreviated as H–P relation) the hardness of all used nanoparticles is higher than the specimens’ hardness, even taking into account the inverse H–P relation More analysis of the wear surfaces was done in order to detect a possible tribofilm formation. Although zinc, copper and zirconium were detected before, The antiwear mechanism of nanoparticulate additive can follow three different processes: the nanoparticles may be melted and welded on the shearing surface (this option is impossible for the nanoparticles here studied because their melting points are between 1326 and 2700 The following conclusions can be drawn from the results presented above: All nanoparticle suspensions exhibited friction and wear reduction compared to the base oil. ZrO The suspensions with 0.5% of ZnO and ZrO An increase of nanoparticle concentration in base oil increases deposition on wear surfaces. Nevertheless, tribological results can differ. For example, raising the CuO, ZnO and ZrO Friction and wear behaviour should both be taken into account when designing lubricants because both parameters can exhibit different tendencies depending on additive content. Size and hardness should be taken into account when the additives are solids. The antiwear mechanism of nanoparticulate additive was produced by tribo-sintering of nanoparticles on the wear surfaces, reducing metal-to-metal contact and acting as load-bearing areas. The authors wish to express thanks to the Ministry of Education and Science, Spain, for supporting this work within the framework of the Research Project MAT2003-06153.