A carefully chosen selection of CMC polymers was used to probe the depression of talc and chalcopyrite and to highlight the effect of specific alterations of the bulk polymer chemistry on the power and selectivity of the depressants. In situ tapping mode atomic force microscopy (AFM), captive bubble contact angle measurements, and flotation tests were used to study the adsorption of the CMC polymers on chalcopyrite and talc. The degree of substitution and distribution of substitution of carboxymethyl groups on CMC was seen to have a strong influence on the ability of the polymers to adsorb onto the surface of talc and chalcopyrite. High substitution results in low coverage on both minerals whereas low substitution results in higher coverage. The influence of distribution of substitution (random or clustered) was also seen to affect the adsorption, with more random/even substitution giving rise to greater adsorption on talc and chalcopyrite. The contact angle of talc and chalcopyrite is significantly altered in the presence of the three polymers, with increased surface coverage (determined by AFM) correlating with the ability of the polymers to decrease the wettability of talc and chalcopyrite. This trend was also followed in single and mixed mineral talc and chalcopyrite flotation.Carboxymethyl cellulose is a commonly used polymer depressant for the rejection of talc in flotation ( In addition to combining a study of polymer adsorption on gangue The techniques used to determine the adsorbed layer characteristics (tapping mode atomic force microscopy ( Three different carboxymethyl cellulose polymers were used as supplied from CP Kelco. These polymers have different degree of substitution (the average number of carboxymethyl groups attached into the glucose unit) and different relative blockiness (carboxymethyl sequence distribution within the cellulose chain; low blockiness implies random/even distribution along the polymer chain): HSHB – high substitution, high blockiness; LSHB – low substitution, high blockiness; LSLB – low substitution, low blockiness. The general chemical structure of carboxymethyl cellulose is presented in High-purity Milli-Q water was supplied by an Elga UHQ water system and had conductivity less than 1 The talc and chalcopyrite samples used for atomic force microscopy imaging experiments were provided by the Mineralogy Department of the South Australian Museum and originally sourced from Delaware, USA (talc) and Huanzala, Peru (chalcopyrite). Both mineral samples were determined to be pure and free form impurities using XPS (talc) and electron microprobe (chalcopyrite). Talc samples were cleaved immediately prior to use using sticking tape, producing a very smooth surface with an RMS roughness of 0.06 The AFM imaging was performed in situ, in tapping mode using a Multimode Nanoscope III (Digital Instruments, Santa Barbara, California). A piezoelectric tube scanner E with the 10 Bare mineral surfaces were conditioned in the AFM liquid cell for 30 The contact angle was measured by the captive bubble method in a quartz cell with background solution (potassium chloride 10 Batch flotation experiments were carried out in a 1 Twenty grams of chalcopyrite was mixed with 10 The suspension was conditioned for 2 The in situ AFM images of HSHB adsorbed on talc are shown in The corresponding AFM images for the other two polymers, LSHB and LSLB, are given in The in situ AFM images of HSHB on a polished chalcopyrite surface are given in The corresponding in situ AFM images of LSHB and LSLB on chalcopyrite (at 25 The AFM images of the three polymers give some indication of the expected effect of the three polymers on the contact angles of talc and chalcopyrite. Assuming that DS will not alter the ability of the polymer to reduce the contact angle of a surface, surface coverage should be a good indicator of the degree to which the contact angle will be reduced for a surface treated with one of the three polymers. As such, LSLB should minimise the hydrophobicity of talc and chalcopyrite more than LSHB, and HSHB. All three polymers can be seen to decrease the contact angles of both minerals. HSHB reduced the contact angle of talc by 17° (both advancing and receding), LSHB by 19° (both advancing and receding), and LSLB by 23° and 21° for advancing and receding angles, respectively. For chalcopyrite, the reduction in the two contact angles was 23° and 16° for HSHB, 26° and 19° for LSHB, and 28° and 21° for LSLB (advancing and receding, respectively). The difference between the three polymers for a given mineral phase can straightforwardly be attributed to the difference in surface coverage determined by AFM. The comparison between the two minerals is not as straightforward. The polymers have similar effects on the contact angle of both minerals in terms of reduction of the receding contact angle. In addition, all three polymers affect the advancing angle of chalcopyrite slightly more than talc. This is to be expected for LSLB, but the other two polymers have greater coverage on talc than chalcopyrite. It is possible that continued exposure of the chalcopyrite to alkaline solution has resulted in more extensive oxidation and a prevalence of iron oxide/hydroxide products at the chalcopyrite surface. This would act to further decrease the surface hydrophobicity of the chalcopyrite, amplifying the effect of the adsorbed polymer. The three polymers were studied in their effect on the single mineral flotation of talc and chalcopyrite. The data reported are those for a polymer concentration of 25 The data for the three polymers indicates that there is a hierarchy of effectiveness in talc and chalcopyrite depression. HSHB depresses both minerals the least and LSLB depresses both minerals the most. LSHB is intermediate in its ability to reduce the hydrophobicity of the talc and chalcopyrite. The trends observed correlate with the variation in surface coverage for the three polymers on the two mineral surfaces, and with the contact angle measurements. The three polymers appear to have a greater effect on the theoretical maximum recovery value of the two minerals, rather than the flotation rate constant, with only LSLB having a consistent effect in lowering the rate constant for flotation. The results from the mixed mineral flotation study are shown in It is interesting to note that all polymers appear to be selective in their depression of talc over chalcopyrite, in spite of having a very large effect on chalcopyrite single mineral flotation. It is likely that either varying affinity for adsorption on the two minerals (i.e. different adsorption kinetics; faster adsorption on talc) or potentially the role of dissolved copper ions (re-adsorbing on talc and providing binding sites for the carboxylate groups on the CMC) ( The adsorption of three CMC polymers with variation in degree and distribution of substitution has been studied on talc and chalcopyrite using tapping mode atomic force microscopy, captive bubble contact angle measurements, and single and mixed mineral flotation. The atomic force microscope images indicate that the three polymers adsorb more onto talc than chalcopyrite (assuming surface coverage can be used as an indicator of adsorbed amount for polymers of similar chemistry). The AFM images also indicate that polymers with a high degree of substitution cover less of the mineral surfaces that polymers with low substitution, presumably due to intra- and inter-molecular repulsion effects on adsorbed layer conformation. The distribution of substitution along a chain appears to have a smaller but similar effect, reducing the ability of the polymer to coat the mineral surfaces. Contact angle measurements for a given mineral indicate that the surface coverage of CMC on a mineral surface is a good indicator of the ability of the CMC to reduce the mineral contact angle. Single mineral flotation studies for talc and chalcopyrite in the absence and presence of the three CMC polymers show clear correlations between recovery and the coverage of the polymers on the minerals. In spite of having a large effect on the single mineral chalcopyrite recovery, the three polymers are selective in the mixed mineral system, highlighting the role of differential adsorption affinity and/or the role of dissolved multi-valent metal ions in determining depressant selectivity. Financial support for this study was received from the Australian Research Council and AMIRA International sponsors of Project P498B, which include Penford Australia, Cytec, Anglo Platinum, CP Kelco, Rio Tinto, and Xstrata. The authors would like to thank Associate Professor Allan Pring (South Australian Museum, Adelaide) for the provision of the talc and chalcopyrite samples. The authors would also like to thank Robert Acres for help in preparing the chalcopyrite surfaces for contact angle measurements, and Iliana Sedeva for drawing the structure of CMC.