We investigated the short-term effect of LIPUS on human dentin-pulp complex in vitro. We collected sixty-three premolars from patients who needed the extraction. The premolars were sectioned transversely into 600-μm-thick slices, and then divided into five groups according to LIPUS application time (control, 5, 10, 15 and 20 min). LIPUS transducer produced an incident intensity of 30 mW/cm2. After 24 h, tissue was harvested for histomorphometrical analysis and RT-PCR (Genes of interest: Collagen I, DMP1, DSPP, TGF β1, RANKL and OPG). Histomorphometric analysis showed no significant difference among the five groups in the odontoblast count and predentin thickness. RT-PCR demonstrated no expression of TGF β1, low amounts of DSPP, a twofold increase in collagen I expression in the 5- and 10-minute LIPUS groups and a threefold increase in DMP1 expression in the 10-minute LIPUS group. LIPUS application was stimulatory to the dentin-pulp complex in vitro and increased the expression of collagen I and DMP1.Low-intensity pulsed ultrasound (LIPUS) is an acoustic radiation with frequencies above the limit of human hearing that can transmit into the body as high-frequency mechanical waves. The micromechanical strains produced by the pressure waves while passing through the biologic tissues are assumed to initiate biochemical events that affect hard and soft tissue activity. This form of ultrasound has been already established as a therapeutic form of ultrasound that can enhance healing of bone fracture ( Because of the non-invasive nature of LIPUS, the interest in its application was extended to studying its effect on dental and periodontal tissues. It was reported that low- and high-intensity ultrasound increased the expression of alkaline phosphatase (ALP) by cementoblasts, which plays an important role in the mineralization process, but ultrasound had no effect on cell proliferation ( Dentin pulp complex is the principal tissue in the process of hard tooth structure initial development and reparative mechanism when assault is introduced to the tooth by forming reparative dentin. Like any specialized cell line; attempts to culture odontoblasts A human tooth organ culture model for the dentin-pulp complex has been reported in which cell viability was maintained for different periods. This model was useful in testing the cytotoxicity of dental restorative materials and the stimulatory effect of growth factors on the dentin-pulp complex ( LIPUS has great potential to enhance biomechanical properties of tissue-engineered constructs and still be clinically applicable. LIPUS has been shown to enhance periosteal cell expansion ( In this experiment, we investigated the effect of LIPUS on a 3-D tissue culture of the dentin-pulp complex Healthy permanent premolars were extracted from 18 adolescent orthodontic patients with a mean age of 12 years 8 months (±14 months) who needed extraction as part of their treatment plan. We included in the study teeth that were sound and had an open apex on the panoramic X-ray film. Sixty-three premolars were obtained, and 8–11 slices were obtained per tooth. The slices were allocated randomly to five groups, to which LIPUS was applied one time for 5, 10, 15 and 20 min. A control group received a sham transducer that did not emit LIPUS. The Health Research Ethics Board at the University of Alberta granted ethics approval for this study. Extracted teeth were placed in a sterile washing medium consisting of DMEM containing antibiotic/antimycotic (1000 units/mL penicillin G sodium, 10 μg/mL streptomycin sulphate and 25 μg/mL amphotericin B). The teeth were sectioned transversely into 600-μm-thick sections with a 0.006" diamond wafer saw (ISOMET Wafering Blade, Series 15HC, 3" x 0.006" × 1/2"; Buehler, Whiteby, Ontario, Canada) and cooled with sterile PBS. Tooth slices were immediately placed in sterile washing medium before culture and washed several times at 37°C immediately after cutting, and then transferred to individual wells of a plastic 6-well plate containing 4 mL of culture media. The culture medium contained DMEM, vitamin C (0.15 mg/mL), 10% heat inactivated fetal calf serum, L-glutamine (200 mM), and 1% penicillin/streptomycin solution. Tooth slices were cultured at 37°C in an atmosphere of 5% CO Custom-built ultrasound devices that provided adjustable output parameters and long-term operation stability were used (Smilesonica Inc., Edmonton, AB, Canada). The devices were set to generate ultrasound pulses with a repetition rate of 1 KHz. Each pulse has a square envelop with duration of 200 microseconds and a pulse frequency of 1.5 MHz. The ultrasound transducer has an emitting surface area of 3.9 cm We fixed the samples by placing them in 10% neutral buffered formalin (approximately 4% formaldehyde) (Sigma-Aldrich, Oakville, Ontario, Canada) for 24 h at room temperature, then decalcified using CAL-EX II (Fisher Scientific, Ottawa, Ontario, Canada) (formaldehyde 1.03 M/L, formic acid 2.56 M/L) for one week. Samples were processed into paraffin blocks; sections of 4-mm thickness were cut and stained using hematoxylin and eosin stain. Photomicrographs were taken using a Leica Fluorescent Digital Microscope with a (CCD) digital camera (Leica, Wetzlar, Germany), and the image processing analyses were done using RS Image software (Version 1.73) (Photometrics, Roper Scientific, Inc, Tucson, AZ, USA). Cells of the odontoblastic layer in each section were counted in three random field/slices (0.02113 mm Three to four slices of tissue cultured in the same well were grouped to have enough mRNA. The slices from each well were snap frozen in liquid nitrogen and then stored at −80°C. Afterward, the tissue was pulverized while frozen using Mikro-Dismembrator S (Sartorius Mechatronics, Mississauga, ON, Canada) at 2500 rpm for one minute, then the tissue powder was treated using TRIzol (Invitrogen, Burlington, ON, Canada). The mRNA was extracted using Qiagen RNeasy kit and QIAGEN RNase-Free DNase set for RNA extraction and purification. RNA quality and integrity were measured by performing a eukaryote total RNA nano assay using Agilent 2100 Bioanalyzer (Agilent Technologies Canada Inc., Mississauga, ON, Canada). An Omniscript RT Kit was used for reverse transcription of RNA into cDNA. Relative quantization of gene expression of the genes listed in Data was collected and processed using SPSS 18.0. Means of the odontoblasts cell count and predentin thicknesses were compared using MANOVA test. Also, means of the expression of genes of interests were compared using MANOVA. A Histomorphometrical analysis showed no statistical significant difference among the five groups in measured histomorphometric analysis variables, odontoblast cell count, Evaluation of tissue and cellular morphology, the control and the four LIPUS application groups showed almost the same histologic pattern and viability ( RT-PCR demonstrated that there was a statistically significant difference among the control and LIPUS application groups in the expression of all the expressed genes ( DSPP was expressed in very low amounts in all groups without any significant difference between them except the 20-minute LIPUS application group, which had lower expression of DSPP than all of the test and control groups, and that difference was statistically significant ( Finally, collagen type I was expressed in all groups, and it was detected in greater amounts than the other genes of interest. The 5- and 10-minute LIPUS application groups were the highest, and they had almost twofold the expression of the rest ( The differential rate of acoustic waves' absorption by different tissue layers may play a critical role in targeting the cells present inside and around the hard tissue of the dentoalveolar complex. Although the actual mechanism of LIPUS effect on tissue is not known, one of the documented mechanisms of stimulation is thermal effect. One of the previously studied mechanisms was the thermal effect, but thermal effects were reported to occur when using intensities as high as 1–3 W/cm We investigated the effects of LIPUS on the dentin-pulp complex in this Although there was no evidence of change in hard tissue layout or histologic pattern indicative of LIPUS stimulation, gene expression results confirmed a stimulatory effect of LIPUS on the dentin-pulp complex The major dentin matrix structural proteins that we investigated were non-collagenous proteins like DMP1 and DSPP that have a regulatory effect on development and differentiation of the odontoblasts ( Transforming growth factor β1 was not expressed in any of the five groups, although reports indicate that low-frequency ultrasound (30 kHz) increased the expression of TGF β1 by odontoblast in a cultured cell line ( It has been reported that this RANKL/OPG balance determines the osteoclastogenesis and odontoclastogenesis ( Clinically LIPUS can be used to stimulate the secretion of extracellular matrix by the odontoblast cells, which could result in narrowing or even sclerosing of the dentinal tubules. This will result in decreased permeability of the dentin layer, which can be more resistant to bacterial or toxin penetration from cariogenic bacteria. Also, a denser dentinal layer will be more resistant to dentin resorption due to orthodontic treatment or periodontal-endodontic inflammation. Our results together with previous reports suggest that LIPUS enhances secretion of other tissue matrices like bone, cartilage and tendons. Future research might be directed toward exploring the effect of LIPUS of other tissue matrices like liver or pancreatic cells for possible regeneration of these tissues by LIPUS. In summary, tooth slice organ culture (TSOC) is an easy and reproducible, yet technique sensitive,