This paper discusses the application of super-conducting high gradient magnetic separator for the recovery of very-fine size uranium bearing mineral values present in the flotation tailings of an Indian copper ore. The U3O8 content of the tailings is 0.009%. The focus of this study is centered on determining the effect of various process variables like applied magnetic field, wool filling factor in the canister, wool diameter, loading capacity of the matrix, feed flow-rate and slurry pH on the recovery of uranium values in the magnetized matrix. The results indicate significant improvement in the recovery of <10μm size uranium bearing particles, to the extent of 60–65% in SCHGMS as against mere 20% in other high intensity magnetic separators. The enrichment ratio of U3O8 values in the magnetic fraction was in the range of 2.2–2.5 only due to interference from other magnetic minerals.Recovery of very-fine size particles (<10 In the domain of magnetic separation, the high gradient magnetic separators (HGMS) have been very successful in the recovery of very-fine size minerals, particularly where value addition to the end product is the defining criteria This paper discusses the application of super-conducting high gradient magnetic separator (SC-HGMS) in recovering very-fine size weakly magnetic uranium bearing particles present in flotation tailings of an Indian copper ore. The U The SC-HGMS system consists of a super-conducting solenoid type magnet of an internal diameter of 100 The feed material used for the experimental work was flotation tailings of a copper concentrator plant assaying about 0.009% U The SC-HGMS was operated in semi-continuous manner consisting of (a) feed cycle, (b) wash cycle and (c) scour cycle. The operation cycle was preceded by magnet preparatory protocol described in detail by Padmanabhan The magnetics, wash and non-magnetics were collected separately, dried, weighed, sampled and analyzed radiometrically using Geiger–Müller counter. The reproducibility of the results was ensured by carrying out each experiment thrice and only those set of data which is within a standard deviation of ±2% were considered. A particle in a magnetic field is acted upon by a number of forces, the predominant amongst them being the magnetic force The recovery of uranium values at three different applied magnetic fields – 1.5, 2.5 and 3.25 The capture of uranium values in the magnetic product fraction increased with increase in the applied magnetic field with all the three different grades of wool. Interestingly the quantum of increase of uranium recovery as well as selectivity or enrichment ratio (Eq. The number of contact sites for particle capture in the matrix of a magnetic separator depends upon the wool filling factor in the canister and the filling factor is determined by the size and shape of the matrix element. With steel wool, the packing is normally done in the range of 1–5% (volume/volume) inside the canister space. The determination of optimum filling factor is essential as undue increase of the sites decreases the selectivity and increases the non-selective mechanical particle capture. Results of experiments carried out with different grades of wool-coarse, medium and fine, at various volumes packing within the canister at various applied magnetic field – 1.5, 2.5 and 3.25 In general, the recovery of uranium values in the magnetic stream increased with increase in the wool filling factor at all the magnetic field strengths studied. However, the enrichment ratio showed the opposite trend. The decrease in the enrichment ratio of uranium in the magnetic stream with increased volume packing signifies non-selective particle capture, mainly by mechanical trapping, due to increased niches in the matrix structure generated by virtue of inter-wining or meshing of the fibers. For the coarse and medium grade wool, which was studied from 1% to 3% volume filling factor the highest recovery and enrichment ratio obtained were about 80% and 2.0–2.2, respectively, and it was practically same for applied magnetic field strength of 2.5 The ratio of the fiber diameter to the particle diameter, “ The recovery of uranium values in magnetic fraction increases with decrease in the wool diameter at both the volume packing viz. 1% and 2%, studied. The recovery of U The matrix type SC-HGMS system used in the present study is of “settling type” hence the magnetic particles get trapped onto the matrix during separation. In due course of time, the matrix gets saturated with the captured particles and it can no longer perform as an efficient separator. The capacity of matrix is therefore limited and this factor needs to be considered during the operation of any matrix type separator. Various definitions for expressing the capacity are reported in the literature The matrix loading was varied by changing both the feed mass as well as the matrix volume keeping the other conditions fixed at the following levels: wool grade – medium, packing 3%, magnetic field – 2.5 The effect of slurry pH of feed on the performance of SC-HGMS was studied with medium grade wool at 3% packing and at a magnetic field of 2.5 The recovery of uranium values as well as the enrichment ratio was practically insensitive to the slurry pH in the range of 2–9, however significant upward trend was noticed when the pH was about 11. At this alkaline pH, the recovery was about 95% with an enrichment ratio of 2.14. Effective dispersion of feed slurry is imperative to prevent hetero-coagulation of desired mineral with gangue minerals. The dispersion is achieved when the surface charge on the major gangue and desired minerals are similar. In the present case the mineralogical composition of the ore ( The metallurgical performance of a magnetic separator changes with the velocity of flow of the feed slurry and this parameter is the next most important one after the magnetic field strength and matrix design. The slurry flow determines the hydrodynamic drag on the particles, which is the dominating force for very-fine size material. Results of effect of superficial flow velocity of the slurry on the capture of uranium values in SC-HGMS are given in The recovery of uranium values showed gradual drop, from 80 to 74, as the slurry flow velocity increased from 1.33 to 3.98 As the ultimate objective of the parametric variation studies was to enhance the recovery of uranium values in <10 About 60–65% of uranium values were recovered in all the size fractions finer than 10 The enrichment ratio of U Studies were carried out to determine suitable process parameters for the recovery of very-fine size uranium bearing particles from low-grade uranium bearing copper plant flotation tailings assaying 0.0090% U The authors are thankful to Dr. S. Banerjee, former Director, Bhabha Atomic Research Centre, Mumbai and Dr. A.K. Suri, Director, Materials Group, BARC, for their interest and encouragement in the studies.