Increasing atmospheric CO2 concentration is currently of considerable concern in terms of global warming. A possible technology that can contribute to the reduction of CO2 emissions is its sequestration by mineral carbonation. In this study, tailings from several different platinum mines in South Africa will be mineralogically characterised and their potential for mineral carbonation reviewed. Mg and Ca-rich minerals (plagioclase, olivine, orthopyroxene, clinopyroxene) present in the tailings are good candidates for mineral carbonation, which mimics natural weathering processes in which these minerals react with gaseous CO2 to form Ca or Mg carbonates. Since the reaction is influenced by particle surface area, the ultra fine grained nature of the PGM tailings provides another reason for the promise of PGM tailings for mineral carbonation. A preliminary ranking of the tailings samples and their efficacy for mineral carbonation has been developed according to whether the samples showed harzburgtic (e.g. Northam Platinum mine), pyroxenetic (e.g. BRPM) or noritic mineral assemblages. This information and understanding will assist in identifying opportunities and guiding the development of engineered facilities for the sequestration of CO2 by means of mineral carbonation.Rock and mineral tailings produced by the platinum mining industry are composed of silicates and oxides that have a potential to be recycled in a variety of innovative schemes designed to reduce their environmental footprint. Incorporation into building materials, road aggregate, agricultural applications, landfills, manufactured fillers and many other schemes have been proposed, all of which raise issues of technical viability and cost effectiveness. In this paper we focus on the suitability of tailings as a mineral storage reservoir of anthropogenic CO Sequestration of CO A natural example of mineral carbonation has been reported in studies by The above studies reported features such as in situ volume for volume replacement of the igneous rock-forming minerals by carbonates, secondary silica and clays. Replacement was complete in narrow dykes (<1 An important conclusion that can be drawn from these studies is that the process of natural carbonation of dolerite dykes inside the coal seams may be explained by abundant fluid, magmatic temperature and geologic time. The question that needs to be addressed is whether these controls could have proxies which are attainable in industrial processes. Natural carbonation of peridotite in the Samail ophiolite, an uplifted slice of oceanic crust and upper mantle in Oman, has been noted by Carbonation of mine tailings as a product of natural weathering processes has been reported by The basic concept behind mineral CO The high reactivity of wollastonite (a rare member of the pyroxene group of silicates) with CO In the study of Other examples of engineered carbonation include the red mud wastes generated through the Bayer process for alumina manufacture in Australia which have the capability to sequester CO Mineral carbonation of fly-ash, a waste product of coal-fired power plants, and steel slags is currently an area under investigation locally by the Council for Geoscience in South Africa ( The analysis of carbonated mineral reservoirs is designed to better understand the factors controlling natural carbonation, with a view to industrial applications. A potential source of suitable material, and one virtually unique to South Africa, is that of mine tailings from the primary beneficiation of Platinum Group Element (PGE) ore bodies ( In South Africa, the synthetic fuels sector captures about 32 PGE ores are traditionally regarded as low grade, high tonnage materials that contain on average 2–5 Factors controlling the mineral content of PGE mine tailings follow the composition of the ores, which can be subdivided into three broad types: Merensky Reef: Silicate dominated (pyroxene, feldspar, olivine, chromite) UG2 Chromitite: Oxide dominated (chromite, pyroxene, feldspar) Platreef: Silicate dominated (pyroxene, feldspar, amphibole, carbonate) Historically, tailings from Merensky ores dominate stock piles, but in terms of current and future production the UG2 and Platreef types will probably become more significant. In view of the inherent greater perceived viability of silicate dominated assemblages to react with CO Frequently regarded as a uniform reef type, the Merensky Reef shows large variations in reef thickness, composition along strike, as well as the position of the mineralization. The Merensky reef is well-known as a major source of PGE. Considerable debate over definition, classification and practical application of reef characteristics has preoccupied workers throughout the PGE mining community. Even the use of the term “reef” has limited consensus, although many workers would agree that it should refer to the mineralized interval, irrespective of lithological variation, and therefore represent that which is mined preferentially (e.g. The typical Merensky Reef comprises a feldspathic pyroxenite zone under- and overlain by thin (5–15 The fact remains that the run-of-mine consists of a range of lithologies that contribute only two dominant minerals: Mg–Fe pyroxene (∼60%) and Ca–Na feldspar (∼20%). Other minerals that might be locally important but with levels still <15% include olivine (∼1–5%), chromite and a Ca–Mg–Fe pyroxene (∼15%). Secondary minerals produced from in situ alteration of the primary phases include serpentine, talc, chlorite, carbonate and quartz; these may be locally important, but do not appear to reach above 1–5% in run-of-mine fresh tailings. The process of extracting the precious metals from the ore (Merensky, UG2 or Platreef) is categorised by liberation and separation by flotation. Liberation is the process of crushing and grinding the run-of-mine ore so as to expose the PGMs contained within. This is typically achieved through a series of crushers and tumbling mills, which operate autogenously or with varying loads of steel balls. In the flotation circuit which is broken down into streams through a series of flash floats, roughers, cleaners, re-cleaners and scavengers, reagents are added to render the surfaces of the PGM-bearing particles sufficiently hydrophobic to enable the valuable minerals to be separated from the waste material by froth flotation. The PGM that are not successfully extracted are left in the tail stream and are pumped out to tailings deposition facilities with average tail grades for UG2 currently ∼0.75 Due to the very fine grained nature of the PGM which are typically less than 30 Overall, the aims of this paper are; to mineralogically characterise Merensky reef tailings from the Northam and BRPM PGM operations for the purposes of mineral carbonation. Secondly, to establish a ranking scheme, whereby PGM operations may be graded in their suitability for mineral carbonation in South Africa. Finally, to estimate the maximum theoretical carbonation capacity of the PGM industry in South Africa annually. The aim of this paper is not to establish or design an engineered mineral carbonation process, but rather to evaluate the feasibility of mineral carbonation of PGM tailings in South Africa. It is anticipated that the results of this study will provide a platform for future engineering research into the creation of the appropriate engineered facilities. Bulk Merensky tailings samples were obtained from BRPM and Northam Platinum Mines. It is noted that the BRPM tailings were sourced from a regrind circuit, and may not be entirely representative of the run of mine tailings for BRPM, but are still considered suitable to evaluate the potential of PGE tailings as a whole. Prior to the analytical measurements, the unwashed tailings samples were dried at room temperature, rolled and split into 1 The particle size distribution of the tailing samples was determined using a Malvern Mastersizer 2000. The refractive index for the analyses was 1.620. This was calculated through the factoring of the modal mineralogy, and the average density of each mineral phase. A Tristar was used for the BET surface area analysis. X-ray Fluorescence Spectroscopy (XRF) was used to determine the bulk chemical composition of the PGM tailings. A series of fusion discs and pellets were manufactured for analysis on a Phillips PW 1480 X-Unique X-ray fluorescence spectrometer. Quantitative X-ray Powder Diffraction (QXRD) was used to determine the relative proportion of the crystalline phases present in the PGM tailings. A 3.5 The bulk mineralogy of the samples was measured at the University of Cape Town using a QEMSCAN based on a LEO platform and equipped with two state of the art Bruker SDD detectors. The BMA (Bulk modal analysis; The particle size distributions of both the Northam and BRPM tailings samples are illustrated in The major phases in both BRPM and Northam Merensky tails are represented in The dominant minerals constituting the Northam tailings samples as shown in Quantitative mineralogical results of the BRPM tailings are given in XRF data were used to validate the results from the QEMSCAN analysis. The XRF results confirmed the relative abundance of the major oxides present in BRPM and Northam PGM mine tailings ( The theoretical CO In order to evaluate the potential of different PGE tailings for mineral carbonation in South Africa, some consideration needs to be given as to the criteria which may make tailings from one deposit more suitable than from another. This is manifested in a preliminary ranking given in Furthermore, the carbon capture capacity and storage (CCS) is dependent on two properties of a PGM operation, the tonnages of tailings disposed of per annum, as well as the mineralogy of the tailings. The particle size distribution and surface area, in turn, have an effect on the rate of mineral carbonation. Larger capacities and increased reactivities are favourable for the purpose of industrial mineral carbonation, as they reduce costs of the procedure. Important factors recognised in the literature of recent kinetic studies of the mineral carbonation reaction include (1) mineral species ( In terms of the ranking scheme given in However, the CO One of the major properties of the PGM industry in South Africa which makes it attractive for the mineral carbonation process is the vast volumes of Ca and Mg-rich tailings produced annually. During the period June 2009 to June 2010, the major “players” in the PGM industry ( In order to determine the theoretical CCS capacity of tailings for the entire PGM industry in South Africa in one year, a generic Merensky, UG2 and Platreef mineralogy was used ( The aim of this paper was to evaluate the potential of PGE tailings for mineral carbonation in South Africa. This was done using two Merensky tailings samples, and accomplished by developing a preliminary ranking system for the application of a mineral carbonation technique to Merensky tailings produced by the PGM industry. Two operations, BRPM and Northam, were used to determine a ranking scheme based upon three key properties: CCS capacity, relative reactivity and distance from CO Secondly, we estimated the CCS capacity of the entire PGM industry, and found that mineral carbonation of the tailings produced by the PGM industry could account for both the direct and indirect CO Finally, apart from addressing the challenges associated with the availability and preparation of suitable CO The authors would like to acknowledge Dr Kirsten Corin, of the Department of Chemical Engineering at UCT, for carrying out the QXRD analyses. Financial support from the