Developments in gold ore processing technology have resulted in periodic step changes for the industry over the years, which have resulted in advances in economic gold production. Factors influencing potential step-change technologies are discussed, including environmental considerations using less toxic reagents at higher degrees of recycle and recovery, which are already trending in leaching with both cyanide and alternative lixiviants. More reagent preparation and product refining operations may take place at the mine site, eliminating transportation costs and associated risks, and increasing overall profits on value metals. These innovations will be underpinned by rapid advances in automation, self-driving vehicles, high degrees of process simulation down to the chemical level, and virtual reality, all driven by accelerating advances in computing power. Ores will continue to be processed at lower grades and more complex mineralogy, with sources becoming less conventional and requiring more advanced and perhaps expensive technologies that would need to be offset by advances in process chemistry, engineering and control. Increased demand for gold may step change as a result of technology development for catalysts or other end uses, or simply by virtue of increasing population densities in emerging economies.Developments in gold ore processing technology have resulted in periodic step changes for the industry over the years. Total gold mined from 1900 to the present is estimated ( Commercial development of the carbon-in-pulp (CIP) process in the early 1980s constituted a further step change, accounting for an increase in gold production from 1220 Gold production in 2014 remained at about 2500 In this chapter several of the technologies detailed in this book, as well as some emerging technologies, are assessed with regard to their potential to influence this trend. Transformational technologies would provide for the economic extraction and recovery of gold and other by-product value metals such as silver, base, and rare metals, at high yields. Gold ore deposits under assessment are increasingly refractory and at ever-lower grades. A step-change technology should therefore be applicable to low-grade, multirefractory ores that may contain several deleterious elements such as mercury, arsenic, and antimony. Owing to the discovery of gold deposits in remote areas, such a process should ideally be composed of relatively simple, industrially proven unit processes that can be safely be operated by plant personnel sourced locally and with a low reliance on the transportation of exotic or toxic reagents. It should result in low emissions of toxic or greenhouse gases and process residues should be benign for safe storage. Perhaps the most challenging aspects of producing a viable technological step change in the modern world will be the financial backing, industry support, and government, nongovernmental organization (NGO), and community buy-in. In 1965, Gordon Moore (co-founder and chairman emeritus of Intel Corporation) made a prediction concerning the modern digital revolution. From observing an emerging trend in semiconductor technology, Although less obvious when viewed from the perspective of a mill tower cyclone cluster, the availability of cheap, fast, and powerful computing and memory storage has enabled various advancements in the field of gold ore processing to take place. Development of integrated mass and energy-balance models is now standard procedure in engineering studies, and the ability to test scenarios and flow sheet options efficiently has made the project development process more rapid. Similarly, three-dimensional (3D) modeling and design software as well as detailed chemical simulations and Monte-Carlo sensitivity analyses have an important role in extractive metallurgical process development. Arguably, however, advances in shrinking lead times for project development owing to increasing computing efficiency may be outweighed by blowouts in development schedules caused by more onerous permitting requirements, legislative restrictions, and environmental pressures from stakeholders, as examined in Automated mineralogy has become more prevalent because of advances in systems development and computing capacity, and these technologies, along with advances in handheld X-ray fluorescence (XRF) and near-infrared (NIR) instruments, as well as ore-sorting machines, will most certainly result in increased gold production. More rapid mining via accurately targeted ore definition, lower waste haulage, and enhanced rejection of gangue at all stages of the mining and processing flow, will collectively move the industry towards higher annual gold production. Although the scarcity of published cases of cyanide poisoning in the gold mining industry reflects well on implemented occupational health and safety standards, environmental impact events involving cyanide have elicited concerns. Tailings Cyanide detoxification plants are becoming standard bolt-ons to existing plants, and in many cases are part of the initial process design. Although their capital costs can be absorbed into overall plant capital expenditure, often the cost of detoxification reagents has more impact on an operation's bottom line, particularly in cases with variable plant feed mineralogy, reactive or partially oxidized sulfides, and base metals such as copper present. Tricyanocopper in particular is a relatively stable species and can cause sufficiently high levels of weak-acid dissociable cyanide in tailings supernatants to pose a toxic threat to wildlife. The hidden costs of cyanide management and monitoring, whether under the auspices of the Code or not, should not be underestimated in project assessment programs. Synergen Met has developed a transportable, modular process plant that manufactures sodium cyanide (NaCN) at the mine site. Pilot-scale test work has been carried out at the University of Queensland's Long Pocket facility in 2012, followed by installation and 12 Cyanide recovery circuits using processes such as acidification, volatilization, and reneutralization (AVR) as well as sulfidation, acidification, recycle, and thickening (SART) have found application at several mine sites, the latter particularly in copper-rich heap-leach operations. The case for cyanide recovery will continue to be based on site-specific criteria. An alternative to cyanide destruction involving a protective mechanism study has been implemented at several mine sites where hypersaline water or subaqueous spigots are present; however, these are also site-specific instances. Alternative lixiviants have been researched for many years and to date have found application only for niche applications such as thiourea leaching at New England Antimony and thiosulfate leaching at Barrick Goldstrike. Chloride as a lixiviant also shows promise; it was operated on a commercial scale before the advent of cyanide leaching and is currently in use on a smaller scale at many refineries. Application to ores or concentrates with low-reagent consumers such as oxide ores, or after prior pressure oxidation, such as in the Kell process ( Smelting remains the “go-to” method for treating sulfide concentrates of many types. However, hydrometallurgical alternatives such as pressure oxidation and bacterial oxidation are now mature, established technologies for gold concentrates. There are several reasons for this encroachment: Increasing environmental constraints on sulfur dioxide emissions from smelters and roasters have a major role in making the permitting process for smelting more difficult. Greenhouse gas emissions are considered to be significantly lower for hydrometallurgy routes ( Other environmental factors such as handling of arsenic and mercury as well as other deleterious elements may also be factors in selecting hydrometallurgical processes over smelting. Stabilization of arsenic is achieved without the formation of arsenic trioxide fume or arsine gas. Once again, site-specific factors become important, with the costs of transporting concentrate to offshore smelters and unfavorable smelter terms potentially making alternative methods more attractive, particularly for projects located in remote areas. It is likely that new projects will increasingly implement onsite hydrometallurgical treatment routes for their concentrates after assessing these factors. However, existing excess smelter capacity will continue to drive smelters to offer more beneficial terms to producers, as well as allow more flexibility on concentrate grade and impurity constraints than in A factor not to be neglected in process selection is that of the lockup of gold in circuit, creating an effective lockup of unrealized working capital in metal inventory that could be used to offset capital costs where applicable. This factor will have a role in the consideration of installing new smelter or bioleaching capacity, where comparatively large inventories of high-grade material may be required, and significantly less so for the shorter retention times in autoclaves, for example. It will be further reflected as longer delays to payment in the case of existing smelting or refining capacity. Following are examples of substantial displacement of smelters by hydrometallurgical processing: For centuries, zinc production was primarily by pyrometallurgical routes such as the Imperial Smelting Process, which uses a blast furnace. This was largely superseded by the now well-established hydrometallurgical roast-leach-electrowin route. A hydrometallurgical process (Sherritt autoclave process) was also invented in 1980 and several plants are in operation using this technology ( Alumina was first produced by a high-temperature sintering process, which was replaced by the Bayer hydrometallurgical process, first conceived in 1887 ( Application of in situ leaching or solution mining has been investigated over the years. Holes are drilled and an orebody is subjected to hydraulic fracturing before infusion with a lixiviant solution that is pumped back to the surface for gold recovery. The technique may have potential niche application to near-surface oxide ore deposits away from environmentally sensitive areas and water tables. Work at CSIRO in Australia has shown encouraging results ( Gold is used extensively for jewelry and as a hedge for storing value off-market. Industrial uses have been few and far between, although gold has long been central to innovations in electronics. Its unique properties and the advent of nanotechnology are driving new uses in medicine, engineering, and environmental management ( As gold reserves become lower grade and more complex refractory, carbonaceous, and polymetallic ore types, alternative sources of gold are increasingly important. Recycling of jewelry has always been prevalent owing to the value of the metal. Recycling of gold and other metals from electronic waste (e-waste) has been identified as a potential new resource (see For many years it has been speculated that precious metals may be extracted economically from certain “nonassayable” materials, such as so-called “abnormal” ores, in which gold and other precious metals are claimed to be not completely detected by spectroscopy and standard assay techniques ( This volume has collected the essence of the most relevant advances in modern commercial gold ore processing techniques and applications. Consideration of these trends, along with emerging technologies, allows for some speculation regarding key areas where step-change transformations may be indicated. Environmental considerations have an increasingly important role in process flow sheet development and plant operations. Future gold processing and refining plants will likely be required to be cleaner, using less toxic reagents at higher degrees of recycle and recovery, which is already a trend in leaching with both cyanide and alternative lixiviants. The “zero discharge” gold process is potentially viable, considering developments in tailings and gaseous emissions management generally. More of the reagent preparation and product refining operations may take place at the mine site, lowering transportation costs and associated risks, and increasing overall profits on value metals. These innovations will likely be underpinned by rapid advances in automation, self-driving vehicles, high degrees of process simulation down to the chemical level, and virtual reality systems, all driven by accelerating advances in computing power. Ores will continue to be processed at lower grades and higher mineralogical complexity, with sources becoming less conventional, requiring more advanced and perhaps expensive technologies, that would need to be offset by advances in process chemistry, engineering, and control. Increased demand for gold may step change as a result of technology development in catalysts or other end uses, or simply by virtue of increasing population densities in emerging economies. As a noble and scarce metal with useful properties both technically and economically, the future for gold remains bright.