The investigation is devoted to sorption recovery of platinum (II, IV) from chloride solutions, freshly prepared and kept over 3months, on commercial anion exchangers with different physical and chemical structure. The resins were chosen for their good sorption properties for other noble metal systems (gold, silver and palladium) in our previous investigations. The concentration of platinum in initial solutions was 0.25–1.0mmol/L, whereas hydrochloric acid concentration varied from 0.01 to 4mol/L. It was shown that anion exchangers investigated possess high sorption ability to chloride complexes of platinum (II, IV). These sorption characteristics do not deteriorate in case of noble metals recovery from kept solutions.At present time the world consumption of platinum is growing steadily. This precious metal is applied not only in healthcare, equipment and jewelries, but also in chemical industry. Platinum is used as a catalyst for organic synthesis, and together with rhodium it serves as a compound for automotive catalysts ( Sorption recovery of noble metals proceeds in solutions obtained after breakdown of noble metals-containing materials (both natural raw materials and secondary sources, including wastes of electrical and electronic industry, military equipment, catalysts etc). The dissolution of such samples is usually carried out by means of oxidant acids (e.g. “aqua regia”) as well as by fusion, chlorination, assay analysis and other methods ( Therefore, the sorption recovery of noble metals, in particular of platinum, from such solutions can be complicated, and some valuable compounds may be lost. That is why in this case the selectivity of a sorbent is very important. At present, natural organic (activated carbon adsorbents) and synthetic (ion exchange resins) sorbents are widely used for recovery of noble metals. These sorbents extract metal ions through physical sorption or through chemical reaction. As a rule, these sorbents possess complex-forming properties, increasing the recovery degrees of noble metals from solutions with complex composition ( We chose strong and weak basic anion exchangers for our investigation, their physical–chemical properties are summarized in The initial platinum stock solution with concentration 10 The dry residue of The present work was focused on two kinds of platinum solutions: freshly prepared and stored over 3 The content of platinum in stock solution was controlled (before preparation of working solutions) by gravimetric method with The sorption of platinum was studied under batch experiment conditions: resin mass — 0.2 The sorption ability to platinum of anion exchangers was estimated by means of recovery degree ( The sorption isotherms were plotted by varying the molar ratio of sorbents to the amount of platinum in contacting solution ( The kinetic behavior of anion exchangers towards platinum was studied by “limited bath method” ( Then, according to Boyd's method ( After that the limited stage of kinetics was determined according to the classical Boyd's model: if the process is controlled by gel diffusion, the dependence if the process is controlled by film diffusion, the dependence − Then for both kinetics types the diffusion coefficients were calculated from the following formulae: All the results were statistically processed according to standard methods. The average experimental error for 3–4 parallel runs is less than 6%. The ionic state of platinum in chloride solutions is extensively studied ( It should be noted that the formation of aquachloro- and aquahydroxo-complexes in solutions of platinum group metals occurs because of the so-called “ageing” of solutions, which is observed in relatively weak acidic media, especially when the solution was kept for longer than 24 The sorption recovery of platinum (II, IV) both from freshly prepared solutions and from solutions kept over a period of 3 The sorption properties of investigated ion exchangers during recovery of platinum (II, IV) from freshly prepared solution in dependence on acidity of contacting solution are summarized in Therefore, the investigated anion exchangers can be arranged in the following order in accordance with their affinity to platinum (II, IV): Lewatit MP 600 WS Thus, in strong acidic media (4 М With the decrease in acidity, when various forms of aqua- and hydroxo-complexes arise in solution, the reaction scheme for ion exchange recovery of platinum is as follows: Moreover, the additional complexation is revealed on weak and intermediate anion exchangers: The results on sorption recovery of platinum (II,IV) from kept solutions are summarized in Therefore, the anion exchangers can be arranged according to their sorption ability during platinum recovery from “aged” solutions in the following order: AN-251 It can be seen that this order is different from the case of freshly prepared solutions. During To sum up the results, there are two main factors in favor of We have plotted the sorption isotherms for both types of solutions ( The Eq. According to Eq. Furthermore, we studied the kinetics of sorption on anion exchangers investigated. It is a matter of practical importance, because the experimentally found sorption rate determines the limited stage of ion exchange and is essential for optimizing the process management, details of ion exchangers synthesis, as well as choosing the best available sorbent for the particular case ( The dependencies of ion exchange rate on time during recovery of platinum (II, IV) from freshly prepared and kept solutions are shown in We have determined the kinetics type in the investigated systems in accordance with the classical Boyd's model ( The main kinetic parameters of the process of platinum (II, IV) sorption recovery are presented in It is known ( We have used solutions of hydrochloric acid with different concentrations and thiourea solutions (80 Therefore, the investigated anion exchangers can be recommended for recovery of platinum (II, IV) from chloride solutions. The strong basic anion exchangers (especially Lewatit MP 600 WS) possess the greatest selectivity during  We have investigated the sorption recovery of platinum (II, IV) from freshly prepared and kept over 3 The kinetics of platinum (II, IV) sorption from freshly prepared and kept solutions on anion exchangers was investigated. It was shown that the studied sorbents possess good kinetic properties. The type of kinetics limiting the sorption process was determined: gel diffusion for strong basic anion exchanger Lewatit MP 600 WS and film diffusion for the other sorbents. We have also calculated the kinetic parameters: process rate, diffusion coefficients and half-exchange time. The obtained results allow to recommend the investigated anion exchangers for recovery of platinum (II, IV) chloride complexes. During