Co-firing of some low quality Turkish lignites with woody shells of sunflower seed was investigated via non-isothermal thermogravimetric analysis method. For this purpose, Yozgat-Sorgun, Erzurum-Askale, Tuncbilek, Gediz, and Afsin-Elbistan lignites were selected, and burnouts of these lignites were compared with those of their blends. Biomass was blended as much as 10 and 20 wt.% of the lignites, and heating was performed up to 900°C at a heating rate of 40°C/min under dry air flow of 40mL/min. This study revealed that the same biomass species may have different influences on the burnout yields of the lignites. Burnouts of Erzurum-Askale lignite increased at any temperature with the increasing ratio of biomass in the blend, whereas burnout yields of other lignites decreased to some extent. Nevertheless, the blends of Turkish lignites with sunflower seed shell did not behave in very different way, and it can be concluded that they are compatible in terms of burnouts for co-combustion in a combustion system. Although the presence of biomass in the lignite blends caused to some decreases in the final burnouts, the carbon dioxide neutral nature of biomass should be taken into account, and co-combustion is preferable for waste-to-energy-management.The “White Paper Report” on energy for future-renewable sources of energy sets an indicative target of 12% of the EU total energy consumption from renewable energy sources by 2010 in all EU member countries At this point, the biomass fraction of Refuse Derived Fuel (RDF) and Solid Recovered Fuel (SRF) is crucial on greenhouse gas protocols, such as the European Union Emissions Trading Scheme and the Renewable Obligation Certificate program in the United Kingdom. The combusted biomass fraction of RDF/SRF is used by stationary combustion operators to reduce their overall reported CO Considering the use of waste-derived fuels, the European directive 2001/77/EC on electricity from renewable energy sources promotes the co-utilization of SRF in large-scale energy production 2000/76/EC European legislation set strict limits not only for the mono-combustion of waste in incineration plants but also for co-combustion in coal-fired power plants As a member country to EU, Turkey must take effective measures to decrease emissions from power stations in which low quality Turkish lignites are burned. In fact, this is a serious problem in Turkey since these lignites take place the most important national primary energy sources. Consequently, about 8.5% of world lignite consumption is carried out by Turkey alone. Co-combustion of biomass with coal usually helps to reduce the emissions such as SO Turkey has an important potential of agricultural waste materials which can be used for energetic purposes. Furthermore, most of these wastes are non-hazardous materials and they are sustainably-grown biomass. For instance, sunflower ( Besides, the physical and chemical properties of this agricultural woody waste can be regarded to meet the conditions described by above EU directives. For example, concentrations of arsenic, cadmium, and mercury in this biomass are below 1 However, one of the challenges of co-combustion is to manage different type of fuels in the same combustion system. Burnout of each fuel plays important role in determining not only the performance of individual fuel but also their compatibility under the same conditions. In this context, synergistic or antagonistic interactions often happen between the constituents of different type of fuels, and accordingly burnouts during co-combustion may be closely affected from these interactions. Experience on co-utilization of a given biomass species with low rank coals is rather limited, and most of such investigations have been conducted using higher rank coals such as bituminous or sub-bituminous coals. Thus, this study addresses the burnout characteristics of low rank Turkish lignites with woody shells of sunflower seed under non-isothermal co-combustion conditions. Yozgat-Sorgun (YS), Erzurum-Askale (EA), Tuncbilek (T), Gediz (G), and Afsin-Elbistan (AE) lignites were selected for this study since they represent an important part of the Turkish lignites with high deposits. The ages of these coals are Eocene, Miocene, Miocene, Middle Miocene, and Pliocene for YS, EA, T, G, and AE lignites, respectively Air-dried lignite samples and sunflower seed shell (SSS) were grounded to particle size of Major biomass ingredients of SSS such as holocellulosics (hemicellulosics Burning characteristics of the fuel samples were investigated by non-isothermal thermogravimetric analysis method using a Shimadzu TG 41 thermal analyzer with a cylindrical alumina crucible. Initial sample weight was fixed at 40 Although there have been some studies in literature reporting that 10–30 wt.% is the optimum range for blending of biomass with coal in terms of minimum pollutant emissions per unit energy output, co-firing up to 20 wt.% biomass with coal in utility boilers gave the best results Heating up to 900 All the experiments were repeated three times to check the reproducibility, and the mean of the closest two results was used.  The moisture content of air-dried biomass is about 10 wt.%, which is noticeably lower than that for usual biomass species. It is widely known that high content of moisture in biomass leads to lower combustion temperatures as well as increasing CO emissions  Compared to lignites used in this study, the highest content of volatiles, the lowest-fixed carbon and -ash contents belong to SSS. These inherent characteristics of SSS are the indication of its special structure and thermal reactivity that differentiates it from coals. In the design of fluidized bed combustor, this high content of volatiles must be considered since an important part of combustion may take place at the upper regions above the bed. But, such high contents of volatiles should not be always evaluated as a problem. For instance, some waste biomass materials such as textile residues have been reported to burn with so low burning rates that it often deteriorates the combustion performance of the whole system It is well-known that problematic deposit formations such as fouling owing to biomass materials during co-combustion systems are usually diminished if an interaction happens between the sulfur content of coal and some inorganics found in biomass. Considering the fact that SSS contains low ash, and Turkish lignites are rich in sulfur, so it is possible to predict that an appropriate condition is available for these binary mixtures to eliminate the likely fouling problem resulting mainly from biomass.   Lignite samples can be arranged in the increasing order of reactivity as EA, G, YS, T, and AE. In addition to, the times elapsed during hold time and consequently burning at this stage designates significant variations. Although the coal samples used in this study were low rank and consequently they should have been thermally high reactive, the applied thermal process with a heating rate of 40 Hold times ( Burnout rates (  On the other hand, lignite EA revealed a different status that biomass addition increased the burnout as proportional to the biomass added. So the highest burnout values were obtained in case of the blend 20% up to 900 Besides, lignite G behaved in different way when it has blended with biomass. This sample showed a non-additive behavior that the presence of 10 wt.% of biomass increased the mass losses from this sample. However, when the addition of biomass was raised to 20 wt.%, not only the same effect could not be observed but also some decrease in burnout occurred. This predicts that the amount of the biomass in the blend is crucial to increase or decrease the burnout of this lignite. These results suggest that within the blending ratios tested in this study, addition of biomass to lignites did not seriously worsen the burning behavior of the lignites. The decreases in the burnout yields may be tolerated. In addition, some problematic features of these low quality coals can be compensated by blending with biomass. Besides, energy potential of this renewable waste biomass material would be evaluated, contributing to lower CO Sunflower seed shell is a potential fuel that can be utilized in lignite firing systems by the aim of waste-to-energy management. When low rank coals such as Turkish lignites are handled, sunflower seed shell is a favorable material in terms of calorific value and low ash in order to compensate the negative aspects of these coals. On the other hand, combustion of this biomass species ends in a shorter time compared to those for lignites. This study revealed that the same biomass material may be able to play different roles on the burnout yields of the Turkish lignites. Burnouts of EA lignite increased with the increasing ratio of biomass in the blend, whereas burnout yields of other lignites decreased to some extent. Nevertheless, the blends of Turkish lignites with sunflower seed shell did not behave in very different way, and they can be co-combusted in the existing combustion system in the blending ratios carried out in the present study. Although biomass addition to lignite led to some decrease in the burnout, the carbon dioxide neutral nature of biomass should be taken into account, and co-combustion should be considered.