Odontoblasts are post-mitotic cells organized as a layer of palisade cells along the interface between the dental pulp and dentin. They are responsible for the formation of the physiological primary and secondary dentins. They synthesize the organic matrix of type I collagen and actively participate to its mineralization by secreting proteoglycans and non-collagenous proteins that are implicated in the nucleation and the control of the growth of the mineral phase. They also participate to the maintenance of this hard tissue throughout the life of the tooth by synthesizing reactionary dentin in response to pathological conditions (caries, attrition, erosion…).
                  Besides these fundamental dentinogenic activities, odontoblasts were recently suspected to play a role as sensor cells. They are able to sense the bacteria invasion during caries and then to initiate the pulp immune and inflammatory response. They are also well equipped in ion channels implicated in mechanotransduction or nociception which make odontoblasts suitable candidates to sense external stimuli and to mediate tooth pain sensation.Odontoblasts are specialized cells of the dental pulp. They are originating from the neural crest and after migration underneath the oral epithelium they differentiate into cells that will organize and regulate the synthesis of the mineralized dentin matrix. These cells when differentiating into mature odontoblasts acquire a specific morphology with a long cell process that will be embedded into a dentinal tubule and a cell body that lies on the surface of the dental pulp. Therefore, odontoblasts are at the interface of the dentin–pulp complex where they are organized as a palisade of cells, providing a natural barrier between the mineralized tissues (enamel and dentin) and the living tissue of the tooth (the pulp). The cells are connected at their apical pole by numerous junctional complexes (tight junctions and desmosomes) making a selective barrier that can control the relationship between dentin and pulp and vice versa under physiological and pathological conditions (for review Therefore, odontoblasts are located at a strategic place in the dentin–pulp complex and maintain a narrow relationship with the living part of the tooth, more particularly with nerve endings and blood capillaries. This review will present the physiology of odontoblasts under normal and pathological conditions during the life of the tooth ( Odontoblasts are mainly known to produce the pre-dentin matrix during tooth formation and to control its mineralization (primary dentin). Their terminal differentiation is characterized by the withdrawal from the cell cycle, elongation and cytological polarization, the nucleus occupying the proximal part of the cell body The first steps of mineralization involve membrane-limited matrix vesicles (MVs) within which calcium (Ca Comparatively, the transport mechanism for P Odontoblasts secrete the primary dentin at a rate of 4–20 The function of odontoblasts is not limited to primary dentinogenesis, but includes maintenance of dentin. In fact, in response to mild noxious stimuli (caries, trauma, excessive wear…), odontoblasts are able to up regulate their synthesis activity in order to deposit a thick layer of reactionary dentin Under high-grade caries, primary odontoblasts are destroyed and secondary odontoblasts, differentiating from stem cells, can make reparative dentin. This property will not be discussed here but for review see the paper from A. sloan in this special issue. During dental caries infection, pulp develops an immune response to oral bacteria that have entered the peripheral dental hard tissues, i.e. enamel and dentin. Due to their situation, odontoblasts are the first cells encountered by oral pathogens that are represented in the carious dentin essentially by Gram-positive bacteria (Streptococcus, Lactobacillus, and Actinomyces spp.) A successful defense against invading pathogens involves their rapid sensing through specialized pattern recognition receptors (PRR). These signaling receptors can be divided into three classes including Toll-like receptors (TLRs), RIG-I-like receptors, and NOD-like receptors (NLRs). TLRs as well as NLRs recognize a wide variety of pathogen-associated molecules (PAMPs). TLRs are membrane bound (cell or endosomal surface) receptors whereas NLRs are cytosolic. Thus, NLRs represent a second line of defense against pathogens that evade cell surface or endocytic PRRs. Ten human TLRs have been described so far. Among them, TLR2 is crucial for the recognition of Gram-positive bacteria components, including lipoteichoic acid (LTA), lipopeptides, and peptidoglycan whereas TLR4 recognizes the Gram-negative component lipopolysaccharide (LPS). All TLR genes are expressed in healthy human dental pulp Odontoblasts are also able to sense Gram-negative bacteria through TLR4. In these cells, LPS up-regulates IL-1β, TNF-alpha, CCL20, IL-8, TLR2 and TLR4 Interestingly, LTA down-regulates the expression of the major dentin matrix components, including collagen type I, dentin sialophosphoprotein and TGF-β1, a known inducer of dentin formation Odontoblasts also express NLR-family proteins such as NOD2, which detects muramyl dipeptide, a subunit of peptidoglycan from the cell wall of Gram-positive and Gram-negative bacteria Chemokines and pro-inflammatory cytokines are not the only molecules involved in the innate immunity of the pulp. Beta-defensins are small antimicrobial peptides that kill microorganisms through the disruption of the integrity of their membrane. Even if more than thirty putative genes coding for human beta-defensins (hBD) have been listed in the human genome, the most studied are hDB-1–hDB-4. Among these four hBD, only hBD-2 and hBD-4 are up regulated by infection. In healthy teeth, hBD-1 is present at a low level in the odontoblast cytoplasm whereas hBD-2 is barely detectable Surprisingly, beside their antimicrobial activity, beta Many of these results have been obtained using If odontoblasts are located at a strategic place to play a role in the defense of the pulp from injuries coming through dentine such as caries, they are also the first target cells for external stimuli such as thermal variations or biomechanical forces. In this way, our laboratory has shown that odontoblasts could act as sensory cells for the detection of nociceptive signals. Tooth pain is mainly characterized by the exposure of dentin to direct mechanical, chemical and/or thermal stimulations. Moreover, pain can be associated with inflammation. Odontoblasts are known to express several classes of ion channels which are involved in nociception and signal propagation, such as L-type Ca More recently, several members of the transient receptor potential (TRP) superfamily of ion channels have been identified in odontoblasts. These receptors play a critical role in sensory physiology, where they act as transducers for thermal, mechanical and chemical stimuli. Subfamilies of heat-sensing TRP channels, such as TRPV1 (>43 Other members of the TRP family are mechanosensitive receptors: TRPV4, TRPM3, TRPP1 and TRPP2. All four are expressed in odontoblasts and whole-cell voltage-clamp recordings or [Ca Acid-sensing ion channels (ASICs) are pH sensors for detecting a wide range of pH fluctuations during normal physiological processes and pathological conditions. ASICs belong to the ENaC (Epithelial Na TREK-1, a mammalian mechanosensitive K Altogether, these observations make odontoblasts suitable candidates to sense external stimuli (thermal and mechanical stimuli) in a manner similar to that reported in skin keratinocytes As in the skin, the dental pulp is highly innervated with sensory nerve fibers reaching the odontoblast layer. The idea that odontoblasts may sense external stimuli and transduce the signal to nearby nerves cells is supported by the close apposition of the odontoblasts to the dentinal nerve terminals. The relationship between odontoblasts and nerve fibers is still an open question. A close association of odontoblast and nerve fiber has been observed by electron microscopy with a restricted cleft delimited by the neuron and odontoblast membranes of about 20 Even if they are not yet demonstrated, several hypotheses are emerging: We have demonstrated that human odontoblasts Another way to communicate can be the release in the gap space of mediators from stimulated odontoblasts. A microarray analysis focused on gene expression profiles of human native and cultured odontoblasts has revealed a set of neuronal genes including galanin (GAL) Odontoblasts and ameloblasts are the two cell types that direct the synthesis of the mineralized tissues (dentin and enamel respectively) of the tooth. However, ameloblasts disappear when the enamel has been formed whereas odontoblasts stay present all over the life of the tooth. This observation raises the possibility that odontoblasts could play a role in the pulp physiology during the adult stage. As described in this review, odontoblasts are not only involved in the synthesis of primary dentin but also in the maintenance of this tissue and the protection of the dental pulp. The last decade has seen an increasing number of studies giving a new role for adult odontoblasts in inflammation and pain. This better knowledge of odontoblast physiology will help developing new therapeutics for caries and dental sensitivity treatments. The works of our laboratory described in this article were supported by Grants from the