Ionic liquids are neoteric, environmentally friendly solvents (since they do not produce emissions) composed of large organic cations and relatively small inorganic anions. They have favorable physical properties, such as negligible volatility and wide range of liquid existence. Liquid–liquid equilibrium (LLE) data for systems including ionic liquids, although essential for the design, optimization and operation of separation processes, are still scarce. However, some recent studies have presented ternary LLE data involving several ionic liquids and organic compounds such as alkanes, alkenes, alkanols, water, ethers and aromatics. In this work, the ASOG model for the activity coefficient is used to predict LLE data for 15 binary and 09 ternary systems at 101.3kPa and several temperatures; all the systems are formed by ionic liquids including the tetrafluoroborate anion plus alkanes, alkanols, water, ethers, esters and aromatics. New group interaction parameters were determined using a modified Simplex method, minimizing a composition-based objective function of experimental data obtained from literature. The results are satisfactory, with rms deviations of about 3%.Group interaction parameters, temperature dependent Component Number of data sets Equations Fugacity Group interaction parameters, temperature independent Number of systems Number of tie lines Number of components Number of data points Number of groups in the mixture Pressure Objective function Absolute temperature Mole fraction in liquid phase Group mole fraction Group activity coefficient Activity coefficient Number of groups Combinatorial Size contribution Group contribution Standard state (pure component Liquid phase Residual Molecule 1, 2, Calculated value Experimental value Group Group Over the past few years, research about ionic liquids has increased greatly, mainly in two directions: as reaction media, especially in homogeneous catalysis, and as solvents for separation processes Ionic liquids have very low vapor pressures Liquid–liquid or solvent extraction is a major industrial process in the chemical industry that depends on the physical and chemical properties of a solvent to effect the separation of complex liquid mixtures, such as in the recovery of valuable products and the removal of contaminants in effluent streams. The separation potential and feasibility of solvents for commercial applicability are dependent on physical properties such as boiling point, thermal stability, viscosity, ease of recovery, toxicity and corrosive nature of the solvent. Liquid–liquid equilibrium data are essential for a proper understanding of extraction processes. The analysis of the composition of the two phases in equilibrium supplies considerable information about mass balance and mass transfer calculations in the design and optimization of separation processes. Liquid–liquid equilibrium (LLE) data for multicomponent systems including ionic liquids, although essential for the design and operation of separation processes, are still scarce. However, some recent studies Robles et al. In this work, LLE data for binary and ternary systems including ionic liquids with the tetrafluoroborate anion are correlated by a group-contribution model for the activity coefficient, the ASOG model The thermodynamic requirement for any type of phase equilibrium is that the compositions of each species in each phase in which it appears be such that the equilibrium criterion: is satisfied The compositions of the coexisting phases are the sets of mole fractions A group-contribution method is more effective in predicting the activity coefficient of the components compared to other methods. The effectiveness of this kind of method depends on the division of the solution into a number of interacting groups. As the mutual behavior of interacting groups cannot be determined experimentally, group-contribution thermodynamic models can be used, where the interaction parameters determined from the behavior of one or several real systems The analytical solution of groups, ASOG In ASOG, the Flory–Huggins The activity coefficient of component, In this work, new group interaction parameters for OH/pyrid, COO/pyrid, Imid/O and BF4/O have been determined from 15 binary and 09 ternary systems using the procedure below. In this work, a new group, the tetrafluoroborate anion (BF4), is proposed. New ASOG group interaction parameters involving the new group have been determined for 15 binary and 09 ternary systems using the Fortran code TML-LLE 2.0 Comparisons between experimental and calculated data can be made through root mean square (rms) absolute deviations between the experimental and the calculated composition of each component in both phases. These rms deviations are given by The ionic liquids involved in this work are listed in     For a more general view of the results,  LLE data for 24 systems and 186 tie lines including ionic liquids were predicted by the ASOG model for the activity coefficient. The group interaction parameters were estimated by minimization of a composition-based objective function using the Simplex method. The results of the prediction were satisfactory, with rms deviations between experimental and calculated equilibrium compositions with the values always below 10% and generally below 5%. The global value for rms was about 3%. From these deviations, we can conclude that ASOG was able to predict the phase behavior of the experimental data with a good precision. P.A. Robles is grateful to the National Council for Scientific and Technological Research (CONICYT-Chile) for grant FONDECYT Posdoct Project 3140013/2014 and L. Cisternas is grateful to University of Antofagasta for the support of this research.