The recovery and separation of rhenium and molybdenum from acidic aqueous solutions that simulate mine waters is studied through an adsorption process using magnetite nanoparticles functionalized with tertiary (TA-MNP) and quaternary amine (QA-MNP) groups as adsorbents. The functionalized nanoparticles (FMNP) were efficiently synthetized and physical and chemically characterized. An average particle size in the range of 6–8 nm based on HR-TEM analysis was determined for the nanoparticles, which exhibited a high saturation magnetization varying between 53 and 60 emu/g. Several factors that affected the recovery of Re(VII) and Mo(VI) from aqueous solution using the synthesized FMNP were studied, such as the adsorbent dose, initial concentration of metal and pH of the aqueous feed solution. In all experiments, QA-MNP presented a slightly better adsorption of both metals compared to TA-MNP. At pH 3, maximum rhenium loading capacities of 30 and 38 mgRe(VII)/gadsorbent were measured using TA-MNP and QA-MNP, respectively. In turn, maximum loading capacities of 60 and 65 mgMo(VI)/gadsorbent were determined utilizing TA-MNP and QA-MNP, respectively. Re(VII) and Mo(VI) equilibrium and kinetics were established in adsorption experiments. A pseudo-second-order kinetic model provided a good fit to the experimental data for the two metals using both adsorbents. Freundlich and Langmuir adsorption isotherm explained the experimental results.Currently, molybdenum is mainly used as a raw material to produce special steels and other alloys, while rhenium is widely used as catalyst in the oil refinery industry and in the production of superalloys resistant to high temperatures. Due to their multiple applications, these metals have been considered strategic for the development of new technologies. Hence, considering that normally both metals are located together in nature, it is necessary to dispose of available procedures for their extraction, separation and concentration. Molybdenum is mostly found in nature forming the compound molybdenite (MoS Customarily, in mining and metallurgical activities of an industrial character, the recovery and separation of these metals is conducted using the current solvent extraction process (SX), using anionic extractants derived from amines, such as Alamine 336 (a tertiary amine) ( Adsorption is effectively one of the alternative options to recover both metals. Many adsorbents can be used in hydrometallurgy, including natural and synthetic, and organic and inorganic adsorbents. Among them are activated carbon ( Undoubtedly, a practical way to overcome the separation difficulties of nanoparticles is to confer on them magnetic properties. This way, once the adsorption is ended, the separation of the adsorbate-loaded nanoparticles can be easily separated from the aqueous solution using a conventional magnet. In recent years, the use of magnetic nanoparticles has gained great interest in hydrometallurgy due to their potential applications, since their surface can be chemically modified according to the later applications ( The uptake of metals from aqueous solutions by adsorption using functionalized magnetite nanoparticles (FMNP) has generated increasing interest in recent years ( In this work, the recovery of rhenium and molybdenum from acid aqueous solutions that simulate mine waters is studied using functionalized magnetite nanoparticles (FMNP). One of them was functionalized with a tertiary amine (TA-MNP) and the other was modified with a quaternary ammonium salt (QA-MNP). This way, a promising composite material is generated that combines the potentialities of solvent extraction with the adsorbent properties of magnetic nanoparticles. At first, magnetite nanoparticles (MNP) were prepared by a coprecipitation method using FeCl A FEI microscope was used to record high-resolution transmission electron microscopy (HR-TEM) images. Zeta potential measurements of nanoparticles in aqueous solution were performed using a Malvern Instruments Zetasizer Nano ZS particle analyser. Thermogravimetric analysis (TGA) curves of the functionalized nanoparticles were obtained using a NETZSCH Instruments TG209 F1 Iris thermogravimetric analyser. Infrared spectra were obtained by mixing and grinding the solid nanoparticles with KBr for measurement in an Interspec 200-X instrument in the range 500–3500 cm The first experiments were planned with the objective of achieving the maximum adsorption capacity of the functionalized nanoparticles towards Re(VII) and Mo(VI) present in the acid aqueous solutions. Synthetic aqueous feed solutions that simulate mine waters were used in these experiments containing molybdenum and rhenium and whose pH were adjusted in a range between 3 and 7. The effects of the pH, metals concentration in the aqueous phase, and the dose of adsorbent on the adsorption of rhenium and molybdenum were studied. In a typical procedure, the mass of adsorbent was mixed at 600 rpm with a known volume of aqueous solution for 1 h at room temperature. The extent of the adsorption ( Once all the adsorption experiments were completed, nanoparticles were separated from the aqueous medium using an external neodymium magnet. Metal ion concentrations in all aqueous solutions were measured by atomic absorption spectrophotometry using a Perkin Elmer PinAAcle 900F apparatus. Molybdenum and Iron were determined using an air-acetylene flame, but rhenium was measured using a nitrous oxide-acetylene flame. The FMNP synthesis was highly reproducible and high yields were obtained. All the nanoparticles including those functionalized with the tertiary amine (TA-MNP) and with the quaternary amine salt (QA-MNP) showed a good dispersion in water and excellent magnetic response to an external magnet. In a first stage, magnetite nanoparticles (MNP) were obtained by the coprecipitation method of iron salts, which consisted in the simultaneous precipitation in a basic medium of the Fe(II) and Fe(III) ions giving the mixed Fe With respect to the functionalization of the magnetic nanoparticles with the tertiary and quaternary amine groups, the synthesis parameters were also optimized with the purpose of facilitating the interaction between the hydroxyl groups (Fe-OH) present on the surface of the MNP and the carboxylate group (COO In this way, both of the synthesized FMNP resemble the chemical structure of Alamine 336 and Aliquat 336, both of which are commercial extractants widely employed in industrial solvent extraction processing for molybdenum and rhenium. In this case, the active metallic ion species in the adsorption process of these metals would be attached to the magnetic nanoparticle, thus combining the advantages of the liquid–liquid SX process and the use of magnetic adsorbents which are easily separated from the treated aqueous solution. The high-resolution transmission electron microscopy (HR-TEM) technique was used to analyse some of the properties of the nanoparticles such as their morphology and size. The HR-TEM images obtained for MNP, TA-MNP and QA-MNP are presented in In The zeta potential of the adsorbent composites was measured as a function of pH to identify the changes in the surface charge of the synthesized nanoparticles when they are suspended in aqueous medium. The curves thus obtained are presented in A potential of zero charge (pH  Mass losses between 3.4 and 5% were observed below 100 °C which can be attributed to some remaining volatile solvent used in the synthesis process. In curve (a) corresponding to TA-MNP, significant mass losses were observed in the range of 224–793 °C. The decomposition of N, N dimethylglycine begins at temperatures close to 230 °C, so it is possible to assign this loss of mass to its decomposition. Other authors propose that the degradation of the N, N dimethylglycine in this temperature range would generate mainly carbon dioxide, trimethylamine and ethylene ( FTIR spectroscopy analysis allows us to observe the presence of characteristic chemical bonds, what would allow confirm the attachment of some species onto the surface of the nanoparticles. The obtained spectra for MNP, TA-MNP and QA-MNP are presented in In the three spectra included in Finally, magnetization measurements were performed to study the magnetic behaviour of the synthesized nanoparticles. A value of zero coercivity and the absence of remnant magnetization are fundamental requirements in order for the nanoparticles to be considered superparamagnetic. This superparamagnetic property indicates that they are constituted by a single magnetic domain, which means that when a magnet approaches the magnetic particles, they are collapsed, but when the magnet is moved away, the particles once again are dispersed. The magnetism curves obtained for MNP, TA-MNP and QA-MNP are presented in An exhaustive review of the magnetism curves of The chemical stability of the functionalized nanoparticles was evaluated in order to establish the appropriate acidity range in which these adsorbents can be used. These experiments were conducted by contacting aqueous solutions of different pH with 50 mg of the functionalized nanoparticles for 24 h. Later, leached iron in solutions was measured. The results are expressed as percentage of iron leached at different pH conditions, as indicated in  With the objective of testing the feasibility of adsorbing rhenium and molybdenum ionic species existing in acidic aqueous solution that simulates mine waters onto TA-MNP and QA-MNP, several adsorption experiments were designed and conducted. In this part of the work, the influence on the adsorption ability of the synthesized functionalized magnetite nanoparticles of the initial pH, the initial concentration of metal in the aqueous feed solution, and the mass or dose of adsorbent were studied. In The dependence of Re(VII) and Mo(VI) adsorption on the mass of adsorbent employed in the experiments is shown in The adsorption of both metals is increased as the mass of adsorbent is augmented. This result is expected because a greater dose of adsorbent implies a higher number of vacant adsorption sites and a larger surface area available for a better adsorption of MoO These experiments led us to design another set of adsorption experiments with the purpose of obtaining the maximum Re(VII) and Mo(VI) loading capacities using QA-MNP and TA-MNP adsorbents. The effect of the initial Re(VII) and Mo(VI) concentration in the aqueous solution on the adsorption capacity of both adsorbents ‘‘ In As was mentioned above, rhenium and molybdenum are usually found together in solutions derived from the leaching of molybdenite. At this point, it is important to separate both metals. With the aim of studying the adsorption selectivity of TA-MNP and QA-MNP towards these ions, some experiments varying the pH of the aqueous solutions were designed and conducted. These experiments were carried out using bimetallic aqueous solutions containing 100 mg/L of Re(VII) and 250 mg/L of Mo(VI), which were mixed with 200 mg of each adsorbent. The adsorption was evaluated in a pH range varying between pH 3 and 7. The results are presented in This way, as in the solvent extraction processing of molybdenum and rhenium using amine-type anionic extractants, their separation is brought about during the stripping stage. When using these adsorbents, the separation of both metals from leaching solutions should be achieved by recovering the contents of Mo(VI) in a first step followed of a second stage in which Re(VII) would be extracted. No chance of a co-adsorption of cationic species would be possible given the adsorption mechanism of these synthesized FMNP. Any practical application of these adsorbents makes necessary to study the possible desorption of metals from them and the repetitive reuse of these compounds in new adsorption-desorption cycles. Effectively, preliminary metal desorption experiments and the reuse of adsorbents were carried out by using sodium hydroxide solutions as desorption agent. In these experiments desorption extents close to 80% were measured. Adsorption and desorption of rhenium and molybdenum were achieved with both functionalized nanoparticles (QA-MNP and TA-MNP), being observed decreasing around 20% of their loading capacity (q) after five repetitive cycles, which is comparable to others adsorbents. From a practical point of view, it is necessary to obtain information about the adsorption equilibrium behaviour of the TA-MNP and QA-MNP adsorbents toward the different adsorbates. The adsorption equilibrium is usually described by some adsorption isotherms whose parameters express the surface properties and the affinity of the adsorbent for the adsorbate at a given temperature and pH. Experimental results of equilibrium experiments were analysed using the conventional Langmuir and Freundlich isotherm models. The very well-known Langmuir isotherm represents a theoretical monolayer-type adsorption on a homogeneous surface, which is given as follows: In turn, the Freundlich isotherm corresponds to an empirical model that assumes a heterogeneous surface and an adsorption process in multiple layers, where the surface sites do not possess any uniform heat of adsorption. The Freundlich isotherm is based on the fact that a higher concentration of the adsorbate in aqueous solution increases its adsorption on the surface of the adsorbent. This isotherm can be written as follows: Equilibrium experiments were carried out at 25 °C and pH 3.0 using samples of aqueous solutions whose initial metal concentration was varied between 10 and 600 mg/L. The results for Re(VII) and Mo(VI) adsorption using TA-MNP and QA-MNP are shown in The values determined for the parameters of the Langmuir and Freundlich equilibrium adsorption isotherms obtained for the two metals using both adsorbents are given in In To obtain information concerning the adsorption rate of Re(VII) and Mo(VI) ions from aqueous solutions on TA-MNP and QA-MNP, a set of kinetic experiments were carried out using samples of the aqueous solution whose metal contents were adjusted to 100 mg/L with an initial pH of 3.0. Many authors have proposed different adsorption rate models that explain the experimental results of using natural or synthetic adsorbents ( In Eq. In The values of the rate constants determined in these experiments were low because the values calculated by the model correspond to an average value for the entire elapsed time. The high initial adsorption rate is compensated by a very low rate towards the end of the process. Finally, the measured It was possible to synthesize magnetite nanoparticles functionalized with a tertiary amine (TA-MNP) and with a quaternary group (QA-MNP) to evaluate them as adsorbents for Re(VII) and Mo(VI) present in acidic aqueous solutions. The FMNP were characterized using distinct methodologies. VSM evidenced the superparamagnetic behaviour of both magnetic functionalized nanoparticles. In addition, TGA and FTIR techniques demonstrated the presence of amine-derived groups on the surface of the nanoparticles which evidenced the functionalization of them. The studies of metal adsorption by these functionalized nanoparticles provided the optimal conditions, achieving values of maximum loading capacity ( Mr. José Gaete acknowledges Doctoral Fellowship N° 21140082 from