In this paper, we described a convenient synthetic route towards crosslinked poly(vinylbenzyl chloride) resins bearing diamine and guanidine ligands. A series of 24 resins were synthesised from an expanded gel (A), and porous (B, C) vinylbenzyl chloride copolymers using alkyldiamines (1,2-diaminoethane, 1,3-diaminopropane, 1,4-diaminobutane and 1,6-diaminohexane) and cyanamide. The resins contain amine and guanidine functionality of 3.1–5.7 mmol/g. The resins reveal excellent sorption ability towards gold, palladium and platinum anions from hydrochloric acid solutions which is proportional to anion-exchange capacity. Among all investigated resins A2 and B2 resins show excellent sorption in acidic solution up to 100 mg Au/g, 105 Pt mg/g, respectively. Palladium sorption is about 50% lower than in other noble metals. High distribution coefficients are observed up to 170,000 for palladium, 50,000 for platinum and for gold. The resins with a longer spacer of the hydrophobic methylene between the amnio group and the terminal guanidine group reveal a higher dicyanoaurate sorption from KCN solution at 9.6 pH. The expanded gel resins, AG6, up to 45 mg Au/g show the best sorptive properties.In recent years, an increasing effort has been devoted to the preparation of ion-exchange resins, chelating and coordinating resins that are useful for gold, platinum and palladium extraction. The recovery of noble metals from waste solutions is a very important economical and ecological problem that attracts attention of many researchers. Polymeric materials, ion-exchange resins containing selective functional groups and chelating resins have been used for many years in laboratories and have been employed for application in hydrometallurgy processes. Since the choice of ligand introduced into resin plays an important role in achieving selectivity, a variety of functional groups, which can be selectively loaded with desired metals, have been utilised The ion-exchange resin IONAC SR3 is a commercial macroporous polystyrene/divinylbenzene resin with (iso)thiouronium functional groups supplied by Sybron Chemicals Inc. Selective ion-exchange resins, like IONAC SR3, can chelate gold and silver. However, they cannot interact with alkaline and alkaline earth metals, not to mention transition metals such as copper and zinc The Russians have developed a number of ion exchanger resins for gold. Nonetheless, it seems that the most effecive and the most widely used in the RIP process is the AM-2B resin. This resin has been used for more than 20 years in the gold plants of Russia Guanidine is one of the most well-known chelating ligands for metals ions and polymers. This compound has been prepared and used in our laboratory as sorbents of metals In a program to develop selective resins, a family of ion-exchange resins, chelating and coordinating polymers, were synthesised in our laboratory. Recently, we have reported a series of resins bearing guanidine ligands attached to a polymer The aim of this work was not only to synthesise resins, but also to try to estimate the effect that different chain length of amine and guanidine ligands of crosslinking resins can have on their application in noble metals sorption. These resins were prepared with use of vinylbenzyl chloride and divinylbenzene suspension copolymerisation and furthermore by subsequent chlorine exchanging by diamine. After that the amino groups were chemically modified by reacting with cyanamide. The resins were characterised by the surface area, meaning: pore radius, porosity in swollen state, water uptake, content of chloride and nitrogen, and amino groups’ capacity. Their abilities for gold, palladium and platinum sorption were evaluated. The starting vinylbenzyl chloride-divinylbenzene copolymer, VBC/DVB, containing 2% of crosslinker, coded A, was obtained in the presence of toluene (50 wt% in respect to the monomers mixture) in order to obtain a material with an expanded gel structure. Details of this procedure have previously been presented in Two porous vinylbenzyl chloride polymers crosslinked with 10% of divinylbenzene were prepared by suspension polymerisation technique in the presence of porogens i.e., decyl alcohol for copolymer B and mixture of toluene and The amino resin was prepared by the following procedure. First, VBC/DVB, polymer has been modified with diamine in order to introduce primary and secondary amino groups into its structure. Next, amino groups attached to the polymeric matrix were transformed in the reaction with cyanamide resulting in a long arm guanidine ligand. The resins differ in the length of the hydrophobic methylene spacer between the amine group and the terminal guanidine group as shown in The procedure was as follows: about 5 g of poly(vinylbenzyl chloride) copolymer, VBC/DVB, was made swollen overnight in 70 ml of dioxane in 250 ml three-necked flask with a reflux condenser and the thermometer. For the first amination, a diamine was added into the swollen polymer (it was done in order to prevent crosslinking formation as the chlorine content in the polymer reaches 10:1) and the mixture was refluxed for 2–24 h. Resin A2 was obtained in 7 days at the room temperature. The resultant product was filtred. After amination, the resin beads were washed successively with cold and hot water until the pH of the eluate was near neutral. Then the resin was washed with 1 M HCl, water and 1 M NaOH. This procedure was repeated three times and finally the resin was washed with 0.001 M HCl. Resins were coded as An, i.e. A2–A6 with accordance to the number of CH The next step was to incorporate guanidine functionality into the amine ligand fixed on VBC/DVB matrix. This process has also been reported in our previous paper According to Water regain was measured using the centrifugation technique in which about 1 g of swollen in water polymer was placed in a glass vial with a fritted glass bottom and centrifuged for 5 min at 3000 rpm. After drying in high vacuum at 60 °C for 24 h, the polymer was weighted. The water regain is expressed as a ratio ( The chlorine content was measured by burning of about 30 mg of the dry polymer sample in an oxygen-filled flask. The products of burning were adsorbed in diluted hydrogen peroxide solution. The content of Cl was determined using the Volhardt’s method All monomers were purchased from Aldrich Chemical Co. Vinylbenzyl chloride was purified by the process of distillation under a reduced pressure. Inverse Steric Exlusion Chromatography (ISEC) was used to characterise the polymers swollen in water. A LC-A6 liquid chromatography pump (Shimadzu) equipped with an RIDK 102 refractometer detector was used. Polymers in a swollen form were packed in 150 A batch method was used to examine the sorption of gold, platinum and palladium in acidic solutions. It was also used to examine the gold sorption in alkali solution from one component solution. The resin, in a swollen form, (equivalent to 0.048 mmol of ligand concentration), was introduced into 50 ml PP bottle containing 20 ml of 0.24 mM metal solution and shaken for 48 h at ambient temperature. Next, the polymers were separated by filtration. The concentration of Au, Pt and Pd was determined using Perkin–Elmer AAnalyst 100 atomic spectrophotometer set at 242.8, 265.9 and 244.8 nm wavelength, respectively. Stock solutions of Au(III), Pt(IV) and Pd(II) were prepared by dissolving appropriate amounts of HAuCl The amount of metal sorption in the resin phase (in mg metal/g of dry resin) was calculated from the mass balance and the initial concentration in the aqueous solution. The distribution coefficients ( Reagents for the sorption study were purchased as analytical grade from Aldrich Chemical Co. In this paper, we report the suspension polymerisation procedure leading to three vinylbenzyl chloride (VBC) and divinylbenzene (DVB), copolymers (VBC/DVB). These polymers were using various inert diluents and diverse content of DVB. A series of resins containing diamine ligands and guanidine ligands have been obtained. Also the effect of the length of alkyl spacer incorporated between amino groups attached into benzyl groups in VBC mers and terminal amino and guanidino group on the noble metals sorption has been investigated. In order to obtain a material with the expanded gel structure copolymer A, containing 2 wt% of DVB (in respect to monomer content) and 5.36 mmol Cl/g was obtained in the presence of toluene. Copolymers B and C with nominal content of DVB 10% and 5.25 and 5.15 mmol of Cl/g were synthesised in the presence of toluene–hexane mixture and decyl alcohol as inert diluents, respectively. Modification using the above solvents was aimed at changing the porous structure of polymers. Characteristics of the obtained materials are shown in The porosity of polymers swollen in water was determined by ISEC and the results are presented in These studies have shown that the structure of VBC/DVB copolymers depends on the kind of diluent and crosslinker content used in the synthesis. The non-sol diluents caused an increase of copolymer porosity while the sol diluent resulted in the gel structure. Larger pore dimension and lower surface areas were achieved with decyl alcohol due to an increased amount of mesopores and macropores ( Modification of investigated copolymers was conducted in two steps. In the first step, a series of resins coded A2–A6, B2–B6, C2–C6 were obtained with terminal amino groups in ligands separated by ethylene, propylene, butylene and hexylene spacer from polymeric backbone. In the second series (AG2–AG6, BG2–BG6, CG2–CG6), guanidine moieties were incorporated into terminal amino groups by reacting amino groups with cyanamide in DMSO solution. The characteristic of copolymers and resins derived from them are presented in Displacement of chlorine atoms with diamines gave the resins A2–A6, B2–B6 and C2–C6 with amino groups. The degree of Cl substitution calculated from unreacted residual chlorine analysis was high and close to 98%. The Cl content given in During modification of the investigated resins the penetration of the modifying agent, i.e., diamine towards chlorine atoms in VBC mers and cyanamide to amino groups is controlled by crosslinking degree. Higher crosslinking degree limits random access to reacting chlorine species atoms. Higher capacity of amino groups is probably a consequence of the less rigid skeleton of the copolymer A (only 2% DVB) and higher permeability of its matrix. Ion exchanger preparation in which amino and guanidino groups were introduced into polymer matrices were found to have significant effects on the pore dimension, porosity and surface area. The results of pore dimension, porosity and surface area obtained by ISEC are presented in It can be noticed in Porosity of polymers was characterised by the pore size distribution The introduction of guanidine functionalities to copolymers A, B and C was confirmed by the FTIR spectra. The sorption capacities of resins for each metal are presented in The kinetic studies of Au(III) sorption from hydrochloric solution are presented in The dicyanoaurate sorption ability of resins has been investigated with an excess of potassium cyanide at pH 9.6. Dicyanoaurate complexes were extracted with resin-in pulp methods. These conditions simulate low grade ores cyanide leaching at pH 10. Most weak base resins possess p The results in The gold sorption does not increase with an increase of ligand content, as in resin A2 and AG6 as well as resin B2 and BG6, C2 and CG6. One can conclude from data in We have designed and synthesised a series of resins consisting of vinylbenzyl chloride and divinylbenzene copolymers that were modified by attaching an anion-exchange group in VBC mers and then by reacting it with cyanamide. The resins contained amine functionality of 3.1–5.7 mmol/g of dry polimer and water content of 1.2–3.8 g/g. The ISEC method has been used to characterise the investigated material, i.e., that the B series resins were microporous and the C series resins were mesoporous. It was found that the investigated resins, bearing alkyldiamine and guanidine groups, were suitable for the removal of gold Au(III), platinum Pt(IV) and palladium Pd(II) from hydrochloric acid. Moreover it was observed that these resins were also capable of removing gold Au(I) from cyanide solution at pH 9.6 with high efficiency. The best sorptive properties had the expanded gel resins from the A and AG series. Out of this group AG6 resin was found to exhibit the maximum Au(I) sorption capacity from cyanide solution, 46 mg Au/g. The attached ligand structure was found to affect the Au(I) sorption capacity, whereas porosity affected the kinetic of the sorption process. By optimising the chain length and the degree of chlorine atoms substitution in VBC mers, these resins may be found useful in separating gold from solutions containing other metal ions. It may be suggested that the chain length of the ligand introduced to the resin have influenced the sorbatibility and the selectivity for sorption of metal ions. It can be concluded that higher amino group content, the chain length, higher water content, low crosslinking abilities of resin and an expanded structure of resin are responsible for the excellent sorption abilities towards noble metals. Future studies concerning selectivity of sorption from multicomponent solutions are in progress and will be published in due course. These resins offer the prospect of removing and recovery of gold, platinum and palladium more effectively from many secondary waste solutions. This work is supported by the Polish Committee of Scientific Research under Grant # 7 T09B 119 21.