This study aimed to increase resistant starch (RS) content of black chickpeas (Cicer arietinum L.) by using pullulanase enzyme. Physicochemical and functional properties of enzyme treated starch (NE) was compared with that of enzyme-treated and gelatinized starch (GE) and the retrograded control starch (RC). RS contents for native black chickpea starch (NS) and black chickpea flour (NF) were measured as 15.2% and 5.0%, respectively. While for NE and GE, were found as 16.4% and 12.3%, respectively. Treatments made on the NS, increased the amount of RDS and reduced the amount of SDS significantly (p < .05). When the effect of enzyme application-autoclaving and retrogradation were compared, 41.3% increase in RS content was measured. In this study; RS3 production from black chickpea starch by a pullulanase enzyme was successfully performed. Enzymatic applications also improved the functional properties such as water absorption capacity, water solubility index value, fat binding capacity and emulsifying capacity. This enzyme treated black chickpea starch samples, being functionally improved, will possibly help to produce different products with desired quality parameters. Therefore, instead of native starch, pullulanase treated black chickpea starch may be used as a functional ingredient for increasing the amount of RS in food formulations.Chickpeas ( Chickpea is composed of 22% protein, 4.5% fat, 63% carbohydrate, 8.0% crude fiber and 2.7% ash [ During starch gelatinization, amylose molecules are strengthened against enzymes by the crystal structure after reformation of double helical structure of starch. Therefore, starch crystallization is very highly effective on RS3 formation [ This study mainly aimed to 1) increase resistant starch formation by an enzymatic method in black chickpea starch and also add value to desi type chickpea; 2) characterize and identify the composition of black chickpea starch; 3) clarify the efficiency of using gelatinized or native starch for optimum resistant starch production and 4) investigate the effect of enzyme application on functional and thermal properties and determine whether this black chickpea starch can be used as an ingredient in the food industry as a new source of starch. Black chickpeas grown and harvested in Malatya, Turkey in 2013, were bought from a local market in Istanbul. They were stored at room conditions until analysis. Starch was isolated from black chickpea, using the previous method [ Black chickpeas were separated from foreign materials, grinded using a grinder (Waring Commercial, Torrington, USA), sieved through a 214 μm sieve and stored at room conditions in sealed jars until analysis. Native black chickpea flour (NF) and starch (NS) were analyzed for their moisture (AOAC International Method No. 925.10), ash (AOAC International Method No. 923.03), protein (Kjeldahl Method, AOAC International Method 920.87) and oil contents (Soxhelet extraction Method, A previous method for enzyme modification of starch and resistant starch production was used [ Total resistant starch and total starch contents in the samples were determined according to AOAC Method 2002.02 and AACCI Method 32–40, respectively using the Resistant Starch Assay Kit (Megazyme Int. Ireland Ltd., Wicklow, Ireland). Samples were incubated in a shaking water bath with pancreatic α-amylase and amyloglucosidase (AMG) for 16 h at 37 °C, during which non-resistant starch is solubilized and hydrolyzed to Starch digestibility was measured as RDS and SDS. Determination of RDS was made using the resistant starch assay kit (140307-1, Megazyme Int., Ireland). Starch samples were incubated with α-amylase and amyloglucosidase enzymes in a shaking water bath at 37 °C for 20 min. Reaction was stopped by adding ethanol and the resistant starch in the precipitate was separated after centrifugation. Amount of glucose in the digested supernatant was determined spectrophotometrically at 510 nm. The similar procedure was repeated for SDS and incubation was stopped after 120 min again by using ethanol. After centrifugation and separation of the precipitate, glucose content of the supernatant was determined spectrophotometrically at 510 nm. The absorbance value for RDS was subtracted from the current absorbance value to calculate the amount of SDS. The following formulations were used in the calculations. RDS: Rapidly digestible starch. SDS: Slowly digestible starch. G G F: 100/GOPOD absorbance W: [sample weight × (100 − moisture content) / 100]. 0.9 is used to represent an experimental factor to convert monosaccharides into polysaccharides. Water holding capacity and water solubility properties of the starch samples were measured using a previously described method [ Swelling power method comprises the addition of distilled water (20 ml) onto starch samples (0.2 g), mainly [ For determining the emulsion capacities of starch samples [ The method for oil absorption was based on a previous study [ Starch suspensions (2%, w/w) were kept at 85 °C water bath for 30 min and then they were kept in ice to cool down to room temperature. Cooled samples were stored at 4 °C for different time intervals (24 h, 48 h and 120 h) and centrifuged at 1648 Turbidity of samples were measured with a spectrophotometric method [ Thermal properties (transition onset temperature, T A Rapid Visco Analyzer (RVA; Newport Scientific, Warriewood, Australia) was used for determining the viscoelastic properties of samples. 3.5 g of sample (with 14% moisture) were mixed with 25 ml of distilled water. Pasting data was acquired using Thermocline version 1.2 software (Newport Scientific). According to the applied method, equilibrated samples (at 50 °C, for 1 min) were heated to 95 °C in approximately 3.75 min and held at that temperature for 2.25 min, and then cooled down to 50 °C in almost 4 min. Cycle was completed after 2 min of equilibration at 50 °C to complete the total cycle in 13 min. Pasting data was acquired using Thermocline software (Newport Scientific). Pasting tests were repeated twice for each sample by following AACCI Method 76-21 [ Crystal structures of starch and flour samples were determined by an X-ray diffractometer (Phillips X'Pert Pro, PANanalytical, Holland). The radiation used was Cu-Kα (wavelength of 0.1544 nm). The scan was performed at 45 kV and 40 mA for a 2θ range of 10–35° with a rate of 1°/min at room temperature. Amounts of crystal and amorphous phases were measured and diffractograms were prepared. All analyses were performed in triplicate. Granular starch structures in native chickpea flour and isolated starch in addition to treated samples were depicted by Scanning Electron Microscope (SEM). They were fixed on aluminum pin-type stubs using carbon paste. Excess powder was removed using high-pressure air. Samples were coated with gold‑palladium by a mini sputter coater (Quorum SC7620; Quorum Technologies Ltd., Laughton, UK). The samples were viewed at 800 and 10,000 × resolutions with a scanning electron microscope (FEI Quanta 250 Company, Hillsboro, OR, USA). Statistical evaluation among treatments was carried out using the SPSS (version 16.0) statistical program by one-way analysis of variance. Duncan's new multiple range test was used for detailed verification of significant differences ( Results for proximate analysis of both chickpea flour and isolated starch are given in Ash contents in native starch and chickpea flour samples were consistent with previous studies [ Protein content of native starch from chickpea was lower than 1%. Therefore, its purity may be considered as relatively high [ Starch samples (NS, NE, GE and RC) were characterized for their total starch contents, RS, RDS and SDS contents and amylose contents ( The lowest amylose content was found in native chickpea starch (19.5%). Amylose contents of starches isolated from different varieties of chickpea samples were previously reported to range between 28.6 and 34.3% [ Resistant starch content of NF was 5% while NS was found to contain 15.2% RS. Initial RS content in NS decreased to 11.6% in RC samples. Type of RS present in native chickpea starch is RS2 and its structure may have been deteriorated by adequate heat treatment [ With hydrolysis, starch branching points (α-1,6 bonds) are disrupted and thus the number of linear chains increased. The resulting linear chains interact more easily with each other during incubation with the enzyme and subsequent drying, thereby increasing the formation of enzyme resistant structures. Similarly, it was previously determined that RS was not present in the natural form of corn starch, but at a level of 8.1% instead, after the applied gelatinization, autoclaving and drying processes [ Water holding capacity and water solubility index (%) values of starch samples were depicted in The lowest water solubility index was measured for NS (0.40%). Any treatment made significant increases on the water solubility index of NS ( Swelling power of starch samples differed significantly after treatments ( Starch swelling power is mostly associated with the amylopectin fraction of starch granules. Particularly crystal structure in amylopectin molecules are responsible for the starch swelling power and gelatinization. The long chain (≥35 polymerization degree) ratio is an effective factor on the increase in swelling power, whereas cross binding increases the molecular interactions but decreases the swelling power [ Oil absorption and emulsion capacity (%) properties of native and treated starch samples were depicted in The lowest emulsion capacity was detected in control samples. Although autoclaving and retrogradation increased the amount of emulsion capacity slightly they were not found significant ( Syneresis properties of native and treated starch samples were evaluated on 24th, 48th and 120th hours of storage ( Starch gelatinization with heating enables the starch granules to become partially soluble and soluble starch passes into the solution. Solved starch has a high viscosity and forms gel when it is cooled. New hydrogen bonds are formed between starch chains when this gel was kept aside. Syneresis is defined as the water leakage from the structure in systems with high amount of water content, after interactions of starch chains [ The highest amount of syneresis was detected in RC sample (5.76%), while the lowest value was measured for GE sample (4.50%) after 24 h of storage. The highest amount of amylose (54.3%) was measured in GE sample, as depicted in When syneresis values were compared with previous findings on different chickpea samples; (6.9–8.7% after 24 h; 9.6–11.6% after 48 h and 14.7–18.5% after 120 h) it was seen that for black chickpea samples syneresis were lower than other chickpeas especially after 48 h and 120 h of storage [ Turbidity properties of native and treated starch samples were measured throughout 5 days and results were given in According to the initial turbidity measurements of starch samples, the lowest turbidity was measured in RC sample (1.31 ± 0.28). This value was significantly lower ( Thermal properties of native and treated black chickpea starch samples in addition to chickpea flour were given in Main pasting properties of both starch samples and black chickpea flour were given in X-ray diffraction properties were depicted in Morphology of native chickpea starch and treated starch samples were investigated by scanning electron microscope (SEM) micrographs ( Resistant starch (RS3) content of black chickpea starch was successfully increased using enzymatic procedures. Chickpea starch is found to be a potential source for resistant starch production. It is seen that starch isolated from black chickpeas are unique in terms of their RS content and their technological use. Higher water retention, water solubility, oil retention and emulsion capacity will make it possible to produce products from black chickpea starch with the desired quality characteristics. The resulting starch seems promising for its use as a functional ingredient by virtue of these properties and as a substitute for natural starch to increase the amount of RS. In this study, H. Demirkesen-Bicak was financially supported during her postgraduate study at Istanbul Technical University (ITU) Food Engineering Department, by the Graduate Study Support Fund of ITU Graduate School of Science, Engineering and Technology (Grant Number: 38457). RVA analyses were conducted at Abdullah Gul University (AGU), Kayseri, Turkey. We thank Dr. Kevser Kahraman for her support.