In the present study the evaporative precipitation into aqueous solution (EPAS) process and the high homogenization press (HPH) process were compared to evaluate their feasibility to form a chemically stable quercetin nanosuspension. The particle size and Zeta potential of the EPAS nanosuspension were similar to those of the HPH nanosuspension. Differences in results of differential scanning calorimetery and X-ray measures were observed between the two processes. The crystalline-to-amorphous phase transition was shown in the profile of EPAS dried powder. On the contrary the initial crystalline state of drug was maintained throughout the HPH process. Dissolution test results indicated that the EPAS process showed a higher improvement in the drug solubility and dissolution rate than the HPH process. At last the High performance liquid chromatography (HPLC) analysis proved the superiority of both nanosuspensions over QCT solution formulation for the chemical and photo-stability. As a result, it can be concluded that the EPAS and HPH techniques were feasible to prepare a chemically stable QCT nanosuspension with significantly enhanced dissolution rate.Quercetin (QCT, 3,3′,4′,5,7-pentahydroxyflavone, Recently, the nanosuspension technology has been successfully applied to tackle the formulation issue of the poorly soluble drugs. Nanosuspension is a carrier-free colloid drug delivery system containing only minimum stabilizers and pure drug particles with a mean particle size in the nanometer range, typically between 10 and 1000 Generally, the nanosuspension techniques are classified as bottom up processes and top down processes according to the differences of the production principle ( The aim of this study was to compare the EPAS process (bottom-up) and the HPH process (top-down) for the preparation of QCT nanosuspension. QCT nanosuspension was characterized in terms of particle size, size distribution, thermal properties and X-ray powder diffraction. The solubility and dissolution behavior of QCT before and following EPAS and HPH process were also compared. At last the chemico- and photo-stability of nanosuspension were evaluated over the monitoring period. QCT (95.0%) was purchased from Zelang herbs Company (Nanjing, China). QCT standard (98.0%) was purchased from the Shanhai Tongtian Co. Ltd. Pluronic F68 and lecithin was purchased from the Sigma-Aldrich Chemical Co. (USA). Acetonitrile used was of HPLC grade, and other materials were of analytical grade. HPLC analysis of QCT was performed on an Agilent 1200 series HPLC system (Agilent, USA) equipped with an autosampler system and a variable wavelength UV detector. The detection wavelength was set at 373 The calibration curve was linear within the range of 0.1–200 0.2 Pluronic F68 (0.75%, w/v) and lecithin (0.25%, w/v) were completely dispersed in 20 First the QCT nanoparticles were gathered from nanosuspension by centrifugation using an ultracentrifuge (Biofuge stratos, Kendro Laboratory Products, Osterode, Germany) at 4 The particle size and Zeta potential of QCT nanosuspension were measured with a Zetasizer (3000SH, Malvern Instruments Ltd., UK). All measurements were made in triplicate and the mean values and standard deviations were reported. The morphology of nanosuspensions was observed using TEM (JEM-1200EX, Japan). One drop of nanosuspensions was placed on a copper grid and stained with 2% phosphotungstic acid solution for 2 Thermal properties of the powder samples were investigated with a differential scanning calorimeter (CDR-4P, Shanghai, China). Approximate 10 The crystalline state of the samples was estimated by an X-ray diffractometer (D/max r-B, Rigaku, Japan). The experiments were performed in symmetrical reflection mode with a Cu line as the source of radiation. Standard runs using a 40 To compare the solubility of the QCT before and following nanosizing process, saturation solubility was determined using a constant-temperature shaker (THX-82, Shanghai, China). Samples containing equivalent QCT (20 Dissolution behavior of the QCT For the chemical stability studies, all samples were kept in siliconized glass vials at 25 The particle size and Zeta potential of EPAS nanosuspension and HPH nanosuspension were shown in  The XRPD patterns of the QCT, Pluronic F68, lecithin, the physical mixture and lyophilized powder were as shown in The solubility of bulk QCT was only 10.28  The effects of nanosuspension technology on improving the chemical and photo-stability of QCT were investigated. Based on the maximum solubility of QCT in water (10.5 From Both nanosuspensions show a good physical stability with a moderate size increase during 1 month of monitoring (data not shown), however, further investigation of physical stability was not performed, because the long-term physical stability was not the aim of the present studies, it would be investigated in detail in the future research. The alteration of the physical state of the substances before and after the formation could be analyzed through DSC and XRPD studies. DSC was performed to investigate the interaction between the drugs and the excipients during the fabrication process and evaluate the effect of the excipients on the inner structure of drugs. XRPD could be used to analyze potential changes in the inner structure of drug crystals during the nanosizing process. The differences between EPAS dried powder and HPH dried powder in physical state might result from the different production principles. The HPH process mechanically breaks the microparticles preferentially at weak points, i.e. imperfections. With the process of the comminution the number of imperfections is getting less and less and the crystals remaining are becoming more and more perfect. When the mechanical force is equal to the interaction forces in the crystal, the particles will not further diminute, and the drug retains the original crystalline structure (  Considering the same formulation composition and similar particle size, the higher solubility of the EPAS dried powder compared to the HPH dried powder could be ascribed to its amorphous state. It was well known that the amorphous state characterized by higher energy showed relative higher solubility compared with the crystalline state ( Besides the increase in saturation solubility, enhancement of the dissolution rate was also achieved for the nano-sized powder as shown in Results of the stability studies proved that nanosuspension could significantly improve the chemical- and photo-stability of QCT compared with the solution stored in the same conditions ( Both EPAS and HPH process were shown to be a simple and adequate operation to fabricate QCT nanosuspension. The two processes exhibited opposite effects on the physical state throughout the production, crystalline state of QCT was shown not to be altered through HPH process, and a crystalline-to-amorphous phase transition occurred through EPAS process. The EPAS nanosuspension showed higher improvement in drug solubility and dissolution rate compared to the HPH suspension due to its higher inner energy related to the amorphous phase. Remarkable improvement in chemical and photo-stability of QCT molecules in nanosuspension was observed compared with the solution. The increased chemical stability could not only hold the activity but also reduce the toxicity of QCT. The present studies demonstrated that both the EPAS and HPH process could be utilized as a useful method for preparing a chemically stable QCT nanosuspension. Institute of Radiation Medicine, Academy of Military Medical Science, Beijng, China is gratefully acknowledged for supporting the Zetasizer machine. We are grateful for editorial assistance provide by Dr. Luan.