The present study aims to understand non-isothermal reduction behavior of nanocrystalline NiO powder in undiluted CH4 and Ar atmospheres by thermal analysis, mass measurement and XRD techniques. Low Ni content observed in the oxide powder was attributed to the moisture and OH groups which were removed upon heating to 625K above which reduction of NiO to Ni took place in both atmospheres. Under Ar flow, the oxide powder was slightly reduced to Ni as temperature increased to 1300K. In CH4 atmosphere, the oxide reduction was followed by C deposition with increasing temperature. Complete reduction of NiO to Ni was attained at ~1000K owing to H2 formed by CH4 pyrolysis. It was observed that nickel particles were sintered into pellets with a size of ~2μm at 1100K under CH4 flow. At 1200 and 1300K, Ni had finer particles with sizes <200nm and gained mass in consequence of C deposition.NiO is an intermediate product extracted from nickel ores (e.g. lateritic ore) by various hydro/pyrometallurgical processes. It has been used for producing metallic Ni, which is an alloying element in metallurgical products ( A comprehensive review on the reduction of NiO by gaseous agents (H The present work was carried out because little is known about non-isothermal behavior of NiO powder in undiluted CH The experimental synthesis set-up used for the present study consists of a hot-wall furnace with SiC heating elements, a quartz tube (20 The oxide powder (~ DSC, TGA and DTA analyses of the NiO powder used (0.06268  Mass of the oxide powder heated to 625 Let us now revisit Further examination of the data in Because H Obviously, the reduction reaction is accompanied by mass loss. At temperatures >  Assuming that Ni and NiO are pure (their activities are equal to unity), the Gibbs' free energy change of the reaction (ΔG Reduction of NiO is thermodynamically feasible when P    Non-isothermal behavior of nanocrystalline NiO powder was investigated in undiluted CH The Ni content of nanocrystalline NiO powder was found to be ~ The lower Ni content in the powder was attributed to the moisture and OH groups which were removed upon heating to 625 Reduction of NiO was observed at temperatures > NiO was partially reduced during heating to 1300 Sintered Ni pellets with a size of the order of 2 The reduction of NiO to Ni was attributable to H2 produced by CH4 pyrolysis reaction. Pre-reduced Ni increasingly gained mass during heating to 1200 and 1300 This work was supported by the Scientific Research Projects Coordination Unit of