A coupled continuum model representing thermo-hydro-mechanical behaviors is applied to follow the evolution of induced seismicity within a prototypical enhanced geothermal system (EGS) reservoir. The model is applied to the potential Newberry EGS field (USA) by assuming fracture sizes of 10–1200m. Models are classified by their conceptualization of the fractured reservoir geometry as networks of discrete fractures and with equivalent fractured media as fill-in. The THMC model is applied to a doublet injector-producer to explore the spatial and temporal triggering of seismicity for varied fracture network geometries both shallow (2000m) and at depth (2750m). The magnitude of the resulting seismic events is in the range −2 to +1.9. The largest event size (∼1.9) corresponds to the largest fracture size (∼1200m) within the reservoir. The rate of hydraulic and thermal transport has a considerable influence on the amount, location, and timing of failure, and ultimately, on the event rate. The event rate is highest when the fracture density is highest (0.9m−1) and the initial stresses highest (at depth). In all cases, the a-value decreases and the b-value increases with time. The b-value is largest (∼1.34) for the highest fracture density and the highest stress regime. Thermal energy recovered during production is also greatest at depth and for the highest density of fractures.In enhanced geothermal systems (EGS), fluid circulation is influenced by thermal-hydro-mechanical effects in the short-term and by chemical reactions in the long-term. These effects may alter fluid transport properties and as a result enhance the permeability of fracture networks ( Many field experiments ( Circulating fluid at elevated pressures within naturally fractured reservoirs may cause induced seismicity in the early stages of reservoir stimulation (few weeks) ( In this work, we apply a THMC flow-transport-deformation simulator to examine the importance of these factors on reservoir evolution and specifically on the strength of their influence. The focus of this study is to observe the evolution of dominant fracture behaviors that lead to enhanced permeability and induced seismicity during the long-term (∼20 year) production of thermal energy from engineered geothermal systems (EGS). We also focus on the significant influence of fracture density and fracture spacing on long-term reservoir behavior. This paper provides a brief description of the fracture network model and mechanisms of shear failure that result from circulating cold injection fluids at modest overpressures and under pressures. Effective stresses, modulated by fluid pressures and thermal stresses, are used to define the spatial and temporal release of seismic energy as individual fractures are reactivated in shear. The progress of fluid pressures and cooling in the reservoir is represented by the advancement of the hydrodynamic and thermal fronts as well as the progress of pore-pressures and thermal stresses within the reservoir. The triggering of seismicity and the frequency–magnitude distribution ( The simulations presented in the following uses a THMC simulator ( Brittle failure on pre-existing fractures is represented as a prescribed stress drop (∼3 The principal assumption in this procedure is that strength will fully recover in the interseismic period, allowing the failure cycle to repeat once shear stresses have rebuilt. To define the evolution of failure in a stimulated reservoir, the failure of the seeded fractures is calculated within FLAC This model is now applied to a doublet geometry within a reservoir with half-symmetry (2000 Prior to long-term production, the reservoir is hydraulically stimulated by elevating fluid pressures and quenching the reservoir at the injection well and withdrawal well over a period of 21 days and at an overpressure of 5 During this stimulation a similar evolution of permeability and progress of seismicity is observed for both zones B (shallowest, located at 2000 The presumed fracture orientation and density representing the reservoir are defined in Two sets of pre-existing fractures are generated in the reservoir. These comprise a set of long (200–1200 The shallow (B) and deep (D) reservoirs have different (low and high) fracture densities. Thus different sets of fracture network models are examined to determine the important influence of the fracture density on response. Both the deeper reservoir (D), with a high density fracture network and shallow reservoir B, with low density, have the same overprinted network of large fractures (density of 0.003 Permeability evolution is calculated from changes of the fracture aperture and the predefined spacing of fractures. Therefore, a sensitivity analysis is conducted to determine the influence of fracture spacing on permeability evolution. A more finely fractured representation of zones B and D (shallow and deep) is developed to examine the effect of a reduced average spacing of the large fractures on rates of seismicity and permeability evolution. The fracture characteristics listed in Shear failure calculations are handled with FLAC The stress drops along the large fractures are capped at the prescribed stress drop, τ. However, for the larger fracture density (smaller spacing of A significantly higher rate of fracture reactivations is observed for high density fracture networks (zone D), causing an increase in stress rate compared to the low density fracture network (zone B) Understanding the stress drop distribution is significant for further analysis of the evolution of induced seismicity. Therefore, the following sections illustrate that the highest seismic activity will occur when the stress drop is close to that capped at the prescribed stress drop. Next we evaluate the cumulative potential release of energy ( The spatial/temporal evolution of moment magnitude in the reservoir for the ensemble arrangement of fractures is determined using the above relations. For minimum (10 To determine the evolution of moment magnitude during long-term production, we examine the behavior of the two fracture networks models, first shallow and then at depth. First: the same network of large fractures (density of 0.003 Second: a fractured network ( The outcomes for moment magnitude evolution for these different cases allow comparison of the effects of various fracture density, spacing and stress states as a result of reservoir production. During the evolution of energy release, the principal difference between zones B (shallow) and D (deep) for both large (∼300 The response for different realizations of fracture network spacing is compared and contrasted for both shallow and deep zones. This analysis is based on small (∼150 The model with the higher fracture density (0.9 Using a stress–strain fracture criterion to determine the total strain energy available for release (this energy is assumed to be shed seismically), we observe that during the rupture process the shear stress drops an amount The characteristic event magnitude distribution that occurs in such cases is defined based on the size, population, location, and spacing of larger fractures (200–1200 The largest events appear to occur close to existing large and widely spaced fractures where stress drop reaches the maximum magnitude ∼3 This section discusses the mechanisms of seismic triggering by correlating the evolution of seismicity with the transit of the hydrodynamic and thermal fronts within the reservoir. The evolution of the seismicity from stimulation to production of a reservoir in the long term (i.e. 20 years) is illustrated by determining the propagation of fluid pressure and thermal fronts through the reservoir over time. Large magnitude events (1.5–1.9) are observed during early transit of the fluid pressure front transitioning to lower magnitude late-time events resulting from the secondary transit of the thermal front. Both temperature and pressure-diffusion may induce seismicity and may be related in a natural way to the triggering front concept ( The hydrodynamic and thermal fronts are tracked as they propagate through the reservoir for various fracture networks of low to high density and at low and high initial stresses (shallow to deep zones). The location of these fronts is defined by the propagation of the fluid flow rate at any given time. The evolution of seismicity for long-term production (20 years) is shown in a radius-time plot relative to the propagation of the fluid and thermal fronts in  The deepest penetration of the hydrodynamic front into the reservoir at any given time is recorded for the network with the most closely spaced fractures (∼150) (i.e. with the larger fracture density (0.9 Events are separated into three magnitude classifications ( The cumulative number of seismic events can be expressed by the magnitude distribution ( This section discusses the scaling of event frequency, with The modeled By modeling results during stimulation ( The largest Over longer periods of time (20 years), the largest The thermal output of the reservoir is examined after 20 years of production to consider the key influence of stress state and fracture network structure on thermal production. In this circumstance, the reservoir comprises fractures with either low or high fracture density and from shallow depth (zone B) to greater depth (zone D). These models examine the sensitivity of the network with large and small fracture spacing on thermal recovery within the reservoir during long-term reservoir production. The rate of thermal energy production is a function of the fluid mass production rate and the temperature difference between the injected and recovered fluid. The thermal energy ( The flow rate and temperature profile for both shallow to deep zones (B and D) is displayed in A previous study ( Larger fracture density also increases the heat transfer area, which would significantly increase the performance of the system at an earlier time (∼1 year). Higher rates of temperature decline when the zone is filled with a higher number of fractures, leading to more rapid advancement of the thermal front ( As discussed, the more desirable system for energy recovery is achieved at early times (∼1 year) when the fracture density is high and fracture spacing is small. Such a system is capable of supporting a thermal recovery close to ∼10 Using different experimental models, this paper examines the dominant behaviors influencing induced seismicity as well as heat production within EGS reservoirs during long-term production (∼20 years). A THMC model is used to explore the roles of thermal-hydraulic-mechanical- and chemical-effects on different fractured reservoirs. Various fracture networks (low to high density) are considered for both closely and widely spaced fractures, and reservoir conditions change due to varying reservoir depths, shallow (2000 The results demonstrate that when a reservoir is located at greater depth and with more closely-spaced fractures (∼150 A maximum event magnitude for identical fracture distributions is The hydrodynamic and thermal fronts are also defined for different fracture structure (with closely-widely spaced fractures) to determine seismicity triggering during long-term production. A higher migration rate and a quicker advancement of these fronts is observed when the zone is filled with closely spaced fractures (∼150 There is a significant increase in both the number and magnitude of seismic events when the fracture density increases and fracture spacing decreases. The effects of thermal stress and pore pressure on the evolution of seismicity in reservoirs is examined separately and indicates that the most important mechanism triggering slip and promoting both the number of seismic events and the moment magnitude, is the augmentation of fluid pressure. The penetration of the hydrodynamic front is observed to be controlled principally by the size, number, location, and spacing of fractures. When the spacing of fractures in the system is decreased, the fluid flow is able to penetrate more rapidly during injection. We observe the propagation of fluid pressure and thermal fronts generate seismic events thorough reservoir with time. Large events at early-time (days to month) occurs due to the fluid front. Over longer periods of time (month to years) smaller seismic magnitude formed as a result of thermal (-chemical) front within reservoir. The network with small (∼150 We then modeled the The temperature and flow rate profile for shallow and deep zones B and D with small and large fracture spacing was examined to evaluate the thermal recovery from these zones after 20 years of reservoir production. The highest thermal output is from the deeper zone D with a closely spaced fracture network. A high number of fractures in the system with small spacing between fractures increases the rate of cooling and contributes to having a quicker decline in temperature and also to generating a fluid flow path for a higher system flow rate. Based on the information discussed above, this paper concludes that the total thermal output for Newberry EGS at four shallow to deep zones B, C, D and E is close to ∼36 This work is a partial result of support from the