This study evaluates the effect of ultrasound and ozone pretreatments for the subsequent recovery of Desmodesmus sp. biocomponents—lipids, proteins, and carbohydrates—using a response surface methodology. Both pretreatments impact on the recovered lipids quality, solvent waste production and extraction time is analysed for process intensification purposes. For ultrasound pretreatment, independent parameters were energy applied (50–200 kWh/kg dry biomass), biomass concentration (25–75 g/L), and ultrasonic intensity (0.32 and 0.53 W/mL). While for ozone pretreatment, independent parameters were ozone concentration (3–9 mg O3/L), biomass concentration (25–75 g/L), and contact time (5–15 min). In the case of ultrasound pretreatment, recovery yield reached 97 ± 0.4%, 89 ± 3%, and 73 ± 0.6% for proteins, carbohydrates and lipids respectively. Given process required: energy applied of 50 kWh/kg dry biomass, 75 g/L of biomass concentration, 0.32 W/mL of ultrasonic intensity, and 56 min of time process. Ultrasound caused high cell disruption releasing all proteins, thereby obviating downstream processing for its recovery. Ozone pretreatment recovery yield was 85 ± 2%, 48 ± 1.4%, and 25 ± 1.3%, for carbohydrates, lipids and proteins respectively, under the following conditions: 9 mg O3/L of ozone concentration, 25 g/L of biomass concentration, and 5 min of contact time that depicts an energy consumption of 30.64 kWh/kg dry biomass. It was found that ultrasound and ozone pretreatments intensified the lysis and biocomponents recovery process by reducing solvent consumption by at least 92% and extraction time between 80% and 90% compared with extraction of untreated biomass biocomponents. Both pretreatments improve the composition of the recovered lipids. It was noted that the yield of neutral lipids increased from 28% to 67% for ultrasound pretreatment while for ozone pretreatment from 49% to 63%. The method used for lipid extraction may also have an effect but here it was kept constant.A microalgae biorefinery is focused on the recovery, fractionation and conversion of biocomponents such as lipids, proteins, carbohydrates, and other added-value components into energy, chemicals, and feed. Biocomponent recovery is one of the most energy demanding -therefore expensive- unit operation of a microalgae biorefinery due to the lack of low-cost technologies for microalgal cell disruption The aim of process intensification is to deliver energy-efficient technology by reducing energy consumption, waste streams and improving product quality Ozonation is another technology process that intensifies microalgal cell lysis through cell pre-oxidation, facilitating separation and release of intracellular material. Ozone increase considerably the quality of the microalgae lipids recovered because polyunsaturated fatty acids are very susceptible to oxidation by free radicals and strong oxidants such as ozone Reports issued so far, regarding the impact of ultrasound and ozone pretreatments for microalgal cell disruption and biocomponent recovery are not considered as true biorefinery approach, in meaning of the tandem recovery of multiple microalgal biocomponents. In this work, intensification of the subsequent recovery process of microalgal lipids, proteins, and carbohydrates based on the ultrasound or ozone pretreatments was studied. The independent parameters evaluated for ultrasound pretreatment were applied energy, biomass concentration, and ultrasonic intensity while for ozone pretreatment were examined ozone concentration, biomass concentration, and contact time. Response surface methodology (RSM) was used to evaluate the interaction between parameters which are studied. Cell disruption, recovery yields, energy consumption, extraction time, and solvent waste were studied as effects of each pretreatment. The microalgae, Ultrasound pretreatment was carried out using two types of ultrasound baths: 1) a 100 W, 42 kHz bath with a tank capacity of 2.81 L (2510-MT, Branson, Hampton, NH, US), and 2) a 300 W, 40 kHz bath with a tank capacity of 5.5 L (KS-8893, Branson, Hampton, NH, US). All experiments were carried out in 100 mL Erlenmeyer flasks containing 25 mL of a microalgae suspension, which were immersed in the ultrasound bath, at a temperature of 3 ± 1.5 °C, cooling with ice-water. The dissipated acoustic power applied to the solution during this study was calculated by determining the temperature increase during the first 30 s of the experiment. Based on this, using ultrasound pretreatment with the 42-kHz bath and power output of 100 W, the ultrasonic intensity was 0.32 W/mL while using the 40-kHz bath and output power of 300 W, the ultrasonic intensity was 0.53 W/mL. These two conditions also would be described as low-power/long-time and high-power/short-time. The energy applied and ultrasound frequency (~40 Hz) were maintained constant during operation, hence the time was decreased when the output power of the ultrasound bath increased from 100 to 300 W. Ozonation was conducted using 250 mL Erlenmeyer flasks containing 25 mL of microalgae suspension. The ozone gas was provided with ozone generator at a flow rate of 0.5 L/min (Labo76, Emery Trailigaz, Wayne, NJ, US) with a production capacity of 19 g O Lipids, proteins and carbohydrates released into the aqueous phase were quantified separately after each pretreatment. Lipids were determined by the sulfo-phospho-vanillin assay The remaining microalgal biocomponents were extracted from the pretreated cell pellet after each pretreatment in the following order: lipids, proteins, and finally carbohydrates. For this purpose, microalgae suspensions were centrifuged at 2500 Lipids were quantified using a modification of the procedure reported by Valeriano-González et al. After lipid extraction, the defatted algae biomass was dried in the incubator at 40 °C for 1 h to eliminate the solvents residue. Protein extraction was conducted using the procedure reported by Safi et al. Carbohydrate extraction was performed by hydrolysis according with the procedure reported by Mirsiaghi et al. Fractionation and analysis of the total amount of lipids recovered were carried out by the solid phase extraction (SPE). Crude lipids (10 mg) were dissolved in 100 µL of chloroform and loaded on the Agilent Bond Elut NH The total amount of lipids recovered from the extraction process were mixed with methanol at a 30:1 ratio, in a 125 mL Erlenmeyer flask. Then, 1.8% (v/v) of 0.04 N sulphuric acid was added and the samples were left in an oscillating shaker to react for 24 h. Subsequently, the samples were allowed to evaporate to a final volume of 2 mL; then were centrifuged for 30 min at 4200 Identification of fatty acids was carried out in a gas chromatograph (6809, Agilent Technologies, Santa Clara, CA), coupled to mass spectrophotometer (5973, Agilent Technologies), with a DB-5 ms fused silica separation column (length: 30 m, ID: 0.25 mm, 0.25 μm). The carrier gas was helium with 99.9995% purity. The operating conditions of the GC–MS were as follows: split type injection, injection temperature: 250 °C, initial temperature 85 °C (5 min), heating rate of 7 °C/min from initial temperature to 265 °C (10 min). For the identification of FAME, the spectrophotometer was operated in SCAN mode at 50–550 The experiments designs comprised of a response surface methodology based on a multilevel factorial design. The design development and subsequent statistical analysis were performed using statistical software (Statgraphics Centurion XVI, Statgraphics Technologies, The Plains, VA). This approach was used to simultaneously evaluating and modeling effects of the ultrasound and ozone pretreatments operating parameters for the microalgae cell disruption and the microalgae biocomponent recovery efficiency. All the experiments were performed in triplicate. The analysis of variance (ANOVA) was also performed to identify the significant operating parameters. The effects were considered significant at 95% (p < 0.05). In order to find a combination of the experimental parameters that provide a good result for the lipids, proteins and carbohydrates recovery, the experiment design based on a response surface methodology was applied. The starting point for the assessment relied on the establishment of the experimental parameters for ultrasound and ozone pretreatments based on the information available in the literature ( Only biomass concentration and ultrasonic intensity had a significant effect on the released biocomponents yield ( In contrast to the effects of ultrasound pretreatment on cell disruption, the studied parameters had differentiated impact on the recovery efficiency of each biocompound. Only ultrasonic intensity had a significant effect on the yield of recovered proteins. It was noticed that proteins recovery yield decreasing where ultrasonic intensity increasing ( Only biomass concentration and contact time had a significant effect on the released components into the aqueous phase ( The direct influence of the pretreatment conditions on the yield of recovered biocomponents after ozonation was diverse in contrast to the influence showed on the yield of released biocomponents. The parameters studied for ozone pretreatment did not show a significant impact on the yield of recovered carbohydrates ( Desirability function has been largely applied in industrial processes involving many responses. In this method, each set of responses obtained by applying an experimental design is transformed into dimensionless values called individual desirabilities (di), which are then aggregated into a single response called overall desirability (D). By fitting a mathematical model to the values of D in order to adequately describe its behaviour, it is possible to optimize the variables with considering all the available responses. The first step in the application of this method is the calculation of the individual desirabilities (di) for each value that makes up the response set obtained for a specific measured property. Desirability (D) values can range from 0 (undesirable response) to 1 (completely desirable response). Intermediate values of D indicate more or less desirable responses, depending on their approximation to the unit value. The obtention of this scale is essential, once it makes it possible to combine the various responses of different orders of magnitude into a single response, without running the risk of overlapping the effect of another one In this study desirability function was applied in order to find out a combination of the experimental parameters for each pretreatment that provide a good result for the lipids, proteins, and carbohydrates recovery yields. The target value or acceptable range for each response were specified. The maximum efficiency of the studied values for ultrasound pretreatment of Ozone concentration of 9 mg O  As mentioned, the effect of ultrasound or ozone pretreatment on the quality of the recovered lipids was a function of the increase in the percent of total recovered lipids that can be converted to FAME. This means an increase in neutral lipids fraction. For ultrasound pretreatment the effect of suspension concentration and applied energy was studied, The influence of contact time over the recovered lipids composition had a positive effect and was shown in In Intensification of the biocomponent recovery process was achieved for both pretreatments. Solvent efficiency increased considerably after ultrasound or ozone pretreatment in comparison to the lipid recovery process in the case of untreated biomass. Lipid recovery process usually has a solvent efficiency between 0.05 and 0.1 g of lipids/L solvent Martin Ultrasound and ozone pretreatments had different impacts on lipids, protein, and carbohydrate fractions recovery for the Ultrasound and ozone pretreatments have indicated significant intensification in the microalgae biorefinery process in terms of enhanced biocomponents extraction yields and reduction of extraction time, energy, and solvent waste. Solvent consumption was reduced by 95% for ultrasound pretreatment and 92% for ozone pretreatment compared with untreated biomass. Both pretreatments reduced lipids extraction time by 90%, proteins extraction time by 87.5% and carbohydrates extraction time by 80%. Furthermore, ozone and ultrasound pretreatment increased quality of recovered lipids for biofuels production. The authors declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this paper. The authors thank Msc. IsauraYañez-Noguez and Dr. Ignacio Monje-Ramirez for their valuable help in laboratory and ozonation processes; thanks to the Programa de Maestría y Doctorado en Ingeniería, UNAM; thanks to The Academic Writing Team of Dirección General de Cooperación e Internacionalización, UNAM. The experimental work was carried out in the Laboratorio de Ingeniería Ambiental, Instituto de Ingeniería, UNAM. This work was supported by the