The beneficiation of titania (TiO2) by sulfuric acid (H2SO4) pressure leaching of Panzhihua ilmenite was investigated. The reaction temperature, H2SO4 concentration, and concentration of ferrous ions (Fe2+) had significant effects on the enrichment of TiO2. With increasing reaction temperatures, the dissolution of iron from ilmenite was enhanced, while the titanium loss was reduced. Increasing the concentration of Fe2+ had an adverse effect on the beneficiation of TiO2. In contrast, the dissolution of iron from ilmenite was accelerated by increasing concentrations of H2SO4, up to 40wt.% H2SO4. SEM analyses of the leach residues under different leaching conditions indicated that severe agglomeration occurred among the primary hydrolysate particles at high concentrations of H2SO4 or with the addition of ferrous sulfate (FeSO4). Furthermore, a compact layer was formed on the surface of unreacted ilmenite particles, thus retarding the ilmenite leaching. The agglomeration might have resulted from the adsorption of H2SO4 on the primary particle surfaces, as revealed by energy-dispersive X-ray spectroscopy (EDX) and thermogravimetric analysis (TGA). The optimal conditions for the beneficiation process were as follows: H2SO4 concentration 40wt.%, acid/ore mass ratio 2:1, reaction temperature 150°C, and reaction time 3h. Thus, a Ti-rich material with a TiO2 content of ~85wt.% was obtained. Moreover, the results demonstrated the technical feasibility of upgrading Panzhihua ilmenite in 40wt.% sulfuric acid obtained by concentrating the diluted acid waste discharged from the sulfate TiO2 process.Titania (TiO Several processes including the smelting process, the reduction and corrosion process (also called the Becher process), and the acid leaching process have been developed for the beneficiation of TiO The acid leaching processes include HCl and H The H The TiO An ilmenite concentrate was provided by the Titanium Company of Pangang Group Corp. (Panzhihua, China). The chemical composition of the ilmenite is shown in Ilmenite was leached in a 700-mL lead-lined stainless steel pressurized reactor. It was stirred with a magnetic agitator and heated using an electric furnace. Its temperature was well controlled by an intelligent temperature control device. In each experiment, 100–200 The concentrations of titanium and iron ions in the filtrate were determined by redox titrations of ammonium ferric sulfate (NH XRD was performed using a DX-2007 X-ray diffraction spectrometer (Danton, China) operating with a Cu Kα radiation source filtered with a graphite monochromator at a frequency of The surface morphologies of the ilmenite samples were observed before and after leaching using a Hitachi S-4800 scanning electron microscope (SEM) at an accelerating voltage of 5 An X-ray fluorescence (XRF) spectrometer (Swiss ARL Advant'XP The relative elemental abundance of the leach residues was determined with a Hitachi S-450 SEM equipped with an energy-dispersive X-ray spectrometer (EDX, Thermo Electron V4105). Thermal analyses were performed on a thermogravimetric analyzer (TG) (Seiko, Japan, EXSTAR6000) with a heating rate of 10 The effect of reaction temperature on the dissolution of Ti and Fe from Panzhihua ilmenite was studied under the following experimental conditions: H It has been widely accepted that there is no selectivity in the acid leaching of ilmenite, as Ti and Fe dissolve at their stoichiometric ratios ( The concentration of waste H  The relative Ti and Fe contents in the Ti-rich materials obtained under different H The effect of different acid/ore ratios on the ilmenite leaching under a H Notably, the leach residues obtained under high acid/ore ratios were easy to filter and wash, probably due to the dissolution–precipitation mechanism (  One of the objectives of the present study was to utilize the waste H The effects of different concentrations of Fe The decrease in the extraction of Fe was probably due to an increase in the hydration water of iron ions with the increasing FeSO Overall, the optimum conditions for the beneficiation of TiO The Ti-rich material obtained under the optimum beneficiation conditions was subjected to chemical and XRF analyses. The results are summarized in To further understand the H  The SEM images of ilmenite and its leach residues obtained under different beneficiation conditions are shown in To explore the explanations behind the agglomeration, EDX was used to determine the primary elements in the residues after a thorough washing with acid and distilled water. The results are shown in Obviously, Fe is associated with unreacted ilmenite, while S is either in the form of sulfate or sulfuric acid. However, no insoluble sulfate was detected by XRD, indicating that the sulfur was mainly in the form of sulfuric acid. H To quantitatively determine the amount of sulfur, the leach residues were subjected to thermogravimetric analysis under a nitrogen atmosphere, and the results are shown in Based on the results shown in The point of zero charge (PZC) of anatase TiO In the present study, the leaching behaviors of Ti and Fe from Panzhihua ilmenite were significantly affected by the concentration of H The beneficiation of TiO The reaction temperature, H High concentrations of H The optimal conditions of the beneficiation process were as follows: H In conclusion, it is feasible in technology to upgrade the Panzhihua ilmenite in 40 The authors are grateful for the financial support of the key