The open literature and accessible US Department of Energy-sponsored reports were reviewed for the dehydration and rehydration characteristics of potential corrosion products from thorium metal and thorium oxide nuclear fuels. Mixed oxides were not specifically examined unless data were given for performance of mixed thorium–uranium fuels. Thorium metal generally corrodes to thorium oxide. Physisorbed water is readily removed by heating to approximately 200 °C. Complete removal of chemisorbed water requires heating above 1000 °C. Thorium oxide adsorbs water well in excess of the amount needed to cover the oxide surface by chemisorption. The adsorption of water appears to be a surface phenomenon; it does not lead to bulk conversion of the solid oxide to the hydroxide. Adsorptive capacity depends on both the specific surface area and the porosity of the thorium oxide. Heat treatment by calcination or sintering reduces the adsorption capacity substantially from the thorium oxide produced by metal corrosion.Some experimental spent nuclear fuel, such as thorium metal fuel, has been exposed to wet or damp storage with the potential for localized conditions of aggressive corrosion. Thorium corrosion products are assumed to be simple thorium oxides similar to those found in US Department of Energy (DOE) spent fuel rather than complex mixed compounds analogous to natural minerals. The drying of such spent nuclear fuel will require aggressive drying conditions to remove water associated with corrosion products This review focused on thorium oxide and thorium hydroxide The accessible literature was searched for the following data for thorium corrosion products: The measured values or thermodynamic predictions of the equilibrium water vapor pressure of the hydrated corrosion products as a function of temperature. Experimental transformation data, including transformation sequence and the characteristic temperatures, for the dehydration (e.g., thermogravimetric analysis [TGA], differential scanning calorimetry [DSC], mass spectroscopy [MS] data). Drying kinetics. Observations on the significance of the material form and microstructural changes (e.g., agglomeration, sintering, exfoliation, and comminution) during drying. Observations on the rehydration of the dried material. The review covered the available open literature, unclassified and declassified DOE reports and personal communications from technical personnel at the Idaho National Engineering and Environmental Laboratory (INEEL) and other DOE sites. Four areas of thorium research were evident from the literature reviewed: (1) nuclear breeder fuel production and its irradiation performance, (2) fuel dissolution for recovery of bred uranium, (3) waste package performance for repository disposal and (4) catalysis. Many of the early thorium corrosion studies focused on gross physical changes (i.e., weight, metal thickness) to the exclusion of suitable chemical analysis of corrosion products. Much of the reported data is ancillary to the drying and rehydration interests that prompted this review. However, where available, such sources were considered. The literature review of thorium corrosion products identified only anecdotal rate data and an empirically derived rate equation for the dehydration and rehydration reactions, respectively. Isothermal vapor pressure curves, thermogravimetric test runs, and supporting discussions offer some quantitative data for specific samples and test conditions. However, by themselves, these data are not likely to be very useful for interpolating or extrapolating to process conditions. The thorium fuels considered were thorium metal rods or mixed oxide bundles of ThO Like most metals, thorium metal is highly reactive. Thorium has only one stable oxidation state, Th(IV), simplifying the thorium chemistry by comparison to that of uranium Thorium oxide from corrosion of the thorium metal fuels is expected to take up much greater amounts of water than the thorium oxide of the oxide fuels. Firing and sintering of the thoria at high temperatures and under controlled atmosphere during fuel fabrication significantly reduces the specific surface area and the available adsorption sites Thorium metal and oxide corrosion were studied to assess fuel form viability, and corrosion studies were generally limited to well-defined distilled water or laboratory air conditions. For these conditions, ThO Under the locally extreme and variable conditions possible in some fuel storage locations, thorium dissolution and precipitation may result. Thorium oxide may adsorb water and carbon dioxide, and several mobile thorium complexes may be possible. Thorium hydrolysis yields complex polycations with multiple hydroxyl groups, and these hydrolyzed species can form mixed salts. However, the oxide/hydroxide system is stable under most groundwater conditions and is unlikely to form large quantities of thorium phosphate, sulfate, or silicate compounds or lead to significant migration of thorium Thorium oxide, often referred to as thoria, is unreactive in most gases at temperatures up to its melting point, 3390 °C Thorium oxide is relatively insoluble in neutral to basic aqueous systems. Thorium solubility in seawater, with ThO Thorium oxide does have the capacity to adsorb both water and carbon dioxide quickly, and detectable quantities are taken up within minutes to within a few days The dominant thorium fuel corrosion product from exposure to air and water is expected to be thorium oxide with some unknown quantity of surface adsorbed water. The primary thorium metal corrosion reaction proceeds by Th From the hydrolysis reaction, complex ions of the form Th Drying thorium oxide corrosion products requires the removal of physisorbed water. If chemisorbed water is a significant water source, its removal may also be necessary. The adsorption and desorption of water on thorium oxide are limited to the surface and do not result in bulk hydration even in immersion in liquid water at 25 °C Thorium hydroxide decomposes smoothly to the oxide with the most significant drop occurring between room temperature and about 160 °C. This is probably because of loss of physically adsorbed water. X-ray diffraction (XRD) analysis of Th(OH)  The general shape for TGA and differential thermal analysis (DTA) curves for the decomposition of thorium hydroxide is confirmed by several sources with similar rapid temperature ramp rates ranging from 7–8 °C/min up to 10 °C/min In The changes in surface area with temperature indicate thermally induced changes in microstructure. Specific surface areas were given as 100.5 m The published data from powder samples generally indicate progressive removal of chemisorbed water with increasing temperature, rather than a discrete threshold temperature for rapid decomposition of Th(OH) Of course outgassing under vacuum will help, but water affiliated with thorium oxide may be tenacious at any fuel drying temperature. The drying (and rehydration) behavior may be dependent on the material's history as well as powder characteristics Clayton Apart from the anecdotal observations that lengthy time periods are required to establish equilibrium, dehydration kinetics has not been determined. Thoria gel (prepared from thoria calcined from the oxalate), dried at 90 °C for 16 h before the study, was shown to have first order dehydration kinetics between room temperature and about 130 °C Only limited information is available for decomposition of thorium oxycarbonate species. The decomposition of ThOCO Upon exposure to moisture, the thorium oxide surface rapidly hydrolyzes to form an initial surface hydroxyl layer. Additional water can be slowly adsorbed by diffusion-limited formation of further hydroxyl layers or by irreversible physisorption of molecular water. This second stage of adsorption is not so easily accomplished with exposure to water vapor, because prolonged cycled (adsorption/desorption) exposure is necessary to obtain an equilibrium isotherm Large heats of immersion, 29–92 kJ Thoria powder adsorbed varying quantities of water depending on calcination temperature, powder origin, surface area, crystal morphology, and extent of exposure to moisture. Thoria samples fired at 600 °C picked up ∼1.8% water by weight while samples fired at 1000 °C showed only an ∼0.2% weight gain. This is almost an order of magnitude difference over the same 24 h exposure to atmospheric conditions. Data ranged from 0.2% to 6.4% weight gain for thoria powder exposed to ambient air with ∼70% relative humidity (RH) for 24 h. These weight gain data do not indicate equilibrium after a 24 h exposure At room temperature (25 °C), water adsorption equilibrium took periods of over 50 h to achieve. This 50 h period required to reach equilibrium was experimentally validated by monitoring the decline in vapor pressure and increased in sample weight until stable (equilibrium) values were attained Rehydration may be a complex process, typified by slow kinetics. Meaningful reversible adsorption isotherms are difficult to produce experimentally. For water adsorption on thoria and thorium hydroxide, equilibration is slow at or below 300 °C, typified by hysteresis unless equilibrated by multiple adsorption/desorption cycling. In order to reproduce the isotherms, outgassing for not less than 72 h at room temperature was necessary Reversible adsorption was not observed at temperatures above 350 °C, but irreversible adsorption was identified over the entire temperature range from 25 to 500 °C. The change in character of the irreversible binding of water above and below 300 °C seems to indicate that above 300 °C only chemisorbed water remains. This hypothesis is further supported by the rapid irreversible adsorption observed and the apparent absence of slow adsorption above 300 °C and by the long time and number of adsorption/desorption cycles required to obtain reversible isotherms below 300 °C Generally, the literature sources give nonequilibrium isotherms In Evidence from ORNL work and from Smid indicate dependence of water adsorption/desorption on porosity as well as specific surface area The amounts of H A classical algebraic adsorption model appears to fit the empirical data from moisture adsorption on high density pellets Test data were for durations of 24 and 96 h of exposure Th(OH) ThO Physisorbed water is removed relatively easily at temperatures less than 200 °C; removal of chemisorbed water requires temperatures over 300 °C. The comparatively featureless TGA data for thorium hydroxide samples indicate no clear characteristic threshold temperatures for dehydration as in the uranium and aluminum oxide systems. While some chemisorbed water can be removed at 300 °C, complete dehydration requires temperature above 1000 °C. Dehydration kinetics is not known. Rehydration may occur by a three-stage process. The first stage, resulting in the formation of a monolayer of hydroxyl, is immediate. The second stage, forming either subsequent monolayers of hydroxyls by diffusion of water or an irreversible physisorbed layer, is complex and extremely slow. The third stage forms additional layers of reversibly physisorbed water that are easily desorbed. But rehydration to an equilibrium state is extremely slow and difficult to achieve. Rehydration kinetics is not available for powder, but a single reference gives a mathematical fit for sintered fuel pellets. Thanks to M.A. Ebner for his critical review of this document. The work was sponsored by Atomic Energy of Canada, Ltd. and by the US Department of Energy, Assistant Secretary for Environmental Management, under DOE Idaho Operations Office Contract DE-AC07-99ID13727.