The stress–strain response of a Fe–17.5Mn–0.7C–2Al TWIP steel during cyclic loading has been investigated by means of tension–compression tests within the strain limits of ±2%, ±5% and ±10%. In addition, the microstructural evolution during the ±5% cyclic test has also been studied. The difference between the forward and reverse stress for each pre-strain has been analyzed at 0.2% offset strain and at the strains in which forward and reverse curves were parallel in order to study the Bauschinger effect (BE) and permanent softening, respectively. The evolution of the BE with pre-strain for this steel is similar to other FeMnC TWIP steels, that is, increasing values of BE are obtained as the pre-strain increases. However, its absolute values are half those reported in the literature on other FeMnC steels. This diminution of the BE is related to the lower activity of mechanical twinning in FeMnCAl TWIP steels at the pre-strains herein investigated, which promotes less polarized stresses in the matrix due to the lower dislocation storage capacity.
                  Regarding permanent softening, the evolution is similar to that of the BE and the same analysis can be applied. During reverse compression, a slight increase of twin thickness and twin spacing with respect to the first tensile stage took place. This fact might be linked to the lower flow stress observed in the permanent softening period during reverse straining.Twinning-induced plasticity (TWIP) steels are being extensively studied because of their excellent combination of high-tensile strength and large ductility. One of the most promising applications is the manufacture of car components where energy absorption is a determining factor. It is well-known that one of the problems during sheet forming of high strength steels is the large amount of springback. In the control of springback, numerical methods (such as the finite element method) are used to predict the differences between the final obtainable forms and the designed forms. With this knowledge, die modifications can be carried out and springback can be controlled (and minimized) following an iterative process. In order to obtain accurate forming simulations and therefore diminish the number of iterations, it is necessary to use good plasticity models that can give accurate stress predictions. The hardening law to be introduced in the these models must be able to predict the cyclic stress–strain behavior of the given material, especially when bending–unbending operations are involved, such as the ones taking place in industrial forming processes. It is particularly important to model the reverse loading flow curve, which should include the Bauschinger effect, the transient behavior and the permanent softening The hardening models that have shown better accuracy in predicting the magnitudes of the forward and reverse stresses are based on mixed isotropic–kinematic hardening laws Various studies on the cyclic behavior of TWIP steels Despite the excellent tensile properties of FeMnC TWIP steels, it has to be mentioned that some problems have been reported in the literature. Among these problems we can find low yield strength, delayed fracture and heterogeneous deformation. The addition of Al can solve some of these problems since it suppresses the precipitation of cementite Although the tensile properties and strain hardening of FeMnCAl TWIP steels have been widely studied The studied material was a hot rolled TWIP steel sheet provided by POSCO with a thickness of 2.6 The tensile and cyclic tests were carried out at room temperature in a MTS 250 kN testing machine. Tensile samples were machined from the initial sheet according to EN 10002-1 standard, with the tensile axis (TA) parallel to the rolling direction (RD) and a gauge length of 50 In the case of the cyclic tests, an anti-buckling device inspired by the apparatus used by Boger et al. The true stress–true strain curve for the TWIP Fe–17.5-0.7C–2Al steel is shown in The evolution of the strain hardening rate (d The tension–compression curves for cycles with strains of 2, 5 and 10% are displayed in Regarding cycles with strains of 2% and 5%, cyclic hardening was observed and the increase of the stress at the end of the cycle was directly related to the strain of the cycle (60 The evolution of the forward stress ( As already pointed out, the back stresses calculated with the 0.2% offset method were 2–3 times higher than the ones determined when the reverse curve is parallel to the forward curve. The difference seems to be independent from the type of steel and the kind of equipment used, shear or tension–compression test. As already stated, the back stress obtained with the 0.2% offset method focuses more on early re-yielding or BE. In It is interesting to note that for FeMnC steels a constant increase of the BE is observed at larger strains up to 20–25%, and this trend coincides well with another study of a Fe–22Mn–0.6C with results very close to the present ones The evolution of the back stress with pre-strain calculated by permanent softening is shown in As pointed out by Gutierrez et al. Finally it has to be mentioned that for the Al-added TWIP steel, the calculated contribution of back stress to the total work hardening is less than the calculated value reported for the other TWIP steels mentioned. For the Fe–17.5Mn–0.7C–2Al steel this contribution is 8% at a pre-strain of 2% and increases only to 10% with pre-strains of 5% and 10%, whereas for Fe–22Mn–0.6 To analyze the evolution of the microstructure during cycles with a strain of 5%, one sample was stopped at the end of the first tensile stage at a strain of 5% (sample named T5), another one was stopped at the end of the compressive stage at a strain of −5% (sample named T5C5), and one sample was studied at the end of the complete cycle (sample named T5C5T5). The evolution of the microstructure was first observed by EBSD, but since the twin thickness was smaller than 100 After the first tensile stage, the aspect ratio of the grain increased to 2.39±0.10 as a result of tensile deformation, but in the KPQ for T5 sample ( The microstructure in The microstructure after the second tensile stage (T5C5T5) is displayed in  After the first tensile stage up to a strain of 5% (T5), there is an increase of the signal for rotated Brass {110}<111> and Goss orientations, both of them typical texture components during tensile deformation of TWIP steels When the samples are deformed in compression to a strain of −5%, some changes are observed in the After the second tensile stage at a strain of +5%, the resulting texture in the Following the same procedure used in the section above, it is necessary to divide the discussion on back stress in two parts: Firstly, concerning early re-yielding during reverse stress, i.e. what here is defined as the Bauschinger effect (BE), and secondly, taking into consideration the difference between forward and reverse stresses when both curves become parallel when permanent softening (PS) is noticed. Looking at the evolution of the BE with pre-strain in When the pre-strain attains to 5%, the differences between the various materials start to increase. The differences in the amount and rate of increase of the BE with strain must be related to the strengthening mechanisms acting in every particular case. Firstly, there is a Dual-Phase steel in which the microstructure consists of hard martensite (12%) and a soft ferrite matrix A similar situation can be observed in the case of 316L austenitic steel. After the first stage of deformation (≈1.5%), a transition from planar slip to wavy slip has been described; it has also been observed that the number of grains presenting different dislocation interactions due to cross-slip increases Compared to DP and 316L steels, TWIP steels show no signs of reduction in the rate of increase of the BE at the pre-strains analyzed in In particular, models for the increment of back-stress where The continuous increase of the BE for TWIP steels up to 20% strain observed in Firstly, the validity of this mechanism in TWIP steels at low strains due to the low twinning activity must be discussed. There is some variability between different works in the literature about the twinning activity at a pre-strain of 5% in TWIP steels. In some cases, it has been found that the number of grains with mechanical twins is moderate, with a As mentioned above, stacking faults can act as a source of back stress. Here it is interesting to note that at low strains, the presence of overlapped stacking faults has been described in FeMnC steels and other fcc metals In the case of a pre-strain of 10%, it can be considered that the effect of twinning activity on the mechanical behavior of TWIP steels is even more important. This strain marks approximately the beginning of the high work hardening stage and the fraction of primary twinned grains is between 20 and 30% Secondly, although this mechanism can be applied to all TWIP steels in As pointed out in the work by Jin et al. This decrease of twinning activity for Al-added TWIP steels can then be related to the lower values of the BE as derived from Eqs. In the Eq. Therefore, Eq. It must be borne in mind that the back stress is measured by Eq. Before analyzing the differences between the different materials, the fact that very similar strain hardening behavior is observed during the tensile and compression periods in With regard to the back stress values obtained by permanent softening for the different type of steels, it seems that in general, increase stops at large strains. This was more or less expected for the DP-steel since the same situation was found in analyzing the BE, due to the dislocations slip and creation of dislocations cells. In the case of TWIP steels, the values for the present Al-added TWIP steel are slightly lower than the ones for the Fe–22Mn–0.6C steel with a large grain size In order to understand the reason for the permanent softening during reverse stage in the present FeMnCAl steel, one factor that could play a role would be the twin thickness The FeMnCAl TWIP steel studied shows a continuous increase of the back stress during reverse loading in the compression stage as the pre-strain is increased to 10%. This trend coincides with the behavior of some FeMnC TWIP steels reported in literature and is consistent with existing hardening models for TWIP steels. When the back stress is analyzed using the 0.2% offset method and related to the Bauschinger effect, the value of the back stress for the FeMnCAl TWIP steel and its contribution to the total hardening is half the one reported for FeMnC TWIP steels. This behavior can be related to the decrease of mechanical twinning activity in Al-added FeMnC TWIP steels, since it has been reported that the primary source of polarized internal stresses in these steels consists on the dislocations pinned in the matrix by twin boundaries. When the back stress is analyzed by permanent softening measurements, the values are in all cases much smaller than in the case of the Bauschinger effect. The FeMnCAl steel shows again lower values than FeMnC steels, which can once more be related to the lower twinning activity of FeMnCAl steels. For the present FeMnCAl steel the strain hardening in tensile and compressive stages is very similar. It has been found that the twin thickness and twin spacing appeared slightly larger in the compressive stage. Since the increase of both parameters is related to a diminution of the kinematic hardening, they could explain the differences between the tensile and compressive strengths after the transient hardening period for the FeMnCAl TWIP steel. The authors would like to thank the