The chemical stability of LIX® 63 hydroxyoxime (‘hydroxyoxime’) when in the presence of Versatic 10 and tributyl phosphate (TBP) has been assessed under synthetic nickel laterite extract conditions between 30 and 60°C and strip conditions at 60°C.
                  In all extract systems, nominally at pH 5.5, syn to anti hydroxyoxime isomer inter-conversion was observed. The hydroxyoxime half life under extract conditions at 30°C was almost two years. Increasing the operating temperature to 60°C under otherwise identical conditions saw this decrease to 8weeks. Hydroxyoxime degradation resulted in the generation of previously identified products 5,8-diethyl-6,7-dodecanedione (diketone) and 5,8-diethyldodecan-6-oxime-7-one (‘keto-oxime’) and the nett loss of 5,8-diethyl-7-hydroxy-6-dodecanone (acyloin), as expected. These products do not quantitatively account for all hydroxyoxime loss. The activation energy for hydroxyoxime decomposition under the chosen extract operating conditions was calculated to be 70kJ/mol, with a pre-exponential factor of 9.0×109 per week.
                  The hydroxyoxime half life when determined under strip conditions, using 10g/l sulphuric acid, at 60°C was 26weeks, with degradation yielding diketone and acyloin in a near-stoichiometric manner. Analysis, in conjunction with studies performed previously, allowed the activation energy for hydroxyoxime decomposition under strip conditions to be determined as being 58kJ/mol, with a pre-exponential factor of 3.0×107 per week.The synergistic behaviour obtained when LIX Although possessing desirable metal separation properties, the hydroxyoxime in this system has been shown to be susceptible to chemical degradation under some operating conditions. Minimising reagent degradation in commercial operations is desirable from both an economic and operational perspective. Initially, investigations into the chemical stability of hydroxyoxime were performed predominantly under conditions relevant to the El Boleo operation ( The hydroxyoxime in LIX The extension of outcomes from chemical stability studies under one set of operating conditions (e.g. El Boleo) to another (nickel laterite) is not necessarily automatic. The nickel laterite system presents a new set of conditions, given the presence of TBP in the organic phase and, most importantly, a different aqueous extract solution. Reagent degradation rates can be very dependent on aqueous phase composition and therefore re-investigation under relevant operating conditions is required. As shown recently ( A synthetic nickel laterite aqueous feed solution was prepared using analytical grade cobalt sulphate and calcium chloride and technical grade nickel, copper, zinc, manganese and magnesium sulphate salts in de-ionised water. This was filtered to remove insoluble solids. Assay results using Inductively Coupled Plasma Atomic Emission Spectroscopy (ICP-AES) found the metal content to be 3.01 An organic solution (3.00 Tests under laterite extract conditions were performed at 30, 37, 45, 52 and 60 Each sample was then mixed vigorously at the appropriate temperature for 15 A single test was also performed under laterite strip conditions at A:O 1:1 (each 200 A Varian 3800 gas chromatograph fitted with a DB-1 fused silica capillary column (30 To enable the detection of the hydroxyoxime extractant, samples (90 Versatic 10 analyses were performed on the same instrument using an Alltech EC1000 capillary column (30 High performance liquid chromatography (HPLC) analyses were performed using a Shimadzu LC10 instrument with a SPD M10A diode array detector. A 150 Organic (250 Examination of the metal loading data associated with these experiments ( To ensure the decrease in cobalt loading capacity in the 52 and 60 Relative to fresh organic, a yellowing of the solutions was observed in the day 105 extract and strip samples. This colour, which became more prevalent as the operating temperature was increased, is indicative of the amount of diketone formed. The absence of an orange colour in the extract samples was consistent with negligible cobalt (III) complexation ( Inter-conversion of uncomplexed The pH levels in all samples were intermittently monitored with time and adjusted back to pH 5.5 as required. All systems showed a clear decrease in pH after 1 Hydroxyoxime levels (expressed as a percentage of their initial, day 0 concentration), calculated rate constants and half lives for the organic samples from experiments performed under extract conditions at the various temperatures are presented in The results clearly demonstrate the detrimental effect of increasing temperature on hydroxyoxime stability under synthetic laterite extract conditions. However, they also serve to highlight the ruggedness of this synergistic system when operated at lower temperatures, with an extract half life of about one The temperature-related hydroxyoxime data was used to calculate the activation energy (E This format is equivalent to a straight line equation y Hydroxyoxime levels determined throughout the trial for the organic sample agitated under strip conditions at 60 The present result was incorporated with data from previous studies performed primarily under nickel laterite strip conditions at other temperatures ( Millimolar concentrations of initial and final day hydroxyoxime and degradation products diketone, keto-oxime and acyloin in the extract and strip samples are summarised in The stoichiometric sum of hydroxyoxime and known degradation product content in each of the trials is also summarised in Underivatised final day samples were analysed for Versatic 10 and TBP content using an EC1000 column. Versatic 10 contains multiple isomers of decanoic acid, resulting in multiple peaks in the GC trace whereas TBP presents as a single peak. Under the conditions used, TBP co-eluted with some (< Assuming a metal:hydroxyoxime:Versatic 10 complex stoichiometry of 1:3:2 for nickel, cobalt, copper, zinc and manganese in these TBP-containing systems ( The present work assessed the effect of temperature (30 to 60 Operation under strip conditions at 60 Under all conditions trialled, loss and/or degradation of Versatic 10 and tributyl phosphate was minimal. The support of the