The findings presented in this paper have shown conclusively that composted olive mill waste (COMW), characterized by its relatively high humus content, contributed to producing an economically sustainable and fit-for-purpose growing medium for soilless cultivation of strawberries. In so doing, it has also shown to be a successful replacement for the commonly used and expensive peat moss. The capacity of COMW to transport nutrients essential for the growth of different varieties of strawberries was indicated by the optimum levels of nutrients such as N, K, Ca, Mg, Na, Fe, Mn, Zn and Cu recorded in petioles and leaf blades. The relatively high amount of nutrients left over in the substrate at the end of cultivation meant that it can be recycled as organic matter in different agricultural practices.Sustainable farming practices include remediation and recycling of agricultural waste materials. Literature shows several examples of successful application of recycled organic waste in horticulture ( The process used in the extraction of olive oil results in relatively large amounts of solid waste (Olive Mill Waste – OMW) depending on the technology used by the olive mill. OMW is high in organic matter and appears to lend itself to bioremediation and as a suitable substitute for peat in soil-less cultivation ( OMW is characterised by phytotoxicity, hydrophobicity, salinity, low pH, phenolic compounds and short and long chain fatty acids ( In a preliminary study, OMW was collected from the olive mill Cooperativa Nuova Cilento, S. Mauro Cilento at Salerno, Italy, where two-phase oil extraction process is used. The MATReFO method used in the preparation of COMW for the soilless cultivation of strawberries is essentially a static composting process. The stones (seeds) were removed from the OMW using a purpose-built machine and mixed mechanically with hygroscopic organic waste in the ratio of 72% de-stoned OMW, 11% wool waste, 8.5% wheat straw and 8.5% sawdust (fresh weight basis). Net sacks were filled with this mixture and stacked on pallets protected from rain. The net sacks allowed aerobic conditions to prevail during the static composting process. The duration of the MATReFO process was three months and it resulted in the formation of COMW. The COMW was then used for all the experiments in soilless cultivation of strawberries ( The trials were conducted similar to the procedures described by The plants were fertigated with a standard nutrient solution (stock solution diluted at 0.5–1% v/v). The standard stock solution ( Fertigation were carried out by means of a localized drip system, providing 6 applications per day with a maximum of 20–25% water leaching per application. The number of applications was based on evapotranspiration and nutrient needs of the plants during the cultivation phases. The trials were managed according to recommendations laid down for annual commercial crops published by Three months old COMW was collected in triplicate for chemical, physical and biological analyses ( The Dynamic Respiration Index (DRI) was determined according to Humic substances were extracted from air-dried compost samples (<0.5 mm) with 0.1 M NaOH and Na At the beginning and the end of cultivation (308 days after transplanting), samples of the substrates were randomly collected in triplicate from each plot for determining the main chemical–physical parameters (namely, moisture, pH, EC, ash, TOC, N total). Samples collected at the end of cultivation were also analysed for macro- (K, Ca, Mg), and micro-nutrients (Fe, Mn, Zn, Cu and Na); all parameters were determined according to procedures reported above. Samples of leaves were harvested at 263 days from transplanting and their blades and petioles were separated for chemical analysis. Petioles were oven dried at 65 °C for 24 h and, after acid digestion, analysed for: N, K, Na, Ca, Mg, Fe, Mn, Zn, Cu. Dry samples of blades were also analysed for total nitrogen. All parameters were determined according to procedures described above. Yield of strawberry per plant and average weight of 20 marketable fruits at each picking were recorded in Autumn and following Spring. Total yield per plant was calculated from all harvests (autumn and spring); intact fruits (diameter > 22 mm) represent marketable yield while the discarded (waste) one included small (diameter < 22 mm), malformed and rotten fruits. Average fruit weight was calculated using the formula: Σ [(average strawberry weight at each picking) × (commercial yield for each plot at each picking)]/Σ (commercial yield for each plot at each picking) as reported by Secondary or tertiary fruits in autumn and spring harvest were selected for uniform dimension, size, color and absence of damage and prepared for quality analysis. Flesh firmness was measured by using an Ametek digital penetrometer with a 6 mm piston diameter (star-shaped plug); solid soluble contents was measured with an Atago digital refractometer PR-32 Alpha on a small fraction of homogeneous clear juice obtained by the same fruits utilized for flesh firmness. Titratable acidity was determined by a 702 SM Titrino titolator Metrhom Swiss. 5 g sample of strawberry juice was homogenized in 25 ml distilled water and titrated up to pH 7.00 with a 0.1 N sodium hydroxide solution. Data were expressed as meq NaOH per 100 g of fresh weight. InfoStat Professional, Version 1.1 program ( The physical, chemical and biological characteristics of the COMW used as peat substitute in the strawberry trials are given in The main chemical and physical parameters of growth media at the beginning and the end of strawberry cultivation trial are presented in The macro and micro-nutrients contents in leaf petioles and total N content in blades samples collected during the trial are given in Correlation matrix between COMW content in the substrate and macro- and micro-nutrient contents in substrate, petioles and blades of strawberry plants, reported in Productive and vegetative data collected from strawberry plants during their cultivation are given in The number of runners at the end of the autumn growing season (early December, before dormancy) was higher in both COMW treatments with respect to the control, which is a symptom of a greater vigor in the COMW-treated plants. This indicates that the effects of intense fertigation have gradually washed away the growing media, making it more suitable for the cultivation of strawberries. It appears therefore that, compared to the control, the plants treated with COMW appeared to benefit from the amendment more in the vegetative rather than in the later stages. This could possibly be due to the run-off from COMW. This probably had a positive influence on bud differentiation albeit in different ways among the varieties, as indicated by the significant treatment × variety interactions registered for yield during the spring season, which is well known to be much more important from the quantitative point of view, compared to the yield obtained in the fall ( The different varieties of strawberries appeared to behave in completely different ways indicating the possibility of genetic influence in the interaction between the plants and the substrate composition. The variety Irma was the most productive one but no differences were found between the 25COMW and the control, while the production was 12% lower in 50COMW than in the control. The variety Patty was the least productive and appeared to be the most sensitive to the treatment. On the contrary, variety Maya benefited significantly from COMW treatments, both doses being significantly more productive than the control. Variety Marmolada did not seem to have suffered from the effect of the addition of COMW to the substrate, recording a stable response in general. With regard to the qualitative analysis of strawberry fruits, reported in The results obtained in the present study corroborates the preliminary report by The present paper has demonstrated a different ability of the strawberry varieties to tolerate a high level of electrical conductivity induced by COMW in the substrate. As regard fruit quality, in the spring production all varieties showed higher level of sweetness and acidity and a standard nitrate content, without negative effects on the flesh firmness, linked to the fruit shelf life: this could result in an interesting increase of the fruit taste. This work has thus provided an economic substitute for the expensive and rapidly dwindling source of peat moss for use in soilless cultivation of strawberries. The relatively higher amounts of nitrogen left particularly in the 50COMW plots at the end of cultivation opens the possibility of recycling the spent COMW for further use in agriculture and horticulture farming practices.