When identifying and developing lithium ion battery recycling technologies, understanding the role of impurities is always a concern as they may have an impact on electrochemical performance, material stability, or lifetime for recovered active materials. Here we show that Cu impurity in different forms could play very different roles on the recovered LiNi0.6Co0.2Mn0.2O2 (NCM622). Cu metal impurity could easily short the cell, while Cu ion impurity could play a positive role due to partially substitution of the Ni2+ sites to lower the cation mixing degree. In specific, NCM622 material with certain amount (0.34 at%) of Cu ion impurity delivers high initial specific charge/discharge capacity of 211.8 and 186.0 mAh g-1 at 0.05 C, which are 12.2 and 14.1 mAh g-1 higher than those of virgin NCM622 cathode. Moreover, a superior retention capacity of 171.3 mAh g-1 after 90 cycles at 0.33 C, and striking rate capability are achieved in this NCM622 cathode sample. These results clearly indicate that Cu metal impurity should be avoided and the ionic Cu impurity should be controlled with optimal concentration during recycling process for spent LIBs.Electrochemical energy storage has been widely developed for different applications in the last few years [ Several research groups have focused on the influence of Cu impurity on the physical properties and electrochemical performance of the NCM-based cathode materials. Wu et al. studied the feasibility of Cu ion impurity as beneficial dopants for NCM111 cathode materials and found that Cu ion impurity could enhance the rate and cycling performance but lower the initial specific capacity [ In this work, the fundamental effects of Cu impurity in different forms on physical properties and electrochemical performance for recovered NCM622 cathode materials are systematically studied. To simulate Cu impurity existing in hydrometallurgical and pyrometallurgical recycling, the Cu ions are introduced into NCM622 through a co-precipitation process with the content of 0.2 at%, 1.0 at% to 5.0 at% Cu additives (0.2CuNCM, 1CuNCM and 5CuNCM). While for direct recycling process, Cu metal powders are mixed with virgin NCM622 sample (VNCM) at the same concentration of Cu ion impurity to prepare the simulated cathode electrodes, which are abbreviated as 0.2CuMNCM, 1CuMNCM and 5CuMNCM, respectively. It is revealed that the Cu metal impurity easily causes short circuit issues and leads to the failure of the Cu metal based electrodes. In contrast, for Cu ion impurity, the reasonable amount of Cu ions could partially substitute the Ni The VNCM cathode material in this work is synthesized with the co-precipitation and post-sintering process, in which the hydroxide precursor (Ni The prepared NCM622 cathode materials are dissolved in sulfur acid (H In order to test the electrochemical performance of these prepared active materials, the prepared NCM622 cathode powders are mixed with super C65 carbon black as conductive additive and polyvinylidene difluoride (PVDF) as binder in N-Methyl-2-pyrrolidone (NMP) solvent with a weight ratio of 8:1:1, and the mixture is well stirred to form a homogeneous slurry. Then, the mixed slurry is casted onto an aluminum foil by a doctor blade and dried in a vacuum oven at 120 °C for 10 h. Finally, the dried electrodes are pressed by a roller to control their thickness, and subsequently they are punched into circular disks with a diameter of 12.7 mm. The mass loading of the NCM622 cathode materials is controlled within the range of 2.85 ~ 3.15 mg cm The galvanostatic discharge/charge performance and cycling stability of these synthesized NMC622 cathode electrodes are measured in a LAND Battery Testing System (LANTH CT2001A) with the voltage range from 3.0 to 4.3 V (vs. Li/Li The morphology of the hydroxide precursors and NMC622 cathode samples are examined with SEM. The elemental distribution of the prepared cathode samples is identified by the EDX mapping, and the results are shown in Powder XRD measurements are carried out to analyze the phase and crystal structure of the prepared cathode samples, and XRD patterns are shown in The XRD patterns of these samples are refined to verify the effects of Cu impurity on the crystal structure of NCM622 cathode particles, and the results are present in From the EDX mapping results of 1CuNCM and 5CuNCM cathode particles in The high-resolution XPS spectra of Ni 2p The electrochemical performance of the prepared NCM622 based cathode materials is examined with coin cells under room temperature, and all cells are rested for 3 to 6 h before testing. For the cathodes with Cu metal, as shown in In contrast, the Cu ion based cathode materials exhibit much better electrochemical performance. As shown in The cycling performance of the prepared cathode materials is carried out at 0.33 C within the voltage window of 3.0 to 4.3 V (vs. Li/Li+) and the results are shown in In this work, we determine the impacts of Cu impurity with different forms from recycling processes on the morphology, crystal structure and electrochemical properties of NCM622 cathode materials. It is proved that Cu metal impurity holds negative effects on the electrochemical performance of NCM622 materials, while the ionic Cu impurity plays an important role on the physical properties and electrochemical performance of NCM622 cathode materials. For both the precursor and cathode particles, the reasonable amount of Cu ions can facilitate the nucleation and accelerate the growth of the primary particles, and reduce the cation mixing degree of the NCM622 cathode materials. However, excess Cu ions would introduce impurity phase into the NCM622 cathode structure, and result in an increased cation mixing degree. For the electrochemical performance, reasonable amount Cu ions (the 0.2CuNCM and 1CuNCM samples) could facilitate the cycling stability and rate capability of NCM622 cathode materials. Herein, the 1CuNCM cathode exhibits the best electrochemical performance in the reported NCM622 cathode materials with dopants, which delivers a high initial specific capacity (186.0 mAh g  The authors declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this paper. Dr. Ruihan Zhang and Zifei Meng contributed equally. This work was performed through the ReCell Center, which gratefully acknowledges support from the The following is the Supplementary data to this article: Supplementary data to this article can be found online at