The paper deals with flotability of bituminous coal and examines how individual maceral groups float in the course of a fractional flotation test. Eight samples of bituminous coal from the localities of Jaworzno, Staszicz, Marcel (Poland), three samples from the Dukla Mine, CSA, CSM (Czech Republic) and two samples from Brut Petrosani and Brut Paroseli Mines in Romania were tested by flotation. The objective of this paper was to evaluate the flotation characteristics of bituminous coal from localities in Poland, the Czech Republic and Romania; using Montanol and Flotalex collector agents. The performance of these collector agents was tested and the results evaluated from the petrologic analyses.Coal flotation is used for the separation of fine fractions of mined coal that are produced by abrasion and disintegration during mining and subsequent processing. In the Czech Republic, flotation is used only for coking coal processing. Coal flotability depends on its coalification degrees and it is connected with the non-polar character of its surface. Vitrite and clarite have pronounced flotability, expressed by a shorter flotation time, when compared with fusinite and durite. The paper deals with flotability of bituminous coal and examines how individual maceral groups float in the course of a fractional flotation test The flotation tests were carried out in the laboratory of the Environmental Engineering Institute using the laboratory flotation machine VRF-l, a product of RD Pribram. This is a mechanical mixing flotation machine with an air intake. In order to test the selectivity of flotation collector agents, Flotalex and Montanol collector agents were used as they are the most applied collector agents both in Poland and the Czech Republic The flotation test was carried out under the following conditions: pulp density: 150 collector agent dose (Flotalex, Montanol): 500 Fractional flotation was implemented obtaining concentrates after 1, 2, 3 and 5 The coal polished samples were prepared according to the CSN ISO 7404-2 standard The maceral analysis was carried out on a grain polished specimen according to the CSN ISO 7404-3 For each sample a planimetric analysis was also carried out to determine the inorganic matter and the separate contents of pyrite, carbonates, clay minerals and others. The ‘others’ include mineral matter of inorganic origin, which could not be specified by means of a microscope This section focuses on the evaluation of percentage abundance of all products, which were formed in the flotation process since it is necessary to clarify how the individual macerals react in the course of the flotation process, and where they cumulate. Next, the most significant maceral groups, particularly vitrinite, which transfer into the flotation concentrate, and the mineral matter transferring into the flotation tailings, are determined. For the sample from the Marcel Mine, using the Flotalex collector agent, 97% of the vitrinite group floated into the concentrate in 3 Using the Flotalex collector agent with the Jaworzno locality sample, it was noticed that 61% of the vitrinite group floated into the concentrate during 3 For the sample from the Staszicz Mine, using the Flotalex collector agent, 75% of the vitrinite group floated into the concentrate in 3 Applying the Flotalex collector agent with the Dukla sample, 75% of the vitrinite group floated into the concentrate in 3 Applying the Flotalex collector agent with the CSM sample, it was intercepted that in 3 For the sample from the CSA locality, using the Flotalex collector agent, 84% of the vitrinite group floated into the concentrate during 3 Using the Flotalex collector agent with the Brut Petrosani locality sample, it was noticed that 64% of the vitrinite group floated into the concentrate during 3 For the sample from the Brut Paroseli Mine, using the Flotalex collector agent, 66% of the vitrinite group floated into the concentrate in 3 The objective of this paper was to evaluate flotation of bituminous coal from localities in Poland, the Czech Republic and Romania; where the Montanol and Flotalex collector agents were tested as well as their selectivity. The performance of the above-mentioned collector agents was evaluated from the petrologic point of view. It is apparent from the flotation tests results that both collector agents have an approximately identical selectivity. The petrologic analyses proved that applying both collector agents, 75% of all maceral groups floated in 3 The paper was compiled with a financial support of GACR No. 105/02/1014 project.