Herbivores influence nutrient cycling either through direct effects (e.g. excreta) or through indirect effects such as a modification of plant–soil feedbacks. This work investigated if grazing-enhanced net N mineralization rates were related to (1) enhanced quality of plant litter and/or (2) reduced plant litter inputs. Rates of net N mineralization in soil and both the quantity and quality of litters were characterized in various plant patches occurring within a grazed grassland. Soil incubations were performed in controlled conditions to assess the respective role of litter quantity and quality on N mineralization.
                  In laboratory incubations, the effect of litter quantity on net N mineralization rates was found to depend on litter quality. High inputs of litter produced by grazing-promoted species (C/N 11) stimulated net N mineralization rates, while high inputs of litter produced by grazing-reduced species (C/N 46) decreased rates of net N mineralization. The intensity of either the negative or positive effects of litter was then regulated by litter quantity. In the field, litter quality only varied within a limited range. Litter with the highest quality in the field (C/N 22) increased N mineralization minimally compared to the lowest quality litter (C/N 46). Grazing-induced variations in litter quality monitored in the field thus appeared unlikely to cause measured variations in net N mineralization rates. Litter with C/N ratios of 46 and 22 stimulated N immobilization and reduction of their inputs increased the rate of N mineralization due to decreased microbial N immobilization. Within-grassland variations of litter quantity were large and negatively correlated with net N mineralization rates. Our results support the hypothesis that grazing-induced patchiness modifies net N mineralization rates by controlling microbial N immobilization mainly through changes in the quantity of litter-C supplied to the soil.Spatial heterogeneity is a typical feature of grazing ( Large herbivore urine or dung depositions may influence soil nutrient availability ( Although mechanisms underlying the impact of grazing on plant–soil feedbacks are complex, herbivores have been reported to enhance soil nutrient availability via two main mechanisms ( In this work, we investigated how vegetation patchiness impacted N mineralization and subsequent N availability for plants, with a special focus on the relative importance of C and N amounts in the litter deposited on soil. We hypothesized that contrasts in soil N mineralization rates occur within the grassland and are driven by grazing-induced variations of litter quality and quantity. Two non-exclusive hypotheses were tested: (1) the enhanced quality of plant litter in highly-grazed patches will enhance rates of litter decomposition and net N mineralization; (2) reduced plant biomass and plant litter due to grazing will decrease the available substrate for microbial growth and thus microbial N immobilization and will result in an increase in the release of N in the soil. We investigated the relationship between soil N mineralization and plant litter properties by conducting two complementary studies: (1) in situ rates of soil N mineralization and both the quantity and quality of plant litter were characterized in a panel of plant patches differing in species composition and grazing intensity in the three plant communities (i.e. mesophilous, meso-hygrophilous and hygrophilous communities) in a grassland; (2) laboratory soil incubations were used to assess the respective role of the quantity and quality of plant litter on N mineralization together with their interaction effects. The study area was a grazed wet grassland situated in the Marais Poitevin (France, 46°28′N; 1°13′W). The soil had a clayey texture and hydromorphic characteristics with a superficial A0 horizon 5 to 10 This study was conducted in 2002 in an experimental grazing design set up since 1995. Four experimental paddocks with similar stocking rates were considered in this study: two cattle-grazed paddocks (1 Standing plant biomass and litter were harvested in four 25 For each of the 13 studied patch types ( For the incubation experiment, soil samples were collected at the end of July from the 0–10 The soil was homogenized and distributed in 40 rectangular (10 During the incubation experiment, the mineral N content of soils was measured at days 16, 44, 94 and 176 using a sub-sample of 10 Variations in rates of net N mineralization and vegetation characteristics (i.e. litter biomass, litter Repeated measures ANOVA was performed to compare N mineralization dynamics in the soil, both with and without litter addition ( Within the grassland, short patches with good quality plant biomass displayed higher rates of net N mineralization than patches of tall vegetation with low quality plant biomass. A significant correlation between in situ standing biomass and plant biomass Most of the ammonium-N was rapidly nitrified during the incubation experiment and the proportion of NH The microbial N biomass increased according to the amount of litter added regardless of the quality of the litter ( In the wet grassland studied, spatially heterogeneous grazing generated a vegetation patchiness with contrasts in the quality and quantity of litter among plant patches. In this study, we found in controlled conditions that litter quality and quantity controlled rates of net N mineralization with a significant interaction between them. In particular, the effect of litter quality changed from being negative to positive when the Enhanced plant quality with increased grazing intensity was reported to result from both floristic composition changes and tissue renewal after grazing ( In the grasslands studied, floristic changes induced by herbivores appeared as the main driving factor of litter quality variations (data not shown) and were thus expected to impact N cycling rates, as found in previous studies ( Thus it can be concluded that although grazing patchiness generated important variations in litter quality in the fertile wet grasslands studied, the range of litter quality found in situ was not sufficient enough to explain variations in net N mineralization rates measured among plant patches. In contrast with limited variation in the A reduction in the amount of litter accumulated on the ground is one of the most striking effects linked to the occurrence of grazing ( The consequence of increased N immobilization on net N mineralization rates after litter addition strongly depended on litter quality. In contrast with the intermediate and low quality litter found in situ, the input of a high quality litter ( An increase in grazing intensity simultaneously corresponds to less organic matter returning through the litter pathway and to more organic matter returning through faeces deposits ( In extensively grazed grasslands, it appears that foraging by large herbivores is patchy and leads to the coexistence of different plant patches ( This work was funded by The Parc Interrégional du Marais Poitevin and is a contribution to GDR 2574 “TRAITS”. We are grateful to Dr Tina Bell and two anonymous reviewers for their constructive comments on this manuscript. We particularly thank Didier Naudon and Sébastien Cosson, Parc Interrégional du Marais Poitevin, for their assistance. We are grateful to Stéphane Barbier, Aurélie Josset and Anthony Pingray for their help in the field.