Inert gas atomized (IGA) superalloy Inconel 718 powder was consolidated by hot isostatic pressing (HIPing) at 1200°C under 120MPa pressure for 3h. The HIPed alloy heat treated as per the aerospace materials specification (AMS) 5662J standard schedule, viz. solution treatment (ST) at 980°C for 1h/water quenching (WQ) to room temperature (RT) and a two-step ageing treatment (AT) at 720°C for 8h/furnace cooling (FC) at 55°Ch−1 to 620°C and holding at 620°C for 8h and air cooling (AC) to room temperature has exhibited the yield strength (YS) and ultimate tensile strength (UTS) comparable to that of the conventionally processed (forged and heat treated) IN 718. However, its ductility and stress rupture properties at 650°C were found to be poor due to the presence of prior particle boundary (PPB) networks decorated with highly stable oxides (Al2O3 and TiO2) and brittle MC (Nb, Ti)C carbides. To mitigate this problem, the HIPed alloy was subjected to solution treatment at 1270°C for 1h followed by re-HIPing at 1100°C/130MPa/3h before heat-treating it as per AMS 5662J standard schedule. Optical and scanning electron microscopy (SEM) of the alloy processed under modified HIPing and heat treatment conditions have shown the dissolution of MC-carbides, breaking up of PPB networks and formation of equiaxed grains with an average diameter of about 50μm. Transmission electron microscopy (TEM) of this alloy has revealed uniform distribution of γ″ and γ′ strengthening precipitates in the γ-matrix and the presence of δ(Ni3Nb) phase as well as very fine oxide particles near the grain boundaries. The tensile properties of the alloy processed under modified conditions have shown quite satisfactory levels of YS and UTS combined with a significantly improved elongation (EL) values at room temperature (19.5%) and at 650°C (8.0%). The improvement in alloy ductility was found to correlate well with the fractography of the tensile tested specimens, which showed the predominance of transgranular fracture with fine dimples at room temperature and fine dimples together with the particle boundary facets at 650°C. The stress rupture properties of modified processed alloy at 650°C and at a stress level of 690MPa have shown a vastly improved rupture life of 80h combined with 5% ductility. The improvement in tensile and stress rupture properties accomplished by the modified processing makes it possible to explore the near net shape capability of HIP technology to its full potential in the development of alloy 718 components.Superalloy Inconel 718 is used extensively in aircraft/aerospace, nuclear and petrochemical industries due to its high tensile strength and resistance to fatigue as well as oxidation at elevated temperature In the present study, alloy 718 prealloyed powder was processed through HIP route with basic aim of producing near net shaped integral turbine rotors for use in the reactive type turbine of space vehicle's engine. Before making full size components, the as-HIPed alloy was characterized for microstructure and tensile properties. The alloy has shown highly homogeneous microstructure containing fine grains, annealing twins and prior particle boundaries (PPBs) decorated with the stable oxides (Al Several methods have been proposed in the literature for reducing the PPB networks in P/M (HIPed) superalloys without going in for thermomechanical working The chemical composition of inert gas atomized (IGA) powder used for this study is given in The microstructure of as-HIPed superalloy 718 is presented in The microstructure of re-HIPed alloy in the as-polished and also in the etched conditions is presented in The room temperature tensile properties of the alloy processed under modified HIPing and heat treatment conditions are given in The 650 The stress rupture properties of the alloy processed under modified HIPing and heat treatment conditions along with those of the HIP The fractured surfaces of the alloy processed under modified conditions were examined to correlate the fracture characteristics with structure and properties. Typical fractured surfaces of tensile samples tested at room temperature and at 650 Hot isostatically pressed superalloy Inconel 718 has shown highly homogeneous microstructure containing fine grains, annealing twins and prior particle boundaries (PPBs). The presence of PPBs decorated with highly stable oxides (Al It may be noted that the conventionally processed wrought alloy 718 usually is solution treated in the temperature range of 925–1050 The tensile properties of the alloy 718 processed under modified HIPing and heat treatment conditions were compared with those of the HIP The stress rupture properties are important criteria for selecting the material for the development of near net shaped integral turbine rotors for use in fast firing engines of satellite launch vehicles and similar components for aerospace applications. In view of this requirement, the stress rupture properties of the alloy processed under modified conditions were evaluated at a specified temperature of 650  Hot isostatically pressed superalloy Inconel 718 consists of undesirable prior particle boundary networks due to a high levels of oxygen contamination of prealloyed powder, resulting in poor ductility and inferior stress rupture properties after heat treatment as per AMS 5662J standard schedule. Modified processing procedures based on solution treatment at supersolidus temperature followed by re-HIPing under high pressure and standard heat treatment virtually eliminates the PPBs, which leads to a substantial improvement in tensile ductility and stress rupture properties. The improvement in mechanical properties accomplished by modified processing makes it possible to explore the near net shape capability of HIP technology to its full potential in the development of alloy 718 components. The authors gratefully acknowledge the Defence Research and Development Organization (DRDO) for providing the financial support for this study. The authors would like to thank Dr. A.M. Srirama Murthy, Director, DMRL, for his encouragement for this study. Thanks are due to Dr. D. Banerjee, the former Director, DMRL, Chief Controller Research and Development (CC R&D) for Aeronautical Materials and Systems (AMS), DRDO for extending immense support for this study. One of the authors Dr. GAR would like to thank Shri. Mahendra Kumar, Head, Powder Processing Group for extending needful support during the course of this work. Thanks are also due to Dr. D.K. Das, Scientist, DMRL for sparing his valuable time for technical discussions. The cooperation of PPG, MEG, Metallography, SEM and MBG groups of DMRL in the experimental work is gratefully acknowledged.