Opening holes in rock including their size and distribution can affect the performance of rock-related structures. A good understanding on this will contribute to, for example, rock cavern design, and construction, tunnelling, and mining engineering. To improve the understanding, a comprehensive investigation of the opening hole effect on the rock mechanical behaviour under biaxial loading condition is carried out by virtue of a hybrid continuum-discrete element method. Laboratory specimens with both single hole and multi-hole of various radii are investigated and compared with the cases subjected to uniaxial compression. It is demonstrated that the confining pressure can increase both the stiffness and strength due to delaying the crack initiation and propagation. The increase due to the confining pressure is more evident for the compressive strength. For single hole specimens with 0.75 mm radius hole, the increase ratio of the compressive strength is a linear increasing function with width and the increase ratio ranges from 2.15 for the specimen with 3.5 mm width to 2.45 for 10 mm width. For the single hole specimen with 10 mm width, the increase ratio starts at 2.13 for the specimen with 0.75 mm radius hole, ascending to the peak of 2.37 for the specimen with 1 mm radius hole, followed by a decline to 2.2 for the specimen with 1.25 mm radius hole. However, for the multi-hole specimens, the increase ratio varies from 1.66 to 3.13. In addition, to verify the influence of confining pressure magnitude on the performance of the rock specimens, totalling 10 confining pressure levels are applied and modelled. The simulation results show that even though there are opening holes in the specimens, the simulated compressive strength generally follows the generalised Hoek-Brown model.Rock is non-homogeneous material and normally contains various defects, for example, beddings, faults, and opening cavities. These defects influence the strength and stiffness of rock significantly. When subjected to internal and external loadings, they can propagate, interact and sometimes coalescence, resulting in damage or failure ( The main contribution carried out in the literature has been the studies of rock fracturing under uniaxial loading condition for fissured rock ( The paper aims to investigate the influence of the opening hole on rock's strength, stiffness and crack initiation and propagation under biaxial loading condition. The mechanical behaviour of the rock is investigated based on the distribution of the principal stresses in the rock specimens. The aspects that the paper covers include: (i) the single circular hole effect on the mechanical behaviour for rock; (ii) the multiple circular hole effect on the mechanical behaviour for rock; (iii) the principal stress inside rock specimen; and (iv) the effect of confinement on the mechanical behaviour for rock with multi-hole (this is not covered in the literature). The simulation results demonstrate that the opening including its size and alignment in rock can significantly change the rock mechanical behaviour in terms of strength and stiffness deterioration as well as cracking behaviour under biaxial confinement. The numerical method used in this paper is UDEC, which is a hybrid continuum-discrete element method (  The specimens with single hole used in this study are shown in  The compressive stress–strain relationships for the five specimens under uniaxial and biaxial compression conditions are presented in  To understand the mechanism of the observations, the principal stresses inside the specimens are investigated, as shown in Due to the confining pressure in biaxial compression simulations, the tensile zone length is shorter than that in uniaxial compression simulations with smaller tensile stress. Comparing the three specimens, it is found that the tensile zone length is prohibited if increasing the specimen width so that shorter cracks at the top and bottom wings of the opening hole under the same axial strain are induced. The microcracks at the top and bottom of the hole are governed by the tension of the major principal stress. Due to the confinement, the crack initiation and propagation have been postponed in the biaxial compression simulations. Eventually, the postponement results in a higher compressive strength in biaxial compression simulations, as presented in In this section, the hole size effect on the specimens with identical width is discussed. It can be seen in The principal stress distribution and microcrack pattern at low vertical compressive strain (9.55 × 10 In this section, the effect of group of holes on the mechanical behaviour of the rock is presented. It is based on the specimens presented in The principal stresses and microcrack pattern under low vertical compressive strain are investigated as presented in In alignment V1 ( For diagonal alignment (e.g. alignment D1) ( For the random alignment (alignment R1 is used in this paper, In underground space development, for example, tunnelling, the in situ horizontal stress is more complex compared to the vertical stress. It depends highly on the excavation level/depth, rock properties (e.g. elastic properties, density and thermal expansion coefficient). To further study the influence of various confining pressures on the mechanical behaviour of the rock with holes, nine more confining pressures (i.e. 1 MPa, 2 MPa, 3 MPa, 4 MPa, 6 MPa, 7 MPa, 8 MPa, 9 MPa, and 10 MPa) are applied to the specimens with multiple holes and without hole. It can be seen that the confining pressure investigated here is in good agreement with the practical in situ horizontal stress in the ground ( The simulated stress–strain curves are plotted in A comprehensive study of the influence of opening in rock on its mechanical behaviour including Young's modulus, compressive strength, microcrack propagation as well as the principal stresses distribution in the specimen under biaxial condition has been conducted. Various hole arrangements including single-hole and multi-hole have been considered. It shows that confining pressure can significantly increase compressive strength and slightly increase Young's modulus. For the specimen with single centred-hole, increasing specimen width can increase both Young's modulus and compressive strength. However, increasing hole size in the same sized specimen can decrease the Young's modulus and compressive strength. The impact on the compressive strength is higher for the specimen with larger hole. The mechanism is that the confining pressure could postpone the tensile zone length and its stress level, thereby delaying the microcrack initiation around the hole boundary. For the specimen with multi-hole, the confining pressure has strengthened the specimen, however, with lower strength compared to intact rock. Among the multi-hole specimen, vertical and horizontal alignments have less impact on the strength than the diagonal and random alignments. We wish to confirm that there are no known conflicts of interest associated with this publication and there has been no significant financial support for this work that could have influenced its outcome.