Nowadays, economic uncertainties have an indispensable role in mining evaluation projects, so the evaluation of a mining project without considering if the available uncertainties are incorrect and unreliable. Metal price uncertainty and operating costs uncertainty are the most important parameters in economic uncertainty. Numerous research studies have been carried out for price uncertainty, but there is no noticeable research on the simultaneous effects of operating cost and price uncertainties on the evaluation process. To solve this problem, a new evaluation method – pyramid technique – was developed based on the multidimensional binomial tree method. The pyramid technique can evaluate the mining projects under the situation of multi-uncertainties.
                  In this research, in order to determine the efficiency of the pyramid technique, the net present value of the Grasberg copper mine was computed under economic uncertainties. Finally, the achieved results were compared with the results of the other evaluation methods such as binomial tree. It is concluded that when uncertainties are considered by the pyramid method, the mine evaluation suggests more reliable net present value.Mining projects are impacted by numerous risks and uncertainties, as evaluating a mine project without considering the risks and uncertainties will lead to invalid results. Consequently, managers and stockholders of a mine company make an indiscreet decision based on invalid information. Economic uncertainty is one of the most important sources of uncertainty, which has a critical impact on mine project evaluation. From the economic point of view, future metal prices and operating costs are the most important factors of uncertainty. In order to make a correct decision via managers, it is necessary to investigate the effect of price and operating cost uncertainties, simultaneously. Numerous research studies have been carried out for price uncertainty ( In this paper the roles of metal price and operating cost uncertainties were studied in a mining project evaluation process, simultaneously. For this purpose, a new method, the Pyramid technique, was developed based on the binomial tree method. The binomial model is a well-known alternative in discrete time, which is developed by Inability in considering the uncertainties of the metal price and operating cost, simultaneously, is one of the most important problems in the binomial tree method. An example is represented for more clarification. All of the possible scenarios for changes in metal price and operating cost conditions are shown in The Binomial tree method can only consider the price and operating cost variations with the same direction, in other words from the above mentioned scenarios, this method can only survey In this process the price and operating cost have coefficient of correlation, There are four branches instead of two at every node, corresponding to the four possible combinations of the amounts of price and cost going up or down. The probabilities (Pr In this section, four different scenarios were studied to investigate the effect of the uncertainty of the economic parameters such as metal price and operating cost on a mining project: Net present value (NPV) computation under certain metal price and operating cost situations; NPV computation under uncertain metal price and uncertain operating cost situations using the Monte Carlo method; NPV computation under uncertain metal price and uncertain operating cost situations using the binomial tree technique; and NPV computation under uncertain metal price and uncertain operating cost situations using the pyramid technique. In this scenario, the project NPV was calculated using the traditional discounted cash flow (DCF) technique. For this purpose, in the first step, the taxable income ( There are many methods for estimating the future metal price and operating cost such as using the average of the previous metal price and operating cost data and regression analysis. After calculating the CF, NPV will be determined using Eq. First coined by In this scenario, the metal price and operating cost are uncertain ( In this scenario, like the previous scenarios, the metal price and operating cost are uncertain, and the uncertainty of these parameters will be modeled using the Pyramid method. Then, the project cash flow binomial tree will be constructed using Eqs. In this section, the role of price and operating cost uncertainties is studied on the project evaluation using the Grasberg mine data. Grasberg mine complex is located in the province of Irian Jaya, Indonesia. Open pit mining and block caving mining are utilized at the Grasberg mine. Grasberg is a copper–gold porphyry and produces copper, gold and silver concentrates. The grade of copper is 1.2%. Now, the Grasberg mine project may be evaluated using the mentioned scenarios. For more simplicity, it is assumed that the Grasberg mine only produces the copper ore. The effective tax is 35%. The annual deprecation at this mine is equal to 230 For validating the presented model, first, the real NPV of the Grasberg mining project in the period 2008 to 2012 is calculated and then the results of other evaluation methods are compared with the real NPV.  In this scenario, it is assumed the metal price, operating cost and fixed cost are adjusted by the risk free rate for the entire life-of-mine. In this scenario, the NPV of the Grasberg mining project was predicted using the historical data and the Monte Carlo simulation method. For this purpose, @RISK ver. 5.7 was used. The correlation between price and cost was considered using the Cholesky decomposition method. In order to simulate, 5000 iterations were selected. More iteration has no noticeable effect on the results of simulation. Normal distribution was selected as the best distribution. In this scenario, the NPV of the Grasberg mine is determined by considering the uncertainty of price and operating costs. For this purpose, the binomial trees are constructed for the metal price and operating costs ( The cash flow is calculated using Eqs. In this scenario, similar to the previous scenario, the NPV of the Grasberg mine is determined by considering the uncertainty of price and operating costs. For this purpose, probabilities of increasing or decreasing the price and operating cost are calculated using Eqs. The results of the various evaluation methods are presented in As expected, due to the inability to estimate the economic uncertainties, the conventional DCF method cannot predict the real NPV. The NPV of the Grasberg copper mine production project is determined and compared in four scenarios; (1) certain metal price and certain operating costs situation using conventional DCF, (2) uncertain metal price and operating costs situation using Monte Carlo simulation, (3) uncertain metal price and operating costs situation using the binomial tree method and (4) uncertain metal price and operating costs situation using the pyramid technique. The following results are concluded: The pyramid technique is a suitable and applicable technique for forecasting the economic uncertainties in mining projects. The real NPV was 3983.7M$ and the result of the pyramid method (3417.8M$) was the nearest value to the real NPV. The second rank was for the binomial tree method with 3349.7M$. Applying the metal price and operating cost uncertainties cause the net present value to be calculated more realistically than certainty conditions. Using the pyramid technique, the effect of the metal price and operating cost changes on the project NPV can be investigated, simultaneously. A multidimensional binomial tree can be built to model the joint evolution of more than one variable. Derivatives that depend on more than one asset have to factor in correlation between the variables. In a simple two-variable model (for example If we work in terms of the logarithms of the asset prices, the model is simplified as with the single-asset binomial tree, and we get the additive two-variable binomial process shown in