There is a large body of literature that tries to model flotation based on froth properties with little or no experimental verification of the underlying features. These models adopt the so called channel-dominated theory of foam drainage. There is no experimental evidence to support this foam drainage theory. Instead the new, simple and experimentally validated foam drainage equation of Stevenson (2006a) [Stevenson, P. 2006a. Dimensional analysis of foam drainage. Chem. Eng. Sci. 61, 4503–4510] has been extended to describe the liquid flux and liquid profile in columns of pneumatic froth. The condition for the maximum value of gas rate for froth stability has been described and this shows that there is a maximum volumetric liquid fraction that a foam can exhibit. It is shown that the numerical calculations of liquid profile of Neethling et al. (2003a,b) [Neethling, S.J., Lee, H.T., Cilliers, J.J. 2003a. The recovery of liquid from flowing foams. J. Phys.: Cond. Matter 15, 1563–1576; Neethling, S.J., Lee, H.T., Cilliers, J.J. 2003b. Simple relationships for predicting the recovery of liquid from flowing foams and froths. Miner. Eng. 16, 1123–1130] are incorrect, and this may mean that all of their later simulations of the flotation process are similarly deficient. Instead a simple and accessible method of calculated liquid fraction profiles, both with and without added washwater is shown. In addition, a model for the effect of surface and internal bubble coalescence on the hydrodynamic condition of the froth is presented. It is recognised that the gas–liquid systems considered in the current work are dissimilar to practical mineralised flotation froths and these differences are discussed.Plateau border cross-sectional area (m a geometrical constant (≈0.402) (–) Plateau border loss coefficient (–) bubble diameter (≡2 acceleration due to gravity (m superficial liquid drainage velocity (m superficial liquid velocity up the column (m liquid superficial velocity reporting to the concentrate (m superficial gas velocity (m maximum superficial gas velocity for a stable foam (m dimensionless number used in Eq. dimensionless index used in Eq. dimensionless number used in Eq. dimensionless index used in Eq. volumetric liquid flow rate (m volumetric gas flow rate (m radius of curvature of a Plateau border wall (m) harmonic mean bubble radius (m) harmonic mean bubble radius on the top of the froth (m) Stokes number time (s) average liquid velocity in a vertical Plateau border (m vertical dimension in the froth measured positive upwards (m) volumetric liquid fraction in the foam (–) maximum liquid fraction that a pneumatic foam can adopt (–) dimensionless number used in Eq. length of Plateau borders per unit volume of foam (m interstitial liquid dynamic viscosity (Pa dimensionless number defined in Eq. interstitial liquid density (kg equilibrium surface tension (N Rising columns of froth are studied because they occur in the processes of flotation and foam fractionation. Both processes separate components in slurries or solutions on differences in hydrophobicity. Even though flotation froths are mineralised, and the presence of both hydrophobic and hydrophilic particles will surely have an impact upon the hydrodynamics of the system, recent fundamental work on rising columns of froth has tended to study gas–liquid systems; these are much simpler than mineralised froths but may give insight into the fluid mechanics nonetheless.  In this paper, a simple method of calculating the liquid fraction profile in the froth phase, the equilibrium liquid fraction and the liquid overflow rate will be demonstrated. In addition the thresholds for the existence of a stable column of foam will be demonstrated and the affect of bubble coalescence described. However, in order to do this, we must consider first the liquid drainage rate from a stationary column of foam before extending the theory to rising pneumatic froths such as those observed in flotation and foam fractionation. There are two generally accepted models for predicting liquid drainage behaviour in gas–liquid foams; both consider the balance of gravitational and capillary forces with viscous losses in the foam network. In channel-dominated drainage (  The surface shear viscosity (upon which the stress state at the gas–liquid interface is dependent) cannot be measured ( The viscous losses at the nodes cannot be quantified. This is the origin of the adjustable constant used in the node-dominated drainage model of  There is a relatively large body of literature relevant to froth flotation that adopts the channel-dominated foam drainage equation for modelling the process, so it is pertinent to express this model in the form of Eq.      It should be noted that Note that an expression of the form of Eq. In circumstances where the liquid fraction is not constant with height, capillary forces must be taken into account. In fact, Eq.  Eq. It is apparent that the curve in Consider a dynamic mass balance on an element of the froth. Such a balance yields: By considering Eq.  The question arises as to what the foam looks like if It is widely recognised that rising foam is not spatially invariant but exhibits a relatively high liquid fraction at the interface with the bubbly liquid and gets dryer up the column before eventually reaching an asymptote ( By modifying Eq. If 0.26 is selected, the asymptotic liquid fraction calculated by Eq. If 0.36 is selected, the maximum liquid fraction given by Eq. To overcome these problems it is suggested that the maximum possible liquid fraction given by Eq. The liquid fraction profiles are calculated by solving Eq. In column flotation washwater is added to the top of the froth to aid the rejection of gangue material from the concentrate stream. Consider Now, the liquid fraction profile can be calculated by solution of: Throughout this section it has been assumed that there is no bubble coalescence, both on the top surface of the froth and internally (this will be considered in the following section). It is assumed that foam coarsening due to Ostwald ripening is insignificant. It is relevant to discuss how washwater is added to the top of a froth. Thus far it has been assumed that there is no bubble coalescence, which is clearly not the case in most flotation operations. It is not the intention to present a theory for bubble coalescence herein, but to develop a theory for the hydrodynamic state given a certain degree of coalescence. First consider a froth in which bubbles coalesce only on the top surface. The average bubble radius within the froth remains at Consider an example: A pneumatic foam rises in a column and the bubbles exhibit no coalescence (they remain at This example has assumed zero added washwater. Added washwater can be readily accounted for by adding the washwater flux onto the value calculated for effective washwater rate due to surface coalescence. Coalescence, of course, occurs in the bulk of the froth phase as well. Consider the case of a pneumatic froth, with no added washwater, with initial If one wished to include deliberately added washwater to this analysis, the dashed line would need to be dropped accordingly and the new liquid fraction as a function of bubble size calculated. However, the liquid recovered into the concentrate would remain constant at 0.089 Note that A hydrodynamic theory for the characteristics of a demineralised gas–liquid foam has been presented herein. Clearly this system is, in large part, dissimilar to a flotation froth. Firstly the presence of hydrophobic particles at the gas–liquid interfaces will amend the stress condition at the interface and therefore the values of It should be noted that a one-dimensional approach to modelling the hydrodynamic state of rising columns of foam has been taken herein. In fact, a convective instability in relatively wet pneumatic foams has occasionally been observed by However, experiments are currently in progress at Newcastle to measure  A theory for predicting the maximum gas rate to produce a stable pneumatic froth has been presented. The maximum liquid fraction that corresponds to this maximum gas rate has also been calculated. It is suggested that this liquid fraction is used as a boundary condition in the calculation of the liquid fraction profile in a pneumatic froth. The liquid fraction profile in a pneumatic froth can be calculated by numerically solving a first order differential equation. It is seen that an asymptotic liquid fraction predicted by Eq. Simple graphical methods of accounting for surface and internal bubble coalescence have been presented. It is apparent that the method of The possible application of this theory to practical flotation plant has been discussed. Dr. Stephen Neethling, of Imperial College, London, is thanked for correspondence relating to his previous research.