This paper describes the properties and leaching behaviour of a pentlandite concentrate mechanically activated by grinding in an attritor (stirring ball mill) in H2O for 15–60 min. It appears that mechanical activation brings about an increase in specific surface area and a decrease in the content of crystalline phase of the mineral components pentlandite (Fe,Ni)9S8, chalcopyrite CuFeS2 and pyrite FeS2. These transformations are accompanied by mechano-chemical surface oxidation of individual minerals and the formation of water-soluble Ni, Cu and Co compounds. The process of mechanical activation in water and subsequent leaching in an acid solution (Fe2(SO4)3) proceeds in two steps. In the first step (dissolution in H2O), 46% of Ni, 29% of Cu and 29% of Co dissolve; and the rest can be extracted in the second step (leaching in Fe2(SO4)3 solution). Mechanical activation affects the selectivity of extraction of individual minerals.Mechanical activation of minerals by intensive grinding is a non-traditional way of influencing the processes in extractive metallurgy Pentlandite (Fe,Ni) Owing to the refractory character of the sulfides occurring in pentlandite concentrates, different approaches to influencing the extraction of nickel, copper and cobalt have been attempted (various oxidizing agents The possibility of influencing the selectivity of leaching by combining mechano-chemical oxidation with chemical leaching has not yet been investigated. The aim of this study has been to investigate the possibility of using mechanical activation for the selective extraction of nickel, copper and cobalt from pentlandite concentrates. The investigations were carried out with a pentlandite concentrate (Silver Swan deposit, Western Australia). The principal nickel sulfide is pentlandite, chiefly as granular to well-formed crystals with very good cleavage. The pentlandite forms aggregates of coarser crystals. The coarsely granular pentlandite forms composites with pyrrhotite. Pyrite is also present, presumably formed from pre-existing pyrrhotite. Pentlandite (Fe,Ni) The chemical analysis of the “as-received” concentrate is given in The mechanical activation of samples was accomplished in an attritor Molinex PE 075 (Netzsch, Germany) under the following conditions: 500 mL grinding volume, 2000 g grinding balls of 2 mm diameter, 86% of volume filled with grinding balls, 100 g of concentrate, 200 mL of water, temperature 25°C, time of mechanical activation 15–60 min. The specific surface area was determined by the low temperature nitrogen adsorption method in a Gemini 2360 sorption apparatus (Micromeritics, USA). The X-ray diffraction (XRD) data were obtained using a DRON 2.0 diffractometer equipped with a Gur 5 goniometer (Techsnabexport, Russia) under the following conditions: FeKα radiation, 24 kV, 10 mA, time constant 2 s, rate of counting tube movement 2°/min, rate of goniometer movement 1°/min. The XRD patterns of “as-received” as well as the mechanically activated pentlandite concentrate are shown in The degree of amorphization ( According to Dutrizac and MacDonald The leaching was carried out in a batch glass reactor of 500 mL volume under the following conditions: 500 mL of leaching solution, 2 g of concentrate, concentration and composition of leaching solution 0.25 M Fe For dissolution in water, the same reactor as described above was used. The working conditions were as follows: 500 ml water, 2 g of concentrate, stirring rate of 8.33 s As already stated, the intensive grinding of sulfide minerals generates changes in surface and bulk properties of these substances The recovery values of nickel from pentlandite at temperatures of 45°C and 90°C are given in The recovery of copper from chalcopyrite at 45°C and 90°C is shown in The recovery of cobalt at 45°C and 90°C is shown in The Ni, Cu and Co recoveries depicted in As for the crystalline minerals in the “as-received” concentrate, the differences in recoveries for each metal follow the sequence Ni<Cu<Co, which unambiguously indicates a lower temperature sensitivity to leaching for (Fe,Ni) For the mechanically activated concentrate, the temperature sensitivity follows the sequence Ni<Co<Cu. This sequence applies both to reactivities of pentlandite and chalcopyrite. In the case of the mechanically activated samples, the progress of leaching is affected not only by temperature, but also by the degree of amorphization of individual minerals. The reactivity sequence correlates well with the amorphization values for (Fe,Co,Ni) The results of the leaching tests presented in The Ni, Cu and Co recoveries obtained by dissolution in H The properties and leaching behaviour of a pentlandite concentrate mechanically activated by grinding in an attritor were studied. The following conclusions follow from the study. Mechanical activation of a pentlandite concentrate causes an increase in specific surface area and some degree of amorphization of the mineral components of the concentrate. The recovery of Ni, Cu and Co by leaching from the pentlandite concentrate is sensitive to temperature. A sample mechanically activated by grinding in an attritor for 60 min yielded recoveries of 73% Ni, 100% Cu and 90% Co after 2 h leaching with Fe Mechanical activation of a pentlandite concentrate in an aqueous medium and subsequent dissolution of soluble metal species in water enables us to obtain 46% of Ni, 29% of Cu and 29% of Co. These results suggest the possibility of preferential solubilization of Ni from (Fe,Ni) The authors wish to express their thanks to Mrs. M. Galdová for experimental assistance. This work was supported, in part (E.B., M.A.), by Slovak Grant of Agency for Science (grant no. 2/6101/99) and Deutscher Akademischer Austauchdienst (P.B.).