Polymer inclusion membranes (PIM) used for selective transport and separation of metallic ions have emerged in recent times. Their expansion depends on the method of preparation and their suitable structure and physico-chemical characteristics.
                  In this paper, a novel category of membranes for ions separation is reported. The membranes were synthesized by thermally induced phase separation using a mixture of polyvinylidene fluoride (PVDF) and cellulose triacetate (CTA) plasticized by tris(2-ethylhexyl) phosphate (TEHP) and with di-(2-ethylhexyl) phosphoric acid (D2EHPA) incorporated into the polymer as carrier to increase specific interactions between polymers. PIM membrane exhibited a hydrophobic (∼100°) and thermally stable up to ∼200°C porous homogenous structure.
                  The transport of Ni(II), Zn(II) and Pb(II) from aqueous solutions was studied by competitive transport across polymer inclusion membranes (PIM). Competitive transport of ions in solution across PIM provide the selectivity order: Ni2+ (45%)>Pb2+ (35%)>Zn2+ (5%). A long-term transport experiment was carried out to study the durability of the system.Polymeric materials have been increasingly related to our daily life and hydrophilic/hydrophobic polymer blend systems are gaining increasing attention in the last few years, particularly in applications related to environmental areas. Polymer blending is a way of producing novel materials with improved physicochemical properties, reason why has been considered an important research field for several decades Further, the use of membrane technologies is limited to systems with suitable chemical and mechanical stabilities and useful lifetimes Polymer membrane processes have become a viable and interesting alternative to conventional solvent extraction methods for selective separation of compounds such as acids and metals from aqueous solutions, since it combines extraction and stripping operation in a single stage. In the last 30 years several membrane separations techniques have been explored with the aim to reduce the needed energy and reactants of solvent extraction separation, and hence the economic and environmental impact. Among these, polymer inclusion membranes (PIM) and support liquid membranes (SLM) stands out due to high transport rates, good selectivity and long-term stability. PIM membranes have been successfully used in the extraction of metals using solvating-type extractants, such as crown ethers, trioctylphosphine oxide (TOPO), calix[4]-crown-6, cyanex 471X, tributyl phosphate (TBP) and di-(2-ethylhexyl) phosphoric acid (D2EHPA) A comparison between SLM and PIM performance reported that similar phenomena control Cu(II) facilitated transport across both types of membranes using lauric acid as carrier, however, the stability of both membrane systems was not discussed On the other hand, poly(vinylidene fluoride), PVDF, received great attention as membrane material due to its outstanding properties such as high mechanical strength, chemical resistance, thermal stability and high hydrophobicity compared to other commercial materials. PVDF membranes have been prepared by phase inversion processes such as thermal evaporation, immersion precipitation, non-solvent separation and electro-spinning This paper reports on the synthesis of a novel class of polymer inclusion membranes prepared by thermally induced phase separation using a mixture of two polymers: polyvinylidene fluoride (PVDF) and cellulose triacetate (CTA) plasticized by tris(2-ethylhexyl) phosphate (TEHP) and with di-(2-ethylhexyl) phosphoric acid (D2EHPA) as carrier. The morphological, structural and thermal properties of the membranes were determined as well as their transport efficiency. Polyvinylidene fluoride (PVDF pellets Mw Polymer inclusion membranes were prepared according to the procedure reported in The morphology of the samples was studied by scanning electron microscopy (SEM) collected with a Quanta 650 FEG (FEI) Scanning Microscope with an acceleration voltage of 10 The transport experiments were carried out with a cell (100 The microstructure of PIM membranes affects the carrier distribution along the matrix and therefore it is crucial for their transport efficiency. Thus, the SEM micrographs provides important qualitative (dense or porous structure) and quantitative (porosity and layer thickness) The morphology of the PVDF and PVDF The inclusion of the carriers into the PVDF The contact angle (θ) results are presented in The hydrophobicity of the carrier molecules should modify the contact angle of the PVDF In order to further evaluate the characteristics of the membranes, The FTIR spectrum of PVDF shows five principal bands, the less intense band at 2924 The spectrum also presents the characteristics bands of the electroactive γ-PVDF at 833 and 1234 Regarding the spectra of the blend membranes, the main absorption bands are located around 1735–1751  The thermal properties of the membranes were studied by TGA, The variation of the fluxes of nickel, lead and zinc ions as a function of membrane nature is reported in These results are in accordance with the literature The results show that the transport of nickel, zinc and lead obtained for the membrane with the carrier (D2EHPA) are higher than that for the membrane without D2EHPA, achieving the maximum transport percentages ion transfer of ∼45% for nickel, ∼35% for lead and ∼5% for zinc. This could be ascribed to the membrane diffusion mechanism that controls the ion migration, thus being the kinetically determining step of the process. The study over time up to 5  Finally, it was noted that a competitive transport of three heavy metals resulted in the following selectivity order: Ni(II) Membranes of PVDF and CTA containing TEHP as plasticizer and D2EHPA as carrier have been prepared by thermally induced phase separation. The PVDF and PVDF A comparative study of the transport across the polymeric membrane shows that the nickel (II) and lead (II) transport efficiency increases using a modified PIM, achieving transport percentages of ∼45 and 35% for Ni(II) and Pb(II) respectively. This study represents an interesting approach in the treatment of hydrometallurgical solutions using the D2EHPA acidic carrier mediated transport. We are grateful to Unité de Développement des Equipements Solaires, UDES, Centre de Développement des Energies Renouvelables, CDER for providing a financial support to D. Zioui at the Centro/Departamento de Fisica, Universidade do Minho, Braga, Portugal. This work was supported by the Portuguese Foundation for Science and Technology (FCT) in the framework of the strategic project UID/FIS/04650/2013, by FEDER funds through the COMPETE 2020–ProgramaOperacionalCompetitividade e Internacionalização (POCI) with the reference project POCI-01-0145-FEDER-006941. The authors acknowledge funding by the