An alkaline based continuous leaching process is commonly used for extraction of uranium from uranium ore. The reactor in which the leaching process is carried out is called a continuous leaching reactor (CLR) and is expected to behave as a continuously stirred tank reactor (CSTR) for the liquid phase. A pilot-scale CLR used in a Technology Demonstration Pilot Plant (TDPP) was designed, installed and operated; and thus needed to be tested for its hydrodynamic behavior. A radiotracer investigation was carried out in the CLR for measurement of residence time distribution (RTD) of liquid phase with specific objectives to characterize the flow behavior of the reactor and validate its design. Bromine-82 as ammonium bromide was used as a radiotracer and about 40–60MBq activity was used in each run. The measured RTD curves were treated and mean residence times were determined and simulated using a tanks-in-series model. The result of simulation indicated no flow abnormality and the reactor behaved as an ideal CSTR for the range of the operating conditions used in the investigation.Uranium as sodium diuranate (Na A continuous leaching reactor (CLR) based on alkaline leaching of uranium was designed, installed and operated for the leaching process at a Technology Demonstration Pilot Plant (TDPP) in India. The efficiency of the leaching process depends upon the effectiveness of the leaching and the design/performance of the reactor used for the leaching. The leaching process had already been studied and optimized. However, it was felt necessary to evaluate the hydrodynamic behavior of the reactor and the connected heat exchanger. Residence time distribution (RTD) analysis is very useful to access the design of the continuously operating chemical process equipment and optimize their operating parameters ( The continuous leaching reactor is a horizontal autoclave with three interconnected compartments. The volume of each compartment is 260, 175 and 150 The schematic diagram of the CLR and experimental setup is shown in The data recorded in each tracer test were treated and analyzed using a residence time distribution analysis software provided by International Atomic Energy Agency, Vienna, Austria ( The first moments ( The values of mean residence times in the reactor obtained from experimentally measured RTD curves are given in The theoretical mean residence time ( The values of In order to quantify the degree of mixing and to investigate the hydrodynamic behavior of the continuous leaching reactor (CLR), a two-parameter tanks-in-series model was used to simulate the measured RTD data. According to the tanks-in-series model, a reactor is represented by a series of Since in the present case, the tracer was injected as a Dirac's pulse, the model RTD was directly fitted to the experimentally measured RTD. The least squares curve-fitting technique is used to fit the two curves. The quality of the fit is judged by choosing the model parameters to minimize the sum of the squares of the differences between the data and model, identified as the root mean square (RMS) value. The values of the model parameters corresponding to the minimum RMS value were chosen as the best set of parameters ( The results of RTD analysis of the leaching reactor are given in The graphical comparison of RTD curves with varying impeller speed (RPM) is shown in The tanks-in-series model was used to model the measured RTD curves and to assess the degree of mixing i.e. flow pattern. The results of model simulation, i.e. value of Radiotracer investigation was successfully conducted in the pilot-scale CLR at ambient conditions. The investigation revealed that there was no bypassing/short-circuiting or any other flow abnormality in the reactor. The mean residence times were determined and found to be ranging from 97 to 359 The authors wish to thank to Dr. Gursharan Singh, Associate Director, Radiochemistry and Isotope Group, Dr. S.K. Suri, Director, Materials Group, and Mr. S.K. Ghosh, Director, Chemical Engineering Group of Bhabha Atomic Research Centre, Trombay, Mumbai for their support and encouragement during the course of the investigation.