This paper is aimed to introduce an approach for evaluating compressional and shear wave velocities via the neutron, density, gamma ray logs and poissons ratio (σ ) in a very simple way for different types of lithologies provided that this approach assumed matrix to be known from any one of the sources employed for such objectives.
                  The approach taken in this present study based on the well known Dresser Atlas [Dresser Atlas, 1979: Log Interpretation Charts. Dresser Industries Inc., Houston, Texas, 107p.] equations for computing porosity. This can be achieved by merging such equations with the well known effective porosity equation in order to end up with a formula for both compressional and shear wave velocities as a function of neutron, density, shale volume poissons ratio; taking into account the effect of both matrix and fluid nature.
                  A number of measurements, including compressional, shear and all elastic moduli, are used to test the proposed approach and compare its results with those obtained. The success of such comparison give us the opportunity to apply the suggested formula to real field data in the northern part of the Gulf Of Suez basin. The results of both test and application came in a good agreement and the small existing error can be negligible.The long spacing sonic has been extensively used to investigate transit time (Δt) representing two component namely compressional and shear. The inverse of these time determining the velocities to be used in VSP and AVO, in general term the accuracy of determine such velocities depending mostly on the accuracy of the tool used to serve such task. In-addition to what had been described from elastic theory for determining both velocities as a function of shear modulus, bulk modulus and bulk density, Elastic waves have a fundamental importance for geophysicists to determine the position and the properties of fractures (such as their thickness) to make predictions about the mechanical properties of a fractured platform or the diffusion of a pollutant, for instance. When the wavelengths are much larger than the distance between fractures, the fractures are generally not studied individually, and homogenization theories are applied. The aim of the present paper is to introduce a formula to calculate the mechanical wave velocities (Vp and Vs) in a simple manner as a function of neutron, density derived from LDT, gamma ray logs and poissons ratio (σ).  By re-arranging Eqs. ϕ Effective porosity can be defined as: From Eq. (6) into Eq. Assuming that ϕ Vp Can be defined as the reciprocal of transit time, so, compressional wave velocity can be determined from Eq. From elastic theory we have that: The following example represents the Mississippian Mission Canyon Formation of Williston Basin located in the USA, However, the following data were available to complete the formation evaluation process: Neutron, Density and Sonic data. Δt Δt ρ ρ Vp and Vs was calculated using two approaches. The first which defined by elastic theory; and the second from the proposed equations. A comparison was made between these values of compressional and shear waves velocities(Vp and Vs). and the results obtained are illustrated in Eqs. The interval was taken as an example for computing Compute the compressional waves velocity from the reciprocal of sonic data after correcting from the shaliness effect to be the observed Vp. Calculate poissons ratio (σ) from the following Calculate the shear waves velocity from σ and Vp to be the observed Vs. Determine Vp from Eq. Δt Δt ρ ρ ρ Δt Calculate shear waves velocity from σ and the calculated Vp using Eq. Comparing the observed and calculated compressional and shear waves velocities, From the comparison, it is indicated that the amount of error in an acceptable range ,but it is increased as the shale volume increase, so, it is recommended to use the suggested equations in clean formation. The paper introduced an approach for evaluating compressional and shear wave velocities using neutron, density, gamma ray logs and poissons ratio (σ ) in a very simple manner for different types of lithologies provided that this approach assumed matrix to be known from any one of the sources employed for such objectives. This can be achieved by merging the well known The suggested equations is tested and applied on two well from USA and Egypt to reflect the reliability of these formula and The results of both came in a good agreement and the small existing error can be negligible especially in clean zone, so, It is recommended to use the suggested equations in clean formation (Vsh ≅ 0) since the amount of error increase by increasing the shale volume.  Shallow Laterolog True resistivity (Ωm) Invaded Zone resistivity (Ωm) Resistivity of the mud filtrate (Ωm) Mud cake resistivity (Ωm) Transit time for matrix (ms/ft) Transit time for the fluid (ms/ft) Shale density (gm/cm Fluid density (gm/cm Neutron porosity. Sonic derived porosity. Total porosity. Density log reading (gm/cm Volumetric fraction of shale Apparent resistivity of formation water (Ωm) Deep Laterolog Microspherically Focused Log Resistivity of formation water (Ωm) Shale resistivity (Ωm) Temperature of the formation (°F) Shale transit time (ms/ft) Bulk density (gm/cm Matrix density (gm/cm Neutron porosity Total porosity Density derived porosity Neutron-Density combination Sonic log reading (μs/ft) Corrected shale fraction The author would like to express his gratitude to Professor Dr. M. H. Kamel, Chairman of the Geophysics Dept., Cairo University for his valuable advice, Special thanks are also due Dr. E. M. Abdelrahman, Professor of Geophysics, Faculty of science, Cairo University for their continuous encouragement’s and reviewing manuscript