A spent eggshell has been mechanically treated by a planetary ball mill under various conditions. Under the experiments investigated, rotational speed, grinding time and sample mass loading are three important operating parameters. The results showed that the resulting powders are type IV with hysteresis loops corresponding to type H3 from their nitrogen adsorption/desorption isotherms, indicating slit-shaped mesoporous characteristics. Under the optimal conditions, the ground eggshell powder has larger BET surface area (21.2m2/g vs. 0.5m2/g) than the starting eggshell. In addition, this study clearly demonstrated that the intensity of X-ray diffraction is on the decrease with the pore properties of the resulting eggshell powders, showing that the structure of the crystalline eggshell can be transformed into an amorphous one due to the decrease of the crystallite (calcite) sizes. Thus, the approach to create the porous network developed in eggshell agrowaste by high-energy ball milling offers a novel method in the preparation of mesoporous materials, which may be further applied in the fields of biomaterials.Hen eggshell typically consists of ceramic materials constituted by a three-layered structure, namely the cuticle on the outer surface, a spongy (calcareous) layer and an inner lamellar (or mammillary) layer Taking into account the efficient utilization of eggshell particle, it is necessary to fabricate finer powder according to the method of size reduction because the properties (e.g., surface area) of powder material mainly depend on its particle size, particle shape and porosity Due to the available significance of fine eggshell powder in the fields of biomaterials, the study on the utilization of the biomass mineral as a fine form is important. However, the information about its characterization is very scarce in the literature. Garcia-Ruiz et al. aimed at the textural analysis of eggshell with X-ray powder diffractometer Raw membrane-bound hen eggshell was collected from a breakfast shop on a university campus and immediately stored in the refrigerator. Its preliminary pretreatments including stripping membrane off eggshell with a high-speed mixer, rinsing with water, drying, and cutting by rotary cutter were reported previously The crude eggshell sample was finely ground by a tumbling (planetary) ball mill (Retsch Co., Germany; Model No.: PM 100). The apparatus was equipped with a pair of jars made of agate. The inner diameter and depth of the 50 Rotational speed: 100, 200, 300, 400, 500, and 600 Grinding time: 1, 5, 10, 30, 60, 120, and 180 Sample mass: 0.5, 1.0, 5.0, 10.0, 20.0, and 30.0 Rotation direction: clockwise/counterclockwise (interval of 5 The ground powder product was thoroughly removed from the mill jar after grinding for the prescribed operation mode, and then stored in a desiccator for the subsequent characterization measurements. The preparation conditions and sample identification codes of the resulting eggshell powders (denoted as ESP-series) were listed in The surface area, pore volume, and pore size distribution of fine powder were obtained by measuring its nitrogen adsorption–desorption isotherms at −196 In the measurement of true density, the contribution to the volume occupied by pores or internal voids must be subtracted based on its definition. Because of the inertness and small molecule size (about 0.2 In addition to the pore property, the particle size also contributes to the surface area of the resulting eggshell samples. The particle size distributions of crude eggshell particle and its ground powders were examined by using an LS 230 (Micro-volume module) laser diffraction particle size analyzer (Beckman Coulter Inc., USA). Prior to the measurement, a suspension was first prepared by adding about 0.1–0.15 In order to elucidate the particle properties (e.g., pore property and particle size) of the resulting eggshell powders from the measurements of nitrogen adsorption/desorption isotherm and laser diffraction, the powder texture was further examined by scanning electron microscope (SEM) observation. The surface morphologies of the samples were examined using the scanning electron microscopy (SEM) by a S-3000N (Hitachi Co., Japan) apparatus operated at a 15.0 The X-ray diffraction (XRD) analysis was made to observe the possible changes in crystallinity between the crude eggshell particle (i.e., ESP) and some resulting fine powders. Dry fine samples were scanned using a Siemens D500 instrument (Cu-Kα radiation) between 2 The data in From the pore size distribution curves ( In the rotation-ground eggshell particle series ground under a fixed grinding time of 30 As shown in The curve in To study the influence of the rotational direction on the pore properties of the resulting samples, the milling operation of the starting sample ESP was carried out at the identical conditions. As shown in  From the SEM photographs, the textural structure examination of four typical eggshell samples (i.e., ESP, ESP-M2, ESP-M3, and ESP-M5) was further observed to elucidate the grinding effect on the pore development and the particle size. From In order to observe the diffraction patterns of phase change and modification of crystal minerals as a result of the grinding, the powder XRD patterns of four typical eggshell samples (i.e., ESP, ESP-M2, ESP-M3, and ESP-M5) are shown in The ground eggshell powders have been analyzed to characterize their pore properties, particle sizes, surface morphologies, and crystallinities by N The grinding treatment significantly enhances the surface properties of the eggshell by using a planetary ball mill. The pore properties of the optimal resulting solid are 21.2 A hysteresis loop, which is corresponding to type H3, can be found from the nitrogen adsorption–desorption isotherms of the ground eggshell samples, suggesting that they should be characterized by the mesoporous solids associated with wide mouth slit-shaped pores. By the observations in the XRD diffractogram, the intensity of X-ray diffracted is on the decrease with a broadening of the diffraction peaks due to the decrease of the crystallite sizes, showing that the structure of a crystalline eggshell can be transformed into an amorphous one by the grinding as a result of an increase in the pore properties of the resulting eggshell powders.