In this article, the use of external fixation in the management of juxta-articular fractures in paediatric patients is discussed. Basic principles of Ilizarov technique are described for distal radial, distal femoral, distal humeral and distal tibial fractures.
                  Common indications for external fixation in pediatric fractures are comminuted, complicated, and/or open fractures, particularly at the distal humerus, distal radius, distal femur and distal tibia. There are several benefits of external frame fixation in these type of injuries in children. This method avoids additional injury to the growth plate as K-wires are not placed through it. It enables careful reduction without interfragmentary compression and correct anatomic alignment. There is no soft tissue dissection and periosteal blood supply is preserved. External fixation ensures primary fracture stability even in presence of comminution and high adjustment capability. Immediate joint motion and early weight-bearing are further advantages. Joint bridging is an option in severe bone loss or soft tissue injuries.Juxta-articular fractures (JAF) are fractures occurring near the joints. In literature, the notion of JAF in children includes extraarticular fractures type Salter-Harris I and II, metaphyseal and, especially, comminuted metaphyseal fractures [ JAF are common pediatric injuries related to extreme bending and rotational moments often observed during falls and sport activities [ But indications for surgery are not infrequent. Bohn et al emphasized that extra-articular pattern of fractures is usually associated with highest incidence of early (instability leading to secondary angular or rotational displacement, malunion, joint stiffness) and late problems (limb length discrepancy, angular deformity due to growth arrest, joint instability) [ The ultimate goal in the treatment of all extra-articular fractures is to achieve bone healing with a good functional outcome including early mobilization and weight-bearing of the affected limb [ Surgical treatment is challenging due to the short length and small size the bone fragments and the relative softness of the bone [ External skeletal fixation awards the ability to place thin wires at different angles to maximize purchase within a small fragment and to avoid transfixation of the growth plate cartilage. Ilizarov circular external fixator using wires of 1.5–1.8 mm diameter provides good bone fragment stabilization, even in small fragments [ The aim of this article is to touch on principles of Ilizarov frame application in juxta-articular fractures in children in various anatomic regions. Traction by a wire inserted through olecranon allows to achieve approximative reduction of the fracture ( Comminuted compound supracondylar fractures ( For supracondylar fractures in children, the Ilizarov method provides anatomic alignment by acute reduction without soft tissue dissection, fracture stability even in presence of comminution, immediate joint motion and functional rehabilitation. We recommend that the use of Ilizarov frame treatment in pediatric supracondylar fractures should be limited to severe open and/or comminuted fractures, or for cases with secondary displacement after pinning or nailing. In the literature, external fixation in supracondylar fractures is preferred for type III and IV supracondylar fractures, where stable fixation using standard percutaneous pinning cannot be achieved, in cases with severe swelling, in comminuted fractures, in fractures with neurological or vascular problems [ Basic surgical technique involves insertion of 3 proximal radial and radio-ulnar wires fixed and tensioned at the proximal ring and 1 wire inserted through the II-V metacarpal bones. External circular fixator assembly includes a proximal ring, a distal forearm ring placed 2–3 cm proximally to fracture level and a half-ring for a metacarpal wire ( Furthermore, Ilizarov frame technique is of substantial benefit in patients with bilateral distal radius fractures ( In our opinion, there is no indications for external fixation in metaphyseal simple fracture of distal forearm, in which conventional methods provide good functional and anatomical outcomes [ Advantages of external fixation this type of injuries includes stability with simultaneous immediate functional recovery in comparison to conservative management or pinning with K-wires applied with plaster cast [ Traction using a wire inserted through distal femoral epiphysis or proximal tibia allows to achieve approximative reduction of the fracture ( If there is ligament damage or hemarthrosis, the bridging of knee joint is indicated ( Conservative management [ External fixation can be seen as a first-line method in complicated pediatric distal femoral juxta-articular fractures because of several reasons: reduction is anatomical, acute and gentle, there is no need to open the fracture site, fixation is stable, there is no need for additional external immobilization, and physical therapy involving walking with weight bearing may be started immediately after surgery [ As for distal femoral fractures, the surgical technique for distal tibial fracture management implies intraoperative traction for approximative reduction followed by application of the external frame. The insertion of the proximal wires and assembly of the proximal system are straightforward. The distal wires must be inserted only through distal epiphysis to avoid transfixion of the growth plate. In the management of non-complicated distal tibial juxta articular fractures, the Ilizarov frame has only advantage of early joint motion and walking with weight-bearing in comparison to conventional methods. These fractures are common in older children and adolescents where the remaining growth is so little that residual length discrepancy and angular deformity are unlikely to become a clinical problem [ Nowadays, the optimal treatment of displaced Salter-Harris II fractures of the distal tibia is controversial [ Common indications for external fixation in paediatric fractures are comminuted, complicated, and/or open fractures, particularly at the distal humerus, distal radius, distal femur and distal tibia. There are several benefits of external frame fixation in these type of injuries in children. This method avoids additional injury to the growth plate as K-wires are not placed through it. It enables careful reduction without interfragmentary compression and correct anatomic alignment. There is no soft tissue dissection and periosteal blood supply is preserved. External fixation ensures primary fracture stability even in presence of comminution and high adjustment capability. Immediate joint motion and early weight-bearing are further advantages. Joint bridging is an option in severe bone loss or soft tissue injuries. All authors (Dmitry Popkov, Anatoly Korobeinikov) confirm that they have no financial and personal relationships with other people or organisations that could inappropriately influence their work. The authors declare no conflict of interest with regards to the content of this manuscript. The paper is part of a supplement based on the 2017 workshop on “External Fixation and Percutaneous Pinning.” Support for the publication of this supplement was provided by the Osteosynthesis and Trauma Care Foundation (OTCF) sponsored by a research grant from Stryker.