Kwame Nkrumah, the anti-colonial leader and first president of Ghana and the first theorist of neocolonialism, defined neocolonialism as: “modern attempts to perpetuate colonialism while at the same time talking about ‘freedom”. In this formulation it was the ‘last stage’ of imperialism because it emerged in the context of the Cold War in which the Third World became the site of proxy anti-communist struggles. For Nkrumah the control by imperial powers over nominally independent states was achieved through new forms of corporate, and especially financial, forms of capital, by a psychological dependency among Third World elites, by the effects of what he called ‘limited wars’ and by the capitulation of African, Latin American, and Asian leadership to the hegemonic forces of the former colonial states. The term became an integral part of African anti-imperialist theorizing and the likes of Leopold Senghor, Alioune Diop, and Albert Memmi all articulated similar sorts of ideas in the 1950s and 1960s. Franz Fanon in particular in what he called “the pitfalls of nationalist consciousness” laid out a map of the forms and norms of the neocolonial condition. The Algerian was of liberation played an absolutely indispensable role in the formation of neocolonialism as a category of thoght, and French intellectuals – most obviously Jean Paul Sartre – also contributed to the theorization of neo-colonial rule.Standing at the heart of the term neocolonialism is a sort of paradox. Kwame Nkrumah, the anticolonial leader and first president of Ghana and the first theorist of neocolonialism as such, defined the condition as: In his formulation it was the ‘last stage’ of imperialism because it emerged in the context of the Cold War (in which the Third World became the site of proxy anticommunist struggles) and the deepening militancy of ex-colonial territories. This was no longer ‘naked colonialism’ but rather more invisible modalities – economic, ideological, political, and cultural – in which colonial exploitation was perpetuated. For Nkrumah, the control by imperial powers over nominally independent states was achieved through new forms of corporate and especially financial forms of capital, by a psychological dependency among Third World elites, by the effects of what he called ‘limited wars’ and by the capitulation of African, Latin American, and Asian leadership to the hegemonic forces of the former colonial states. While Nkrumah first gave voice to the concept of neocolonialism as an analytical device, the substance of the term was an integral part of African anti-imperialist theorizing. Leopold Senghor, Alioune Diop, and Albert Memmi all articulated similar sorts of ideas in the 1950s and 1960s. In 1967, it was Franz Fanon, in particular, in his searing account of Algeria and what he called “the pitfalls of nationalist consciousness,” who laid out of profound map of the forms and norms of the neocolonial condition. The Algerian war of liberation played an absolutely indispensable role in the formation of neocolonialism as a category of thought, and French intellectuals – most obviously Jean Paul Sartre in 1964 (reprinted 2001) – also contributed to the theorization of, in his case, French neocolonial rule and the deployment of violence (the assassination of Patrice Lumumba in particular) as its particular instrumentality. Central to the idea of neocolonialism is the persistence of ‘colonial’ (or more properly imperial) and therefore exploitative relations. There are three broad senses in which exploitation is usually deployed in this regard: first, as a modern form of industrial or commercial land use (or mineral extraction) derived probably from its Latin origins as an arrangement or explanation. The second meaning is a generic sense of unjustness or oppression, referring to a potentially wide-ranging social relations across time and space (exploitation of women by men, workers by capitalists, slaves by slave-owners, low by high castes, serfs by feudal overlords). The range of opinion here can be substantial ranging from the Kantian view that exploitation refers to the instrumental treatment of humans to coerced activity to psychological harm. The analytical content is of less concern than its moral standing and the moral force of the reasoning (whether and how the state or groups of states should prohibit exploitative transactions or refuse to enforce such agreements). The third meaning which is central to neocolonial theorizing is explicitly analytical in the sense that it purports to provide a theoretical and conceptual ground on which the claim – A exploits B when A takes unfair advantage of B – can be assessed. In philosophical terms, one can say that social science seeks to understand the truth conditions under which such a claim can be made of a particular social setting. The theorization of exploitation in neocolonialism was originally (and to a large extent still is) associated with the work of Karl Marx and the notion of surplus appropriation and the labor theory of value, and subsequently theories of imperialism. Marx’s account identifies a fundamental contradiction at the heart of capitalism – a contradiction between two great classes (workers and owners of capital) which is fundamentally an exploitative relation shaped by the appropriation of surplus. Unlike feudalism in which surplus appropriation is transparent (in the forms of taxes and levies made by landowners and lords backed by the power of the church and crown), surplus value is obscured in the capitalist labor process. Marx argues that labor is the only source of value, and value is the embodiment of a quantum of socially necessary labor. It is the difference between the sale of a worker’s labor power and the amount of labor necessary to reproduce it that is the source of surplus value. The means by which capital extracts this surplus value under capitalism – through the working day, labor intensification, and enhancing labor productivity – coupled to the changing relations between variable and constant capital determine, in Marx’s view, the extent, degree, and forms of exploitation. In the first volume of A long line of Marx-inspired theorizing has, of course, attempted to grasp exploitative relations between countries, and this contributed directly to Nkrumah’s original formulation. This is the heart of theories of imperialism, whether as the coercive extraction of surplus through colonial states through unequal exchange or through the imperial operation of transnational banks and multilateral development institutions (the World Bank and the International Monetary Fund). The so-called ‘anti-globalization’ movement (especially focusing on institutions like the World Trade Organization) and the ‘sweatshop movements’ (focusing on transnational firms such as Nike) are contemporary exemplars of a politics of exploitation linking advanced capitalist states and transnational companies with the poverty and immiseration of the Global South against a backdrop of neoliberalism and free trade. In the Marxian tradition, there has been in general an abandonment of the labor theory of value – away from Elster’s view that “workers are exploited if they work longer hours than the number of hours employed in the goods they consume” – toward John Roemer’s notion that a group (or country) is exploited if it has “some conditionally feasible alternative under which its members would be better off”. Perhaps the central figure in developing these arguments is Erik Olin Wright. Building on the work of Roemer, Wright distinguishes four types of assets, the unequal control or ownership of which constitute four distinct forms of exploitation: labor power assets (feudal exploitation), capital assets (capitalist exploitation), organization assets (statist exploitation), and skill assets (socialist exploitation). While Wright and others have used this approach to grasp contemporary exploitation within so-called advanced capitalism, there are obvious resonances between the operation of neocolonialism and his quartet of forms of exploitation. Decolonization refers to the process, often long, tortuous, and violent, by which colonies achieve their national aspirations for political independence from the colonial metropolitan power. Decolonization can be understood as the period of later colonialism but implicit in the notion of neocolonialism is the idea that decolonization was incomplete or perhaps aborted to perpetuate a form of metropolitan or imperial hegemony. Modern colonialism in its various norms and forms extended over the period from the fifteenth to the twentieth centuries. In the New World, which had been subjected to Spanish, French, Portugese, and Dutch colonial rule in the ‘first age of colonialism’, the first wave of decolonization occurred in the eighteenth century. In this regard, the so-called ‘classical age of imperialism’ in the last quarter of the nineteenth century was short, the first decolonizations of the second wave being achieved after the end of World War II. The two cycles of imperialism both concluded with a limited phase of decolonization followed by the rapid collapse of empires and an irresistible push to political independence. What neocolonialism offered was a critical sense of how this process occurred and whether it was in any sense complete. The first challenge to the first wave of colonization came in 1776 as British North American colonies declared independence. While Britain maintained its Caribbean and Canadian colonies, the Napoleonic upheavals in Europe so weakened Spain and Portugal that European settlers from Mexico to Chile expelled their imperial masters. By 1825, the Spanish and Portugese empires were dead. In the subsequent 115 years up to World War II, decolonization was limited to Cuba in 1898 and two groups of British colonies: the white settler colonies (Canada, Australia, New Zealand, and South Africa) granted internal autonomy and finally full sovereignty in 1931, and Egypt and Iraq after World War I. World War II marked the death knell for European colonization: India’s separation from the British, Indonesia from the Dutch, the remaining Arab-mandated territories, and Indochina from the French. The independence of Ghana in 1957 marked an avalanche of liberations in Africa, though the process was not complete until 1990 (Nambia). Between 1945 and 1989 over 100 new independent states were created. Decolonization is a process marked by the achievement of political independence but the duration, depth, and character of decolonization movements vary substantially. In some African colonies, colonization was barely accomplished and resistance movements of varying degrees of organization and institutionalization attended the entire colonial project. In other cases, an organized anticolonial and nationalist movement came late, accompanied by a rapid and hastily assembled set of political negotiations in which it is clear that the metropolitan power wished to hand over the reigns of power with utmost expedience (Nigeria). In others, it took a war of liberation, a bloody armed struggle by leftist guerillas or nationalist agitators pitted against white settlers or intransigent colonial states (as in Laos, Vietnam, and Zimbabwe). One of the problems with analyzing decolonization, as Fred Cooper notes, is that the story ‘lends itself to be read backward and to privilege the process of ending colonial rule over anything else that was happening in those years’. It should also be said that any account of decolonization – or for that matter neocolonialism – presumes an account, or a theory, of colonialism itself: top-down interpretations take colonial projects at face value, whereas the nationalist account denies any reality to the goal of modernization which the colonial state is purported to bring. In general, decolonization is seen as either (1) ‘self-government as an outcome of negotiated preparation and vision from above’ by a colonial state apparatus, or (2) as a ‘nationalist triumph from below’ in which power is wrested (violently or otherwise) from recalcitrant colonizers. In practice, decolonization was an enormously complex process involving something of each, and shaped both by the peculiarities of colonialism itself and the particular setting in world time in which the nationalist drive began. There are two forms of decolonization which rest on what one might call nationalist triumph. The first is built upon social mobilization in which a patchwork of anticolonial resistances and movements (many of which are synonymous with colonial conquest itself) are sewn together into a unified nationalist movement by a western-educated elite (Malaysia, Ghana, or Aden). Mobilization occurred across a wide and eclectic range of organizations – trade unions, professional groups, and ethnic associations – bringing them into political parties and propelled by a leadership focused on racism, on liberation, and the sense of national identity of the colony, given its own history and culture. The second is revolutionary – Franz Fanon is its most powerful and articulate spokesman – in which the vanguard is not western-educated elites or indeed workers, but the peasants and Both views depict nationalism as subsuming all other struggles and hence obscures and misses much history; both posit a ‘true cause’, as Cooper puts it, in which there is little truck with opposition. Mamdani’s enormously influential book on Africa makes the important point that decolonization posed the possibility of breaking with the tradition of European colonial indirect rule (what he called ‘decentralized despotism’) in which African custom granted enormous powers to local systems of traditional (and therefore cultural) authority, and developing instead a sort of civic nationalism in which cultural politics did not play a key role. Most African states continued the colonial model in which African colonial subjects were granted a racial equality and citizenship rights but in which ‘indigenes’ were simultaneously a sort of bonus. In the historiography of the period, the nationalist road to self-government tends to take for granted the depth and appeal of a national identity. It is precisely the shallowness of these nationalisms in the postcolonial period which reveals how limited is the simple nationalist account of decolonization itself. In practice, decolonization occurred in the context of all manner of contradictions and tensions between the national question and other social questions. There is also a narrative of decolonization which has a singular vision but from the side of the colonial state. It was the colonial bureaucracy, long before nationalist parties arose, which shaped self-government on a calculus of interest and power derived from an older conception of colonial rule (New Zealand and Canada) as a stepping stone to Independence. In this view, Africa by 1947 had already been set on the road to decolonization – this is a classic instant of Whig history – in spite of the fact that the colonial offices typically saw early African leaders as schoolboys or demagogues. Another version of the In all of these accounts – for India as much as Indonesia or Iraq – colonialism is as monolithic as the explanations themselves. There is a reduction involved in seeing Indians or Kenyans as colonial subjects or as national or proto-nationalist actors. An alternative approach pursued by the so-called subaltern school sees colonialism as a contra-metropolitan project, moving against trends to exercise power under universal social practices and norms. In other words, the hegemonic project of colonialism fragmented as colonial rule attached itself to local idioms of power. From this experience characterized by hybrid forms of identity, of blurred boundaries, and contradictory practices, the process of decolonization must necessarily look more complex than simply self-rule managed from above by the colonial state or mobilized from below by nationalist forces. In the same way, the shift from decolonization to neocolonialism operated through similar sorts of complexity and intermixing in which hegemonic metropolitan power was exercised through a battery of institutions and practices (‘development’, ‘capitalism’, and ‘socialism’). The term neocolonialism has fallen out of fashion since the 1970s (with perhaps the exception of a flood of Soviet Marxist-inspired, and largely ideological, studies published up to the mid-1980s). It is quite true however that the broad thrust of critical development work from the late 1960s onward – dependency theory emerging from Latin America, the calls for a New International Economic Order, unequal exchange theory, and the French Marxisant modes of production debate, and Wallersteinian world systems theory to take handful of the most prominent trends in development discourse – all spoke of relations of exploitation between former colonial states and the advanced capitalist core. Indeed, any theory of imperialism almost by definition presumes the exercise of powerful forms of dependency among First and Third World states and to this extent the analytic core of neocolonialism identified by Nkrumah has been central to any critical and left-wing account of global political economy. More recently in the so-called anti-globalization protests – the movement of movements – the critique of corporate power, of the expanded role of finance capital in the impoverishment of the Global South, and the imperialist role of multilateral development institutions such as the International Monetary Fund (IMF) and World Bank is entirely consistent in substance with Nkrumah’s account. The revivification of neocolonialism is especially clear in the World Social Forum (WSF). First convened in January 2001 in Porto Alegre, Brazil, the WSF in an annual meeting held by members of the so-called anti-globalization movements – sometimes dubbed the ‘movement of movements’ – to provide a setting in which global and national campaigns can be coordinated, shared, and refined. It is not an organization or a united front but “an open meeting place for reflective thinking, democratic debate…by groups and movements of civil society that are opposed to neoliberalism and to domination of the world by any capital or any form of imperialism.” The WSF has grown substantially from its first meeting in Brazil. Subsequent meetings in 2002 and 2003 were also held in Porto Alegre, and thereafter in Mumbai (2004), Porto Alegre (2005), and Nairobi (2007). In 2006, a ‘polycentric forum’ was held in Bamako (Mali), Caracas (Venezuela), and Karachi (Pakistan). In 2001, 12 The genealogy of the WSF is complex. The fact that four of the 11 WSF meetings have been held in Porto Alegre – a city with strong connections to the Brazilian Left and the Workers Party and the home to an innovative model of local government and participatory democracy (so-called participatory budgeting) – says much about the broad ideological thrust of the Forum. Ideologically, it clearly stands against neoliberalism and free-market capitalism; it is of the Left but looks for new and different models of economic and political organization drawing from a vast array of experiments embracing the landless workers movements, anti-dam struggles, indigenous peoples, and anti-corporate and multilateral struggles. The idea of a global convention of anticapitalist movements was in part driven by the desire to provide a counterweight to the World Economic Forum held every year in Davos and by the difficulty of organizing mass protest in Switzerland capable of generating sufficient media coverage to challenge the prevailing hegemony of free-market discourse and practice. The protests against the World Bank and IMF annual meetings in 1999 and thereafter – most notably in Seattle, Genoa, and Washington, DC – were an important milestone in the move toward an alternative forum for civic movements opposing unfettered capitalism around the world. It is impossible, however, to understand the WSF outside of the counter-revolution in development thinking and relatedly the growing dominance of neoliberalism (free markets, free trade, privatization, and state cut-backs). The abandonment of Keynesian models of capitalist development – marked by the ascendancy of Ronald Reagan, Margaret Thatcher, and Helmut Kohl – and the rapid adoption of the economic ideas associated with Frederick Hayek and Milton Friedmann and the Mont Pelerin Society had massive and direct implications for the Global South beginning in the 1980s with the massive onslaught of structural adjustment and stabilization programs. It was out of this combination of ‘economic reform’ (viz., the rapid liberalization of state-led development), ‘shock therapy’, and in many places massive economic recession (e.g., the early 1980s and the late 1990s) that the plethora of movements, often arraigned against the privatizations of various commons, arose. In contradistinction to the triumphalism (and purported inevitability) of globalization that dominated the 1990s, the WSF stood for, in their own language, “another world is possible” rather than “there is no alternative”. In some circles, the WSF is held up as a shining example of what Negri and Hardt call ‘the multitude’. The term neocolonialism does not appear prominently in the WSF but the affinities are clear. The language now is of ‘recolonization’ (as the process) and ‘empowerment’ and ‘alternative development’ (as the solution). Neocolonialism more than anything was a key marker of a certain sort of 1960s Third World nationalism. Neocolonialism was a by-product of its largely African and Marxist origins, of the Bandung movement, and of the contradictions of decolonization as it unfolded in the wake of World War II and in the heart of the Cold War. For a while, it was central to thinking of the theories of imperialism within a Marxist frame but it fell out of intellectual fashion. The so-called neoliberal counter-revolution and the devastating consequences of structural adjustment and economic reforms on a large part of the Global South (and Africa, in particular) has given neocolonialism a shot in the arm (seen in the various forms of anti- or alternative globalization movements). The anti-IMF movements across Africa in the 1980s and 1990s had, in this respect, more than a tinge of Nkrumah’s original intent. There are also close affinities between neocolonialism in the Nkrumah sense and postcolonial theory , but the latter always distanced itself from the sort of determinism and historical telos that accompanied so much of Leninist and orthodox Marxist accounts of empire. 