Present work focuses on the differences in the performances obtained in the froth flotation of copper smelter slag with multiple collector viz. sodium iso-propyl xanthate (SIPX), sodium di-ethyl dithiophosphate (DTP) and alkyl hydroxamate at various dosages. Flotation tests were carried out using single collectors as well as various mixtures of the two collectors at different but constant total molar concentrations. Flotation performances were increased effectively by the combination of collectors. The findings show that a higher copper recovery (84.82%) was obtained when using a 40:160g/t mixture of sodium iso-propyl xanthate (SIPX) with di-ethyl dithiophosphate compared to 78.11% with the best single collector. Similar recovery improvement (83.07%) was also observed by using a 160:40g/t mixture of sodium iso-propyl xanthate (SIPX) with alkyl hydroxamate. The results indicate that in both cases DTP and alkyl hydroxamate played important role as co-collector with SIPX for the recovery of coarse interlocked copper bearing particles and has an important effect on the behaviour of the froth phase. However, comparatively higher mass recovery was obtained when hydroxamate was used as a co-collector, accompanied by poorer copper grades. In this context the co-collector DTP is advantageous for the improvement of copper grade and recovery from copper smelter slag.Copper slag is produced during pyrometallurgical production of copper from copper ores. For every tone of metal production about 2.2 In general, the main components in the copper slags are Fe and Si. They amount to 25 to 40% each. Slags usually contain reasonable quantity of valuable metals. Almost all copper slag contains a considerable amount of Cu (0.5 to 3%). They can be treated as secondary resource of metals, rather than an end-waste. Various methods for copper recovery from the copper slags were reported with attention given to beneficiation, pyrometallurgical, hydrometallurgical, and mixed pyro and hydrometallurgical processes. However, among the various processing method, physical separation by froth flotation is widely applied and some researchers considered flotation as an effective method to recover copper from slag. Understanding the slag mineralogy and associations of copper in the flotation feed is crucial to optimise operations. Changes in mineralogical composition influence mineral recovery, reagent choice and also help in identifying and explaining possible processing challenges. Lack of accurate mineralogical characterisation of copper slag often leads to low copper recovery. Froth flotation has been utilised over the years in pre-concentrating copper. Even with this technique, there are still some discrepancies in copper recoveries due to the difficulty in selecting the right reagents to impart hydrophobicity to this valuable metal phase. Therefore, for an improved copper recovery by flotation, it is ideal to have a considerable understanding of mineralogy and association of copper in the flotation feed. The mineralogical characterisation should be able to identify the copper-bearing minerals, show how the copper particles are distributed in each fraction and also to show how copper particles are associated with the gangue minerals. Hydrophobicity of copper can be enhanced by the addition of generic collectors for sulphide minerals such as xanthate and dithiophosphates or specific collector for oxide copper minerals such as hydroxamate etc. Thiol collectors were used in the froth flotation of copper sulphide from the slag. The xanthates, dithiophosphates are classes of thiol collectors that each form different surface products on different copper sulphide minerals. It has been shown that the use of mixtures of thiol collectors can have benefits over the use of pure collectors (    Synergistic effects in flotation were also reported by The use of alkyl, arylaryl or alkylaryl hydroxamates in the flotation of minerals that chelate with hydroxamate is also known in the industry ( In present work, flotation process was applied for the recovery of copper value from copper smelter slag which is generated from Birla Copper Smelter in Dahej, Gujarat situated in western part of India. This paper discusses the differences in the performances obtained in the froth flotation of copper smelter slag with selected collectors such as sodium iso-propyl xanthate (SIPX), Sodium di-ethyldithiophosphate (DTP) and alkyl hydroxamate at various dosages and the mechanisms responsible. It also evaluates the effectiveness of adding sodium di-ethyldithiophosphate (DTP) to sodium isopropyl xanthate (SIPX) as a co-collector and the effect of adding of alkyl hydroxamate to sodium isopropyl xanthate (SIPX) as a co-collector in the flotation of a copper slag with a view to investigating whether there was any evidence of a synergistic beneficial effect resulting from the use of the mixture. Flotation tests were carried out using single collectors as well as various mixtures of the two collectors at different but constant total concentration. Copper slag sample containing 1.9% Cu, 51.58% Fe and 12.15% Si was used in this study. The slag was collected from Birla Copper Dahej, Gujarat, India for characterisation and beneficiation studies. The sample was crushed to pass 300 All batch flotation studies were carried out using lab scale Denver D-12 flotation cell. Slag samples were ground to d Sodium iso-propyl xanthate (SIPX), Sodium di-ethyldithiophosphate (DTP) and alkyl hydroxamate are the three collectors used in this study. Sodium iso-propyl xanthate (SIPX) and Sodium di-ethyldithiophosphate (DTP) collectors were supplied by CYTEC. Sodium iso-propyl xanthate (SIPX) was received in powder form. The alkyl hydroxamates used in the present work is potassium n-alkyl hydroxamate (AM2), which has been manufactured by Ausmelt, Australia. Potassium n-alkyl hydroxamate has a stabilised hydroxamate structure which results in strong and selective surface chelation during its application as a flotation reagent. This reagent is most effective in pH range from 8 to 10.5. Reagents were prepared on a daily basis using deionised water adjusted to pH Characterisation of the slag sample consisted of various steps including chemical analysis, Scanning Electron Microscopy (SEM-EDS) and Quantitative Evaluation of Minerals by scanning electron microscopy (QEMSCAN). QEMSCAN was used to quantitatively determine the mineral abundance, elemental deportment of copper and liberation characteristics on feed, concentrate and tail samples. The sample was ground and split into five size fractions and each fraction was mounted into a polished block. The block was mapped and the results combined to determine mineral abundance, particle size distribution and liberation characteristics of the major copper species. The mineral abundance of the feed is summarised in A particle mineralogical map for flotation slag sample ( QEMSCAN was used to determine liberation characteristics based on the area of the target particle compare to the perimeter of the particle, where it is associated with secondary minerals and touching other particles. Liberation data of copper sulphide in copper slag sample obtained from QEMSANE is presented in Flotation tests were conducted using different dosage or concentration of Sodium iso-propyl xanthate (SIPX), Sodium di-ethyldithiophosphate (DTP) and alkyl hydroxamate. In the case of the xanthate and the dithiophosphate, the copper recoveries obtained with collector dosages of 200 QEMSCAN analysis shows the presence of interlocked copper particles in the tailing products of SIPX flotation ( Slightly different copper recovery was obtained with the similar concentration of SIPX and DTP. As each of the collectors had a similar probability of attachment, preferential adsorption was unlikely. As both the collectors have a tendency to interact with copper sulphide, the final copper recovery should have been similar. Lowest copper recoveries were obtained with alkyl hydroxamate in single collector floation performance. It has been reported that the alkyl hydroxamate is not very selective for sulphide flotation. In case of copper slag most of the copper occur in the form of copper sulphide and shows very low response with alkyl hydroxamate. However, mineralogical observation revealed that some copper are highly interlocked in the fayalite matrix ( A slightly superior copper grade was obtained with dithiophosphate ( In the In The higher mass and water recoveries obtained with hydroxamate compared to those obtained with SIPX and dithiophosphate (  The use of a combination of collectors resulting in both physisorbed and chemisorbed surface products can also affect the froth structure and influence the final grade achieved. These processes involve the chemisorption of a monolayer of the thiol collector, the substitution of oxidation products on mineral surfaces by a thiol collector. Physisorption of an uncharged dithiolate occurs on the mineral surface and result in the formation of a metal thiol compound on the surface. The possible reaction mechanism was metal-thiol formation and cuprous thiolate and cupric dithiolate were responsible for surface hydrophobicity ( Mineralogical analyses were carried out on the concentrates and tails. It was observed that the combine collectors increased the flotation of coarse copper bearing interlocked particle and improved the copper recovery (  Comparatively large volume of stable froth was produced by the addition of alkyl hydroxamate ( The present work focuses on recovery of copper value by froth flotation from the copper smelter slag. The QEMSCAN results revealed that copper is present in sulphide form in fayalite (iron–silicate) matrix and very poorly liberated and require fine grinding. The present investigation has studied the respective roles of sodium iso-propyl xanthate (SIPX) sodium di-ethyldithiophosphate (DTP) and alkyl hydroxamate in the flotation of copper sulphide from copper slag. Flotation performances were increased effectively by the combination of collectors. Maximum copper recovery (84.82%) was obtained by using a 40:160 In both cases the improvements by using co-collectors were thought to be due to competitive adsorption, where xanthate adsorbing selectively onto the fines and co-collector DTP and Hydroxamate played important role for the adsorption of coarse interlocked copper bearing particles and increased the copper recovery. It is observed that each reagent played a key but different and parallel role in the flotation process. However, relatively higher mass and water recovery were obtained when hydroxamate was used as a co-collector, accompanied by poorer copper grades. Under such circumstances the co-collector DTP is found to be suitable for the improvement of copper grade and recovery from copper smelter slag. The authors would like to thank The Institute of Minerals and Materials Technology, Bhubaneswar for QEMSCAN analysis of the sample. Support from the Management of Aditya Birla Science and Technology Co. Ltd. is also gratefully acknowledged.