In order to develop a fundamental understanding of the adsorption mechanism of thiophenic compounds on TiO2-based adsorbents for ultra-deep desulfurization of liquid hydrocarbon fuels, a density functional theory (DFT) study was conducted on the adsorption of thiophene over the TiO2 anatase (001) surface. The perfect, O-poor (with oxygen vacancies), and O-rich (with activated O2 on the surface) anatase (001) surfaces were built, and the interaction of thiophene molecule with these surfaces was examined. The adsorption configuration and adsorption energy on the different surfaces and sites were estimated. The results showed that thiophene may be adsorbed on both the perfect and O-poor surfaces through an interaction between the Ti cations on the surface and the S atom in thiophene, whereas on the O-rich surface through an interaction of the activated O atoms (the dissociatively or associatively adsorbed O2) on the surface with the S atom in thiophene to form a sulfone-like surface species. The adsorption of thiophene on the O-rich surface is significantly stronger than adsorption on the perfect and O-poor surfaces on the basis of the calculated adsorption energies. The results indicate that the activated O2 on the TiO2 anatase (001) surface may play an important role in the adsorption desulfurization over the TiO2-based adsorbents, and increased concentration of the activated O2 on the surface may result in improvement of the adsorption capacity of the adsorbents.Ultra-deep desulfurization of liquid hydrocarbon fuels has become an increasingly important subject, as the quality of crude oils is getting poorer and the sulfur restriction of liquid fuels becoming tighter Hydrodesulfurization (HDS) is a conventional and dominant method in refineries worldwide for removing sulfur from liquid hydrocarbon steams. However, this process needs to be conducted at high temperature and high pressure in the presence of hydrogen. Especially for removing the refractory sulfur compounds (alkylated dibenzothiophene-type compounds), lower space velocity and higher H A Ti However, the adsorption site and structural dependence of thiophenic compound adsorption over the TiO In the present study, first principle calculations by density functional theory (DFT) method were conducted to clarify the adsorption mechanism of thiophenic compounds on the TiO Calculations were carried out using the Vienna Adsorption of thiophene on the anatase (0 The unit cell of anatase was built first by using the experimental lattice parameters from the literature. After the optimization of the bulk volume and the atom positions, the crystal parameters ( The anatase (0 Several adsorption geometries of thiophene on perfect anatase (0 In many cases, vacancies on the adsorbent surface may be the adsorbent sites Several potential adsorption configurations were examined. The estimated adsorption energy for thiophene on the O vacancy is −7.8 An over-oxidized surface may arise from the activation of the O The conformations of thiophene interacting with these two surfaces are shown in For adsorption on the O-rich ( Interaction between the S atom and the extra O atoms can also be observed in the O-rich (  In both cases of the perfect and the O-poor anatase (0 The present computational results indicate that the anatase (0 On the basis of the present DFT study on the interaction of thiophene with the perfect, O-poor and O-rich anatase (0 All the adsorption conformations suggested by the present computational chemistry study indicate that adsorption of thiophene on the anatase (0 Thiophene can be adsorbed strongly on the O-rich anatase (0 The interaction between thiophene and the perfect or O-poor anatase (0 This work is supported in part by the US National Science Foundation (NSF) and the US Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) joint TSE program, by the U.S. Office of Naval Research (ONR), and by a fellowship from ConocoPhillips Corp. We gratefully acknowledge the support of ONR Navsea Program Manager Donald Hoffman. We also thank Dr. James Kubicki and Dr. Jonathan P. Mathews of PSU for many helpful discussions and providing a part of computational resource for this study.