The kinetics of the digestion rate of pure boehmite in concentrated sodium hydroxide solutions was studied experimentally and modelled mathematically. The experiments were performed under ambient pressure and at 60°C–85°C in the kinetic regime. The changes in morphology of the solid phase were studied during the reaction by particle size, porosity and surface area measurements as well as SEM imaging. The reaction rate was observed to be strongly dependent on temperature and hydroxide concentration. The kinetics was determined for the solid–liquid reaction by taking into account the morphological changes during the reaction. The influence of boehmite on the dissolution kinetics of gibbsite was investigated, too. Moreover, the boehmite model was compared to experimental data from literature on the leaching of boehmite from actual high level nuclear waste.The solid–liquid reaction between boehmite (Eq. Another application, where the selective leaching of boehmite at ambient pressures is of great interest is in the radioactive waste treatment ( To establish the operational conditions of the Bayer process, plants are generally operating on an empirical basis due to the fact that the overall leaching kinetics of the aluminum from the raw material, bauxite, varies as a function of a wide variety of factors, such as the chemical composition of the ore ( The published research on the leaching kinetics at ambient pressures and temperatures is somewhat limited and contradictory ( In industrial applications, boehmite is often not the only aluminum hydroxide phase present in the system. Mixtures of gibbsite and boehmite are often encountered in e.g. many bauxite ores as well as in radioactive sludges. Sodium aluminate is produced in both reactions and this affects the equilibrium considerations. Most of the research on the dissolution kinetics of these minerals has been performed separately for both phases and the kinetics is assumed to be independent. However, boehmite particles have a strong tendency to attach to the surface of gibbsite particles and this could influence the dissolution rate of gibbsite by diminishing the available surface area for the reaction. Moreover, other interactions such as the influence on the surface energies and adsorption to the surfaces could affect the leaching rate. In order to investigate the dependence of the reaction kinetics, experiments were performed with pure gibbsite, which reacts two orders of magnitude faster than boehmite, as well as with mixtures of the two. Experiments have been performed with pure raw materials and the morphology of the materials has been investigated as a function of time. On the basis of these data, the kinetics of the surface reaction can be determined. This is the building block for future models, which can be incorporated in different industrial applications, in which materials with substantial amounts of aluminum hydroxides are involved. The main objective of the experiments was to reveal the boehmite dissolution kinetics by taking into account the changes in morphology of the solid phase. Moreover, the influence of boehmite on the leaching kinetics of gibbsite was investigated. The temperature was varied from 60 The boehmite was provided by Nabaltec GmbH, Schwandorf, Germany (density 3.04 All the NaOH solutions were made out of analytical grade sodium hydroxide pellets and ultra pure water. In all stages of the experiments, containers of high density polyethene (HDPE) or polypropene (PP) were used. These materials do not react with the strong caustic solutions and thus do not contaminate the solvent in any way, e.g. by leaching trace amounts of silica, which is known to influence the reaction rates ( The experiments for revealing the kinetics were conducted as follows. 100 When investigating the conversion of boehmite and mixtures of boehmite and gibbsite, the amount of aluminum as well as sodium in the filtrate was determined with inductively coupled plasma atomic emission spectroscopy (ICP-AES). About 40 The filtered solid samples were placed in 200 A few of the solid samples which were washed with milli-Q water were re-filtered, vacuum dried and imaged with SEM to get visual confirmation of the laser diffraction measurements. Fresh boehmite samples were measured with nitrogen adsorption to obtain the specific surface area (BET) and porosity (BJH) of the solid particles. The Malvern Mastersizer has an inbuilt algorithm for transforming the particle size to surface area depending on the anticipated shape and morphology of the material. The values calculated by the inbuilt algorithm were compared to the ones obtained by nitrogen adsorption measurements followed by recalibration of the Mastersizer values to account for the porosity of the material. In the experiments performed with pure gibbsite, the conversion was determined with gravimetry. The remaining solid samples were weighed after filtration with a 0.45 The influence of external mass transfer on the reaction rate was investigated by performing several experiments with gibbsite, which reacts orders of magnitude faster than boehmite, at the highest temperature 85 Both the temperature and the concentration of sodium hydroxide influenced significantly the dissolution rate. The significant influence of the sodium hydroxide concentration is in accordance with the literature findings of the reaction mechanism, in which the hydroxyl group reacts with the hydrated solid surface to form finally, to some extent, an ionic product with sodium and the hydroxide is consumed in significant amounts in the reaction ( Boehmite particles used in the experiments showed a thick plate-like particle structure according to SEM images. Based on the nitrogen adsorption measurements (BET), the specific surface area of fresh boehmite is 5 Due to the well-defined structure of the particles and the lack of aggregation a narrow particle size distribution is observed by laser diffraction. The mean particle size d(0.5) showed a very sudden increase in the very early stages of the reaction. This is probably due to almost instantaneous dissolution of some of the very small grains with defects in the crystal structure. Moreover, some of the tiny fragments might have passed the filter. These fragments do not represent adequately the bulk of the material and thus the first points in the measurements have been neglected in the data interpretation. The average particle size d(0.5) increased steadily during the dissolution process. This is probably due to the fact that no cracking of the particles was observed and that the smaller particles are more vulnerable to dissolution caused by NaOH. As the average particle size continues to increase during the reaction due to the dissolution of the smaller particles, the specific and overall surface area of the solid decreases. In order to investigate the influence of boehmite on the dissolution kinetics of gibbsite experiments were initially performed with gibbsite only. The initial load was 66 As gibbsite reacts two orders of magnitude faster than boehmite, the influence of the dissolved boehmite on the overall conversion is negligible. The results obtained with pure gibbsite can thus be directly compared to the experiments performed with mixtures of the two. It can be concluded that no detectible influence of boehmite on the leaching rate of gibbsite can be noticed. It can thus be stated that the kinetics of both reactions can be considered as independent in processes, where mixtures are present. However, it should be kept in mind that the reaction products are identical and at higher concentrations, the equilibrium limitations are, thus, interconnected. A kinetic model was developed for explaining the dissolution of boehmite in sodium hydroxide solutions. The model is based on ordinary differential equations (ODE), which not only predict the experimental results, but also the concentrations of each compound in the solution, as the dissolution takes place within the studied range of temperatures, solid loads and caustic concentrations. The estimation of kinetic parameters was made by non-linear regression analysis using the simulation and parameter estimation software MODEST ( The reaction rate of solid–liquid reactions depends on the temperature of the reactive regime, the concentration of the liquid phase components, as well as the reactive surface area of the solid phase. The possible external and internal mass and heat transfer phenomena can also significantly affect the kinetics. Moreover, the reaction mechanism and the formation of product layers influence the leaching rate substantially. In this work, it has been shown that the external mass and heat transfer can be neglected due to the efficient agitation and the slow reaction rate. The same can be reasonably assumed for the internal mass transfer in the pores of the boehmite particles, due to the low reaction rate. The temperature of the mixture was continuously controlled and measured and the temperature in the reactive regime on the particle surface was assumed to be the same as in the bulk of the liquid. Even though the reaction is exothermic, the rate of dissolution is so slow that no temperature gradients can, in practice, be formed. The concentration of the liquid phase compounds has been measured as a function of time. The parameter most challenging to be determined in conventional leaching reactions is the reactive surface area of the solid phase during reaction. No analytics has been developed for direct determination, thus a combination of indirect methods is often applied. A common methodology in the modelling of solid–liquid reactions is to assume different ideal geometries and reaction mechanisms, e.g. spherical/cylindrical particles and chemical/diffusion control of the reaction, based on test plots with conversion as a function of time. The change in the reactive surface area is then taken into account by relating the assumed changes in particle morphology to the kinetics. Another method is to measure initial rates and assume that the morphology is unchanged. In this work the particle size and total surface area of the solid phase was quantified by the help of laser diffraction and nitrogen adsorption. The total available surface of boehmite is assumed to react with the hydroxide and water molecules. Even though, it can be argued that this is not theoretically valid for most crystalline solids, as some crystal surfaces tend to be more reactive than others, the overall surface area can be assumed to correspond to the reactive area. Thus, the obtained values are representative of the average of the material, even though the difference in the reaction rate of different crystal surfaces is not taken into account. No product layer formation was observed during the reaction and the kinetics is assumed to be purely chemically controlled. The equilibrium concentration of dissolved boehmite ( A good fit of the model to experimental data was achieved in the parameter estimation ( Despite the excellent fit of the model to experimental data, it does not confirm the reliability of the obtained values for individual parameters in the modelling. The reliable value of the parameters is the most important factor, when the model is used in the simulation of the reaction and incorporated into a larger frameworks. It is crucial that a clear minimum is found for the objective function and that the correlation of the parameters is not too strong. The sensitivity analysis, i.e. the correlation, of the model parameters is presented in Scotford et al. ( Scotford et al. determined the activation energy to be 123 Experiments with actual high level nuclear waste have not been widely reported. In a study performed at the Pacific Northwest National Laboratory, Richland, WA ( In a recent study performed at the same laboratory ( For testing the model developed in this work to the results obtained with the actual high level radioactive sludge, data from The equilibrium constant K was expressed with the help of equilibrium concentrations of the products and reagent. The concentration of pure solid material and water is not taken into account in the equilibrium constant K due to the fact that the concentration of pure solids cannot change (  The term The fit of the model to the data collected by The fit of the model can be concluded to be satisfactory taking into account the variations in the initial data. However, the model seems to underestimate the conversion in the experiments performed with 0.8 The fit of the model to the experimental data can be concluded to be good in the experiments performed with 3 Overall, the results clearly indicate that the model is able to describe well the dissolution of boehmite from the radioactive sludge in the sodium hydroxide concentration range 2 The dissolution kinetics of synthetic boehmite in strong caustic solutions under ambient pressure and high temperatures was studied. The reaction rate was strongly dependent on temperature and sodium hydroxide concentration. The change in morphology of the solid phase was studied during the reaction. A model which takes into account the changes in temperature, concentrations and the accessible surface area of the particles was developed. The fit of the model to the experimental data was good. Moreover, the influence of boehmite on the leaching rate of gibbsite was studied. The kinetics of the two phases was concluded to be independent, despite the visually observed attachment of boehmite to gibbsite. Finally, the boehmite model was compared to available experimental data from literature on the leaching of boehmite from actual radioactive sludge. The boehmite particles were assumed to be rough/porous and made out of 0.2 This work is part of the activities at Åbo Akademi Process Chemistry Centre within the Finnish Centre of Excellence Program (2000–2011) by the Academy of Finland. Financial support from the