Purpose
                  To evaluate the efficacy of intramedullary Kirschner wires for the treatment of unstable tibial shaft fractures in children.
               
                  Methods
                  This prospective study was conducted at the Department of Orthopaedic Surgery in Maharishi Markandeshwar Medical College from June 2005 to June 2010. Sixty-six children having closed fracture of the tibial shaft with a mean age of 7.7 years (range, 2–14 years) were recruited from emergency and outpatient department. They were treated with percutaneous intramedullary Kirschner wires. The clinical results of our study were rated on the basis of the criteria of union, nonunion, delayed union or malunion. All children were followed for one year.
               
                  Results
                  Children achieved union in a mean time of 8 weeks (range, 6–10 weeks). Postoperatively, three children (4.55%) had delayed union, one (1.52%) valgus deformity of lower leg, three (4.55%) postoperative knee pain and twelve (18.18%) skin irritation at pin site. Wires were removed after 8–22 weeks without any complications. No patient was lost to follow-up. The results were excellent in 95.45% and good in 4.55% children.
               
                  Conclusion
                  This technique is cost-effective, simple, quick to perform, safe and reliable and avoids prolonged hospitalization with good results.Tibial shaft fractures are common injuries in children This prospective study was carried out at Department of Orthopaedic Surgery, Maharishi Markandeshwar Medical College from June 2005 to June 2010. Institutional medical ethics committee approved it. Sixty-six children with a mean age of 7.7 years (range, 2–14 years) having closed unstable fracture of tibial shaft were included in present study. All children were given above knee plaster slab prior to operation and preanaesthetic check-up was done. The inclusion criteria were: displaced fractures; multiple fractures which were found to be unstable in closed reduction; fractures displaced in traction; fractures in patients with polytrauma and under intensive care to facilitate nursing; Irritable patients with brain injury. The exclusion criteria were: undisplaced fractures and fractures in a good position treated by traction and plaster; age less than two years and more than fourteen years; open fractures; fractures requiring open reduction; nonunited fractures. The goal of this study was to provide rapid healing of the fracture in a correct position, ease of nursing care and early mobilisation. A written informed consent was obtained from the parents of the children. They were followed up after surgery, and were clinically and radiologically assessed for fracture healing, joint movements and implant failure. According to the criteria the results were graded as excellent when the fractures united within 10 weeks (clinically and radiologically) without any complications, good when union occurred within 16 weeks with treatable complications like superficial infection and knee stiffness and poor when union occurred before or after 16 weeks with one or more permanent complications like deep infection, implant failure, nonunion, limb shortening and permanent knee stiffness. Delayed union was recorded when the fracture united in more than two to four months (radiograph showed external callus traversed by a zone of radiolucency, a typical picture of fibrocartilaginous delayed union). Nonunion was noted when union had not occurred following six months of treatment. Follow-up was done for one year. In majority of the patients, percutaneous K-wire fixation of the tibia was performed within one week of the injury. All children were operated upon under general anaesthesia. The affected limb was cleaned and draped. The appropriate diameter of the wires depended on the size of the medullary canal of the child. The size of the implant is selected to be approximately 40% of the diameter of the medullary canal at the level of isthmus, and two equally sized implants are used to prevent asymmetric force on opposite cortices. Two stainless steel K-wires of 30–45 cm in length and 2.5–3.5 mm in diameter were prepared by bending them at an approximate angle of 45°, 2 cm from the tip and cutting off the sharp points to prevent inadvertent penetration of the cortex. The wires were not pre-bent in a “C” or “S” curve. The wires were loaded onto a “T” handled introducer with a Jacob's chuck. Two small skin incisions were made distal to the proximal growth plate of tibia, one anterolaterally and the other anteromedially. Entry portals were made into the proximal tibial metaphysis distal to the growth plate of the proximal tibia with a sharp bone awl anterolaterally and anteromedially. The wires were introduced via antegrade approach by hand or gentle hammering. The lateral wire was introduced first. The tips of the wire were placed just proximal to the growth plates of the distal tibia, with the bends pointing towards the side of the entry portal. Angular and rotational malalignment spontaneously correct on passage of the wires across the fracture. Image intensifier screening in two planes perpendicular to each other confirmed proper placements of the wires. The tail portions of the wires were bent towards the fracture and cut 1 cm away from the entry portal in the cortex. The skin wounds were sutured and dressed. Fracture stability, correct linear and rotational alignment were assessed on table. All children had received a preoperative bolus of intravenous antibiotic. Retrograde medullary Kirschner wiring was carried out in one small child with a single intramedullary K-wires. The entry portal was on the lateral cortex proximal to the growth plate of the distal tibia. Above knee slab supplementations were done in the immediate postoperative period for a period of four to six weeks. Sutures were removed on the 10th day after surgery, and then all the patients were mobilised, non-weight-bearing for 4–6 weeks. Weight bearing in a walking plaster was permitted when adequate callus was seen at the fracture site. Evaluations on follow-up were done according to a fixed protocol. The children were followed up at 2 weeks, 6 weeks, 12 weeks, 6 months and 12 months. The time to weight bearing and to union were recorded, as well as the range of knee motion and limb length discrepancy. Union was defined radiographically when bridging callus was visible on two standard views with partial obliteration of the fracture line, and clinically when bony tenderness and pain on weight bearing were absent. Any differences in the limb length were measured, keeping both lower limbs in identical position (with pelvis squared) and measuring the distance from the anterior superior iliac spine to the inferior tip of the medial malleolus. Rotational deformity and any significant varus or valgus angulations at the fracture site were measured radiologically. Fractures were considered to be united when tricortical callus was visible on the radiographs and there was no tenderness at the fracture site on clinical examination. Generally, sufficient callus formation is shown at 4 weeks in paediatric fractures, and radiological fracture consolidation has been reported to be achieved at 7–8 weeks. The children were started on non-weight-bearing crutch walking and knee physiotherapy 2–3 days after the surgery and were ready for discharge 3–4 days after surgery. The children with polytrauma stayed on for a longer period in the hospital because of associated injuries. Full weight-bearing was allowed after clinicoradiological fracture union. Union was defined clinically by the absence of bony tenderness and abnormal mobility at the fracture site, and no pain at the fracture site on weight bearing. Radiological fracture union was defined by the presence of callus bridging the fracture and partial obliteration of the fracture line in two views perpendicular to each other. The clinical results of our study were rated on the basis of the criteria of union, nonunion, delayed union or malunion. Totally, 66 children with the age of 2–14 years were included in this study, and among them 40 were girls and 26 were boys. There were 30 left-sided and 36 right-sided fractures. Forty-two children suffered a road traffic accident and twenty-four had a fall from a height. All were closed fractures. There were transverse fractures in 45 children, oblique in 8, spiral in 5, comminuted in 7 and segmental in 1; fractures were at middle one third in 42 children (30 boys and 12 girls), proximal one third in 11 (7 boys and 4 girls) and distal one third in 13 (3 boys and 10 girls) of tibia. Out of 66 children, 55 had isolated tibial shaft fractures and 11 had associated injuries. Two children had ipsilateral forearm fractures, one ipsilateral femoral fracture, two contralateral femoral fractures, two contralateral forearm fractures, two ipsilateral and one contralateral humeral fractures and one child had head injury. All children were followed up for one year. None was lost to follow-up. The clinical results of our study were based on the criteria of union, nonunion, delayed union or malunion. Children were allowed to start walking with crutches on the second day of operation, as they feel comfortable. All children, except two, started partial weight-bearing on the 6th week and full weight-bearing on the 12th week. These children had non-weight-bearing ambulation until the callus became visible on radiographs. They had comminution at fracture site. All children had full range of motion of their knees and ankles. Three children complained postoperative knee pain, which was spontaneously resolved in two weeks. None of the children in our series developed migration or sinking of the intramedullary wires. Skin irritation by the protruding wire ends was encountered in 12 patients. In the majority of cases, we noted that the alignment achieved intraoperatively was maintained at the time of the final review. However, two patients with significant communition had some progression of deformity. No patient had any rotational deformity. Limb lengthening of less than 1.5 cm was found in 3 cases both clinically and radiologically, which was clinically insignificant. In our study, there were three (4.55%) delayed unions which were corrected within three weeks. K-wires were removed between 8 and 22 weeks. The results were excellent in 95.45% and good in 4.55% children. In subjective overall assessment 95.45% patients were fully satisfied and 4.55% were satisfied with the outcome of treatment ( Diaphyseal tibial fracture is the second most frequent traumatic injury in children requiring hospitalization.