The present study focuses on model based parameter optimization of nanosuspension preparation via wet stirred media milling. Based on experimental data of nanomilling a crystalline organic material, two different approaches for process optimization were evaluated: The stress model for stirred media mills, introduced by Kwade, was compared to the microhydrodynamic approach modified by Bilgili and Afolabi. The different approaches to describe influences of operating parameters were discussed with respect to their applicability on process optimization of nanosuspension preparation. Both approaches yield characteristic values which are derived from proportionalities to process parameters. Despite of different physical assumptions, the milling process can be optimized by both approaches. A more detailed insight into physical interactions can be only generated by numerical procedures. Limitations of the applied procedures were observed especially with respect to the accessibility of parameters required for calculation.The preparation of nanosuspensions via wet stirred media milling has become an established production technique for different applications. Stirred media milling is a complex process which depends on several process variables, such as mill parameters (stirrer tip speed, grinding media size, type and filling ratio) and suspension properties (solids loading and viscosity), making process development rather difficult. Process development is often focused on reaching a maximum fineness. From the production related point of view, one has to take energy efficiency and production capacity into account, underlining the importance of process optimization. In general, wet stirred media milling processes are applied to many industries, for example ore liberation in mineral industries, for quality enhancement of ceramics and fillers, for flavor enrichment of food products, as well as in the pharmaceutical industry to enhance pharmacokinetics of active pharmaceutical ingredients and in many other sectors. Despite of all these different products and their special requirements, the physical mechanisms inside the mill are the same. The principle is based on mechanical stress which is transferred to the product particles by colliding and shearing grinding media, leading to particle and/or aggregate fragmentation. This process is influenced by many variables which determine energy efficiency and product quality. There are different approaches to access the most important parameters of stirred media milling in order to characterize and optimize the milling process. Numerical studies of wet operated mills can provide insight into flow characteristics [ More applicable tools for describing the mill performance and process optimization are represented by mechanistic process models. Different approaches for characterizing the mechanisms inside wet operated stirred media mills have been developed. Kwade introduced a stress model to describe the stress intensity Another model to describe the grinding media collisions based on the transformation of turbulent flow into kinetic energy of grinding media was introduced by Eskin et al. [ The present study focuses on these two approaches and their applicability is discussed based on experimental data. It has to be noted that nanomilling is only possible if the particles are stabilized against agglomeration in order to ensure colloidal stability. The aspect of particle stabilization is not incorporated into these models, all experiments were performed with the same product formulation and differences are discussed with respect to machine parameters. The milling process in stirred media mills is based on grinding media collisions. There are different types, designs and sizes of stirred media mills available on the market but their general operating principle is almost the same. Mechanical power is supplied via the stirrer into the grinding chamber, and the energy has to be transferred finally by the grinding media to the product particles in order to induce particle fragmentation. Process efficiency and production capacity are strongly dependent on operating conditions. In the following, two approaches for the characterization and optimization of stirred media mills are presented and discussed based on the example of milling organic crystalline particles.  A high fraction of the energy which is supplied to the grinding chamber is dissipated within the suspension by liquid friction. This mechanism is mainly a function of the suspension viscosity, the applied shear rate, and proportional to the suspension volume fraction inside the grinding chamber. It has to be noted that energy which is transferred to the liquid is not effective for real particle breakage but it may contribute to fluid based dispersion processes. Friction at the grinding chamber wall is determined by geometric aspects, i.e. the surface to volume ratio of the grinding chamber: with increasing mill volume, the proportion of energy dissipated by friction at the wall decreases [ Suspension is displaced by approaching grinding media, thus kinetic energy is transferred to the fluid. The degree of dissipation depends mainly on the suspension viscosity, and if a critical suspension viscosity was exceeded, real grinding would no longer be possible [ Grinding media contacts without stressing product particles lead to energy dissipation, this mechanism decreases with increasing solids concentration. Energy dissipation due to grinding media wear and deformation. The degree of deformation is a function of the elasticity ratio between product particles and grinding media, especially product particles with a low elasticity lead to higher dissipation rates due to grinding media deformation [ Most of the energy introduced into the grinding chamber is dissipated into heat due to friction, only a small amount is used for particle stressing which is in the end also transferred into heat. The grinding result is determined by the energy which is transferred to the product The predominant energy dissipation mechanism due to fluid friction is inversely proportional to the grinding media filling ratio As the grinding result is determined by Eq. Kwade introduced the stress energy of grinding media Eq. Low or moderate suspension viscosity The grinding media has a much higher Young's modulus compared to the product particles Constant mill geometry and size If different mill sizes or geometries are compared, the entire stress energy distribution has to be considered because changing flow patterns and different geometrical dimensions lead to significant shifts of the stress energy distribution [ From a product related point of view one has to take also the product particles into account. The stress energy is related to the volume of captured product particles. This relation is called stress intensity Assuming a constant The microhydrodynamic approach according to Eskin et al. was intended to describe the power dissipation inside stirred media mills by taking dissipation mechanisms of liquid-bead viscous friction and lubrication ( Eq. Collisions of grinding media are considered as ideal elastic contacts, this enables the calculation of the maximum contact pressure at the center of the contact circle The average maximum normal contact force The comparison of characteristic parameters from the two models showed several similarities. It was already stated by Schönert that the stress intensity of one stress event can be described either by the specific force, e.g. compression force related to the cross sectional area of the particle, or by the specific energy of one stress event [ The polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbon pyrene (purity 98%), purchased from Sigma Aldrich (Germany), was used as model compound to represent physiochemical properties of class 2 biopharmaceuticals. Specifications are listed in Milling experiments were performed with a 900 mL sized lab scale disc mill (PML 2 from Bühler, Switzerland). The mill was operated in recirculation mode and the process temperature was set to 20 ± 2 °C by cooling water flow regulation through the double walled grinding chamber. Experiments were evaluated by the overall specific energy The stirrer tip speed Particle sizes of ground pyrene suspensions were measured by dynamic light scattering (DLS) (Nanophox from Sympatec, Germany). Samples were diluted with pyrene-saturated water according to the DLS detector signal. Suspension viscosities were measured with a rotational viscometer (Gemini 2 from Malvern Instruments, UK). A shear rate controlled measurement cycle from 10 to 1000 s Both approaches lead to similar expressions for the description of the grinding process inside stirred media mills. In order to compare the microhydrodynamic approach with the stress model, process parameter dependent variables, such as the maximum contact pressure and the frequency of particle compressions of the microhydrodynamic approach, were compared in the following to the stress intensity and stress frequency derived from the stress model. The values were calculated based on the variables of the experimental procedure described in Several calculation steps were required in order to derive the characteristic variables of the microhydrodynamic approach. A median product particle size of 250 nm was taken into account for calculation. The granular temperature was calculated from Eq.  Another important measure is given by the stress which can be provided by colliding grinding media. Both approaches enable the calculation of characteristic values, the stress model recognizes the stress intensity From the comparison depicted in Grinding experiments of pyrene were performed under variation of milling parameters. Various experiments with changing grinding media sizes and tip speeds were performed. As an example, In Product quality is linked to the particle size, therefore a defined product particle size can be taken as key parameter to match critical quality attributes. In the following the process optimization is related to a target particle size of 250 nm.   The applicability of two different models for parameter optimization of wet stirred media milling was discussed within the present study. The microhydrodynamic approach and the stress model for stirred media mills were discussed with respect to their characteristic parameters. It was shown that process optimization led in the end to the same optimum set of operating parameters. In spite of different underlying physical assumptions and complexities the optimization can be fulfilled with both approaches for the given product and mill. There might be other products, e.g. with higher viscosities, where deviations are possible. In addition, neither the microhydrodynamic approach, nor the stress model covers aspects of colloidal stability. Especially for submicron grinding processes, there is the need to implement parameters which describe agglomeration or crystallization effects in future work. The herein presented models are tools to access milling parameters, and both enable process optimization in order to minimize the specific energy input for a certain product quality.  frequency of particle compressions, s energy dissipation coefficient solids mass concentration solids volume concentration diameter, m specific energy, kJ·kg average maximum normal contact force, N coefficient of restitution mass, kg number stirrer revolutions per minute, min power, W probability of stressing (stress model) probability of stressing (microhydrodynamic model) dissipation coefficient stress energy, N·m mean stress energy, N·m stress intensity, N·m stress number time, s volume, m stirrer tip speed, m·s particle size, m Young's modulus, N·m  radius of the contact circle, m grinding media bulk porosity energy dissipation rate due to inelastic bead collisions, W·m energy dissipation rate due to shearing of suspension, W·m energy dissipation rate due to viscous friction, W·m total energy dissipation rate, W·m viscosity, Pa·s granular temperature, m energy transfer coefficient Poisson's ratio of grinding media density, kg·m maximum contact pressure, N·m grinding media filling ratio frequency of single bead oscillations, s  grinding chamber grinding media grinding product mill suspension The