The final quality of solid wood molding depends on several factors, where the choice of cutting conditions and consequently the tool performance are key points when processing this type of material because tool wear affects physical–chemical and thermodynamic behavior of the surface submitted to coating. One of the main problems at the production line is to achieve an adequate monitoring system of the cutting process to prevent and detect operational problems or loss of productivity. The objective of this research is to evaluate results from two different control process methods, such as sound pressure and electrical current measurement submitted during different cutting conditions and to determine the cutting distance increase, as innovative methods to estimate tool wear when appearance grade products are being produced.Use of dynamometers, mounted between the spindle and the feed table. Difficulties to use the system as an on-line monitoring system. Electroacoustic system coupled with computer software as a non-invasive method of monitoring molder machine tools. Linear relationship between sound pressure RMS (root mean square) and feed speed during the cutting process. Increase of wood density and cutting depth showed a continuous increase of the cutting power requirements, with a clear surface deterioration when increasing feed rate. Wood density influences directly the cutting power with a constant level of chip thickness. Currently, added value wood based products such as the appearance grade of decorative moldings, reach increasingly demanding markets. These wood products are not free from defects, produced either from raw material or as a result of mismatches in the production process. Several processing variables can produce these defects, the most important being surface quality. In the industrial context of molding production, comprehensive selection and classification controls of raw material are applied, using infrared scanning technology and X-ray vision Tool wear prediction methods have been extensively studied in metal machining The cutting tool is constantly submitted to stress and temperature rises due to forces exerted at the cutting edge that generate progressive wear at both faces: rake and clearance, rapidly modifying the edge radius, and hence the cutting geometry The evolution of tool wear It is important to monitor wood machining process, because an efficient survey provides an early alert to the operator in order to shut-off the machine before critical conditions of cutting kinematics (cutting speed or feed) are reached. Different methods may be applied for monitoring a tool׳s cutting performance and to detect changes occurring in the process line at early stages ( The interesting relationship between cutting forces and electrical current makes these methods promising to assess cutting performances of wood material Therefore, the response parameters of sound pressure and electrical current became interesting aids to control and survey tool wear. Consequently, the use of some means to monitor the cutting process, such as sound pressure, seek to improve performance by decreasing delays in the production line, maintaining the quality standards of wood machining operations. For this reason, the research objective involves testing a new and innovative online monitoring system developed for early detection of changes in cutting conditions, based on an electrical current and sound pressure monitoring process technique, when appearance grade products are being produced for Radiata pine solid wood molding. Kiln dried and free of defects (knots and resin pockets) Radiata pine wood were machined in a 4 The cutting conditions were defined considering chip thickness (mm) as a parameter that explains both the cutting power and surface quality In order to study the cutting process behavior, two main response variables were evaluated: electrical current (amperage) and sound pressure (RMS). Both were evaluated systematically, each 1500 Measurements of electrical current (amperage) were recorded through ACO Pacific 7012 sound pressure probe ( Before carrying out the final installation of the monitoring and recording of acoustic signals, some preliminary measurements must be performed. It is important to review, and if necessary correct, aspects such as microphone placement, calibration signal recordings, recording levels, etc. In preliminary measurements, it was determined that there are four main sources of noise emission in the molder machine, which consist of the suction airflow system, the automatic feed system, the cutter head drive system, and the sound associated to the cutting tool in contact with the wood to be processed. These noise emissions were identified by their amplitude profile over time and their sound spectrum in the frequency domain. Each source has a unique profile and sound spectrum, which infers the possibility to record their acoustic emissions and thus characterize and identify each record. Preliminary measurements of these acoustic emissions under different machining conditions (head rotation frequency, feed speed, etc.) were recorded. Having identified the measurable sound sources the statistical descriptor for processing recorded acoustic signals was determined. These statistical descriptors characterize continuous audio signals digitized with a representative number of the measured conditions. The Peak, Crest Factor, kurtosis, RMS, skewness descriptors were initially considered (Eqs.    Generally, cutting tool suppliers do not provide the features of the cutting materials used on their products. In order to discover the general features and properties of cutting knives, a microstructural characterization, hardness and composition analysis of knife samples were performed as follows: the samples were cut into pieces with a width of 1 After the first step of understanding the behavior of a molder machine under various laboratory conditions, a system for capturing and processing electroacoustic signals was implemented in an industrial molder machine, without altering the recording or processing parameters used previously. Sound pressure (SP) was monitored at normal processing conditions (95 Chemical, microscopic and hardness analysis were conducted on the samples in order to obtain a complete characterization of the cutting knife. The chemical analysis indicates that the knives are composed of the following major elements: 0.81% C, 6% W, 6% Mo, 4.7% Cr and 2% V. With this composition the sample corresponds to a MO type of HS steel. This type of steel is designated with a letter M. The knives are type M2 steel (designation UNS T11302), although a slight difference is observed in the compositions of Cr, Mo and Co elements with regard to the composition reported in the ASTM A600 standard for an M2 steel. Characterization by optical microscopy:  The first analysis was to evaluate the behavior of electrical current when changes occur in chip thickness (see expression The effect of cutting distance is reflected by a slight increase of the instant power consumption in Amperes (A) (electrical current) recorded at different chip thickness levels. In this sense, for a constant chip thickness, the greatest cutting distance (more kilometers covered during the cutting process) effectively measured higher levels of net electrical current at increased wood processed distance. It is inferred that when the radius at the cutting edge reaches a certain level, with the onset of wear at the clearance face, the friction produced between this face with the new wood surface leads to an increased electrical current. However, when comparing cutting distance and chip thickness effect, the effect of chip thickness is more evident than cutting distance, mainly because of the variation of feed speed, meanwhile all others parameters remain constant.  The results presented in An average measurement between 1.0 and 2.5 (A) at 500 Another method applied to indirectly evaluate tool wear was the spectral profile of acoustic signals. This included recording sound emitted during wood cutting and filtering all external noise and idle sound, the net cutting sound was conserved for further analysis. Once processed sound pressure signals were recorded with each of the descriptors Sound pressure RMS versus feed speed is presented in Once electrical current and sound pressure trials have been made, it is important to reach an approximation of both methods in order to compare them. Is it possible to use either one method or the other to monitor the cutting process? In The wear on both knife faces (rake and clearance face ( The knife exposed to Radiata pine machining at different cutting distances presents an evident degree of deterioration at the clearance face ( Sound pressure sampling on a molder was conducted in a mill. These recordings characterize the behavior of the last cutter head on a molder machine, considering sampling from 0 to 26,000 As shown in The purpose of this research was to develop an indirect method for detecting tool wear when processing Radiata pine solid wood for decorative products such as moldings. In these tests, a high speed steel blade was used for a fixed cutting distance of 10 The relationship cutting speed and feed rate expressed as chip thickness reflects the changes in the instant electrical current consumption and sound pressure as well. Increased chip thickness correlates very well with increasing sound pressure and instant electrical current. Electrical current behavior presents a positive trend when the cutting distance increases: more distance, more electrical current is demanded, but in this research stage, it is not possible to determine the critical point where tool wear reaches its maximum. More research is being conducted with new funds in order to undergo a thorough analysis. Both tested methods allow the cutting wear to be determined indirectly when measuring power consumption and sound pressure as process control tools. Sound pressure trials executed at an industrial facility allowed us to observe a progressive increase of signals at about 26,000 Sound pressure signals at laboratory and industrial test are not entirely comparable because of the differences in feed speed and number of knives in the cutter head, this generates changes in cut kinematics. It is important to note that it was possible, with this method of sound pressure, to detect increased levels of sound pressure when production progresses along the shift. Further research is needed to increase cutting distance, while at the same time recording the electrical current in order to validate laboratory tests. The knife exposed to Radiata pine machining presents an evident degree of deterioration at clearance face and wear at the edge. It increases progressively with cutting distance which includes resin deposits and important rubbing marks. This can explain the electrical current and sound pressure increased behavior according to the increase of cutting distance. The authors would like to thank the support of the