Simultaneous milling and dissolution in a stirred mill was tested on Panzhihua ilmenite in a 50% sulfuric acid solution. The results show that the dissolution of ilmenite was greatly enhanced by in situ milling, which continuously produced new surface and new crystal defects on the surface of unreacted particles. The milling–dissolution resulted in a high leaching conversion of 80% under an industrially used ore/acid ratio at 120 °C over 2 h. The characterization revealed that the reaction was likely to start from the surface perpendicular to the c-axis of the ilmenite crystal since increased lattice strain in the c-direction significantly accelerated the dissolution. Kinetic experiments show that the milling–dissolution probably consists of three competing kinetics, surface area increase due to milling, surface area decrease due to dissolution and hydrolysis increase due to induction of fresh surface and active sites on the surface of the particles freshly broken by milling. However, within the initial 50% the dissolution followed the shrinking core model with an apparent activation energy of 38 kJ/mol.Panzhihua ilmenite, located in Sichuan, Southwest China, is one of the largest ilmenite reserves over the world and about 90% of the total resource in China. However, its high impurity content (MgO In the sulfate process ilmenite is vigorously digested with concentrated sulfuric acid (∼ 85%) at a temperature up to 200 °C, which is an uncontrolled and dangerous operation ( Mechanical activation, usually done via high energy milling, has been demonstrated to significantly accelerate dissolution processes ( However, the long mechanical pretreatment time, milling under controlled atmosphere and extremely low ore/acid ratio during dissolution in these investigations imply high cost. The leaching kinetic experiments revealed the mechanical pretreatment mainly enhanced the early stage leaching with essentially little improvement during the subsequent dissolution (  The purpose of the present study is to investigate the effect of simultaneous milling and dissolution in a stirred ball mill on the dissolution of Panzhihua ilmenite under an industrial ore/acid ratio. To help understand the dissolution behavior the kinetics and mechanism of the dissolution were examined. An ilmenite concentrate was provided by Titanium Industry Company, Panzhihua Steel and Iron (Group) Cooperation. Its chemical composition is listed in The dissolution of the concentrate was conducted in a 1.2 L vertical polytetrafluoroethylene lined vessel, 4 mm diameter glass balls were used as the milling medium. The vessel was fitted with an agitator, a condenser and a thermocouple thermometer, and heated with an oil bath. In each test, the ilmenite sample was added to a preheated mixture of sulfuric acid and the milling balls. The dissolution experiments were carried out at two distinct ore/acid ratios. The first was 1 g ore:1.4–1.6 g 100% H The reaction slurry was sampled periodically and filtered to determine the titanium content and stability of the solution. The dissolution residue was characterized with XRD and its particle size distribution was analyzed. The titanium content in the solution was determined by reduction–oxidation titration ( An XRD instrument (X'Pert Pro MPD, Philips, Netherlands) was used to measure the ilmenite ore and leach residue. The voltage and anode current used were 40 kV and 40 mA, respectively. The CuKa Particle size analysis was conducted using a laser diffraction analyzer (China, JL-1178).  The effect of varying the ore to acid ratio are shown in Due to the lower boiling point of dilute acid, the dissolution temperatures used are much lower than in the commercial operation. The initial temperature of dissolution was chosen to be 100–120 °C. The exothermic dissolution process increased the temperature inside the reactor, but only by 3–8 °C due to the high thermal mass of the whole milling system. Unlike the high temperature process there was no emission of toxic vapor. The temperature influence on the dissolution is depicted in Measurement of the stability of the titanium sulfate solutions shows that the solutions obtained at 120 °C had very low stabilities (see The XRD of the residue after 3 h at 120 °C, An ore/acid ratio of 1:69.8 was employed in the kinetic experiments in order to avoid any large variation of acid concentration and reaction temperature during the dissolution process. The effect of acid concentration was also investigated with As shown in The shrinking core model ( Where Previous work has shown that essentially 100% Ti dissolution in sulfuric acid could be achieved from the same ilmenite ( In the 100 °C plot curvature is evident above 1 Fitting of the kinetic data in The unreacted residues under the industrial ore/acid ratio were further analyzed by XRD. Using Rietveld structure refinement, the lattice strain within the ilmenite crystal structure was estimated. The calculated strains are presented in Comparison of this data with data for ilmenite milled under identical conditions in water, Even though the titanium solubilisation during milling–dissolution reached 80% in dilute acid, it is still significantly lower than a commercial operation in which the conversion is 90–95%. The major problem with the system is the hydrolysis of titanium and this could be avoided by using lower temperatures, however, this requires a prolonged dissolution time. Dissolution of mechanically activated ilmenite at 90 °C confirmed that hydrolysis occurred within 8 h ( The present study revealed that the dissolution was much more sensitive to the The kinetic investigation indicates that the simultaneous milling and leaching results in a decrease in activation energy from 47.5 kJ/mol for unmilled Panzhihua ilmenite ( There are two possibilities, which result in the curvature in the Arrhenius plot. First is due to a change in rate determining step with increasing temperature since chemical reaction rate increases more rapidly than diffusion. However, the high stirring rate (700 rpm) used in the kinetic runs and random motions of the milling media cause highly turbulent flow in the reacting slurry making the effect of diffusion minimal during milling–dissolution. The second possibility may be the simultaneous hydrolysis during dissolution at high titanium extent although the stability detection in If this kind of hydrolysis did exist, the milling–dissolution essentially consists of three competing kinetics, surface area increase due to milling, decreased surface area due to dissolution and increased hydrolysis due to induction of fresh surface and active sites on the surface. These three are all independent of each other and proceed at different rates and it is somewhat surprising that the shrinking core model applied at all. The milling–dissolution of Panzhihua ilmenite has a reaction order of 1.37 with respect to sulfuric acid. Compared with the result that was obtained at high acid concentration (  Simultaneous milling greatly enhanced the dissolution of ilmenite, in which a high leaching conversion of ∼ 80% was obtained in 2 h under an industrial ore/acid ratio and 120 °C with 50% dilute sulfuric acid. It indicates that the milling–dissolution of Panzhihua ilmenite is much attractive because it helps reduce the waste acid emission in the titanium oxide pigment production. Kinetic experiments show that the milling–dissolution probably consists of three competing kinetics, and can be described up to 50% dissolution by the shrinking core model. Simultaneous milling greatly enhanced the dissolution reaction by continuously producing new surface and surface defects. The defects on the surface perpendicular to