Energy and water have become major constraints for China’s sustainable development. Effective measures focused on resource conservation are important to this country. In this study, a comprehensive assessment is conducted of the energy and water use of different sectors using exhaustive data collection and an environmentally extended input-output model. Given the interdependent relationship between energy and water, this paper also identifies the key sectors with most closed energy-water nexus. The results show the following; (1) the key sectors for high direct energy consumption and water use include Mining and Washing of Coal, Manufacture of Chemicals, Manufacture of Nonmetallic Mineral Products, Manufacture and Processing of Metals, and Electricity. (2) The key sectors for high indirect energy consumption and water use include the Manufacture of Chemicals, Manufacture of Electrical Machinery, and Construction. (3) The Manufacture of Chemicals sector should be focused on due to its direct and indirect influences. A focus on the key sectors may provide a greater opportunity for simultaneously achieving energy savings and water conservation, whereas different priorities should be applied; production-based or technology-related measures are effective for influencing direct energy consumption and water use, whereas consumption-based or end-use measures are better suited for influencing indirect energy consumption and water use.Energy and water are two fundamental resources and are requirements for human well-being and socio-economic development. As the population is expanding and economic growth occurs, the demand for both resources will experience rapid growth In China, water issues are even more severe than in other parts of the world. According to the World Bank In recent years, the energy-water (EW) nexus has become a topic of concern worldwide because this concept can be used to focus on the efficient management of both resources through a systematic analysis of the interactions between energy and water. Energy and water are interdependent in the sense that the supply of one depends on the availability of the other In general, EW nexus-related studies fall into two major categories. One focuses on the water requirement of the energy system and its impact on water resources; examples include water resource constraint for the coal industry Although the aforementioned studies provide insights into water or energy requirements of other sectors, they were mostly focused on the production activities of the energy sector or water sector. However, from a resource utilization perspective, there is still a lack of studies tracking the nexus through the energy and water flow within the general sectors. This is also of great importance, particularly in China, because the government regards consumption-side energy saving and water conservation as crucial approaches to address resource pressures and significant steps have been taken to promote these goals. In China’s Thirteen Five-year Plan, it has set forth energy-saving targets for the main industrial sectors Accordingly, the present study explores the EW nexus from the supply chain perspective by using China as an example and considering direct and indirect influences with a large amount of data were used in conjunction with input-output (IO) models. The IO method has been widely used to assess the environmental impact of socio-economic activities, including the energy consumption and carbon emission driven by investments (1) Because the water consumption and water use data at sector level have not been available in China since 2007, one contribution of this study is to fill this gap using exhaustive data collection and processing. Coupled with the latest IO table available in China, it is possible to track the new characteristics of energy and water uses for different sectors in China. (2) By adopting the IO model, this study provides a comprehensive representation of the direct and indirect energy and water use, quantity, and intensity of the sectors; this provides an understanding of the complex inter-relationships between energy and water among the sectors and the integration in China’s economic system. (3) The sectors are divided into four categories to evaluate their magnitude in the context of the EW nexus; this is conducive to determining the prior sectors in achieving the synergy effects of energy saving and water conservation in China. The general IO framework proposed by Leontief (1966) When calculating the energy use, only the primary energy sectors are considered to avoid double counting. Accordingly, the indirect energy use refers to the indirect consumption of the products from the primary energy sectors, including mining and washing of coal, extraction of crude petroleum, extraction of natural gas, as well as the primary energy power portion used during the production and supply of electricity, which is calculated based on the proportion of hydropower and nuclear power generation to the total power generation in China. To do so, where, In comparison, when calculating the water use, the general IO model has to be modified by integrating an environmentally extended IO model; this is achieved by introducing the vectors of the water withdraw coefficient and water consumption coefficient, as shown Eqs. In order to obtain a more holistic view of the energy and water use conditions, this paper further defines several marginal indicators, i.e. the marginal energy consumption (MEC), marginal water withdraw (MWW), and marginal water consumption (MWC). These indicators refer to the intensity of the indicators and reflect the indirect energy consumption, water withdraw, and water consumption stimulated by a unit of final demand, which is calculated using the following equations: The latest China IO Table 2012 was published by the National Bureau of Statistics at the end of 2015 In the China IO Table 2012, the oil and natural gas extraction sectors are combined into a single sector. In order to separately account for the oil and natural gas contained in various products, the same method used in the national IO table construction The disaggregation of the rows was more complicated and was achieved as follows: The decomposition of the intermediate inputs. Based on the oil and natural gas consumption (physical quantity) in various sectors and the corresponding producer price, the value of oil and natural gas, as well as the ratios of the oil and natural gas input, in each sector can be calculated. The oil and natural gas consumption data of various sectors were obtained from the China Energy Statistics Yearbook 2013 The decomposition of import and export. The import and export data for oil were obtained from the China Energy Statistics Yearbook 2013 The decomposition of the inventory. According to the “China Energy Balance Table 2012” in the Energy Statistics Yearbook 2013, the inventory of natural gas is zero. Therefore, the changes in inventory was distributed to the crude petroleum extraction sector. At this point, the disaggregation results of the oil products and natural gas products do not add up to the same sum for the row and corresponding column, that is, the total input and total output of the two sectors are not equal. Subsequently, this paper applied the RAS method to balance the row sum and column sum by adjusting the intermediate inputs. The adjusted input matrix of the two sectors is shown in the Appendix The national primary energy production and thermal power generation data were obtained from the China Energy Statistics Yearbook 2013 This study will focus primarily on blue water (i.e., fresh surface and groundwater withdraws) and do not consider green water (i.e., precipitation on land that is stored in the soil or temporarily remains on top of the soil or vegetation) because green water is usually not subject to competitive use. In addition, the water withdraw and water consumption are calculated. The water withdraw data for different sectors originated from different sources. The agricultural water withdraw data came from the China Water Statistical Yearbook 2013 For the water consumption data, the agricultural data were derived by summing up the water consumption for farmland, forestry, fisheries, and livestock. The data came from the China Water Statistical Yearbook 2013 This section provides a comprehensive picture of the direct and indirect energy and water use, quantity, and intensity of the sectors in China, followed by an in-depth discussion of the EW nexus at the sector level. As shown in Furthermore, it can be also concluded from In terms of direct water use ( The indirect energy consumption of the sectors differs from the direct energy consumption. It can be seen in Aside from the energy consumption, the MEC indicator also provides fresh insight into the indirect energy use because it reflects the energy per unit value consumption of the product. The top five sectors in terms of the MEC are Mining and Washing of Coal (No. 2), Extraction of Natural Gas (No. 4), Manufacture of Coke Products (No. 13), Production and Distribution of Gas (no. 25), and the Electricity sector (No. 24). It is interesting to note that these sectors are either energy extraction sectors (No. 2, No. 4) or energy processing and conversion sectors (No. 13, No. 24 and No. 25). This is not surprising because the marginal indicator reflects the primary energy intensity of the final use; the final demand for energy or energy processing per unit naturally causes large energy inputs although the energy consumption of these sectors is relatively low. The Agriculture sector has the highest indirect water withdraw and water consumption values (  In China’s IO table, the final use is divided into six categories, including rural consumption, urban consumption, government consumption, gross capital formation, and changes in inventory and exports. Since then, this section is intended to analyze the indirect energy and water use by final demand in each category. In terms of overall indirect energy consumption, However, the results are quite different for the MEC. In comparison, different results are observed for indirect water usage ( Although the inventory category has the lowest water withdraw and consumption values, it has the highest MWW and MWC. In addition, the indirect water intensity (water withdraw and consumption) is also comparatively high for rural households and urban households. It is also interesting to note that rural household consumption has a higher dependency on water than urban household consumption. This can be attributed to a greater proportion of agricultural products, which are water intensive, consumed by rural households. Moreover, when comparing the results of the energy and water use, it is interesting to note that the proportion of the water withdraw or consumption in the export category as a fraction of the total water withdraw or consumption (i.e., the virtual water) is considerably lower than that of the energy. The significantly lower proportion of indirect water withdraw and consumption in the export category can be attributed to the small proportion of agricultural products of China's total exports. It is estimated that the economic value of exported agricultural products only accounts for less than 1% of total exports In previous analysis, the resource utilization conditions by sectors from the energy and water perspectives have been comprehensively presented. Considering the intertwined relationship between energy and water, the results can provide important references to determine the key sectors that have greater opportunity in realizing synergistic effects of energy savings and water conservation, i.e., the water conservation effects resulting from energy savings measures. Therefore, the 34 sectors are classified into four categories based on quantity and intensity to determine the key EW nexus sectors. As shown in As shown in In comparison, the indirect key sectors, which are characterized by high indirect energy input and water usage, include the Manufacture of Chemicals (No. 14), Manufacture of Electrical machinery and Apparatus (No. 20), and Construction (No. 27); this indicates a relatively large pull effect because these sectors extensively use products from other sectors as intermediate inputs, resulting in increased energy and water consumption in other sectors. Moreover, it is noteworthy that the Manufacture of Chemicals sector (No. 14) is included in the direct and indirect key sector group. For the indirect key sectors, implementing measures aimed at reducing products utilization, finding proper substitutions, and increasing the proportion of imports can achieve significant indirect energy savings and water conservation effects in the upstream sectors. Energy and water are the major constraints for China’s socio-economic development. Therefore, effective measures aimed at energy savings and water conservation are very important. However, the energy savings and water conservation potential vary greatly in different sectors. Against this background, this paper assessed the direct and indirect energy consumption, water consumption, and water withdraw of different sectors using an IO model. Sectors with relatively high energy consumption, water consumption, and water withdraw are priority targets for improvement. The concept of the EW nexus also provides an opportunity to consider energy savings and water conservation simultaneously. The five key sectors with the highest direct energy consumption and water withdraw included Mining and Washing of Coal (No. 2), Manufacture of Chemicals (No. 14), Manufacture of Nonmetallic Mineral Products (No. 15), Manufacture and Processing of Metals (No. 16) and Electricity sector (No. 24). The key sectors with the highest indirect energy consumption and water withdraw included the Manufacture of Chemicals (No. 14), Manufacture of Electrical Machinery and Apparatus (No. 20), and Construction (No. 27). It should be noted that the Manufacture of Chemicals was included in the direct and indirect categories and should be investigated further. The decision-making processes regarding water and energy in China are still undertaken in isolation by different departments. Accordingly, water issues are barely considered when designing energy policies and vice versa. Currently, China’s government has set forth energy-saving targets for the main industrial sectors, whereas the water management plan is still focused on the overall industry. In the future, the government should target different sectors in terms of water planning by assigning specific upper limits on water use. This also provides an opportunity for coordinating energy savings and water conservation policy. To do so, the sectors identified as key sectors in terms of energy consumption and water withdraw can be selected as pilot sectors. The government should promote scientific research on understanding the underlying mechanisms to achieve the simultaneous benefits of energy savings and water conservation and advanced production technology should be developed to directly reduce water and energy inputs. In addition, spontaneous resource savings measures can also be formulated to reward businesses that meet voluntary targets. At the same time, the control of the demand of the products from the key indirect sectors can provide another opportunity to simultaneously save energy and water. On the one hand, this relies on the government to provide guidance on reasonable and green consumption to reduce the consumption of resource-intensive commodities through market-based regulations, including taxes on energy or water and subsidy programs. On the other hand, resource pressure can be addressed through trade measures. Increasing the import of products with high values of indirect energy and water use, as well as shifting export-oriented sectors to industries that use less energy and water can also contribute to relieving energy and water stress in China. This study identified key sectors characterized by most closed energy-water nexus from both direct and indirect perspectives, providing important input for policymaking. However, additional information is required to obtain a better understanding of the nexus relationship between energy and water. For instance, since water availability has significant volatility over time, the virtual water problem is not homogenous and not comparable in different years. Therefore, this paper did not compare the EW nexus of different years. In addition, the IO table issued by China is a competitive table and it does not provide the sources of the imported items, thus it is difficult to describe the energy and water inputs of the imports. Moreover, the indirect energy consumption method did not take into account the heterogeneity of the energy price (producer price) of the sectors. The authors declare that there is no Conflicts of interest. The authors gratefully acknowledge the financial support of the See Supplementary data to this article can be found online at The following are the Supplementary data to this article: