The purpose of this study was to evaluate the long-term outcome of open patellar fractures and to compare their results with a matched group of patients with closed patellar injuries.
                  Sixteen patients with open patellar fractures were followed up at a mean of 45 months (15–100). Functional outcome was evaluated using a visual analogue scale (VAS) and Knee and Osteoarthritis Outcome Score (KOOS). Sixteen patients with closed patellar fractures, matched for age, sex and fracture pattern, were randomly selected from our database to form the control group.
               
                  Results and conclusion
                  The most common mechanism of injury in the open patellar group was road traffic accidents (94%) whereas in the closed group it was falls (62%). A greater number of patients had associated injuries in the open patellar fracture group compared to the closed fracture group (13 versus 5, p
                     =0.01). The injury severity score (ISS) was significantly higher in the open patellar group (mean 22.75, range 5–50) compared with the closed group (mean 7.06, range 4–20); p
                     <0.0001. Patients with open patellar fractures also had a higher, though not statistically significant, incidence of complications, lower KOOS score and higher VAS for pain.
               
                  Level of evidence
                  Therapeutic study. Level III (Matched Cohort Study) [to evaluate the long-term outcome of open patellar fractures and to compare their results with a matched group of patients with closed patellar injuries].Patellar fractures are commonly encountered in orthopaedic practice and are well reported in the literature. A matched cohort study was performed. All patients with open patellar fractures treated at our institution from January 1989 to December 2004 were included. Twenty such patients were identified from our prospectively documented database. Of these 20 patients, 1 patient had already died and three others could not be followed-up. The remaining sixteen patients were recalled specifically for this study and detailed clinical assessment was carried out. Sixteen patients with closed patellar fractures, matched for age, sex and fracture pattern, were randomly selected from our database to form the control group of the study (see Functional outcome was evaluated using a Visual Analogue Scale (VAS) and the Knee and Osteoarthritis Outcome Score (KOOS) During the 16-year duration of the study period, a total of 216 patients with patellar fractures were treated at our institute. 9.3% of these were found to be open (20 open, 195 closed unilateral; 1 closed bilateral). The most common mechanism of injury in the open patellar group was road traffic accidents (94%), whereas in the closed group it was falls (62%). The mean follow up was 45 months (15–100) for the open and 46 months (9–96) for the closed group. Out of the 16 patients in the open group, 13 patients had associated injuries, whilst only 5 patients in the closed patellar fracture group had associated injuries ( Using the Gustilo and Anderson Classification of open fractures, All patients were treated within 6 Using the VAS, patients in the open group experienced more pain at rest, on walking and on climbing or descending stairs. These results however did not reach statistical significance (see Patellar fractures constitute approximately 1% of all skeletal injuries. Open fractures of the patella are high energy injuries that occur in young adults as shown in our series where all but one open injury was following high energy trauma. They are frequently associated with multiple injuries to other bones or organ systems. Treatment of open patellar fractures is a surgical emergency. Treatment principles remain the same as for other open fractures; namely urgent irrigation and debridement with stable fracture fixation. It is important to maintain soft tissue attachment of bony fragments and devitalised fragments should be discarded. The extensor mechanism should be repaired to residual bony fragments. The synovium and capsule are primarily closed unless there is severe contamination. In this study, we are presenting outcomes in a cohort of patients with open patellar fractures. Special features of this group are highlighted by comparing with another cohort of closed patellar fractures, matched according to the patient's age, sex and fracture patterns. Open patellar fractures were associated with higher energy trauma as shown by the higher incidence of associated injuries and a significantly higher ISS as compared to the closed patellar group. Our hospital is a tertiary referral trauma centre which may be a reason for the higher than expected ISS in our series of open fractures. All attempts were made to preserve the patella and in no case was patellectomy performed as an initial procedure. It is worth noting that at the point of patients returning for assessment for the study, none of them required arthroplasty procedures. This obviously does not exclude a long term potential for post traumatic osteoarthrosis of the patello-femoral joint, and a longer study period would be required to evaluate this aspect of their long term outcome. Patients with open fractures had a higher pain VAS especially during walking and on climbing stairs. It is difficult to say how much of it was attributable to the other injuries sustained by these patients. In retrospect, a VAS directed only towards their injured knee may have answered the aim of this study better. The open group had a higher rate of reoperation rates mainly due to the need for plastic procedures to provide soft-tissue cover. A higher complication rate in the open patellar group was mainly attributed to the poorer range of movement. This may be a reflection of the severity of initial injury and a slower rehabilitation due to associated injuries. Though poorer outcomes (VAS and KOOS scores) were recorded in patients within the open patellar group as compared to similar closed fractures, the results did not reach statistical significance. This finding however, may be due to a type II statistical error (not enough patients studied). A power calculation analysis suggested that we would need 50 patients in each group to identify a real statistical significant difference. In this context, due to the low prevalence of open patellar fractures a multicentre study would be needed. Open patellar fractures are high energy injuries and present with significantly higher rates of associated injuries when compared with similar closed fractures. Although not significantly proven, it was observed that open fractures were associated with a poorer functional outcome and more complications than a control group of closed patellar fractures. No conflicts of interest exist for any author of this manuscript.