Herein, we introduce a novel, ultrasensitive optical sensor for determination of Cu(II) ions over the concentration range of 0 to 1 μM Cu(II). The optical sensor is based on the natural molecule chrysosplenol-D (Chp-D) extracted from the flowering plant Chiliadenus montanus (Vahl.) Brullo. Free Chp-D emits fluorescence at 566 nm when excited at 292 nm. Chp-D chelates Cu(II) ions to form a 1:1 (metal:ligand) complex, which quenches the fluorescence emission peak of the free probe at 566 nm. “Turn-off” luminescence could be easily determined and provided distinct proof of the chelation of Cu(II) ions by Chp-D. This novel optical sensor offers a considerable fluorescence mechanism (charge transfer complex, CTC). Chp-D is an extremely sensitive and selective optical sensor for Cu(II) ions, with distinctive fluorescence properties, a large Stokes shift of ~275 nm and recognition aptitude. Moreover, Chp-D has low limit of detection (LOD) for Cu(II) of 1.2 × 10−
                     8 M in buffered media at physiological pH (pH 7.4), a linear range of 0.04 to 1.0 μM and a relative standard deviation (RSDr) of 1% (n = 3). Furthermore, this natural probe has a high binding affinity for Cu(II), with a binding constant of 3.36 × 108 M−
                     1. Overall, we propose Chp-D represents a novel, natural optical sensor for the detection of Cu(II).Copper ions are essential to a variety of biological systems including the production of energy in living cells, transportation of oxygen and transduction of nerve signals [ Numerous techniques have been developed to detect a variety of molecules or ions individually in the aqueous or gas phases. In aqueous medium, fluorescent nanomaterials or chemical probes present in the same phase as the species to be detected can be excited with light, and the subsequent photoluminescence emission is recorded as the analytical signal of a specific chemical reaction [ In addition to the changes in fluorescence intensity or wavelengths induced by metal-ligand binding, some chemical probes or molecules for metal ions alter their electronic structure when bound to the specific target ligand. Such sensor molecules can be utilized in both colorimetric and fluorometric sensors. Colorimetric sensing mechanisms offer the advantages of being easier to use in field detection, while fluorescent sensors hold more potential for imaging of biological systems [ With respect to the detection of copper ions, the multiple non-emissive de-excitation pathway, which includes electron transfer or excited state energy transfer, characteristically quenches the fluorescence intensity of sensor molecules [ Flavonoids are a broad class of natural products that are added to functional foods and natural supplements, used as dye products and employed in sensitized solar cell biosensors and the synthesis of nanomaterials, among other applications. Flavonoids can act as antioxidants, antimicrobials, photoreceptors, visual attractors, feeding repellants and light screening molecules. Flavonoids exhibit a wide range of biological activities, including antiallergenic, antiviral, anti-inflammatory and vasodilating actions [  Herein, we present a novel optical chemosensor for trace detection of Cu(II) using chrysosplenol-D (Chp-D) isolated from All chemicals were purchased from Sigma-Aldrich. MeOH was HPLC grade; all other chemical compounds and solvents were analytical grade and utilized as received. The natural sensor Chp-D was extracted from TLC analyses were carried out on pre-coated silica gel plates (Kieselgel 60 F Chrysosplenol-D (Chp-D) was extracted and isolated as previously described [ To investigate the optical properties of the natural sensing molecule Chp-D, UV–Vis absorbance measurements were carried out for 1.0 μM Chp-D in aqueous pH 7.4 medium (adjusted with 20 mM HEPES) in the presence of different concentrations of Cu(II) ions (0–1 μM). The total volumes of the Chp-D and Cu(II) ion solutions were adjusted to 2 mL during the titration steps at room temperature (25 °C). Luminescence measurements for Chp-D were carried out in the presence of Cu(II) ions under the same optimal experimental conditions. The slit widths for excitation and emission were 5 nm. Moreover, Chp-D was exposed to 0 to 1 μM Cu(II) to assess the sensitivity of the chemosensor. The stoichiometric ratio for Chp-D and Cu(II) ions was determined based on Job's method (repetitive alteration methodology) [   C The spectra of Chp-D recorded in methanol-HEPES buffer (1:99, The chemical affinity of Chp-D towards copper ions was investigated using UV–Vis absorption and fluorometric techniques. The absorption peak at 276 nm reduced gradually and a maximum absorbance peak at 352 nm emerged as Cu(II) ions were gradually added to the Chp-D solution. Ratiometric absorption was observed between the two peaks, with an isosbestic point at 318 nm (see Fluorescence titration of Chp-D in the presence of Cu(II) ions was examined in an adjusted buffer system including 20 mM HEPES buffer at physiological pH (7.4). Free Chp-D exhibits a main emission peak centered at 566 nm ( The quenching performance of the chelation process can be attributed to a CTC mechanism: Chp-D acts as a donor that chelates Cu(II) ions as a receptor. The natural probe Chp-D exhibited high affinity to Cu(II) over the concentration range of 0 to 1 μM in the buffered system. Assuming that the fluorescence intensity of Chp-D can be detected with a precision of ±1%, the LOD for detection of Cu(II) ions is determined to be 1.2 × 10 To investigate the ability of other metal ions to interfere with the response of Chp-D to Cu(II) metal ions, various alkali, alkaline and transition metal ions were added to a mixture of Chp-D and Cu(II) at a constant molar concentration of 1 μM and the luminescence intensity of Chp-D was recorded. The metal ions were added to a mixture of Cu(II):Chp-D with a molar ratio of (1:1). None of the ions investigated significantly affected the luminescence intensity of Chp-D. Therefore, the ability of these metal ions to interfere with chelation of Cu(II) ions by Chp-D was examined in methanol-HEPES buffer (1:99, The chelation process and molar metal:ligand ratio were further studied using Job's plot [ Under these experimental conditions, the quenching of the luminescence intensity of Chp-D was directly proportional to the Cu(II) metal ion concentration over the range from 0.04 × 10 The UV–vis spectra provided considerable data regarding the coordination sites of Chp-D; the chemical reaction of Cu(II) ions with Chp-D resulted in a bathochromic shift in the absorbance bands, which indicates that the hydroxyl groups at the 3′ and 4′ positions or the 5-hydroxy and 4-carbonyl groups coordinate with Cu(II) ions. The UV–vis spectra provided considerable data regarding the coordination sites of Chp-D; the chemical reaction of Cu(II) ions with Chp-D resulted in a bathochromic shift in the absorbance bands, which indicates that the hydroxyl groups at the 3′ and 4′ positions or the 5-hydroxy and 4-carbonyl groups coordinate with Cu(II) ions.  The sensitivity of Chp-D sensor towards Cu(II) ions was studied to investigate the adequacy of our sensor to detect Cu(II) ions in tap water samples. The tested samples were utilized after adjusted at pH 7.4 using 1:99 ( The natural compound chrysosplenol-D (Chp-D) was extracted and utilized as a highly selective optical chemosensor for detection of Cu(II) ions. The UV absorbance and fluorescence behavior of Chp-D in the presence of Cu(II) ions were studied in 1:99 ( The following is the supplementary data related to this article. Supplementary data to this article can be found online at