One of the main concerns in using a shielded machine in deep rock tunnels is the possibility of the shield seizure in squeezing ground. To realistically evaluate the possibility of machine seizure in such grounds, the interaction between the rock mass and shield, lining and backfilling need to be understood. This paper will explain the background theories and the application of numerical analysis for 3D modeling of mechanized tunneling by using a double shield TBM in squeezing ground. The discussions will include the effects of advance rate during excavation cycle of a shielded TBM to observe the impact of tunneling rate on the possibility of machine jamming in the squeezing grounds. Simulation results at five reference points on the tunnel circumference along the tunnel or longitudinal displacement profile (LDP) as well as longitudinal contact force profiles (LFP) on both front and rear shields have been examined. Also, maximum thrust force required to overcome friction and drive TBM forward is calculated. This exercise allows for evaluation of the effects of various parameters on convergence and contact forces between the rock and shield, which in turn determines the required propel forces and can define the possibility of machine entrapment.Today, almost all rock mass conditions can be bored by modern TBMs with tunnel diameter varying from less than 3 For the design of mechanized tunneling in such conditions, the complex interaction between the rock mass, the tunnel machine, its system components, and the tunnel support has to be analyzed in detail and three dimensional models including all these components are better suited to correctly simulate this interplay and avoid the errors introduced by assumption of plane strain conditions ( In this study, 3D finite difference numerical simulation program FLAC The tunnel excavation by a shield TBM is a continuous process, relative to the gradual movement of the ground, unless a major delay in the operation is experienced. This includes weekends, stoppages for machine repair or maintenance, or other machine downtimes. Therefore the time factor must be considered in numerical modeling. Some of the case histories indicate that interruptions of the shield TBM drive may be unfavorable in weak and deep ground, that the “time” factor may play an important role, most often detrimental to the operation. There are several cases where shielded TBM was entrapped when there was a slowdown in operation or standstill/delay in the TBM drive. This suggests that maintaining a high daily advance rate and reducing downtimes may have a positive effect in avoiding entrapment ( Although the time-dependent stress–strain behavior of the rock mass was not included in the step-by-step analysis conducted, the time effect during advancement of the face was implemented inclusively by relaxing the unbalance forces due to excavation. This is done gradually over steps in this simulation and the procedure will be explained in this paper. The shield skin, segmental lining and backfilling were installed after some relaxation of the loads for this hypothetical shield TBM numerical simulation. This means that after relaxation of the unbalance forces, the tunnel walls are allowed to converge and the ground to advance into tunnel envelope. Given the focus of this paper being the study of the interaction between the rock mass, the shielded TBM skin, and the support system near the face and during excavation, the use of short-term parameters can be justified. The gradual increase of ground pressure and of ground deformations in the longitudinal direction are therefore considered to be only due to the spatial stress redistribution that is associated with the advance of the working face ( The study of squeezing behavior of the ground during tunnel excavation has been of interest to experts for years. This is due to great difficulties in completion of underground operation along with major delays in construction schedules and cost overruns. One of the case histories of interruptions in the shield TBM tunneling in squeezing ground is Nuovo Canale Val Viola in Italy. In this project a 3.60 As stated by the International Society of Rock Mechanics (ISRM), Squeezing rock is the time dependent large deformation, which occurs around the tunnel and is essentially associated with creep, caused by exceeding a threshold shear stress. Deformation may terminate during construction or continue over a long period of time. There is a series of empirical and semi-empirical solutions for determination of potential squeezing problems in tunnels. The empirical approaches are essentially based on classification schemes and in terms of the tunnel depth and rock mass quality. Two of these approaches include The semi-empirical approaches also give indications of potential for ground squeezing. However, they provide some tools for estimating the expected deformation around the tunnel and/or the support pressure required, by using closed form analytical solutions for a circular tunnel in a hydrostatic stress field. The common starting point of all these methods for quantifying the squeezing potential of rock is the use of the “competency factor”. Two main examples of such methods are One of the most important disadvantage of the empirical and semi-empirical approaches for use in the tunneling by a double shield TBM is that the calculated squeezing levels by using these approaches along the tunnel is not taking to account the TBM advance rate and face effect. Therefore to account for the impact of TBM advance rate and the ground behavior relative to the distance from the face, numerical simulations can be used to allow for modeling of the relevant geological, geometrical, and time related parameters. Double shield TBMs have become a machine of chose in many cases due to their ability to cope with hard rocks as well as weak and unstable rocks ( Furthermore, the design of double shield TBM was improved with the introduction of the universal double shields (DS) TBM. Compared to the traditional double shield TBM, DS TBMs have a shorter shield length and incorporate the conical shape in the shield structure by stepwise reduction of the shield diameters towards the back of the machine ( On the other hand, total shield length in DS-TBMs is ideally equal to the length of a single shield TBM of similar diameter. High main and auxiliary thrust force has been developed in DS-TBMs to move the shields even in very rapid squeezing ground. Also since in large diameter tunnels the instability phenomena occur more rapidly, this feature allows the DS TBM to advance with maximum productivity in a wider range of ground conditions. However, severe squeezing conditions may lead to deformations that are much greater than the gap or annular space between the ground and the shield which is created by the overcut and the conical shape of the shields. In extreme cases the totality of the shield surface would be in contact with the rock mass that has rapidly converged to embrace the shield. Countermeasures such as ground pre-treatment by grouting or drainage, pre-support of the ground by pipe umbrella, overcuts (maximum up to 30 For modeling the TBM excavation in squeezing rock masses, including the analysis of TBM–rock mass interaction, two main methods have been offered in the literature: the axisymmetric models and the fully 3D modeling. The axisymmetric simulations in the case of squeezing ground have been proposed by A quick review of the literature shows some shortcomings in the available 2D models and related analysis so that few exact 3D numerical studies have been carried out where the connection between squeezing phenomena and double shield TBM excavation has been simulated. Also As a consequence of the assumption of axial symmetry in numerical simulations, the pressure obtained is ‘‘homogenized” over the tunnel cross-section due to the fact that the model assumes an overcut that is constant around the circumference of the shield, while in reality the shield slides along the tunnel floor, which means that the overcut is bigger above the crown than in the lower portion of the tunnel cross-section. Three dimensional numerical models pay due attention to the spatial stress redistribution in the vicinity of the advancing face, thus eliminating the errors introduced by the assumption of plane strain conditions and providing information on the evolution of stresses and deformations in the longitudinal direction as well as allowing a more detailed modeling of the different system components and their interfaces. For numerical modeling of a mechanized tunneling by a double shield TBM, the presence of water pressure and consolidation problems is not taken into account in this study. It is noted that the impact of water pressure and consolidation can be conventionally applied in the numerical calculations. Also, under the assumption of symmetry with reference to the vertical plane through the tunnel axis, only one half of the entire domain is modeled. As states by As the model refers to deep tunnels, the in situ state of stress is applied as a uniform initial stress without consideration of the free ground surface and of the stress gradient due to the gravity. It is assumed that this stress varies linearly with depth and is isotropic, equal to γ To analyze the stress–strain behavior of rock mass in a tunnel excavation with a double shield TBM, numerical analysis were conducted by applying the finite difference numerical method. For the three dimensional numerical analysis, FLAC In order to model a mechanized tunneling process by a universal double shield TBM, various three dimensional models were developed in FLAC The rock mass is assumed to follow a linear elastic and perfectly plastic behavior according to Mohr–Coulomb failure criterion. Any constitutive law based on these assumptions for rock masses can be implemented in the model. The assumed rock mass parameters are shown in A comprehensive 3D model of a shield TBM has been developed in FLAC Different shield types and their main components can be modeled easily by small changes in input data for shield and backfilling materials. Other TBM components are updated with respect to type of TBM only by changing of values assigned to each component. For example, a single shield TBM is modeled by removing the rear shield elements (all geometry parameters relating to rear shield is assumed zero) and changing the cement grouting material properties to pea gravel material for annular gap backfilling. Same procedure could be used to simulate machine advance in the tunnel and extrusion of the segments from the tail shield. The result of analysis includes the deformation and stresses related to all of the monitoring points in the tunnel and on the shield, also deformations and failure stresses relating to the interaction between the rock mass and shields as well between backfilling and support can be monitored or observed in each step of analyses. This is in the form of longitudinal and sectional profiles and as the contours in desired cross sections within the model. Data from each step and for all the points is saved as a text file, so it can be transferred to excel file for evaluation of all deformation and stress behaviors along the tunnel walls and on various shield components. A excel spreadsheet has been prepared for evaluation of analysis results various TBM types and configurations, if the user decides to change machine specifications to evaluate their impact on the system behavior. The model can also be modified to implement some ground improvement measures such as injection of grout or lubricants between the ground and shield in the 3D numerical model.  In the initial simulations the TBM is modeled as a cylinder using cylinder-shell zone elements with variable thickness and diameter. Front and rear shields are modeled with the shell elements with the thickness and material properties of steel that is typically used to manufacture TBM shields. Thrust force of cutter on the cutterhead is applied to the excavation face. Annular gap backfill was assumed to be cement grout which was also modeled with cylinder-shell elements. Therefore, a variable modulus of elasticity was assumed for the backfill to represent different states of the cement grout. The soft phase was used for first 2 In modeling of the shield skin, the total weight of the TBM was ignored, but it was applied by normal stress to elastic area of invert which was in contact with tunnel invert. The bedrock for the applying of the TBM weight effect and lying of shield skin was adopted according to the recommendations of the Because of large deformations occurring at tunnel excavation in squeezing grounds, the large displacement setting approach in the finite difference method was applied to the simulated model. The ongoing TBM excavation was simulated by a step-by-step method depending on the excavation length and construction stages. Assessment effect of step-by-step method on the numerical results is studied in the following. It is noted that the adopted step-by-step method leads to simulate a succession of standstills and not a continuous process. Therefore for reproducing the continuous process of TBM excavation, the excavation length for each solving step is made with fine mesh equal to 1 The excavation of a tunnel is accomplished by applying the forces that are required to maintain equilibrium with the initial stress state in the surrounding material as loads on the perimeter of the tunnel. These loads are then reduced to zero to simulate the excavation (steady-state condition). But the tunnel excavation by a TBM is a continuous process and the unbalance force does not drop to zero because of machine advancement rate except when machine stops due to maintenance or other long delays. Therefore the effect of TBM advancement rate (subsequently the time factor) on the results should be considered in the numerical calculations. Some of the case histories indicate that interruptions of the shield TBM drive may be unfavorable in weak and deep ground, that the “time” factor may play an important role. In several cases, the TBM did not get jammed until there was a slowdown or standstill in the TBM drive, which suggests that maintaining a high gross advance rate and reducing standstill times does have a positive effect in avoiding entrapment. During the excavation of the Nuovo Canale Val Viola (Italy, double shielded TBM, Although the time-dependent stress–strain behavior of the rock mass was not included in the step-by-step analysis conducted, but the time effect during advancement of excavation is taken into account by relaxing the unbalance forces gradually over steps. The shield skin, segmental lining and backfilling were installed after the specified value of relaxation of the loads in the numerical simulation of double shield TBM. This means that after the indicated value of relaxation of the unbalance forces, the tunnel convergence has been allowed to advance into tunnel. Parametrical study of various input data was carried out to evaluate the impact of solving steps on deformation along tunnel for two states of ground behaviors including strong and squeezing grounds, respectively. The study is conducted for assessment of relaxation value of the unbalance forces in the tunnel excavation by a shield TBM. Impact of the different solving steps on displacement magnitudes in squeezing ground is illustrated in Relaxation of the unbalance forces for each solving step of numerical analysis are presented by the percentage value of relaxation. This value depends on the material properties surrounding the tunnel, shield length, annular gap between the ground and shield (overcut), and speed of machine movement in the tunneling. To obtain the appropriate percentage of relaxation for numerical analysis, the simulated initial model was subjected to unbalanced forces by different step-by-step excavation of tunnel. The unbalanced forces along tunnel are monitored in each solving step. The results are illustrated in In this study, for correct representation of continuous excavation by a shielded TBM and accounting for the time factor in step-by-step analysis, a 87% relaxation of the unbalance loads for each step of analysis was used ( For simulation of the contact between the shield and the excavation surroundings due to progressive closure of the overcut and subsequently evaluation of TBM entrapment in squeezing condition, interface elements were applied to both the shield and the tunnel perimeter. Similar interface elements were used between the segmental lining and the rock mass surface in order to represent the effect of a compressible backfilling material. Normal, shear and tensile stiffness values ( If very high stiffness is used for interface elements, the response and the solution convergence in FLAC It is noted that since there is a difference in zone density between two adjacent grids between shield and rock mass, the interface should be attached to the grid with the greater zone density. Also the size of interface elements should always be equal to or smaller than the target faces with which they will come into contact. If this is not the case, the interface elements should be subdivided into smaller elements. On the other hand, interface elements should be limited to grid surfaces that will actually come into contact with another grid ( In this study, the contact between shield and rock mass has been modeled by using the interface elements on both tunnel and shield boundaries by considering the gap between them according to non-uniform overcut in the shielded TBM. Cross section of a front shield and the rear shield are illustrated in Another advantages of model developed for this study is using Mohr–Coulomb or Hoek–Brown failure criterion as input data depending on the field measurements and ground conditions. In order to perform numerical analysis of tunnel excavation in the rock mass, a series of FLAC The excavation stages and the total number of stages for the numerical model were simulated based on the construction design of front and rear shields for a double shield TBM. A total of 41 excavation stages were simulated consisting of the 1 initial undisturbed ground and 40 excavation stages. The total number of the solving steps depends on operation modes of the TBM in squeezing ground and advance rate. The excavation stages for simulated model are defined as follows: In the first stage, initial in situ stresses are implemented and correct distribution of stress is applied to the rock mass model. In the second stage, tunnel boring starts. Numerical results are examined for evaluation of probable contact between the rock mass and front shield. The contact analysis between the cutter-head and rock mass is not taken into accounts. Also, the entrapment risks are analyzed when contact occurs between the walls and shield. At this stage, the thrust force and TBM weight are applied to face and invert of tunnel respectively and are maintained for all stages of excavation. For the simulation of thrust force, simplified a uniform distributed surface load was applied to tunnel face. The maximum cutter-head thrust force has been set to 17 In the third stage, rear shield with reduced diameter (compared to front shield) is activated. Analysis of numerical results for this stage is the same as second stage. In the fourth stage, segmental lining is installed. The injection of backfill into the annular space by using the soft grout is assumed to start from the third segment behind the machine. This also allows for simulation of pea gravel in other types of machine. In the fifth stage, backfilling the annular space by hard grout is implemented. The model is set up such that when a segment ring is extruded from the tail shield, the material property of the rear shield is replaced by the material property of soft filling for the annular space in the area of the first two segmental rings. It should be noted that in modeling of the lining, the joints between segments and adjacent rings are not considered. In this study, the analysis is carried out in terms of longitudinal displacement profile (LDP) on tunnel circumference to detect the probable contact force between rock and both front shield and rear shield as well as segmental lining perimeter after each step. As mentioned above for simulation of TBM excavation in the squeezing ground, 87% relaxation of the unbalance loads for each step of analysis is used. Due to the very high in situ stress, large convergence will take place. Thus it is necessary to consider the possible uplift in the invert which could move the machine. This effect could lead to a reduction of the gap at the crown (  Five reference points are selected on tunnel circumference as well as on shield boundaries for extracting the results of numerical analysis. Over-excavation amounts relating to each reference point are calculated and considered in the analysis. The schematic drawing of the reference points and relevant overcut amounts are shown in It is noted that the rock mass experiences three unloading processes during the excavation by TBM. First, as the tunnel walls remain unsupported, the tunnel boundary experiences the first unloading/relaxation process. At the distance of about 1 For the specified solving step with advancing of tunnel, the shape of longitudinal displacement and force profile (LDP and LFP) changes relative to the previous solving step. Therefore LDPs and LFPs are controlled at each solving steps to find out where the shields get in contact with the rock mass. Also amount of forces in the contact points evaluated at every step for assessment of shield entrapment risk. In this study, the shields are assumed to be rigid and are not subjected to any failure due to bending and buckling. Displacement contours for the first 5  The conditions for point CW are same as point C ( Contact between front shield and invert starts right after excavation ( Displacement contours for 11  The contact forces applied to the both shields at point CW are 1.3 and 2.7 Maximum thrust force to overcome friction and drive TBM forward is calculated by integrating the contact forces The maximum total thrust force by the auxiliary thrust cylinders is the sum of the maximum cutter-head thrust This is equivalent to 7400 Another approach is to increase the gap between the rock and rear shield. The stepwise increase of the annular space gap by decreasing the diameter of the rear shield relative to the front shield can be another solution. With this plan the reduction of shield diameter could increase from 3 The simulation of ground behavior using numerical modeling can be used to evaluate the probability of shield entrapment in potentially squeezing ground. The current study has used the finite difference method (FLAC 3D) to simulate the tunnel convergence and the contact forces between the tunnel walls and the shield for a double shield TBM. To accurately model the ground behavior in this application, a 3D model is necessary to account for the correct geometry of tunnel excavation relative to shield dimensions. Also to incorporate the rock mass properties in a realistic way, Hoek–Brown failure criterion has been mapped onto Mohr–Coulomb criteria in the program. The model is capable of applying various material hardness to represent the shield, annular space, soft and hard grout, and segmental lining. Machine advance rate can also be implemented by allowing controlled relaxation of the ground pressure and movement of the various components of machine into the ground. Longitudinal displacement and contact forces profiles were calculated for transient conditions and also for the complete model by considering the gap between the shields and the rock mass that is not uniform. The results are realistic and plausible and show the potential for use of this approach to assess the risk of machine entrapment in weak rocks for deep tunnels. The modeling shows that for the given machine and rock conditions, the initial contact between the shield and rock occurs towards the end of the front shield at relatively low levels of contact pressures and forces. The continued ground convergence will increase the area of contact between the rock and the rear shield and subsequently higher contact forces. The results of modeling shows the potential for simulation of shielded TBM application in weak rocks at higher depth and implementation of various ground condition parameters (i.e. in situ stresses and rock mass properties) for evaluation of the required thrust forces. This allows for assessment of the possibility for machine jamming in given ground conditions and may lead to development of possible solutions. The authors thank the Scientific and Technological Research Council of Turkey (TÜBİTAK) for funding of first author during PhD period.