Introduction
                  The purpose of this study was to determine the effectiveness of circular external fixation (CEF) as a definitive treatment option for patients with complex tibial plateau fractures (Schatzker VI) compared with the outcomes of a fixed angle locking plates’ group.
               
                  Methods
                  Level III evidence. Retrospective, comparative study in a Level I Trauma Center. Fourteen patients treated with CEF (Group A) were compared to fourteen patients treated with minimal invasive angle locking plates (Group B). The mean time from fractures to surgery was 19 days for Group A with a mean ISS of 24 and 7 days for Group B with a mean ISS of 14. The main outcome measures were clinical and radiographic.
               
                  Results
                  Complete union was obtained in Group A at an average of 22 weeks and at 17 weeks in Group B. Two patients developed non-union, one in each group. Normal alignment was observed in both groups, no statistical differences were observed in Paley’s anatomical posterior proximal tibial angle (aPPTA) and mechanical medial proximal tibial angle (mMPTA) between two groups. Results based on the Association for the Study and Application of the Method of Ilizarov criteria for Group A: 71% excellent and 29% good as far as bone outcomes are concerned and as 57% excellent, 37% good, and 7% fair for functional outcomes.
               
                  Conclusions
                  Definitive fixation with circular external fixator is effective in complex Schatzker VI tibial plateau fractures. Advantages include maintaining the frame till union, reduced risk of infection, early mobilization, restoration of the normal lower extremity alignment, versatility, and improved union rate in patients with multiple traumatic injuries, infection, and soft tissue injuries.Schatzker type VI fractures are complex tibial plateau lesions that separate the articular surface from the diaphysis [ Intra-operative and post-operative complications including soft-tissue dehiscence, infection, osteomyelitis, delayed union or non-union and eventually post-traumatic arthritis could compromise the outcomes of these complex fractures. Temporary external fixation followed by internal fixation using medial and lateral plates with a double surgical approach [ The purpose of the current study is to determine the clinical effectiveness of circular external fixation as a definitive treatment option for patients with complex Schatzker VI-type tibial plateau fractures, and to compare our outcomes with a fixed angle-locking plates cohort. This cohort is composed of a consecutive series of 28 trauma patients, treated at our Institution between December 2007 and August 2013 with either circular external fixation or fixed angle-locking plating using the Less Invasive Stabilization System (LISS; Synthes, Switzerland). The two groups will be referred to as “Group A” (external circular fixation) and “Group B” (plating). The study included patients with Schatzker type-VI (OTA classification 41C2 or 41C3) lesions tibial plateau fractures treated with either CEF or internal fixation with plates and screws. Pathologic fractures and pediatric patients were excluded from the cohort. Both internal and external fixation options were considered at our Institution. The decision between internal fixation versus external fixation options was based on collegial discussion among the entire orthopaedics team in order to achieve the best outcome. The main indications for external definitive fixation included fractures with poor soft-tissue coverage, open fractures and poly-traumatized patients who can’t tolerate prolonged open surgery due to clinical problems or pre-existing comorbidities ( All patients underwent antero-posterior and latero-lateral X-Ray evaluation and a CT scan of the injured knee. Fractures were categorized using the Schatzker classification for tibial plateau fractures and the A.O. Foundation classification for long bones [ Open fractures classified according to the Gustilo and Anderson classification [ Follow-up evaluation was continued either until radiographic healing or up to a year after surgery. Lower extremity alignment evaluated using Paley’s anatomical posterior proximal tibial angle (aPPTA) and mechanical medial proximal tibial angle (mMPTA) at last follow up. Results were assessed by means of the functional and bone scoring systems described by Paley and Maar [ All intra and post- operative complications were recorded. Quadriceps isometric exercises and range-of-motion exercises for the knee were initiated shortly after surgery when possible,and followed by progressive staged weight-bearing. Standard pin care with showered and dry gauze application around the pin was recommended. ASAMI outcome scores used as functional outcome scores. Mean values and standard deviations were calculated for each set of values. Following the results of the normality test (Kolmogorov-Smirnov test) the data were statistically compared by means of All 28 fractures were categorized as Schatzker type VI, AO 41 C2 or C3 lesions ( Group A included 14 patients with a mean age of 51 (range 23–76), a mean ISS of 24 (range 11–50), among which were 1 woman and 13 men ( The average time lapse from trauma to surgical treatment was 19 days, the mean healing time (defined as average time until removal of the fixator) was 22 weeks and one case of non-union were observed. The final mMPTA was 86.1, with an aPPTA of 84.5. Group B was composed of 14 patients, 3 women and 11 men, with a mean age of 43 (range 31–53) and a mean ISS of 14 (range 11–21) ( The overall mean follow-up time was 24 months (range 18–48). No bone grafts were performed to correct metaphyseal bone defects in both groups. Based on the ASAMI outcome scoring system, bone healing and alignment were rated as excellent in 10 patients (71%) and good in 4 patients (29%) in Group A, as opposed to excellent in 8 patients (57%), good in 5 patients (36%) and poor in 1 case (7%) as far as Group B was concerned. Similarly, functional outcomes scored excellent in 8 patients (57%), good in 5 patients (37%) and fair in 1 case (7%) in Group A as opposed to excellent in 9 patients (64%), good in 4 patients (29%) and poor in 1 case (7%) for Group B. Final average angles were compared between the two treatment groups: no statistically significant difference was found (p>0.05) for mPPTA and aPPTA measures. No difference between two groups were found regarding non-unions and healing time (p>0.05). The two groups were homogenous in terms of age and gender distribution (p>0.05) but not in terms of ISS (p<0.05). Group A showed statistical significant higher ISS values than group B ( Complex Schatzker type-VI fractures mandate surgical treatment in order to achieve anatomical reduction of the articular surface and stable fixation to achieve bone healing. The choice of the safest surgical option can be very challenging. Open reduction and internal fixation (ORIF) using medial and lateral plating or “double plating” was first proposed as a feasible treatment option by Ruedi and Allgower in 1969. The results of ORIF were variable especially for comminuted articular or open fractures. The complications included infection (ranging from 50% to 87.5% of all reported cases), post-traumatic osteoarthritis, skin complications and tibial axial deviation. This can be attributed to the need for wide surgical exposures, damaging periosteal vascularization and resulting in an unacceptable rate of wound dehiscence, deep bone infection and delayed bone healing [ Open reduction surgery thus poses a high risk of infection, malunion and non-union. Open surgery interferes with periosteal blood supply and disturb the fracture hematoma [ Such a compelling issue has prompted extensive research in the field of Biologic Fixation over time, leading to the development of an innovative fixation device combining the advantages of minimally-invasive surgery and anatomical plating with angular stable screws (i.e. the Less-Invasive Stabilization System This allowed for a discernible improvement in the prognosis of complex tibial plateau fractures. Angular stable plating in fact substantially reduces the need for autologous bone grafting, previously unavoidable in order to obtain optimal reduction and fixation with traditional open surgery [ The analysis of the results we obtained using LISS® plates for Schatzker type VI lesions confirms the prognostic improvement guaranteed by this system, since our case series showed no need for autologous bone grafting in order to correct metaphyseal bone stock deficiencies. The risk of bone and soft-tissue complications also decreases with fixed angle-locking plating of the lateral side of the proximal tibia only, eliminating the need for fracture site exposure since the plate is positioned via a tissue-sparing, minimally-invasive surgical approach. On the other hand, the surgical technique behind LISS Therefore, LISS Definitive open surgical treatment should be performed when soft tissues condition is ready for surgical incisions. Ring external fixation is thus a feasible and reasonable option for complex tibia plateau fractures with bad soft-tissue involvement. Indirect fracture reduction techniques with circular external fixators avoid the need for extensive surgical exposures. External circular fixation has in fact been reported to contribute to decrease the risk of infection in Schatzker VI lesions, even when combined with the traditional double-incision technique. [ Additionally, circular external fixation helps reducing the need for autologous bone grafting [ Varus or valgus tibial malalignment, construct instability and ROM reduction due to the need of “bridge fixation” of the knee joint might occur: a proper use of the ring external fixation system is crucial in achieving optimal outcomes for severe articular lesions. Patients of group A had a longer time to surgery. This was due to both the greater complexity of the trauma, reflected also by the significant major ISS, and to the local damage of soft tissues and exposure. The circular external fixator has been applied above all in fractures with little coverage of soft tissues and in exposed fractures. Soft tissue injuries took more time from the trauma in Group A, than the patients in Group B, before allowing the surgical approach. Lastly, it is important to note that, in spite of the high fracture reduction quality we achieved and the lack of any significant complications within our cohort, clinical outcomes in our report appear to be slightly less favorable compared to other papers. We believe this discrepancy may stem from the high rate of clinical heterogeneity within our Schatzker type VI fracture group. Such finding also indicates that functional outcomes do not always parallel and match the quality of surgically-achieved fracture reduction and stabilization as assessed via X-Ray and CT evaluation in such complex and multi-faceted high-energy trauma settings. High-energy Schatzker type-VI fractures pose a uniquely complex challenge to the surgeon in order to restore anatomical joint congruity and function, and consensus is spreading among leading Authors [ Zhao et al in a recent meta analysis suggest that soft-tissue injuries and fracture's pattern should drive the choice between ORIF and external fixation [ Temporary joint-spanning circular external fixation in fact facilitates soft-tissue healing and recovery through minimal iatrogenic trauma and bleeding, while at the same time allowing for early weight-bearing and progressive corrections during the whole treatment course. Post-operative construct adjustability is in fact possible at any time prior to complete bone consolidation, offering a unique blend of stability and adaptability which is key to the customization of surgical treatment in such challenging settings. Minimally-invasive techniques and anatomically contoured plates, likewise, enable to limit surgical soft-tissue damage while providing stable internal fixation of bony segments: a feature not to be overlooked in such complex lesions, considering that the risk of non-union and malalignment rises considerably when fracture instability is present. Circular external fixation allowed us to achieve a convincing level of treatment accuracy in our Schatzker type VI patient cohort, obtaining highly satisfactory outcomes with fairly easy and reproducible constructs. In our experience, thus, definitive circular external fixation is a feasible treatment option for complex fracture reduction and stabilization, eliminating the need for extensive surgical exposure and thereby avoiding the vascular and infections issues posed by traditional open surgery. Both techniques, circular external fixation or fixed angle locking plates, provide satisfactory fracture reduction. The minimally invasive allowed by circular external fixation helps reducing the complication rate in high-risk fractures and makes it ideal for treatment of high-energy lesions with extensive soft-tissue damage, open fractures site and poly-trauma patients. In conclusion, circular external fixation, with or without minimally internal osteosynthesis, is a safe option for treatment of Schatzker type VI fractures. Conflict of interest statement: None of the authors received benefits for personal or professional use from a commercial party related directly or indirectly to the subject of this manuscript. The Current study was approved by Ethical Board Review of Niguarda’s Hospital, Milan, Italy.