The wetting of coal pores by water has an observable influence on the flotation recovery of combustible matter from fine coal resources. In this investigation, low-field nuclear magnetic resonance (LF-NMR) was employed to measure the porosity of coal pores after various pre-conditioning times; the water wetting degree of coal pores was then characterized using this porosity data. The water wetting percentage of coal pores was calculated by using the ratio of the measured porosity to the total porosity (obtained from a water-saturated coal sample). The water-saturated coal sample had a total porosity of 23.22%, which was dominated by mesopores and macropores. The measured porosity of the coal surface increased from 11.33% to 15.37% as the pre-conditioning time was increased from 0 to 10 min, and the flotation recovery was reduced from 65.23% to 21.58%. The water wetting degree of the macropores was found to have a stronger negative effect on the coal flotation than that of the mesopores. The larger pores were more easily wetted by water than the smaller pores, resulting in the formation of a thick hydration layer on the coal surface, which reduced the floatability of coal particles. Additionally, the negative linear correlation between the water wetting percentage of the coal pores and the flotation recovery was determined to elucidate the effects of the water wetting of the coal pores on its flotation behavior.Low rank coal is usually difficult to recover directly via conventional flotation The surface of low rank coal is porous. The pores on the surface of low rank coal can be filled with water or air In previous studies of the flotation of low rank/oxidized coal, long pre-conditioning times have been found to cause the pores on the surface of oxidized coal to be wetted completely with water, decreasing the floatability of the coal In this investigation, pre-conditioning times of 0, 1, 3, 5, 7, and 10 were utilized. Low-field nuclear magnetic resonance (LF-NMR) was employed to detect the pore size distribution (PSD) of the coal surfaces treated for different pre-conditioning times, which can reflect the percentage of coal pores wetted by water. The degree of water in the coal pores during the pre-conditioning process was studied by analyzing the in-situ wetting percentage/rate. Additionally, the correlation between the water wetting percentage of the pores on the coal surface and the flotation recovery was established for the first time to reveal the effects of water wetting of the coal pores on the coal flotation behavior. Currently, the PSD of coal can be obtained using a variety of qualitative and quantitative methods. The qualitative methods include scanning electron, transmission electron, and optical microscopy. The quantitative methods are low-field nuclear magnetic resonance (LF-NMR), micro-X-ray computed tomography (μ-CT), gas adsorption (nitrogen gas/carbon dioxide), mercury intrusion porosimetry (MIP), and small angle X-ray/neutron scattering (SAXS/SANS). Some of the methods used to measure PSD have limitations; for example, the MIP method easily quantifies large pores (100 nm–100 μm) but damages the original pore structure, while N Theoretically, the LF-NMR measurement process involves the alignment of the magnetic moments of hydrogen atoms with an external magnetic field and the generation of a dipole moment in the hydrogen-containing fluids in the samples. The spin of a hydrogen nucleus interacts with an external dipole moment to produce a measurable signal. As the number of hydrogen atoms present in the sample increases, the amplitude of the dipole moment also increases; this phenomenon can be used to determine the volume of the pores wetted by the hydrogenous fluid. The time evolution of the dipole moment can be decomposed into longitudinal (   Since larger pores have lower S/V values, Eq. The LF-NMR technique is usually employed to calculate the PSD of coal particles by detecting the hydrogen atoms in the moisture present in coal samples. Thus, the PSD of coal determined using LF-NMR directly reflects the proportions of the different types of pores that are wetted by water. In this way, the effects of the pre-conditioning time on the water wetting degree of coal pores can be investigated by analyzing the response of the hydrogen nuclei in different pore sizes to the magnetic field. Low-density low-rank bulk coal was obtained from the Bulianta Coal Preparation Plant located in Inner Mongolia, China. The bulk coal was crushed, ground, and then screened to obtain the 0.25–0.125 mm size fraction, which was used as the experimental coal sample in this study. The proximate analysis of coal sample is given in To determine whether the particle size distribution of the sample changed during the pre-conditioning process, the particle size distributions of the raw coal (unconditioned coal) and coal that had been pre-conditioned for 10 min were analyzed using a GSL-1000 Laser Particle Size Analyzer (Liaoning Instrument Research Institute Co., LTD, China). A low-field nuclear magnetic resonance (LF-NMR) nanopore analyzer (NMRC12-010V, Suzhou Niumag Analytical Instrument Corporation, China) was used to analyze the PSD of the raw coal. Both the method of converting the The LF-NMR tests were carried out at a spectrometer frequency of 12 MHz and magnetic field intensity of 0.3 ± 0.05 T. A 25 mm probe coil diameter and 0.3 ms echo time ( In order to obtain the in-situ water wetting percentage of the coal pores, the coal samples were subjected to different pre-conditioning times and then analyzed using LF-NMR. The flowsheet of the LF-NMR tests is presented in All flotation experiments in this study were performed in a 60 mL micro-flotation cell. The pulp density was 50 g/L, and the impeller speed and airflow rate of the flotation machine were 1600 r/min and 140 mL/min, respectively. Kerosene was used as the collector at a dosage of 10 μL, and First, 3 g of the coal sample and 40 mL of ultra-pure water were combined in a glass breaker. The slurry was pre-conditioned using magnetic stirring at a speed of 500 r/min for 0, 1, 3, 5, 7, or 10 min and transferred to a 60 mL micro-flotation cell after the pre-conditioning process. The kerosene was added to the pulp and conditioned for 2 min, after which the In this study, the ash content of the froth product was not analyzed because a low-ash coal sample was used. The flotation recovery (i.e., concentrate yield) was the sole index used to analyze the differences in the coal flotation behavior using different pre-conditioning times. The particle size distribution of the coal that was subjected to 10 min of pre-conditioning was nearly the same as that of raw coal, as shown in  The first peak value of the The amplitude (ordinate) of the According to the coal pore classification method described by Hodot in 1966, pores can be divided into macropores (>1000 nm), mesopores (100–1000 nm), transition pores (10–100 nm), and micropores (0–10 nm)  The LF-NMR results can be used to calculate the PSD of coal particles by analyzing the response of the hydrogen nuclei in the different sized pores to magnetic fields. The greater the amount of water entrapped in the coal pores is, the larger the porosity of coal measured by LF-NMR is. In this way, the amount of coal pores wetted by water can be evaluated in-situ by comparing the measured porosity values corresponding to the different pore types. The water wetting percentage of the pores can be further analyzed. The pre-conditioning time only affected the mesopores and macropores on the coal surface; hence, only the effects of the mesopores and macropores on the water wetting percentage of coal pores were considered in this study. First, the water wetting percentages of the pores on the coal surfaces after different pre-conditioning times were analyzed using Eq. The water wetting percentage of the coal pores was adopted to directly reflect the extent to which the pores on the coal surface were filled by water. The flotation recoveries of coal particles after different pre-conditioning times are shown in To analyze the relationship between the water wetting percentages of the coal pores and the flotation recovery, the correlations between the water wetting percentages of the mesopores, macropores, and total pores on the coal surface and the flotation recovery were determined using the data shown in The water wetting percentages of the mesopores, macropores, and total pores all showed a negative linear relationship with the flotation recovery, as shown in The water wetting percentage of coal pores after different pre-conditioning times and its influence on the coal flotation behavior were investigated. Since low speed magnetic stirring (500 rpm) was used to pre-condition the coal particles, the difference in the particle size of the coal before and after pre-conditioning as determined using a laser particle size analyzer was slight, and therefore the influence of the pre-conditioning treatment on the particle size of coal was ignored in this study. The main findings are listed below: The As the pre-conditioning time was increased from 0 to 10 min, the measured porosity of the total pores of the coal increased from 11.33% to 15.37%. The water wetting percentages of the different types of coal pores were analyzed based on the change in their measured porosity. The water wetting percentages of the mesopores, macropores, and total pores all gradually increased as the pre-conditioning time was increased. The mesopores dominated the water wetting percentage of the coal pores for a pre-conditioning time of 1 min, while the macropores had the most influence at longer times. In the overall pre-conditioning process (10 min), the water wetting degree of the coal pores depended mainly on the macropores rather than mesopores. Mesopores and macropores are more easily wetted by water to form a thick hydration layer on the coal surface than the micropores and transition pores; this layer reduces the efficiency of the attachment of bubbles to the coal particle. As a result, the flotation recovery decreased from 65.23% to 21.58% when the pre-conditioning time was increased from 0 to 10 min. Additionally, the water wetting percentage of the macropores and total pores both exhibited a strong negative linear correlation with the flotation recovery, whereas that of the mesopores showed a poor negative linear correlation. The linear relationship between the water wetting degree of the above-mentioned pores and the flotation recovery was established to reveal the effects of the water wetting degree of the coal pores on the coal flotation response.  The authors declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this paper.