Tibial dyschondroplasia (TD) is one of the most prevalent skeletal abnormalities in avian species, causing enormous economic losses and major animal welfare problems. Irregular cell differentiation of the chondrocytes that populate the growth plate has been hypothesized to be involved in the etiology of the disease. We evaluated the effect of incubation temperature at various stages of embryo development and bone formation on growth plate chondrocyte differentiation and the incidence of TD. Eggs were incubated either at a control temperature of 37.8°C, or at 36.9 or 39°C, each for 6 h/ d, during early (0 to 8 d) or late (10 to 18 d) embryo development. At 14 d of incubation and at hatch, tibias were collected and weighed, and their ash and calcium contents were determined. Growth plate chondrocyte differentiation was evaluated by alkaline phosphatase activity and collagen type II and osteopontin gene expression. In addition, the level of the heat-shock protein 90 (Hsp90) was evaluated by immunohistochemistry. The rest of the chicks were raised to 49 d and the incidence of TD was recorded. The incidence of TD increased only when the temperature was altered at the early stages of embryo development, and it was correlated with an increase in tibia ash but not with tibia weight or calcium content. Moreover, increased TD incidence was correlated with delayed chondrocyte differentiation. Early changes in incubation temperature caused an increase in the level of Hsp90 in articular and differentiated chondrocytes of the hypertrophic zone and in the numbers of distinct undifferentiated chondrocytes arranged in columns in the proliferative zone of the growth plate. In summary, the early stages of embryo development and bone formation are of utmost importantance for appropriate growth plate chondrocyte differentiation, and any temperature deviation will increase the subsequent incidence of TD. The increase in TD incidence is probably the result of delayed Hsp90-driven chondrocyte differentiation, supporting the hypothesis that TD is the result of abnormal chondrocyte differentiation.Tibial dyschondroplasia ( Various dietary ( One of the parameters known to affect chondrocyte proliferation and differentiation is heat stress. Heat stress causes the production of a wide range of heat-shock proteins, located at different zones of rat and chicken embryonic growth plates, which suggests that there are different activities at different stages of differentiation ( In recent years, there has been considerable interest in exposure of broiler embryos to changes in incubation temperatures, to enhance postnatal adaptation of growing broilers to different environmental temperatures ( In the present study, we evaluated the effects of temperature during the early and late stages of bone formation, within the incubation period, on the differentiation of growth plate chondrocytes, as correlated with the incidence of TD. As a specific avian collagen type II probe, we used a 360-bp fragment of A total of 2,400 eggs were obtained from a Ross broiler breeder flock at 38 wk of age. The eggs were stored at 16°C and 75% RH for 4 d prior to incubation. They were then divided into 5 groups (480 eggs/treatment) and were incubated at the following temperatures in 5 incubators. In group 1, control eggs were incubated at 37.8°C; in group 2, a low incubation temperature (36.9°C for 6 h/ d) was used on d 0 to 8 of incubation; in group 3, a low incubation temperature (36.9°C for 6 h/d) was used on d 10 to 18 of incubation; in group 4, a high incubation temperature (39°C for 6 h/d) was used on d 0 to 8 of incubation; and in group 5, a high incubation temperature (39°C for 6 h/d) was used on d 10 to 18 of incubation. Relative humidity was maintained at 60%. Eggs were turned once per hour at an angle of 90° from 0 to 18 d of incubation. There were 4 replicate trays of 120 eggs for each temperature treatment. Eggs were transferred to a hatcher unit at 18 d of incubation and kept at 37.8°C and 70% RH until hatching. At 14 d of incubation, 10 eggs were sampled, weighed, and the embryos removed. Embryo weight was expressed as a percentage of the present egg weight. At hatch, 10 chicks were also sampled and weighed from each group. Embryos and chicks were killed by cervical dislocation, and the left tibia was immediately removed for histology. The right leg was removed, cleaned of any adhering tissue, and weighed, and the tibia was weighed and dried overnight at 110°C; samples were then ashed at 600°C for 12 h to determine the tibia ash content, which was expressed as the percentage of ash. The tibia calcium content was also determined by atomic absorption spectrophotometry. During hatching, the number of chicks hatched was recorded and the percentage of hatchability was calculated on the basis of the number of chicks hatched as a percentage of the number of fertile eggs per treatment. Eggs that failed to hatch were opened, and infertile eggs and embryonic mortalities at early, mid, and late stages were determined. After hatching, 90 chicks per hatching temperature (a total of 450 chicks) were individually weighed, wing-banded, and placed into 15 floor pens containing 14 birds/m After the chicks had been killed by cervical dislocation, the tibias were removed immediately and fixed overnight in 4% paraformaldehyde in PBS at 4°C. Serial 5-μm sections were prepared after the samples had been dehydrated in graded ethanol solutions, cleared in chloroform, and embedded in Paraplast (Shandan, Runcorn, UK). For hybridization, the sections were deparaffinized in xylene, rehydrated through a series of graded ethanol solutions, rinsed for 5 min in distilled water, and incubated in 2× SSC (1× SSC contained 0.15 The GLM procedure of SAS (SAS Hatch of fertile eggs was 88.1, 87.0, 85.2, 86.1, and 85.6% for the control, cooler incubation temperature during the early and late stages, and higher incubation temperature during the early and late stages, respectively, and was not significant among the treatment groups. There was no effect of incubation temperature on the different stages of embryonic mortality; however, total embryonic mortalities differed among groups, being highest for the cooler and higher incubation temperatures during the early stage of embryonic development (12.7 and 12.0%, respectively) than the other groups (averaged 9.5%). Changing the incubation temperature, by cooling during the early or late stage or by heating at the late stage of embryo development, did not depress embryo weight on d 14 of embryo development. Only the effect of increased incubation temperature in the early stages of embryo development reached statistical significance on d 14 of incubation. At hatch, chick weight in all treatment groups increased compared with the control. At 21 and 49 d of age, control chicks exhibited the highest weight among all treatments. Body weight gain was 36.5 g/d from 0 to 21 d for control broilers, whereas the treatment groups gained an average of 30.5 g/d. At 49 d of age, although the control chicks were still the heaviest, the differences were not statistically significant ( Altering the incubation temperature for 8 d during the early stages of embryo development did not affect tibia weight at d 14 of incubation. In contrast, altering the incubation temperature for only 4 d at later stages of incubation significantly decreased tibia weight ( On d 14 of incubation, neither tibia ash nor tibia calcium was significantly different among the incubation temperature groups. At hatch, a significant increase in tibia ash was observed only when the incubated temperature was altered in the early stages of development, and a similar tendency was observed at 49 d posthatch. The increase in tibia calcium was significant only at hatch after incubating the eggs at a low temperature. The incidence of TD at 49 d posthatch was affected by the incubation temperature. Only cooling or heating from d 0 through 8 in the early stages of embryo development was associated with a higher prevalence of TD. No effect of incubation temperature on the frequency of TD incidence was noticeable when eggs were cooled or heated from d 10 through 18 of incubation ( Tibial dyschondroplasia has been suggested to result from the failure of chondrocytes to undergo the complete differentiation necessary for cartilage vascularization and mineralization ( Collagen type II is expressed by articular chondrocytes and by chondrocytes of the PZ ( Alkaline phosphatase activity is exhibited exclusively by differentiated and mature chondrocytes; it marks the hypertrophic zone ( Another gene that marks the onset of differentiation and calcification is OPN ( Heat-shock protein 90 is the most abundant cytoplasmic chaperone of eukaryotic cells; as such, it is involved in developmental regulatory networks and in communication within and between cells. It conceals developmental and stochastic variations that otherwise cause abrupt morphological changes in a large variety of organisms ( In this study the relationships between incubation temperature at various stages of embryo development, on the one hand, and TD incidence, on the other hand, were evaluated to discover the critical stage at which temperature might affect TD incidence. Correlations between TD incidence and various parameters of bone metabolism, such as tibia weight, ash content, and calcium content, were evaluated as well. The results demonstrated that broiler embryos were more sensitive to temperatures changes during the early stages of embryo development, although hatching success was similar among groups. These results are in agreement with the report of The incidence of TD at 49 d of age was correlated with incubation at an altered temperature during the early stages of embryo development, which suggests the existence of a critical stage for growth plate development and differentiation ( In the growth plate, the rate of division of the stem cells that give rise to chondrocytes, the proliferation rate of the chondrocytes, the size of the PZ, and the degree of cellular hypertrophy are precisely controlled, as manifested in the near symmetry of the limbs and the hereditary element of adult stature. Any deviation from the normal pattern of chondrocyte proliferation, chondrocyte differentiation, or both may lead to bone abnormalities ( Another gene expressed in the HZ and marking the onset of differentiation is OPN. The suggestion that OPN is involved in growth plate cartilage differentiation and calcification was based on its tissue distribution, its affinity for calcium ( A large body of work spanning the past decade has identified the molecular chaperone Hsp90 as a critical modulator of an extensive network of cellular signaling pathways, including cell cycle control, gene transcription, and apoptotic signaling ( In summary, the early stages of embryo development and bone formation are crucial for growth plate differentiation, and any temperature deviation from the normal will increase the incidence of TD at a later stage. This increase in TD incidence was correlated with delayed chondrocyte differentiation, probably driven by Hsp90, which supports the hypothesis that TD is the result of abnormal chondrocyte differentiation. The research reported here was supported in part by research grants from the