For an optimal design of roof-elements for long spans one has to consider both load-carrying capacity and heat conductivity. In this paper three different alternative web configurations for joining web to flange in a roof-element are investigated. A composite web in combination with fibre reinforced plastics (FRP) is proposed as a solution to achieve an optimised performance. The connection is designed as a mechanical pin-type fastener with a general purpose polyester matrix FRP. Full-scale beam tests and small-scale properties test were carried out. Where connection failure took place, the derived connection capacity load matches fairly. A predicted span length of a roof element is in the order of 8–10 m in a design situation should be possible using the FRP–steel web. The load-carrying and thermal insulation performance of FRP–steel, expanded metal and slotted steel beams are compared by finite element analysis.Sandwich panels with thin-walled cold-formed steel facings and rigid foamed or mineral wool insulation core are becoming more popular as enclosures (claddings). The successful systems use standardised and compatible components, which comes out smoothly from the production line. Roof-elements for long spans have been used in Sweden for almost 30 years. There exists several different types and all include wooden joists, wood based sheeting materials and thin-walled steel facings. Problems with, and even collapses due to, moisture induced stressed and lack of durability related to the wood components makes it desirable to find other materials or other structural solutions. A roof element has to be designed for long-term loads, that is, self-weight and the annually varying snow load. The core in a sandwich panel carries the shear load. However, the long-term shear modulus of foamed plastic cores are reported to be as low as 30% of the short-term shear modulus for quasi-permanent snow loads The manufacture and erection of panel cladding systems demand workmanship with high levels of accuracy to achieve the required alignment, fit of components and fulfilment of the functional requirements (FRs). By using the method of QFD, for example, FR1: Resistance to design loads (stiffness and strength of system). FR2: Thermal insulation (thermal bridging etc.). FR3: Thermal and water vapour movement (designs to accommodate moisture movements etc.). FR4: Durability (changes in strength in different exposure conditions). FR5: Total life costs (reasonable material, labour, and maintenance costs etc.). In recent years a good deal of research and development concerning different structural aspects on load bearing structural sandwich elements have been carried out. The solutions, or in-data, for the optimisation concerning FR1 can to some extent be found in literature. When a flat metal sheet supported by a lightweight core is subjected to axial compression, it buckles into a series of waves at a stress which is usually well below the yield stress of the face material. Ultimate failure is often caused through wrinkling of the compressed face. Wrinkling has been investigated by many authors and is thoroughly analysed in a series of papers When considering FR2 — thermal insulation — a steel web is naturally not recommended. However slotted steel, The structural components must be joined to create useful assemblies. A cost-effective approach for joining mixed materials (web to flange) considering FR1 and FR2 is sought in this study. The focus in on FR1 while only a preliminary study is performed concerning possible solutions for FR2 so that combined effects of load-carrying capacity and thermal insulation later may be considered. The connection design must allow accurate manufacture methods where the joints can be fabricated using tools and methods that can justify necessary economical investments for the roof element manufacturer (FR5). A conceptual design, taking all aspects into account, is not an easy task to find and is outside the scope of this paper. The strategy followed in this paper for the joint-design for the composite FRP–steel web is: a mechanical pin-type fastener with holes (half circles) in the steel connected through ‘pins’ of FRP, see a general purpose polyester matrix FRP with qualities such as: low cost, widely used and with good applicability for mechanical fastening. Also, the problem of load introduction in FRP structures must be addressed to take full advantage of the stiffness and strength of the FRPs. The principal failure modes of mechanically fastened joints are: bearing failure of the material; tension failure of the material — net-section failure; shear-out or cleavage failure of the material; and fastener shear failure. Holes in FRPs cause stress concentrations that vary with the fibre orientation relative to the load direction. The holes also give rise to edge effects based on the normal stress distribution ahead of a hole where larger holes cause greater strength reductions than smaller ones Since no useful data exists for this type of joint an investigation on the resistance behaviour of the connection is needed. For this purpose, a number of small-scale tensile tests were performed on double-lap joints, The static experiments were performed on a Dartec digital hydraulic testing system under deformation control. The loading rate for each test was 0.02 mm/s. The test specimens were fabricated using hand lay-up technique. The specimens were cured in room temperature for the first 24 h and thereafter in 80°C for an additional 24 h. The polymer thermoset matrix was a Norpol 68–70 isophthalic polyester resin, (density 1100 kg/m The steel was lubricated prior to fasten the polymer composite with the purpose to prevent friction forces to carry some of the shear load. The reasons for this are twofold: If some load is transferred by frictional forces at the interface between the FRP and steel the load is effectively distributed over a larger area resulting in a higher bearing strength. But, since the friction coefficient is not known, the exact force transferred by the FRP pin cannot be accurately determined. No friction yields a conservative prediction. The failure, even though it can be characterised as relatively ductile, is still more or less brittle (compared to a similar failure for a steel joint). The design values that are extracted from the tests, se below, show considerable scatter. It is absolutely necessary when promoting a new type of structural design using new type of connections and materials that the design values are on the safe side. The main disadvantages of using a visual method are the general limited accuracy with visual characterisation and that the development of the fractured contact zone and fracture at maximum load cannot be observed since only the final, fully fractured, failure zone is visible. Current design practise Looking closely at The test results are presented in The results evidences scatter with an average apparent bearing strength The relative fracture deformation also shows scatter. The most significant trend is that the visually estimated deformation, The experimental load distribution coefficient, Eight full-scale beam tests were carried out with steel sheet flanges and the composite FRP–steel web. The beams were designed with steel flanges, simulating the upper and lower face of a complete roof element. To get inputs for the solution of FR1 — resistance to design loads — the aim with this experimental investigation was to test for shear capacity. For the chosen web design the load-bearing capacity is limited by shear buckling of the web and/or failure in connection between the FRP and steel. Due to the slender cross-sections tested, FRPs can be tailored for the desired application in terms of structural performance. This is of course one of he absolute advantages using FRPs for structural purposes. However, this means that no material data is generally available for the sought structural system including loading effects. It is therefore advisable, and often necessary, to test for material properties when using FRPs in design. The The test set-up, beam length (span), Important to note is the differences concerning the stiffening of the web between the beams in test series 1–2 and 3. The beams in test series 1 and 2 have a plane web with stiffeners at the supports and at the loading point. This was not intended as the final design solution of the web but used to be able to study shear resistance solely. Without this temporary procedure buckling of the web at the supports would have been the failure mode for these beams. In tests 1:1 and 1:2 this was in fact the failure mode due to insufficient fastening of the stiffeners. In test series 3 the whole web was profiled with no additional stiffening at the supports or at the loading point. The developed FRP–steel connection was used in series 2 and 3. In series 1 the FRP had a C-shaped cross-section with the steel flanges glued to the plastic flange. Load vs out-of-plane deformation (buckling deformation) curves for two selected experiments, Nos 1:2, 2:3, 3:5 and 3:8, are shown in The shear force acting on the webs of a simply supported box beam roof element subjected to an evenly distributed load Shear capacity with respect to shear buckling of the web is calculated according to Ref. For the case of the profiled web in shear the critical stress can be determined by considering an orthotropic plate. An expression for the critical buckling stress for a simply supported corrugated diaphragm was derived in Refs. The plate bending stiffness is calculated as: Shear capacity with respect to shear buckling of the web is calculated from The ratios in In test series 3, where connection failure took place, the calculated critical load, The experimental results are given in The reason not to use steel as web material is of course the thermal bridge this would create. For an optimal design of the web connecting the outer and inner face of the element one has to consider both load-carrying capacity and heat conductivity. In this paper three different alternative web configurations are compared: FRP–steel; expanded metal; and slotted steel beams. To deal with thermal bridge calculations an equivalent heat conductivity is calculated for use in available thermal transmittance, Results from slotted steel, both concerning heat conductivity and load-carrying capacity is taken from the literature. For FRP–steel and expanded metal beams results are derived from the experiments and FEM calculations. In the comparison the shear capacity is set to ca 20 kN for a web height of 150 mm, the design of the web is done accordingly. The As mentioned, the use of steel beams with strips of expanded metal in the web is an alternative to break the thermal bridging. Expanded metal can be produced from a punched coil or using a new roll-forming system that expanded the material in one continuous process To be able to predict the load resistance and thermal performance and the heat conductivity coefficient, The By slitting the web of a steel beam, the thermal bridge is significantly reduced, A profiled FRP web with the developed connection (half circles in the steel connected through ‘pins’ of FRP according to The thermal transmittance, The thermal properties of the three different alternatives are all comparable but only two are acceptable. Only expanded steel and FRP–steel beams have equal (100%) and better (88%) load-carrying and thermal performance than wood. These solutions will probably also provide more attractive solutions to FR3 — thermal and water vapour movement. The FRP–steel beam has advantages in that the steel is completely broken by the FRP material. What is obvious from these calculations is that the slotted steel beams, available on the market today, are not optimised for shear capacity. This is the explanation for the relatively high Problems with, and even collapses due to, moisture induced stressed and lack of durability related to the wood components in the present roof-elements for long span makes it desirable to find other materials or other structural solutions. A cost-effective approach for joining mixed materials (web to flange) considering combined effects of load-carrying capacity and thermal insulation is sought in this study. The focus in on capacity while only a preliminary FE-study is performed concerning possible solutions for thermal insulation. When considering thermal insulation, a steel web is naturally not recommended because the thermal bridge this would create. However slotted steel or expanded metal beams are interesting alternatives if a sufficient resistance to design loads can be achieved. As an alternative to a steel web, a composite web in combination with FRP is examined in this paper. The developed joint design is a mechanical pin-type fastener with holes (half circles) in the steel connected through ‘pins’ of FRP using a general purpose polyester matrix (an isophthalic polyester matrix with a three layer glass fibre WR together with randomly oriented CSM). One of the strongest advantages using FRPs is the possibility to tailor the material for almost any type of loading (mechanical, chemical, moisture etc.). This is, however, also one of the disadvantages since useful data often do not exists for the desired geometry, loading etc. Therefore, experimental characterisation frequently needs to be performed. This was also the case in this study. For this purpose, a number of small-scale tensile tests were to define elastic properties and an apparent bearing strength. To determine the shear capacity and to derive simple capacity models eight full-scale beam tests were carried out. For the chosen web design the load-bearing capacity is limited by shear buckling of the web and/or failure in connection between the FRP and steel. In the first test series (plane webs with stiffeners at the supports) the failure mode was shear buckling or failure connected to extensive deformation due to shear buckling. To increase the capacity the following two series were strengthen against buckling by profiling of the webs. It is apparent from these tests (as was expected) that if the web is not profiled the failure mode is shear buckling or failure connected to extensive deformation due to shear buckling and material degradation (crippling). With profiled webs connection failures took place and for the third series it occurred for all beams. Where connection failure took place, the calculated critical load, The load-carrying and thermal insulation performance of FRP–steel, expanded metal and slotted steel beams are compared by FE analysis. For FRP–steel and expanded metal beams result are derived from the experiments and FEM calculations. Results from slotted steel, both concerning heat conductivity and load-carrying capacity is taken from the literature. In the comparison the shear capacity is set to ca 20 kN for a web height of 150 mm, the design of the web is done accordingly. Only expanded steel and FRP–steel beams have equal (100%) and better (88%) load-carrying and thermal performance than wood. What is obvious from these calculations is that the slotted steel beams are not optimised for shear capacity and thus not a recommended alternative as a web/beam in a long span roof-element. The conclusion from this study is that a composite web (being a continued bent part of the roof-element face) in combination with FRP is a serious alternative to a steel web to achieve an optimised roof-element performance (FR1–FR5). It is recognised that due to the variability in the results, too few specimens examined only for shear-capacity, one span (load level) length and no time and constant effects this investigation is not sufficient. Further work is needed to: determine the effects of combined moisture and mechanical loading; determine possible creep effects; and tailor the FRP material to harmonise better with the mechanical connection design. The aim is to seek solutions that comply with, primarily, FR5 — total life costs. The authors acknowledge the support given to the research by the Swedish Council for Building Research (BFR) and by Plannja AB. The experiments reported in this paper were conducted in the test laboratory for engineering structures at Luleå University of Technology. The authors acknowledge the skilful help from the test laboratory staff and also the help concerning thermal insulation given by Professor Gudni Johanesson at the Royal Institute of Technology.