A systematic investigation of the influence of particle coverage on the dynamics of rising bubbles was carried out using high-speed photography and image analysis techniques to study bubble behavior in terms of changes in velocity and aspect ratio. The buoyancy force and drag force exerted on the bubbles and the effect of particles were calculated to further understand their behavior. Results show that particles attached on the bubbles strongly dampen the oscillations observed in bubble aspect ratio and decrease its velocity and acceleration. The particles also render the bubbles more spherical and slow their velocity. It was found that the overall velocity of a bubble is directly correlated to its aspect ratio and inversely correlated to its particle coverage, while the acceleration and the aspect ratio and its change are inversely correlated. Interestingly, the trend observed in the oscillation and the oscillation period of particle-laden bubbles is similar for different levels of particle coating. A drag modification factor 
                        
                           
                              η
                              p
                           
                        
                     , which quantifies the drag influence of particles on bubble velocity, was identified from force analysis. A modified drag coefficient for uncoated and particle-laden bubbles was introduced, which allows, for the first time, to predict the behavior of rising bubbles in gas-liquid-particle systems.The rise of air bubbles is one of the most common gas-liquid flow phenomena The behavior of rising bubbles, which includes their velocity and aspect ratio (i.e. shape), is determined by several acting forces. A bubble rises mainly because of the buoyancy force, which acts against the drag force. The density and viscosity of the gas in a bubble also influence the bubble behavior, but these effects are not as significant as the drag force and buoyancy force exerted on the rising bubbles For gas-liquid-solid systems, the presence of particles will also influence the behavior of a rising bubble, particularly if the particles are attached to the bubble’s surface. Due to the opaque and highly dynamic nature of the three-phase slurries, it is impossible to directly visualize the behavior of a particle-laden bubble. However, capillaries can be used to generate bubbles of controlled bubble size in a transparent experimental rig, which allows a clear visualization of their behavior. This technique has been used to generate bubbles that remain attached to the capillaries for the study of induction time Other influential factors for the behavior of rising bubbles include chemical adsorption The aim of this research is to use capillaries to generate bubbles of controlled size to explore the effect of attached particles on the behavior of rising bubbles. In addition, the forces exerted on these bubbles are calculated and the relationship between the velocity of a particle-laden bubble and its aspect ratio is analyzed. A modified drag coefficient model is obtained that fits the experiment data for particle-laden bubbles. The findings provide valuable insight into the behavior of particle-laden bubbles, which is essential to inform the modelling of industrially relevant processes where these bubble-particle aggregates play a key role. Spherical soda lime glass beads (Sigmund Lindner GmbH) were used, with a characteristic size A schematic of the setup is shown in Two grams of glass beads particles were added into the transparent chamber, which was filled with 250 mL deionized water (resistivity larger than 15 MΩ cm). TTAB, at a concentration of 1 × 10 For the uncoated bubble, the air injection rate was kept at 0.72 mL h It is important to point out that only one bubble was generated for each experiment and its behavior was recorded and analyzed over a distance of 30 mm from the tip of the capillary. Footage of the rising bubble for each experiment was processed using ImageJ to obtain the position and dimensions of the bubbles. The tip of the needle was also photographed and used as a reference length to calculate the magnification of the optical system. The images of bubbles were analyzed for dimensional measurements first. The exact fractions of bubble surface covered by particles in each experiment were calculated in this work using the pendant drop method. First of all, the bubble was assumed symmetrical, and the images were rotated for the analysis. A series of the edge points on the right half of the rotated bubble were then detected. After that, the pendant drop equation model The above equation was converted to a set of three first-order differential equations, formed by the spatial positions The numerical fit of the bubble shape can yield the surface tension and the radii of the bubbles. By integrating this model, the surface coverage of particles was calculated.   The aspect ratio (AR), a parameter that reflects the dynamic behavior of rising bubbles, was calculated as the ratio between the diameters It has been reported that with an increase in the concentration of frother, bubbles tend to be more spherical and bubble rise velocity decreases. Oscillations in aspect ratio and velocity for uncoated rising bubbles have been found to be inversely related Here, only the vertical direction of the bubble motion was considered. The rise velocity ( The bubble releasing point was 30 mm below the air and liquid interface. The zero time point was taken to be the point one frame prior to the release of a bubble.  The current set up does not permit to track the bubble motion beyond 180 ms. According to the literature To explore the relationship between the parameters discussed above, the rising velocity (both for the uncoated bubble and the coated bubble) is plotted against its corresponding aspect ratio, as shown in Having high velocities for the high aspect ratios and vice versa is counterintuitive as high aspect ratios are associated to high drag configurations. The reason for this apparent contradiction is because this is a dynamic situation in which bubbles are oscillating in terms of aspect ratio. At the maximum aspect ratio, the bubble will be experiencing a deceleration and will return to a round shape and lower drag, with this oscillation then repeating itself. These will be explained in more detail later. The data for acceleration of the uncoated bubble and the coated bubble are shown in Further to the previous discussion. The acceleration and aspect ratio of the uncoated bubble and coated bubble are plotted and shown in For more in-depth analysis, the acceleration and aspect ratio change of the uncoated bubble are also compared and shown in To explore the effect of particle surface coverage on bubble behavior, bubbles with seven different levels of particle coating were produced. For values of surface coverage below 50%, the oscillation trend, shown in  As described in the previous section, the rise of a bubble is accompanied by a fluctuation of both velocity and aspect ratio. In order to better understand the influence of the particles on the bubble shape change, the oscillation periods The capillary force causes the small oscillation in aspect ratio while the overall aspect ratio change is determined by the hydrodynamic force. The oscillation of bubble aspect ratio follows a similar trend under the action of capillary forces; since capillary forces are related to surface tension, it can be concluded that the surface tension does not change significantly when bubbles are covered by particles. The hydrodynamic forces thus play a major role in the phenomena observed and need to be analyzed in further detail. For an ideal bubble, to simplify the calculation, it is assumed that the bubble is rigid and only influenced by the buoyancy and drag forces after it is released from the capillary. The drag force includes both viscous and pressure drag on the body in the direction of the slip velocity The added mass coefficient ( Using Eqs. Therefore the cross section area can be defined as: The Schiller–Naumann drag coefficient was developed for rigid solid spherical particles and also it was extended to various shape of particles, drops and bubbles A drag modification parameter, The existence of adsorbed reagents on the bubble surface can exert a significant influence on the surface forces and the drag coefficient, which finally affect the bubble floating velocity For the calculation of the coated bubble, the overall force that the particles exert on the bubble, Substituting Further, substituting From the data in The drag coefficient calculated from the experimental data ( The behavior of bubbles after being released from a capillary tip was investigated as a function of their particle surface coverage. The pendant drop model was used and fitted to the edge points of the bubbles to calculate their particle surface coverage. Results show that the velocity and aspect ratio of bubbles decrease as the surface coverage of particles increases. The particles exert a strong damping effect on the amplitude of the oscillation observed in bubble velocity, acceleration and aspect ratio. In general, the rising bubble velocity is directly correlated to its aspect ratio, regardless of whether the bubble is coated or not. The acceleration and the aspect ratio and its change are found to be inversely correlated: each peak value of acceleration corresponds to a local minimum value of the aspect ratio (change), and vice versa. The oscillation of bubbles coated with different levels of particles followed a similar trend, indicating the surface tension was not significantly affected by a bubble being coated or not. A drag modification factor This work contributes to a further understanding of the behavior of particle-laden bubbles, in particular with regards to the increase in the modified drag coefficient experience by the bubble-particle aggregate with an increase in surface coverage of particles. Understanding and being able to predict the bubble hydrodynamics in these complex three-phase systems is essential to imporve the performance of industrial processes that rely on particle-ladden bubbles. The authors would like to thank IOM3 (Institute of Materials, Minerals & Mining) for their financial support for the purchase of some of the equipment used in this research. Peipei Wang would also like to thank the President’s PhD Scholarship from Supplementary data to this article can be found online at The following are the Supplementary data to this article: