A clinically appropriate fracture model and testing regimen were used to test the null hypothesis that a palmarly applied locking plate was inferior to a dorsally applied Pi plate in the stabilisation of dorsally comminuted intraarticular wrist fractures. Sixteen standardised fractures of Synbone models of the radius were stabilised using either a palmar locking compression T plate (the experimental group) (n=8) or a dorsally applied Pi plate (the control group) (n=8). The constructs were tested on an Instron materials testing machine. Deformation was monitored during 500 loading cycles to 200N. The mean permanent deformation and stiffness favoured the palmar locking compression T plate over the dorsal Pi plate (P=0.036). However, the absolute difference was only 0.5mm. Such a small difference is unlikely to be clinically detectable and, therefore, we conclude that there is no clinically significant difference between the two types of fixation.The choice of fixation devices for the treatment of unstable intraarticular distal radial fractures is controversial. Palmar instability, as in the palmar Barton type fracture, is satisfactorily addressed by palmar buttress plating. However, the majority of these fractures have dorsal comminution. The options of treatment include external fixators ( Locking plates provide axial stability of the fracture and angular stability of each fragment by locking the screw heads into the plate to set the screws at a fixed angle – providing axial stability of the fracture and angular stability of each fragment ( The aims of this biomechanical study were to devise a clinically appropriate fracture model and testing regimen for dorsally comminuted, intraarticular, wrist fractures and to use this model to test the null hypothesis that, after testing, the permanent deformation of the fracture model stabilised using a palmarly applied locking plate is inferior to a dorsally applied Pi plate. A standardised Colles’ fracture pattern in Synbone anatomical models of the radius was used in this study. This material has been used for other, similar biomechanical studies of locking plates on bone ( An extra-articular transverse fracture 20 Dorsal comminution (a wedge was removed which was 10 Overdrilling the screw fixation holes from the dorsal cortex 10 A sagittal split between the scaphoid and lunate fossae This fracture pattern was created in 16 Synbone models by sawing and drilling. In the experimental group, eight fracture models were stabilised using palmarly applied AO locking compression plates, released for clinical use in March 2000 ( The control group consisted of eight fracture models, stabilised with dorsally applied AO Pi plates (Synthes, Welwyn Garden City, Herts,UK). The Pi plate screw configurations were: three diaphyseal screws (2.7 The plated fracture models were mounted by embedding their proximal 80 The metal tube containing the distal radius was mounted vertically on the baseplate of an Instron 5565 materials testing machine with Merlin control and data logging software (Instron Ltd, High Wycombe, Bucks, UK). A cement spacer that represented the carpus was mounted below the loadcell of the Instron on the moving crosshead. Custom made bone cement spacers were moulded onto the distal surface of the radius and used to distribute the force applied to the articular surface evenly during axial compression ( A loading regimen was chosen to represent the physiological forces that could be reasonably applied across the wrist joint during early mobilisation before union. A compressive force of 200 The results were expressed in terms of the permanent deformation between the end of the first loading cycle and the end of the 500th loading cycle. The end of the first loading cycle was chosen as the reference point to eliminate the variability between model constructs by removing the very small amount of ‘slack’ from the system. This avoids calculation of the mean deformation after 500 cycles as predominantly on the first cycle. The two tailed All of the constructs survived 500 cycles of a 200 The shape and gradient of each load versus displacement cycle revealed similar stiffness for each cycle. There was a gradual shift of the curves to the right which represented the shortening of the fracture-plate construct. The total shortening after the initial settling-in cycle was small – approximately 0.5 The displacement in mm after 500 cycles of a 200 This biomechanical study showed that both a palmarly applied locking compression plate and a dorsally applied Pi plate provided fixation of a synthetic bone model of an intraarticular, dorsally comminuted fracture of the distal radius. All constructs were stable enough to withstand 500 loading cycles to 200 It is perhaps surprising, that a palmar plate can be more stable than a dorsal plate for a dorsally unstable fracture. Our study has shown that the mechanical disadvantage of fixation from the ‘incorrect’ side of a fracture can be overcome by using a plate that utilises screw heads that lock into the plate. One of the mechanical advantages of locking plates which is relevant to distal radial fractures (where the purchase of screws is often poor) is the resistance to angulation of the screws in the distal fragments, which is independent of the fixation of the screws to the bone. There is comparative biomechanical data that favours either palmar or dorsal fixation of extra articular wrist fractures ( The use of palmar fixation for dorsally comminuted distal radial fractures has been explored using other, non-locking devices. The obvious and major limitation of our study is the use of synthetic, rather than cadaveric, bone. Experimental models are designed to eliminate clinical confounders, which must be considered when translating all research into clinical practice. Synthetic bone was chosen for its lack of variation. The synthetic bone used in this study, Synbone, has: (1) a similar screw retention strength to human bone ( There are several other aspects of our methods that require clarification. At present, it is difficult to be certain as to which intraarticular distal radial fracture model is most correct, particularly given the clinical variability of the dorsal comminution. In our study, we simulated comminution of the dorsal cortex by overdrilling of the screws holes in the dorsal cortex so that the screws threads failed to achieve fixation in that part of the synthetic bone. The number of screws used for fixation was designed to simulate the secure fixation of comminuted distal fragments. Two well fixed screws, one in each fragment, is probably a realistic simulation of the clinical scenario. In our experience, additional screws, or pins, are often used in hope, rather than certainty, of increasing construct stability. Further work is necessary to determine how much stability is required and, specifically, whether the use of all of the screws holes actually reduces healing. We thank the AO Synthes company for donating the plates, screws and synthetic bones used in this study and the Arthritis Research Campaign for donating the Instron machine.