The ideal timing for treatment of mandible fractures has not been well established. The objective of this study was to analyse the effects of treatment timing in the surgical management of mandible fractures. A prospective evaluation of 215 continuous patients with a total of 359 mandible fractures was undertaken. Nine outcome variables were analysed in relation to treatment delay by logistic regression modelling: wound dehiscence, hardware exposure, local postoperative infection, malocclusion, trismus, nerve damage, fracture non-union, return to theatre, and radiographic outcome. Nineteen additional variables were included in the analysis to adjust for potential confounding. Delay was measured in days and ranged from 0 to 41days, with a mean delay of 4.6days. The incidence of wound dehiscence, hardware exposure, local postoperative infection, trismus, nerve damage, fracture non-union and return to theatre was 6%, 4%, 11%, 8.5%, 47%, 2% and 8%, respectively. Objective malocclusion and poor radiographic outcomes were evident in 13% and 4.5% of cases, respectively.
                  No statistically significant association was found between treatment delay and treatment outcomes.
                  The findings of this study suggest it may be safe to delay the definitive treatment of mandible fractures. Treatment delay may allow for improved resource distribution and prioritization of more time-dependent interventions.The ideal timing for the treatment of mandible fractures has not been well established This study used a prospective design and involved the collection of predetermined variables as identified from a systematic review of the literature in 2013 This study was undertaken in the oral and maxillofacial unit of the study hospital in Brisbane, Australia. Patients who received active treatment for mandible fractures during the period 27 January 2014 to 26 July 2015 were included in the study. The oral and maxillofacial unit of the study hospital provides a tertiary referral service for facial trauma for a large metropolitan and regional area. Patients with mandible fractures commonly present via the study hospital’s emergency department or through an inter-hospital transfer from a regional centre without a suitable surgical service. Occasionally, patients are referred from a general medical or dental practitioner. Except for patients with non-displaced fractures for whom conservative management is deemed appropriate, definitive assessment and management of mandible fractures at the study unit is generally undertaken in an inpatient setting in a semi-urgent manner. Reasons for delay are multifactorial, but commonly include geographic isolation and inter-hospital transfer, and drug and alcohol intoxication. To minimize treatment delay, patients requiring surgical management are often added to the hospital theatre emergency board. When available, an elective list is sought to minimize uncertainty and unnecessarily long periods of fasting for the patient. Patients usually receive surgical treatment within 4 Unless patient limitations or unforeseen complications arise, postoperative review of all routine maxillofacial trauma surgeries is undertaken at approximately 1 and 6 All patients who required active treatment for a fracture or fractures of the mandible, and who were treated in the oral and maxillofacial unit at the study hospital between 27 January 2014 and 26 July 2015, were included in the study. The following outcome variables were collected for each patient: local postoperative infection, wound dehiscence, malocclusion, fracture non-union, hardware exposure, nerve damage, trismus, return to theatre, and radiographic outcome. Factors considered potential confounders were collected as follows: date of injury, date of operation, delay (days), age, gender, dental status, American Society of Anesthesiologists (ASA) physical status classification, alcohol use, cigarette use, illicit drug use, prior mandible fracture, number of mandible fractures, fracture location, tooth in line of fracture, fracture comminution, operation type, fracture aetiology, local preoperative infection, associated maxillofacial injury, associated other injury, operator experience level, and length of surgery. Data was collected and recorded on a preplanned data collection sheet. Information was obtained from patients at admission and at routine postoperative appointments, from medical records, from pre- and postoperative radiographs, and from the hospital’s Operating Room Management Information System (ORMIS).  The first author was not a member of the oral and maxillofacial unit at the study hospital and as such had no conflict of interest in reporting the unit’s surgical results. The second author, a biostatistician from the School of Population Health at the University of Queensland, who had no professional connection with the oral and maxillofacial unit or the first or third author, conducted the statistical analysis independently. The third author, who conducted the radiographic outcome review, was the primary operator for only two of the 215 patients. For the radiographic review, only the hospital identification number of each participant was made available to minimize bias. The number of cases in the area during the study period determined the sample size. A total of 215 consecutive patients with 359 mandible fractures were included. Delay was measured in days from date of injury to date of operation, as this was the smallest and most practical increment of time that could be reliably measured from injury to surgery. It was determined that analysing delay as a continuous variable, rather than delineating arbitrary groups of delay, would elicit the most meaningful information. Age, cigarette use, fracture number, and length of surgery (minutes) were all measured as continuous variables. Dental status was determined by preoperative radiographic analysis as good, moderate, or poor. ASA was used as a surrogate for overall health status. It was chosen as it is a well-recognized and simple scoring system. Furthermore, it was a feasible and reliable variable to collect. Alcohol use was determined by direct questioning of patients at admission to hospital and was defined as non-drinker, low-regular drinker, high-regular drinker, and binge drinker. Measure of Illicit drug use, prior mandible fracture, tooth in line of fracture, fracture comminution, local preoperative infection, associated maxillofacial injury, and associated other injury was performed in a yes or no fashion. Operation type was divided into six groups: oral ORIF, external ORIF, IMF, external ORIF Fracture aetiology was defined as assault or non-assault for the purposes of statistical analysis. Fracture location was designated based on commonly recognized anatomic divisions of the mandible: condyle, ramus, angle, body, parasymphysis, and symphysis. Operator experience level was measured as a continuous variable. Levels one to four correlated to the number of years of formal oral and maxillofacial surgery training of the primary operator as per the local training structure. When a fellow or consultant surgeon was the primary operator, a fifth level was designated. Postoperative infection, dehiscence, non-union, hardware exposure, nerve damage, trismus and return to theatre were all defined as yes or no. Malocclusion and radiographic outcome were measured as ordinal variables. Postoperative infection was defined as any clinical sign of infection such as erythema or purulence at the site of surgery during the follow-up period. Dehiscence was defined as any clinical breakdown of any related surgical incision at any time during the follow-up period. Fracture non-union was defined radiographically as any permanent failure of healing of related fracture sites at any time during the follow-up period. Hardware exposure was defined as any exposure of metal work to the oral cavity or externally through skin at any time during the follow up period. Nerve damage was defined as any objectively altered sensation in the distribution of the mental nerve at the six-week review appointment, irrespective of preoperative status. Return to theatre was defined as any return to theatre at any time for the correction of complications directly related to a mandible fracture. Trismus was defined as any limitation of mouth opening as a result of mandible fracture or treatment at the 6-week review appointment. Malocclusion was defined as any alteration of occlusion as a result of mandible fracture or treatment at the 6-week review appointment. Three groups were defined: no, subjective, and objective. Subjective malocclusion was defined as a sensation of abnormal bite by the patient that could not be correlated clinically by the reviewer. Objective malocclusion was defined as a clinically observable alteration of bite by the reviewer, such as a premature contact or open bite. Radiographic outcome was assessed by the third author. Outcomes were divided into three groups: poor, moderate, and good. Outcomes were determined by the third author’s personal judgment, such that the fracture segments appeared in the most appropriate position with respect to the remainder of the mandible and the fracture lines. The effect of treatment timing on outcomes involving mandible fractures was examined, using binary logistic regression for dichotomous outcomes and ordinal logistic regression for ordinal outcomes. Modelling was conducted in three stages. First, univariable regression was used to test the association between each mandible fracture outcome and selected independent variables, including the primary independent variable, delay. Second, all independent variables found to be significant at the 0.10 level were included in a multivariable model. Treatment timing, age and gender were forced into the multivariable models; the latter two due to potential confounding. Last, all models were subjected to model diagnostics. The Pregibon link test was used to assess model specification For all outcomes except for radiographic outcome, 18 independent variables were selected in addition to delay to test for associations at the first stage; age, gender, fracture aetiology, dental status, ASA, alcohol use, cigarette use, illicit drug use, prior mandible fracture, number of fractures, fracture comminution, tooth in line of fracture, local preoperative infection, associated maxillofacial injury, significant other injury, operation type, length of surgery, and operator experience. For radiographic outcome, three independent variables were selected in addition to delay to test for associations at the first stage; fracture location, fracture comminution, and tooth in line of fracture. Results are presented as odds ratios and accompanying 95% confidence intervals. Statistical analyses were completed only with patients who provided complete data on all variables required for an analysis. All statistical tests were two-tailed. Statistical analysis was performed using Stata version 15.0 (StataCorp, College Station, TX, USA). Despite having a case series of 215 continuous patients with a total of 359 mandible fractures, the number of statistically analysed observations was significantly less for each outcome variable due to incomplete follow up of 30% of study participants. Furthermore, as a complete case analysis statistical approach was utilized, further reducing the data available. The number of observations available for each outcome variable in the multivariable modelling was as follows: wound dehiscence, 166 (77%); hardware exposure, 157 (73%); local postoperative infection, 164 (76%); malocclusion, 146 (68%); trismus, 154 (72%); nerve damage, 147 (68%); fracture non-union, 162 (66%); return to theatre, 156 (73%); and radiographic outcome, 245 (68%). The oral and maxillofacial unit at the study hospital provides a tertiary referral service for facial trauma for a large metropolitan and regional area. The aetiology of mandible fractures in the studied demographic was assault in 62% of cases. Of the study participants, 49% were binge drinkers and 14% were high-regular drinkers. The mean age of participants was 31   Evidence of model misspecification and lack of model fit were not detected in the modelling. Treatment delay was found not to significantly alter the incidence of infection, dehiscence, non-union, hardware exposure, nerve damage, return to theatre, trismus, malocclusion, or radiographic outcome, such that the hypothesis was accepted in relation to all outcome variables. Several interesting supplementary findings were observed. Patients whose injuries were caused by assault were more likely to develop postoperative infection, nerve damage, malocclusion, and were seven-fold more likely to require a return to theatre than those whose injuries were not caused by assault. Longer surgeries were more likely to result in dehiscence, nerve damage, and malocclusion. Patients with an ASA of 3 or more were 30.6-fold more likely to require a return to theatre than those whose ASA was 1. Patients with three fractures were 13.8-fold more likely to develop postoperative trismus that those with a single fracture. Patients with comminuted fractures were 11.8-fold more likely to have a poor radiographic outcome than those without comminuted fractures, despite fracture comminution not being a significant contributor to other measured outcomes. The findings of this study support those of 15 relatable studies identified in the literature that found no significant relationship between treatment delay and treatment outcomes such as infection, malunion, non-union, dehiscence, malocclusion, nerve injury, return to theatre This findings of this study refute those of the six relatable studies identified in the literature that found a significant relationship between treatment delay and treatment outcomes such as increased rate of technical complications, infection, malocclusion, malunion, non-union, and trismus The non-trial non-blinded study type, non-independent treatment evaluation, and number of variables have all been identified as potential limitations of scope or validity. In relation to at least some of the outcome variables, the wide confidence intervals would suggest that the study was underpowered. Further, the degree of assessment of certain variables was limited for practical reasons. The authors suggest that with greater resources, variables such as pre-hospital care, patient compliance, patient demographics, ethnicity, patient comfort, nutritional status, and general medical comorbidities could be further explored or more clearly defined. Likewise, there is scope for the detailed assessment of the effects of alcohol and many individual drugs, both prescription and non-prescription, on the outcomes of mandible fracture recovery. Nerve damage would be better defined by documenting preoperative nerve deficiencies, as well as by more specifically defining postoperative deficiencies over a longer time course. Trismus should ideally be quantified for all patients in a reproducible manner, such as by measuring in millimetres the inter-incisal distance at all pre- and postoperative appointments. Despite the study limitations, the authors believe that the aim of the study has been met, such that this study evaluates the largest number of variables, in a prospective and well-controlled manner. Regarding generalizability, the outcomes measured are general in nature and are universally assessed in the management of mandible fractures. It has been demonstrated that a reasonable delay in the management of mandible fractures requiring active treatment is unlikely to result in significant adverse outcomes, and may allow for improved resource distribution and prioritization of more time-dependent interventions. These results support and clarify those of 14 studies that found no significant relationship between treatment delay and treatment outcome for mandible fractures in a systematic literature review in 2013 For the sake of patient comfort, and other unstudied consequences of treatment delay such as pain and nutritional compromise, and to minimize admission length, it would be reasonable that the definitive management of mandible fractures by undertaken in a semi-urgent manner where feasible, as is currently practised at the study hospital. None. None. Royal Brisbane and Women’s Hospital Human Research Ethics Committee approval was obtained (HREC/15/QRBW/211). The study was performed in accordance with the National Statement on Ethical Conduct in Human Research (2007). Not required.