The objectives of this study were to evaluate statistically the effects of coprocessing parameters on liquefaction yields, to determine the key process variables affecting the oil+gas, oil and asphaltene yields and total conversion. A statistical experimental design based on Second Order Central Composite Desing was planned fixing the liquefaction period at 1 h. Parameters such as temperature, initial cold pressure, tetralin/(lignite+sawdust) and sawdust/lignite ratios coded as x
                     1, x
                     2, x
                     3 and x
                     4, respectively, were used. The parameters were investigated at five levels (−2, −1, 0, 1 and 2). The effects of these factors on dependent variables, namely, oil+gas, oil and asphaltene yields and total conversion were investigated. To determine the significance of effects, the analysis of variance with 99.9% confidence limits was used. It was shown that within the experimental ranges examined, temperature and sawdust/lignite ratio were the variables of highest significance for oil+gas yields, oil yields and total conversion.Coprocessing of coal with waste materials is considered to be an alternative process with respect to liquefaction of coal alone. The production of liquids from coal is not economically competitive compared to the cost of petroleum technology, partly because of the cost of hydrogen. However, a way to reduce the cost of the liquefaction process may be the reduction of hydrogen consumption and a better usage of hydrogen supply through the utilization of different waste materials Since there are so many parameters which must be considered in coprocessing, it appears that it is important to determine the most significant variables affecting the process. These include the properties of coal, the type of solvent, liquefaction atmosphere and catalyst, the reaction period, the rate of stirring, the type of waste material used in coprocessing, etc. However, these parameters are shown to affect quite differently. Therefore, some of them can be kept constant while the effects of the others are studied. This study was undertaken to investigate the effectiveness of process variables in the coliquefaction of Soma lignite with sawdust. In this work, the experiments were planned using a statistical experimental design based on Second Order Central Composite Desing. The effect of temperature, initial cold pressure, tetralin/(lignite+sawdust) ratio and sawdust/lignite ratio were investigated. The choice of variables was made in the light of earlier reports Soma lignite was liquefied with tetralin (Merck grade) under pressurized hydrogen atmosphere. Sawdust obtained as a SEKA (Dalaman, Turkey) paper industry waste, was used as a coliquefaction agent. The lignite samples were ground to −60 mesh size and the sawdust samples were ground and sifted to a particle size between 0.1 and 0.5 mm. The samples were dried under vacuum at 105 °C for 2 h. The proximate and ultimate analysis data for lignite and sawdust samples were presented in our previous paper Liquefaction experiments were carried out in a 250-ml magnetically stirred and electrically heated stainless steel Ernst Haage 1220 Type autoclave. The temperature of autoclave was measured by a digital thermometer with a NiCr–Ni thermocouple, and it was controlled to within ±3 °C. The values of experimental conditions were fixed according to experimental design requirements. Measured amounts of lignite and sawdust were reacted in tetralin with hydrogen pressurized to the desired initial cold pressure. The mixture was heated to the reaction temperature in about 30 min and held at this temperature by mixing for 1 h. Detailed experimental details and calculations of yields have been reported previously The present work aims to be a study for the optimization of coprocessing conditions. The effects of reaction temperature ( Here, In this work, parameters were investigated in the range of the values given in The results obtained from the second-order central composite design experiments were evaluated for oil+gas yields, oil yields, asphaltene yields and total conversions. The design matrix and the experimental results are shown in The results obtained in the experiments done according to the proposed experimental design were first analysed for the model equations to fit them best. The expected form of the model was second-order. However, it was observed that other interaction effects were also important. As a result, some modifications have been done and the response surfaces obtained for oil+gas yield, oil yield, asphaltene yield and total conversion were third order-like polynomials. The equations are given above. For oil+gas yield ( It is known that when there are a lot of parameters in the experimental design, the correlation coefficient is not sufficient by itself to check the fitted models. Thus, the plots of residuals and the results of ANOVA were also used in this work ( The analysis of data obtained in this study shows that temperature had, as expected The models for It was previously reported Various studies The related model equations are useful in indicating the direction in which the variables should be changed in order to optimize the oil+gas, oil and asphaltene yields and total conversion. A combination of optimum experimental values in coded form was found for each parameter by double differentials for oil+gas yield as follows: Thus, the working conditions at optimum point for oil+gas yield were determined as follows: Temperature=323 °C Pressure=36 atm Tetralin/(lignite+sawdust)≅1.7:1, vol/wt Sawdust/lignite=0.9:1, wt/wt As a result, the optimum oil+gas yield ( The working conditions at optimum point for oil yield were found as follows: Temperature=385 °C Pressure=44 atm Tetralin/(lignite+sawdust)≅3.23:1, vol/wt Sawdust/lignite=0.96:1, wt/wt The optimum oil yield ( The optimum asphaltene yield was obtained at the conditions given below: Temperature=323 °C Pressure=34 atm Tetralin/(lignite+sawdust)≅4:1, vol/wt Sawdust/lignite=0.86:1, wt/wt The optimum asphaltene yield ( The optimum total conversion was obtained at the following conditions: Temperature=380 °C Pressure=20 atm Tetralin/(lignite+sawdust)≅4:1, vol/wt Sawdust/lignite=0.71:1, wt/wt The optimum total conversion ( In the light of the results obtained, it can be said that the third-order models based on central composite design predict the coprocessing experimental results quite satisfactorily. The central composite design helped to establish important relationships. The effectiveness of process variables in coprocessing runs was defined. The results indicated that during the coprocessing of Soma lignite with sawdust, temperature and the sawdust ratio in the lignite liquefaction medium showed to be the main controlling variables affecting total conversion and oil+gas, oil and asphaltene yields. On the other hand, pressure and tetralin ratio in the reaction mixture had not a significant effect on oil+gas yield, oil yield and total conversion in the range investigated. We appreciate the support of YÜAF (Project no. 95-B-07-01-02) for the accomplishment of this work. We are thankful to Prof. Dr. Aziz Bener from Yıldız Technical University for his contribution.