The concentrate mass flow rate of solids of a flotation column was modeled based on geometrical principles and considering complete air recovery to the concentrate and bursting of a fraction of the bubbles that reach the top of froth. For the first consideration, the results show that concentrate mass flow rate of solids experimentally measured, is smaller than that estimated with the geometrical model. For the second consideration, bursting of a 0.45 fraction of the bubbles reaching the top of froth gave improved results (average relative error obtained under these circumstances is about 20%).Knowledge of the froth zone is limited, despite its importance for assessing the quality of the concentrate, and is noticeably less than knowledge of the pulp zone (  One of the first studies that contributed to the knowledge of carrying capacity of bubbles was that reported by In addition,    In the actual flotation process not all the loaded bubbles that arrive to the top of the column are recovered in the concentrate due to the fact that many bubbles burst at the froth surface. The experimental program was carried out using a 2.54 To collect the solids drop back, an acrylic pipe section containing two ball valves was installed in the bottom part of the froth zone. The valves permitted to remove the accumulated solids without disturbing the column operation. The floating mineral used was silica sand with the particle size distribution shown in The pulp was conditioned using dodecylamine as collector (C The algorithm used to compute the mass flow rate of solid in the concentrate is based on the following assumptions: All the bubbles are spheres of homogeneous size, represented by the Sauter diameter ( The particles are spherical or rounded. In the latter case, the shape factor suggested by The contact angle between the particles and bubbles is 0° (i.e., particles are rigidly placed on the bubble surface without deforming the bubble). All the bubble surface was covered by particles (∅ According to the square arrangement of the particles on the bubble surface, the effective bubble area covered by the particles is Bubbles do not coalesce in the upper 5 Using knowledge of average bubble size close to the top of the froth and superficial air flow rate (at the top of the froth), it is possible to estimate the solids mass flow rate in the concentrate. Two cases were analyzed: a) all the bubbles captured by the video-camera (last 5 This parameter was calculated using the following relationship: Therefore, considering this reduced overflow area, the superficial air flow rate was corrected from 1.96, 1.56, and 0.83 The Sauter diameter, or The formal definition of this concept is the bubble surface area (cm Two techniques were used to determine the particle size: sieve analysis and laser diffraction analysis (Coulter LS 100Q). These data were obtained using particles from the concentrate (see After the calculation of the bubble surface area rate, the number of particles collected by the bubbles ( In this method, it is assumed that the whole particle size distribution is accommodated on the bubble surface. An example of a calculation of the mass flow rate of solids in the concentrate is described. In the estimation of the bubble surface area velocity, it was necessary to use the previous estimation of superficial air rate and bubble size. Subsequently, one gram of the particle size distribution ( The surface area occupied by one gram of particles (of a size distribution) ( Considering that it is important that the particle size need to be well characterized due to its impact on the mass flow rate of solids calculations, two methods to measure the particle size were used: laser diffraction and sieve analysis. The main difference between these two methods is that the sieve analysis records size fractions, while the laser diffraction method records continuous data. Therefore, the results from the two methods may be slightly different. With regard to the mean bubble diameter, a number of photographs were taken during each experiment, and subsequently the equivalent diameter was determined by an image analysis software (Image Pro Plus) and Eq. Table 1 in the Once the bubble diameter has been estimated, air surface rate may be calculated using Eq. For the case where bubbles bursting is not considered, The difference between the experimental and calculated mass flow rates may be due to the fact that some of the bubbles do not actually exit in the concentrate stream, because they burst when reach the top of the froth. As a consequence, some particles return to the froth and collection zones (e.g. drop-back). To analyze these phenomena, the solids drop-back was measured as a function of froth zone height, air flow rate and frother addition. Although coalescence and drop-back occur in the entire froth zone, it is assumed that these phenomena are more intense close to the interface (e.g., bubbles are less loaded) and therefore, the algorithm proposed here, estimates the mass flow rate of solids of the concentrate by considering that all the bubbles captured in the video recording are fully loaded with solids. An alternative explanation for the difference between the experimental and estimated mass flow rates of concentrate is that the superficial bubble surface velocity was calculated using the equivalent bubble diameter ( Considering that not all the loaded bubbles reaching the top of the column are recovered in the concentrate and that some of them actually burst, the concentrate mass flow rate of solids was estimated taking into consideration only the unburst bubble fraction ( From the above, this knowledge was used to improve the predictions of the model as follows: the unburst factor was estimated considering that those tests reporting the smaller mass flowrate of solids measured (around 25 Comparison of the experimental and calculated mass flow rate of solids in the concentrate obtained with the algorithm presented here revealed a linear correlation. Nevertheless, when bubble bursting was not taken into consideration, the calculated values were larger than the experimental values. However, when an unburst bubble fraction is considered, the predictions of the model are in better agreement with the experimentally measured mass flow rate of solids in the concentrate. The authors are grateful to CONACYT (MEXICO) for the financing received and to M.Sc. J.A. Gonzalez for the technical support in the laboratory. See