The effect of wood ash, sawdust, ground cocoa husk, spent grain and rice bran upon root development, ash content, pod yield and nutrient status and soil fertility for okra (Abelmoschus esculentum L NHAe 47 variety) was studied. The five organic fertilizer treatments were compared to chemical fertilizer (400kg/ha/crop NPK 15-15-15) and unfertilized controls in four field experiments replicated four times in a randomized complete block design. The results showed that the application of 6tha−1 of plant residues increased (P
                     <0.05) the soil N, P, K, Ca, Mg, pH, and SOM; pod N, P, K, Ca, Mg and ash; root length; and pod yield of okra in all four experiments relative to the control treatment. For instance, spent grain treatment increased the okra pod yield by 99%, 33%, 50%, 49%, 65% and 67% compared to control, NPK, wood ash, cocoa husk, rice bran and sawdust treatments respectively. In the stepwise regression, out of the total R
                     2 value of 0.83 for the soil nutrients to the pod yield of okra; soil N accounted for 50% of the soil fertility improvement and yield of okra. Spent grain, wood ash and cocoa husk were the most effective in improving okra pod weight, pod nutrients, ash content, root length and soil fertility whereas the rice bran and sawdust were the least effective. This was because the spent grain, wood ash and cocoa husk had lower C/N ratio and higher nutrient composition than rice bran and sawdust, thus, the former enhanced an increase in pod nutrients, composition for better human dietary intake, increased the root length, pod weight of okra and improved soil fertility and plant nutrition crop. The significance of the increases in okra mineral nutrition concentration by plant residues is that consumers will consume more of these minerals in their meals and monetarily spend less for purchasing vitamins and mineral supplement drugs to meet health requirements. In addition, the increase in plant nutrition and soil fertility would help to reduce the high cost of buying synthetic inorganic fertilizers and maintain the long term productivity of soils for sustainable cultivation of okra.Okra ( Despite the nutritional value of okra, its optimum yields (2–3 Despite the recognition of plant residues and agro wastes and soil conditioners, limited efforts have been made to investigate the definitive contributions of specific wastes to soil management in tropical agriculture. The use of plant materials such as wood ash, cocoa husk, rice bran, spent grain and sawdust for improving soil fertility, root growth, pod nutrients and pod yield of okra has not been studied extensively. Cocoa husk is an optimal source of K for maize in Ghana ( This work was carried out on four crops in Akure, South West Nigeria investigated the effect of wood ash, spent grain, ground cocoa husk, rice bran and sawdust on soil fertility, pod chemical composition and yield of okra. Cocoa pod husk and wood ash were obtained from the cocoa plantations and cassava processing unit of the Federal College of Agriculture, Akure, Nigeria respectively. Rice bran was collected from the College rice mill and spent grain (sorghum based brewery waste) was collected from the International Breweries Limited, Ilesa, Osun State, Nigeria. The sawdust was obtained from the saw mill industries at Akure. The spent grain was obtained from sorghum malted grains, rice bran was from 0S-6 variety and sawdust from waste of obeche log tree cut into pieces. The organic materials were processed to allow decomposition and rapid release of nutrients to crops. The dried cocoa pod husk was ground with a hammer mill. The rice bran, spent grain and sawdust were chopped into pieces, wetted and partly composted for six weeks at 70 The processed forms of the five organic materials were analysed for the determination of nutrients using a wet digestion method using 25–5–5 Sixty soil core samples were randomly taken from the entire field at 0–15 The soil pH was determined in a 1:1 soil/water suspension and 2:1 CaCl The exchangeable bases (K, Ca, Mg and Na) were extracted with 1 The physical properties of the soils on the site were determined before the field experiment. The soil bulk density (mg The experiments were carried out at Akure in the rain forest zone of Nigeria (elevation 10 Five organic fertilizer treatments were applied to each crop of okra, in addition to 400 The field plots were 16 Four seeds of early maturing okra variety (NHAe-47-4) were planted per hole at 2 Out of 88 plants per plot, 26 plants were selected randomly for pod nutrients and yield determination. Harvest of mature pods started at 35 days after planting and continued every four days until senescence. The cropping season for each crop of okra was four months. The harvest of pods from the remaining 62 plants per plot was combined with the data from sequentially harvested plants and, put into labelled envelopes and oven dried at 70 The dried okra pods were ashed for 6 At the end of each field experiment on okra, 15 soil cores were collected from the 0–15 The data for soil, pod nutrients, root and pod yield for the four crops of okra in 1998 and 1999 were subjected to Analysis of Variance (ANOVA). Variables for which significant treatment effects were found and were characterized further using Duncan Multiple Range Test (DMRT) ( The chemical composition of the organic materials used for the experiments are presented in The nutrient content of each fertilizer plus the quantity of residue applied per crop and year is presented in The physical and chemical properties of the soils before treatment are presented in The plant residues increased the okra pod nutrients status of N, P, K, and total ash content ( Inorganic commercial fertilizer treatment increased the okra pod N more than did the plant residues. The okra pod P and K contents were also higher than other plant residues except in cocoa husk and wood ash. For instance, NPK fertilizer increased the okra pod N and P by 44% and 32% relative to the wood ash treatment. Among the plant residues, wood ash gave the highest values of K and Ca contents while cocoa husk had the best value of pod P. Both the wood ash and cocoa husk had similar values of pod N and ash contents. The plant residues increased ( The SOM, Ca, Mg, and pH in NPK 15-15-15 fertilizer plots decreased with the number of crops while the NPK fertilizer increased N, P and K compared with plants residues. Wood ash and cocoa husk treatments provided the highest values of soil pH, SOM, N, P, and K followed by spent grain, rice bran and sawdust treatments. Cocoa husk also gave the best value of soil Ca followed by wood ash, spent grain, rice bran and sawdust. Spent grain, cocoa husk and wood ash had similar values of soil N. The plant residues decreased the soil bulk density values compared to the NPK fertilizer and control treatments. This supported better okra tap root growth especially in spent grain and wood ash treatments. For instance, spent grain decreased soil bulk density by 15% and 18% relative to the NPK fertilizer and control treatments and this is reflected by having the highest value of okra tap root length. The spent grain residue decreased the soil bulk density the most (mg Finally, wood ash and cocoa husk improved soil chemical composition (N, P, K, Ca, Mg) while spent grain improved soil physical condition by reducing the bulk density and encouraging root growth of okra. Spent grain increased tap root length of okra by 78%, 39%, 27%, 38%, 47% and 48% relative to the control, NPK fertilizer, wood ash, cocoa husk, rice bran and sawdust treatments. The field experiments on four crops of okra showed that the plant residues and NPK fertilizer increased pod weight ( Multiple regression analysis between the okra pod weight, soil N, P, K, Ca, Mg, SOM and pH yielded This experiment demonstrated the importance of fertilizer or application of plant residues to the enhancement of crop productivity in nutrient poor tropical soils, hence, all the nutrient amendments increased soil fertility, pod nutrients and yield of okra. The plant residues such as cocoa husk, wood ash and spent grain had relatively higher contents of N, P, K, Ca, Mg, and micronutrients than sawdust and rice bran. This is because sawdust and rice bran residues have higher C/N ratio than the others, hence, they were not expected to release their nutrients to the soil and immobilize soil N which explain their reduced effectiveness in improving soil fertility ( Out of wood ash, cocoa husk and spent grain which improved soil fertility and pod yield of okra the most respectively, the spent grain had the lowest levels C, N, P, Ca, Mg, Fe, Mn, Cu and Zn. Nevertheless, spent grain reduced soil bulk density more than the five plant residues; hence, it improved soil physical condition the most. Therefore, the combination of the moderate fertility status of spent grain compared to rice bran and sawdust and its beneficial effect in reducing most soil bulk density may have been responsible for the highest values of okra pod yield and root growth in the experiment. The observation agreed with the work of The improved soil physical condition by spent grain (low soil bulk density) enhanced reduction in soil compaction and made penetration in plant roots easier, allowing greater uptake of more soil nutrients which eventually reflected in the highest value of okra pod weight for the experiment. Availability of soil nutrients such as N, P, K, Ca, Mg and SOM was noticeably higher for the plots treated with spent grain, wood ash and cocoa husk than rice bran and sawdust. The same trend was observed for pod N, P, K and Ca nutrients in wood ash and cocoa husk than sawdust and rice bran. Therefore, the general improvement in the soil N, P, K, Ca, SOM and pH by the plant residues compared to the control treatment showed that they have contributed to better plant nutrition for sustainable okra production. The continuous application of NPK fertilizer at 400 The marked contribution of wood ash and cocoa husk K, Ca and Mg could be traced to their chemical composition. The higher soil pH values in the plots treated with wood ash, cocoa husk and spent grain confirmed their importance in increasing availability of cations such as K, Ca, and Mg. The poor effectiveness of rice bran and sawdust in improving the soil pH could be due to their high C/N ratio (23:1 and 19:1) and the consequent immobilization of soil nutrients especially cations to the crop; hence the mineralization process is slowed down. The increase in soil organic matter by the wood ash and cocoa husk treatments may reduce the effects of toxic cations (e.g., Fe, Mn and Al) to the benefit of plants because the humic acid substances absorb the toxic cation resulting in their immobilization and detoxification ( The immobilization and detoxification of the toxic cations by wood ash and cocoa husk treatment as a result of increase in SOM may have also prevented nutrients imbalance and subsequent release of the available nutrients (mineralization) such as K, Ca, Mg and P to the crops. Therefore, they enhanced better plant nutrition to okra crop. The quick release of nutrients (i.e. fast mineralization process) to the okra crops is also enhanced by their low C/N ratio and enhanced root elongation. Wood ash and cocoa husk treatments had the highest values of okra pod N, P, K and Ca and followed by spent grain in the enhancement of okra pod weight. This is consistent with the fact that they had the optimal nutrient contents such as K, Ca, Mg, micronutrients and low C/N ratio compared with other plant residues. This observation was supported by The better effect of cocoa husk on okra pod weight and pod N, P, K, ash and Ca nutrients compared with the rice bran and sawdust is consistent with the fact it had better nutrient composition. For instance, cocoa husk had the highest available P among the plant residues and better Ca, K, Mg and micronutrients than rice bran and sawdust. Cocoa husk has been found to be an optimal source of K in maize ( This increase in pod N, P, K, Ca, Mg and ash by the plant residues would increase the quantities of these minerals in the dietary intake of consumers, hence resulting in better human nutrition. This observation agreed with that of The significance of the increase in plant nutrition by the application of the plant residues to the soil is that profitable and sustainable production of okra will achieved by farmers through reduction in purchases of high cost inorganic fertilizers. Plants residues such as wood ash, cocoa husk and spent grain are effective sources of nutrients for okra because their addition to the soil enhanced okra pod nutrients composition, ash content, pod yield, soil nutrients and pod yield. Sawdust and rice bran were less effective. We recommend that plant residues such as wood ash, spent grain and cocoa husk be applied to 6