Ten different gas sensors were integrated as an array on a substrate to identify various kinds and quantities of volatile organic compounds (VOCs), such as benzene, toluene, ethyl alcohol, methyl alcohol, and acetone. The sensor array consists of gas-sensing materials with SnO2 as the base material and a platinum heater and is fabricated using silk printing methods on an alumina substrate. The sensors show a high and broad sensitivity and reproducibility to low concentrations based on the use of nano-sized sensing materials with different additives. Utilizing the sensing signals of the array, an artificial neural network with an error-back-propagation learning algorithm is then implemented as a recognition system for classifying and quantifying the VOCs. Simulation and experimental results demonstrated that the proposed gas sensor array with the neural network was effective in recognizing various kinds and quantities of VOCs.Recently, environmental regulations on volatile organic compounds (VOCs) have been tightened all over the world, as their speedy evaporation and toxic or carcinogenic nature make them dangerous to human beings at high concentrations in the air. VOCs are also known as the main cause of sick house syndrome, resulting from poor indoor air quality. In turn, this can cause several kinds of diseases, such as allergies, asthma, cancer, and emphysema Therefore, high performance sensors and systems are required to monitor various kinds and quantities of VOCs. Several researchers have previously reported on the use of gas sensors in an array, including metal oxides, electrochemical sensors, conducting polymers, field effect transistor devices, surface acoustic wave devices, and hybrid sensor arrays, for a VOC-recognizing electronic nose To produce a VOC-recognition system with a good performance, the individual sensors involved need to have a high reliability, stability, and sensitivity. However, sensor responses tend to drift significantly when sensors are used over a long period of time, resulting in poor selectivity and redundant pattern recognition. Therefore, the fabrication of more reliable and stable sensors, or the ability to adjust the pattern recognition routine according to variations in the sensor response is needed. Accordingly, in the current study nano-sized tin oxide materials were synthesized using the coprecipitation method, and a sensor array with ten kinds of thick film sensors was fabricated by employing silk printing methods for depositing sensing films, electrodes, and a heater on an alumina substrate. Thereafter, a gas pattern recognizer that could utilize the sensitivity signals of the arrays, artificial neural network, and Digital Signal Processing board were implemented for classifying and quantifying the VOCs, including ethyl alcohol, methyl alcohol, acetone, benzene, and toluene, within the range of their threshold limit values (TLVs), a set of standards established by the American Conference of Governmental Industrial Hygienists (ACGIH) for concentrations of airbone substances in workroom air For the reliable recognition of VOCs, stable sensors with a high sensitivity to gases are very important. It has been previously reported that the nano-size effect through a Ca catalyst along with the spillover effect caused by a Pt catalyst enhance the sensitivity of sensing materials to gases even at low concentrations When preparing the raw materials, a solution containing SnCl After being simultaneously deposited by silk printing, the sensing films were then annealed at 800 °C for 2 h in air. The specifications of the sensor array using ten metal-oxide semiconductors with their dopants are shown in Flow injection systems were used to monitor the characteristics of the sensors in the array in response to VOCs, as shown in The microstructure of the basic sensing-film was investigated using X-ray diffraction (XRD), transmission electron microscopy (TEM), and scanning electron microscopy. A voltage detecting method was used to calculate the sensitivity of the sensor The selective determination of VOC quantities within low explosion limit ranges (ethyl alcohol: 3.5 vol.%, toluene: 1.2 vol.%, methyl alcohol: 5.5 vol.%, acetone: 2.5 vol.%, benzene: 1.2 vol.% etc.) and TLVs (ethyl alcohol: 1000 ppm, toluene: 100 ppm, methyl alcohol: 200 ppm, acetone: 200 ppm, benzene: 10 ppm etc.) requires sensors with a high sensitivity to low concentrations. To enhance the gas sensitivity of a sensor, the particle size, specific surface area, and crystalline structure are all recognized as significant parameters. Accordingly, the microstructure of the base material was investigated for its adaptability. The XRD patterns of SnO Xu et al. previously demonstrated that SnO The initial resistance of the sensors in the array in air was investigated to determine the operating temperature, as regards establishing a stable baseline, as shown in The water adsorbed in the SnO First, the gas-sensing ability of the composed sensors was evaluated to determine the gas concentration range of the sensor array. The sensitivity of the SnO The response time of a sensor to a gas is directly related to gas detection and classification. At 400 °C, the gas reaction was completed after 10 s, while the desorption of the gas was completed after approximately 5 min. The sensors also exhibited differentiated sensitivity curves to VOCs according to the additive Using the sensitivity signals from the sensor array as multi-dimensional input patterns, a gas pattern recognizer based on a multi-layer neural network with an error back propagation learning algorithm  The specific recognition results for the proposed recognition system with 100 ppm E.A., 500 ppm toluene, 1000 ppm M.A., 3000 ppm acetone, and 50 ppm benzene are shown in To construct a VOC concentration meter, the following equation was also designed using the output of the neural network As an example, To monitor various kinds and quantities of VOCs within their TLV and LEL ranges, a sensor array was fabricated including ten SnO Utilizing the signal of the sensors in the array, a neural network analyzer with an error-back-propagation learning algorithm was implemented to recognize the kinds and quantities of the tested VOCs, i.e. ethyl alcohol, toluene, methyl alcohol, acetone, and benzene, within their respective TLV and LEL ranges. In a real-time process, the recognition system was successful in both accurately classifying the gas species and indicating the approximate quantity of each VOC within a range of 0–2000 ppm.