Although osteotomy around the knee is well-established in the adult Before embarking upon any realignment osteotomy in childhood it is important to appreciate the natural history of the pathological process In technical terms it is vital to appreciate whether the knee deformity should be corrected at either the femoral or the tibial level Tibia vara Correlation between the clinical and radiographic appearances is close but not linear, so each indication for surgery is decided upon its merits, recognising that the outcome in both treated and untreated forms of the condition is poorly documented Splintage has a limited role in infantile Blount's disease. Orthoses are poorly tolerated in the obese with ligament laxity, but play a part in the initial care transverse closing or opening wedge inverted arcuate dome or arcuate oblique coronal serrated W-M oblique sagittal spike Traditionally the dome osteotomy has been recommended ( Conventional fixation is achieved with implants (Steinmann pins, interfragmentary screws or plates Complications of the operation have been discussed by Steel et al. Varus deformity may also be acquired following infection ( The great majority of children with genu valgum require no treatment provided that the condition is bilaterally symmetrical and the child is young. Salenius and Vankka When valgus appears to be increasing there is a limited role for stapling medially Distal femoral osteotomy may be indicated if the joint line ceases to be horizontal when weightbearing Unilateral, and initially progressive, tibia valga may follow proximal (metaphysial) fracture Injury to the anterior half of the proximal tibial growth plate and the tongue apophysis of the tibial tuberosity results in a progressive recurvatum deformity if there is sufficient skeletal growth Moroni et al. The siting of the osteotomy is important Tibial recurvatum also develops in certain of the skeletal dysplasias ( Recurvatum secondary to neurological abnormality, such as poliomyelitis, may lead to a gradual stretching of the posterior capsule if the quadriceps is dominant or if the hamstrings and triceps surae are paralysed. Osteotomy to correct the hyperextension may fail, so an anterior bone block procedure, perhaps using the patella, is indicated. In the latter case, major bone deformity may make knee arthrodesis the only salvage procedure. Most cases of flexion deformity require posterior soft tissue release (posterior capsule and hamstrings) initially. If a supracondylar extension osteotomy is only undertaken the correction may at first appear satisfactory, but the deformity soon reverts ( The knee in arthrogryposis may require correction This review encompasses the role of osteotomy in the correction of knee deformity in childhood. In the pre-operative definition of angulatory or rotational deformity careful planning and imaging are essential. Associated ligament laxity, muscle paralysis or contracture must be appreciated, and the effects of skeletal growth and maturation recognised. While many of the procedures described should only be undertaken by those with considerable experience of this form of surgery, it is nevertheless important that the knee surgeon is aware of the principles of treatment. Early diagnosis of the progressive deformity, carefully executed surgery and responsible monitoring of the outcome are the mainstays of reconstruction without undue risk.