In this study, the draw down of floating solids from the liquid surface has been investigated using vessels of 0.61 and 2.67m diameter. The importance of impeller type (mixed flow pitched blade turbine (PBT) and the narrow blade hydrofoil LE-20), pumping mode and position and the effect of varying liquid height have also been studied. Impeller speed and power consumption at which no solids remain at the surface for more than 2–4s are determined by visual observations.
                  Results from different scales are discussed in relation to the way in which solids are drawn down from the liquid surface. It has been shown that over a wide range of conditions the power required for drawing down solids can be reduced by operating in the upward rather than downward pumping mode and using an axial flow narrow blade hydrofoil rather than a mixed flow pitched blade turbine. Different scale up criteria, power per unit volume, tip speed and Froude number, are discussed for these systems. For scale up, specific power input is shown to be the most appropriate criterion for upward pumping impellers.The dispersion of solids in a liquid medium—either to generate a slurry or achieve mass transfer—is commonly required during the manufacturing process of food and personal care products, fermentation processes, polymerisation reactions, minerals processing and wastewater treatment. The process can involve several steps ( wetting, incorporating into the liquid (draw down), off-bottom suspension, break up of agglomerates, homogeneous dispersion, dissolving. Among previous researchers, The research programme undertaken by Fluid Mixing Processes (FMP) has shown that floating solids can be drawn down in different ways depending on the configuration within the vessel ( The study on the effect of scale on the draw down of light particles, presented in this paper, has been carried out in the light of the above findings which suggest that one scale up criterion is unlikely to account for the different modes of draw down. Results obtained at two scales are presented and different scale up criteria are discussed for up and down pumping impellers. Two cylindrical vessels of diameter of A range of liquid heights ( Two types of impeller were used ( a pitched blade turbine (PBT) which generates axial flow with also a strong radial flow component (mixed flow impeller). This had four blades inclined at a narrow blade hydrofoil, LE-20 (manufactured by Hayward Tyler Ltd.), which generates a predominantly axial flow. The impellers were of a diameter of about The PBT was operated in either the upward or downward pumping mode in both vessels, so was LE-20 in T61 but only in the upward pumping mode in T267. The impellers were mounted at different off-bottom clearances Test media consisted of polyethylene particles and tap water. Polyethylene particles have a lower density than water The solids concentration ( Torque Overall, results obtained at different scales follow similar trends; some examples are shown in Data presented in It can also be seen in  In Three scale up criteria, power per unit volume ( Results obtained with downward pumping impellers could not be correlated well using any of the above criteria as data from different scales and for different liquid heights lie above each other ( For upward pumping impellers, power per unit volume is found to be the most appropriate scale up criterion; example results are shown for an up pumping LE-20 in Predicted and measured Overall, the findings from the large-scale Operating in the upward pumping mode requires much less power for draw down compared to downward pumping mode, except for very high impeller submergences i.e., when the impeller is mounted close the base. With the narrow blade hydrofoil, which generates axial flows, power for draw down is also lower compared to the mixed flow PBT. For scale up, specific power input is found to be the most appropriate criterion when using upward pumping impellers. For downward pumping impellers, none of the three scale up criteria tested ( Our current work in the area is focussed on the effect of particle properties.  Experiments reported here were performed by Stuart Fuller and Irfan Rehman. The author would like to acknowledge the financial support of and technical discussions held with the industrial members of the Fluid Mixing Processes (FMP) consortium run at BHR Group.