While pre-draining the coalbed methane from the high gassy coal seams would significantly reduce the hazard in the stage of coal mining, gas recovery from coal seams of low permeability and strong adsorption potential would be an extremely difficult practice. To improve the methane recovery, injection of high-temperature nitrogen (N2) into the coal seams prior to borehole drainage is attempted. According to technical specifications of the Chinese coal mine gas drainage, the permeability that corresponds to the diffusion radius of high-temperature N2 is 0.0025 mD. Triaxial tests were conducted on coal samples from the No. 8 Coal Mine in Pingdingshan. The effective stress that corresponds to a N2 permeability of 0.0025 mD was found to be 21.5 MPa. Numerical simulations of the stress distribution around boreholes were conducted, and the results show that the N2 diffusion radius increases linearly with the borehole radius. During the N2 injection, the distribution of temperature allows affected coal seams to be divided into three zones along the radial direction of the borehole: the N2 heating zone, the heat transfer heating zone and the non-heating zone. A heat transfer model of high-temperature N2 injection into a methane drainage borehole has been established, and the results indicate that either by increasing the difference of temperatures between high-temperature N2 and the coal mass or increasing the injection time, the thermal diffusion radius would increase significantly, but the rate at which it does so decreases. Thermal diffusion radius increases linearly with the borehole radius. The heat transfer model could be considered as a guide for the high-temperature N2 injection into boreholes.Coalbed methane (CBM) is an unconventional gas resource. However, CBM has long plagued the coal industry ( Currently, the use of protective coal seams and the methane extraction by boreholes are two primary gas-disaster prevention technologies in China. However, The suitable formation of protective coal seams is not often in most mines, leaving methane extraction by boreholes as the only solution for preventing gas disasters ( It is a commonly accepted method using heat injection for stimulation of CBM production ( In this paper, experiments and numerical simulations are conducted, through which the diffusion range of high-temperature N After borehole excavation, a redistribution of stress is inevitable around a borehole. Stress concentration occurs and coal permeability decreases ( Coal permeability characterizes the resistance of coal to gas flow, which reflects the degree of difficulty of gas flow in coal. The technical requirements of Chinese coal mine gas drainage state that when coal permeability is less than 0.1 m The experimental apparatus is shown in The coal mass used in the experiment in this study was chosen from working face 14120 of the No. 8 Coal Mine in Pingdingshan, Henan Province, China. The coal samples were further processed into cylinders measuring 50 mm in diameter and 100 mm in length. The gases were 99.9% pure nitrogen (coal samples No. 1 and 2) and methane (coal samples No.3 and 4). The confining pressure and the gas pressure were set to 10 and 1.0 MPa, respectively. The experimental procedure was described as follows: Coal sample No. 1 was placed on an osmotic pressure indenter. The tube was continually and uniformly heat-shrunk with a hairdryer to tightly wrap the indenter end of the tube and the coal sample. The well-wrapped sample was placed on the indenter, which was located at the bottom of the testing machine, and connected to the gas pipelines. The pressure chamber was lowered, and 10 MPa of hydrostatic pressure was applied to the coal sample at a rate of 3 MPa/min. The axial and confining pressures were held constant. N The confining pressure was held constant, and the force control mode was used to increase the axial pressure at a speed of 10 kN/min. After the coal sample began releasing methane, the circular displacement control mode was used to continuously load at a speed of 0.04 mm/min. Prior to the reaching axial peak load, the axial and confining pressures were held constant at an axial load of 6 kN. The gas flow was recorded when it reached a steady state, and the application of the load was continued. After the axial peak load, the axial load was removed. After the test for No.1 was completed, the above-described steps were repeated with samples No. 2, No. 3 and No. 4. The gas permeability is defined by Darcy's equation as follows ( In the tests, changes in the coal's N Naturally fractured bituminous coal samples (with a moisture content of approximately 3%) were taken by ABAQUS is currently one of the most popular numerical simulation software packages used for rock mechanics calculations. It has been widely used in mining engineering, underground engineering and similar fields. The package includes various models, such as the Mohr–Coulomb, Druker–Prager and Cam-Clay models, which can calculate the reaction of the strain characteristics of ground stress ( Our model was built based on the geological conditions of working face 14120 of the No. 8 Coal Mine in Pingdingshan. In Pingdingshan, the ground stress gradient is approximately 0.025 MPa/m. Considering that the top of our model was approximately 750 m below the ground surface, compressive stress of 18.75 MPa was applied to the top of the model as the in situ stress. The initial horizontal stress of the model was 21 MPa. The post-excavation stress distribution around the boreholes is shown in The following assumptions are made in the heat transfer model of high-temperature N The diffusion range of high-temperature N The coal seam is homogeneous and isotropic. Within its diffusion range, high-temperature N The boundaries of the coal seam are sufficiently large. During the process of high-temperature N  Based on the above analysis, the high-temperature N To obtain the analytical solution to Eq. Therefore, we let Eq. During the calculation of the thermal diffusion radius of high-temperature N  Using MATLAB, the fitting equation of the thermal diffusion radius is derived, resulting in the derivation of Eq. As indicated in Eq. A t-test is a statistic that analyzes the distribution of t under conditions in which the null hypothesis is tenable. The field data are analyzed using t-test statistical formulas, resulting in a corresponding t-value. A p-value is later obtained according to the table of critical values. A p-value is less than 0.05 indicates that there is a small probability that an event actually occurs. Based on the p-value, the null hypothesis is rejected or accepted. To compare the effects of the borehole radius, temperature difference and gas injection time on the thermal diffusion radius, a t-test of the regression coefficient is conducted. A t-test of a regression coefficient determines whether the regression coefficient is significantly higher or less than zero. If the corresponding regression coefficient of an independent variable is equal to zero, then regardless of how the independent variable changes, the dependent variable remains unchanged. This finding indicates that the independent variable has no critical impact on the dependent variable. Assumptions: A p-value of the t-test that is less than 0.05 indicates that the null hypothesis does not hold. In other words, the independent variable corresponding to At the No. 8 Coal Mine in Pingdingshan, the depth of the constant temperature zone is 25 m and the temperature is 17.2 °C. The geothermal gradient of the coal mine is 3.5 °C/100 m and the coal seam depth is 750 m. According to Eq. The coal temperature at different depths can be calculated using Eq. The spacing of the methane drainage boreholes is 3 m. To ensure that the coal mass between boreholes can be fully affected by high-temperature N We propose a method for injecting high-temperature N By testing the coal permeability using N A heat transfer model of high-temperature N Based on a t-test analysis, the temperature difference between high-temperature N This research was supported by the