In the zones of high seismic activity, tailings dam should be assessed for the stability against earthquake forces. In the present paper, a simplified method is proposed to compute the factor of safety of tailings dams. The strain-dependent dynamic properties are used to assess the stability of tailings dams under seismic conditions. The effect of foundation soil properties on the seismic stability of tailings dams is studied using the proposed method. For the given input parameters, the factor of safety for low-frequency input motions is nearly 26% lower than that for high-frequency input excitations. The impedance ratio and the depth of foundation have significant effect on the seismic factor of safety of tailings dams. The results from the proposed method are well compared with the existing pseudo-static method of analysis. Tailings dams are vulnerable to damage for low-frequency input motions.Tailings dams are one of the largest geo-embankments built by the geotechnical engineers and are often constructed with steep slopes using the coarse fraction of tailings for economical designs. Tailings dam retains the mine's waste produced from the ore-dressing process. Generally, the wastes are in slurry form and are pumped into the sedimentation pond. The potential failure of such structures is of major concern because of the issues associated with public health, safety, environmental pollution and infrastructure damage. The propagation of seismic waves (S- and P-waves) through a geo-structure may produce seismic inertial forces which lead to instability of the structure, therefore, these forces must be considered in the analysis ( A significant number of analytical and numerical studies were conducted on stability assessment of tailings dams under both static and seismic conditions. Study on the seismic stability of tailings dams has gained importance over the past decades ( Horizontal slice method (HSM) is a newly developed formulation to compute internal stability of reinforced soil retaining structure ( To the best of authors’ knowledge, no analytical method is available that can consider the effect of foundation soil properties on slope stability of tailings dams under seismic conditions. Therefore, a new simplified method is proposed in the present paper to assess the seismic stability of tailings dams using strain-dependent dynamic properties of tailings dam material. The present method is able to consider the effect of foundation soil properties on the seismic stability of tailings dam. In the present study, seismic forces are computed considering the dam material as visco-elastic and dividing the dam into The details of tailings dam model considered in the present study are shown in Each of the above equations has two parts: the first part represents the incident wave travelling in the negative The shear strain generated in the dam and foundation can be obtained using Eqs. The expressions for horizontal accelerations in the dam and foundation soil can be obtained by differentiating Eqs. In the present study, failure surface is assumed to be an arc of a circle having radius The mass of the The total horizontal inertial force ( After computing the seismic inertial forces, force equilibrium is satisfied. The equation for vertical equilibrium for each slice is mentioned below: Again, By substituting Satisfying the horizontal equilibrium for the whole wedge, one can obtain In the present analysis, reduction in the shear modulus and increase in damping ratio with the increase in shear strain are considered. For sand, the stiffness degradation and damping increase curves proposed by  The width of the dam can be given as The radius of the failure slip can be given as A computer program is developed in MATLAB (      Analysis of the mode change behavior is an important prerequisite for the safe and economical design of tailings dam. The physical meaning of “mode change” behavior in the dam is elucidated further using The seismic stability analysis is an essential component of the earthquake resistance design of tailings dams. The existing methods suffer from numerous shortcomings as discussed in the Introduction. Therefore, in the present paper, a new simplified method has been developed and presented. The proposed method is capable of considering the effect of foundation soil properties on the factor of safety of tailings dams. An attempt has been made to use strain-dependent dynamic properties (shear modulus and damping ratio) for the evolution of seismic stability of tailings dams. Under the static conditions (i.e. The mode change behavior of tailings dam should be considered for its safe and economical design. The impedance ratio (at the interface between the dam and foundation) and the depth of foundation have the significant effect on the seismic factor of safety of tailings dams. Tailings dams are vulnerable to damage for low-frequency input motions. The authors wish to confirm that there are no known conflicts of interest associated with this publication and there has been no significant financial support for this work that could have influenced its outcome.  Horizontal seismic acceleration in the dam Horizontal seismic acceleration in the foundation Top width of the dam Damping ratio of the tailings dam material Damping ratio of the foundation soil Frequency of base excitation Factor of safety of tailings dam Acceleration due to gravity Small strain shear modulus Secant shear modulus Height of the tailings dam Depth of the foundation Thickness of the Complex wave number of the tailings dam material Complex wave number of the foundation soil Horizontal seismic acceleration coefficient Top width of the Mass of the Normal force acting on the base of the Horizontal inertial force acting on the Radius of circular slip circle Shear force acting on the base of the Period of lateral shaking Time Horizontal displacement in the dam Horizontal displacement in the foundation Vertical inter-slice force for the Shear wave velocity of the tailings dam material Shear wave velocity of the foundation soil Distance from the free surface of the dam to the top Weight of the Angle of the base of the Slope angle of the dam Unit weight of tailings dam material Unit weight of foundation soil Shear strain in the dam Shear strain in the foundation soil Exit angle for the slip surface Entry angle for the slip surface Impedance ratio Density of tailings dam material Density of foundation soil Internal friction angle Angular frequency of base shaking