This work deals with separation of vegetation from 3D data acquired by Terrestrial Laser Scanning for detecting more complex geological structures. Separation of vegetation is not an easy task. In many cases, the outcrop is not clear and the vegetation outgrows the outcrop. Therefore the separation of vegetation from 3D data is a task which requires adjustment of algorithms from image processing and remote sensing. By using cluster analysis and analysis of spectral behaviour we can detect vegetation from the rest of the scene and erase these points from the scene for detection of geological structures.LASER scanning systems (terrestrial or aerial) together with digital photogrammetry or SAR interferometry belong nowadays to commonly used techniques of land surface description. The number of their applications increases alongside with the price affordability of these devices. In the field of geosciences, in connection with Terrestrial Laser Scanning (TLS) or Lidar (Light Detection And Ranging), 3D computer visualisation outcrops have started to be created, commonly referred to as a DOM – Digital Outcrop Model ( In the year 2000,  Nowadays, the application of Lidar is becoming still more and more popular in geological sciences. It is a powerful device offering a lot of advantages for the collection of terrain data. Nonetheless, we agree with According to a number of authors ( Among the disadvantages, we find the following: unhandiness of the device due to its heavy weight; poor battery life and its long charging time. When scanning, vegetation is a sort of a handicap, as it covers the view of the outcrop. Another disadvantage can be seen in a large number of data which may be difficult to process and interrogate ( The above-stated procedures are demonstrated by the authors merely on the outcrops with simple structural terraces. In most of the works, DOM of sedimentary rocks with sub horizontal folds or monoclines were created. None of the authors ( 3D scans were obtained using a Stonex X300. It is a compact 3D scanner with a pair of cameras for capturing RGB scene and a 2.5–300 The basic principle of scanning outcrops is choosing the number of viewpoints and their position. We try to place the viewpoints in such a way so there will not emerge blind spots in the final data cloud caused by the shades from vegetation or from the profile outcrop. Then the targets are placed, serving for mutual connection of point clouds from the viewpoints. The processing of points into a single data cloud was carried out in the program Stonex Reconstructor which enables the connection of the individual viewpoints into one viewpoint based on the targets, and exporting them to various formats. In this work, we used export to format x3d which is from the xml language family and which enables easy processing in Python language. To compile software for vegetation processing, we used OpenCV and scikit in Python language. The separation of vegetation is one of the first problematic tasks when working with a Terrestrial Laser Scanner. The vegetation often overlaps the scanned area and causes problems with the automatic processing of the point cloud. The correct removal of vegetation creates the basis for subsequent data processing. Many authors ( In our work, where we are trying to create a procedure and software for general use, it is necessary to think about the separation of vegetation in the most difficult locations against the geological outcrop. The vegetation often overgrows the outcrop ( In our work, we are trying to use procedures enabling to use automatic vegetation removal in the most general terms ( Above the surface, trees and bushes basically consist of stems, branches and leaves. It is necessary to find these particular parts automatically in the point cloud and erase them. One of the most logical ways for detecting stems and branches in the point cloud is using edge filters, in our case Canny filter. When processing 3D data, the absence of common algorithms of image processing is a big problem. When using common algorithms, it is necessary to convert 3D data to 2.5D data. Converting data from 3D to 2.5D by using Terrestrial Laser Scanning with more viewpoints can cause a partial loss of information due to an overlap or point of view when creating a 2.5D scene. We have designed a procedure for removing these effects. By using a simple pattern we go through the point cloud and create N-scenes to which we can apply Canny filter. At first, points representing leaves and vegetation are removed from the point cloud. The points are classified on the basis of their spectral behaviour in the visible spectrum. We can use per-pixel classifier ( By the use of DBSCAN algorithm ( Each point is only a part of a bigger whole; therefore it is necessary to choose the same method when doing detection. The goal is not a thorough removal of all points representing vegetation, but achieving the best possible results with the highest precision of detection. Stems and branches are also a part of vegetation. Branch detection is quite difficult because a 3D scanner is not able to detect the whole branch. We remove small branches in the step where we detect clusters representing leaves. These branches are located inside of the clusters and due to this spatial characteristic it is easy to detect and remove them. In 3D point cloud, thick branches behave like stems. For stem detection in 3D point cloud we use systematic scene detection and 2.5D image generation. Generated images can be then processed by common edge detection algorithms of image processing. Canny filter has given us the best results and enabled an accurate edge detection of stems. In the first step, the algorithm creates a box with minimum and maximum coordinates for all axes. In the second step, we cut 3D point cloud into horizontal cuts with 0.5 Separation of vegetation is not a trivial task. It is important to modify the already existing procedures and adapt them to a local situation. Our solution tries to be adaptive and also enables the removal of vegetation in general terms. We do not use only the positions of points from the outcrop but we implement classifiers from Remote Sensing and methods of image processing. We are able to remove vegetation that interferes with outcrop by combining these disciplines. Our goal is not only to process adjusted quarry walls with a simple form of vegetation position, but also to recognise complex geological structures of current outcrops which are often a part of forest and other vegetation and it is not possible to completely remove this vegetation from the direction of scanning. Generally, the 3D data processing is computationally demanding and algorithms that are used for image processing do not allow the processing of 3D data. Modification of these algorithms and their right combination with procedures of remote sensing allows the processing of 3D point cloud. The authors declare that there is no conflict of interest. This research has been carried out within the project SGS SP2015/39 financed by the