Coal gasification with in situ CO2 capture is believed to be able to produce highly concentrated H2 with little or no CO2 compared with the conventional process. This has been demonstrated by other researchers working on a single fluidised bed by continuously feeding the CaO sorbent. This work presents the results of coal gasification with in situ CO2 capture by a synthetic CaO sorbent in a 1 kWth dual fluidised-bed reactor at atmospheric pressure, which has not been reported in the literature. The synthetic CaO sorbent is cyclically used by going through multiple carbonation/calcination cycles during coal gasification.
                  The effect of temperature on coal gasification was firstly investigated with silica sands or the synthetic CaO sorbent as the heat carrier. H2 concentration was raised from normally <12% to >15% with the addition of the synthetic CaO sorbent instead of silica sands at 740–800 °C. A long-term test at 740 °C confirmed the advantages of the addition of the synthetic CaO sorbent. However, CO2 concentration was not reduced to a very low level. This was not improved significantly by reducing the gasification temperature to 700 °C. Mechanical and chemical properties of the sorbent were also analysed in this work.Coal gasification is a clean and highly efficient way of utilising coal, and it has been attracting a lot of research interest in recent years. One of the major gas products of coal gasification, H H This reaction is reversible and the CaO sorbent can be easily regenerated (normally at 900 °C) and be cyclically used. Therefore, coal gasification with in situ CO The production of H In this work, coal gasification with in situ CO Six synthetic CaO sorbents were produced by extrusion from calcium hydroxide and a binder of aluminium oxide (Al Mayenite does not take part in the carbonation/calcination of the sorbent and can be considered as inert. Consequently, the uniform distribution of mayenite among CaO micrograins leads to retarded sintering of calcium based sorbent. It has been reported that calcium based sorbents having mayenite as the binder exhibit stable and high CO The attrition of the sorbents is measured with a Friability tester (Vanderkamp). The tester consists of a transparent drum and a motor. One side of the drum is removable for sample filling and discharging. Before the test, the sorbent particles will be sieved to exclude any particles smaller than 1 mm, and then weighed. The sorbent particles are then introduced into the drum. The motor is set to rotate the drum 2000 times at a fixed speed of 25 RPM. Sorbent particles inside the drum will roll and fall. At the end of the test, the sorbent particles will be sieved and weighed again. The attrition (the percentage of weight difference with respect to initial weight) can then be calculated for each sorbent. The compressive strength of the sorbent is determined by using an Instron Universal Tester (Type of 4505). One sorbent particle is placed between two compressive plates. A uniaxial force is slowly applied until the sorbent crushes. The compressive strength, defined as the ratio of the load applied just before crushing by the original cross-sectional area of the sorbent, is then obtained. Adsorption of N Thermogravimetric analysis (TGA) is carried out with Cahn TG-131 to determine a sorbent's CO The coal used in this work is Shenhua bituminous coal, China. The proximate analysis and ultimate analysis of the coal are given in Tests of coal gasification with in situ CO Before the test, sorbent particles have to be crushed into smaller sizes. The crushed sorbent particles will then be double-sieved for a size fraction of 0.2–0.45 mm or 0.3–0.45 mm. A certain amount of the crushed sorbent particles will then be introduced into the fluidised bed. During the test, the sorbent particles will be entrained to the top of the bed by a stream of air, transported to the spout-fluid bed through the cyclone, and then returns to the fluidised bed through the loop seal. In the spout-fluid bed, the sorbent will capture one of the coal gasification products, CO A 60° conical distributor connected with a tube with 10 mm in inner diameter is mounted at the bottom of the spout-fluid bed. The tube is used to introduce coal particles with the fluidising gas stream into the bottom of the spout-fluid bed. By means of a variable-speed screw feeder, coal particles are pneumatically conveyed to the bottom of the spout-fluid bed with a N The two reactors are electrically heated in an oven which supplies heat for start-up and maintains the temperature during the operation. It has to be noted that the oven is divided into three heating zones as shown in The effluent gases from the fuel reactor and air reactor are cooled down and dried first. Then ash and other solid particles in the gases will be removed by two textile filter bags. By using two suction pumps, gas samples are collected every 15 or 30 min with gas sample bags for offline analysis. The composition of the gases is analysed by gas chromatograph (Agilent 6890N). Before conducting coal gasification in the dual fluidised-bed reactor, thermodynamic studies are performed in order to calculate concentrations of the gas products at equilibrium during coal gasification. This is completed by Factsage 6.2. Provided that the reactants and their moles are specified and conditions such as temperature and pressure are given, Factsage calculates the moles of the final products at equilibrium. The compositions of reactant Shenhua coal are given according to the ultimate analysis. Steam is added at a molar ratio of 2:1 with respect to carbon in the coal. N Mechanical and chemical properties of the six synthetic sorbents are obtained for comparison. The aim is to identify one or more sorbents that will be suitable for coal gasification tests.  A TGA test of the sorbent was performed when the sorbent was subjected to 15% CO For coal gasification without the addition of CaO, 800 mL double-sieved (0.2–0.3 mm) silica sands were used as the heat carrier. Shenhua coal was fed with N It is therefore of interest to know carbon conversion rate and CO  A long-term test of coal gasification with in situ CO It has to be noted that starting H Another long-term coal gasification test with in situ CO It has to be noted that the addition of the synthetic CaO sorbent was to conduct in situ CO Lin et al. One of the benefits in using the synthetic CaO sorbent for CO The mechanical strength of the sorbent has also been studied. All the solid samples were collected at the end of the 700 °C test. The solid samples were sieved and measured. Before the test, 850 mL of the sorbent particles were between 0.2 and 0.45 mm. After the test, the total volume of the sorbent particles greater than 0.1 mm was 563 mL and 31 mL <0.1 mm. About 256 mL of the sorbent was elutriated during the test. If the sorbent particles < 0.1 mm are also considered as a weight loss due to attrition, then the attrition of the sorbent during this test is about 33.8%. This shows that the working conditions for the sorbent were very severe during coal gasification. Efforts have to be made in order to improve the sorbent's mechanical strength. Coal gasification with in situ CO Analyses of the solid samples after two long-term tests show that the sorbent's BET surface area and pore volume decreased compared with the fresh sorbent. However, the used sorbent showed a higher CO This research study was supported by the