The effect of mechanochemical treatment during the grinding of petroleum coke on its gasification by CO2 was studied. An additive derived by drying the black liquor in papermaking industry is adopted in grinding process. Results show that the gasification reactivity of petroleum coke is effectively improved by grinding, and the activation by wet grinding is more noticeable than that by dry grinding. Besides, by wet grinding petroleum coke and additive together, the active metal species in additive are not easily volatilized in gasification, and retain a high catalytic reactivity to the coke–CO2 reaction throughout most of the conversion range. Changes in crystal structure of the petroleum coke induced by mechanochemical treatment is related to its gasification reactivity. In general, the crystalline–amorphous phase transition is the tendency of long time mechanical grinding, while a crystal structure re-formation stage is observed after wet grinding of petroleum coke with and without additive for some time. Similar phenomenon has also been found in the reported data, but not given attention. Some discussion is made in the paper, and more work should be undertaken to disclose the mechanism.With the continuous increase of heavy crude supply, the output of petroleum coke, as the final by-product of refining, is steadily increasing. The gasification of petroleum coke for the production of hydrogen, power, and steam has generated much interest in the petroleum industry Crushing and grinding processes are obligatory steps in the preparation of gasification feedstock, in which some modification of the surface layer of particles is virtually inevitable. Research on the changes on surface, crystal structure and chemical reactions induced by mechanical energy are termed mechanochemistry. It has been developed to a useful method to activate some properties of particles. Research on the mechanochemical activation of carbon materials has become an important issue in recent decades, and it has been proved that mechanochemical treatment has notable impact on some properties of coal and petroleum coke The aim of the present work is to investigate the effect of mechanochemical treatment on the gasification reactivity of petroleum coke by dry grinding and wet grinding, and trying to reveal the mechanochemical activation mechanism by X-ray diffraction analysis. The petroleum coke sample came from Jing Ling Refinery Plant. Its proximate analysis and ultimate analysis are given in Grinding process was carried out in a planetary ball-mill (XQM, Nanjing Kexi Instrument Institute) with stainless steel container (1070 Dry grinding and wet grinding were carried out for the activation of petroleum coke. In dry grinding, petroleum coke or the mixture of petroleum coke and additive was ground for 0.5 Because the average particle size decreases with the increasing grinding time, the 61–74 As to whether the samples with same particle size have the same specific surface area, the BET specific surface area of the samples in 61–74 Evaluation of gasification reactivity was performed in a SETARAM TG-DTG/DSC thermogravimetric analyzer by the isothermal method. Before gasification reactivity measurements, it is essential to judge whether reaction is not influenced by the external and intragranular diffusion. Experiment results show that reaction rates did not increase any more when sample weight was less than 10 The gasification procedure is described as follow: A weighed petroleum coke (around 8 The additive is mainly composed of gasifiable hydrocarbon, which would be gasified together during gasification. Presume the weight loss of the additive were synchronous as that of petroleum coke. Then, the conversion for both non-catalytic and catalytic gasification can be written as The crystal structure of the milled sample was investigated by a Rigaku X-ray diffractometer with CuKa radiation. The interlayer spacing It is shown in At first, the mechanochemical interaction in grinding process will lead to the decrease of particle size and the increase of specific surface area. Then, with the constant increase of mechanical energy adsorbed by particles, some defects like lattice distortion, lattice deformation and lattice dislocation will occur in the surface layer of particles Second, the mechanochemical interaction is different for the two activation methods. Research shows that the energy adsorbed by particles in wet grinding was higher than that in dry grinding When additive is loaded, the contact between additive and petroleum coke particles resulting from the two activation methods is quite different. In dry grinding, the newly generated interface has much higher free energy, which will make petroleum coke particles aggregate spontaneously, thereby resisting the contact with additive. According to the oxidation–reduction mechanism for catalytic carbon gasification, gasification rate is controlled by the content of active metal species and its existing form The effect of mechanochemical treatment time on gasification reactivity was measured by wet grinding petroleum coke with and without additive for different times. Because the gasification rate curve is similar for different grinding times, the In order to specify the causative factor of the variation of gasification reactivity, the crystalline structure of ground petroleum coke is measured by X-ray diffraction. The evolution of the interlayer spacing Another phenomenon shown in The crystalline–amorphous phase transition has also been found in the preparation of nanostructured carbon materials by long time mechanical grinding of graphite It should be noted that the crystalline–amorphous phase transition is the tendency of long time mechanical grinding. Tidjani et al. The evolution of As the feedstock of gasifier, particles in the nano-size fraction derived by long time grinding are not suitable in preparation of the highly concentrated coal/coke–water slurries with low viscosity (less than 1000 The gasification reactivity of petroleum coke is effectively improved by grinding, and the activation by wet grinding is more noticeable than that by dry grinding. Besides, by wet grinding petroleum coke and additive together, the active metal species in additive are not easily volatilized in gasification, and retain a high catalytic reactivity to the coke–CO Changes in crystal structure of the petroleum coke induced by mechanochemical treatment is related to its gasification reactivity. In general, the crystalline–amorphous phase transition is the tendency of long time grinding, while a crystal structure re-formation stage is observed after wet grinding of petroleum coke with and without additive for some time. The research is supported by the program for New Century Excellent Talents in University (NCET-05-0413), National Key State Basic Research Development Program of China (973 Program, 2004CB217700) and Program for Changjiang Scholars and Innovative Research Team in University (PCSIRT-IRT0620). The authors would like to thank Prof. Gao JS for technical assistance.