The particle size distribution (PSD) has a significant implication on the mechanical behaviour of cement-treated base (CTB). Traditional approaches rely on experiments to characterise its influences on the mechanical response of CTB. However, these approaches often face difficulties in controlling the material microstructural properties, thus leading to poor repeatability of experimental results when changing PSD. To address this issue, in this study we combine experiments and a numerical modelling approach to investigate the effects of PSD on the flexural response of CTB. In particular, standard experiments of CTB are first conducted to provide data of the material microstructure and fracture responses when subjected to flexural loading. In parallel with this, the Discrete Element Method (DEM), capable of representing the material microstructural properties, is employed for numerical simulations of CTB. An enriched contact model based on the cohesive damage-plasticity theory is then utilised to properly describe the failure behaviour of bonding contacts that form the mortar matrix in DEM samples. Through a calibration and validation process on two independent sets of CTB samples, numerical results show good agreements with their experimental counterparts. This suggests the proposed modelling approach, once fully calibrated, can be used to describe the flexural response of CTB samples with the same material properties. Further numerical investigations reveal a noticeable change of the flexural properties of CTB when varying PSD and these changes are independent of the specimen size.Cement-treated base (CTB) refers to an intimate mixture of crushed rock or granular soil with a measured amount of cement and water. Chemical additives are sometimes added to this mixture to increase its strength, working period or to reduce permeability Current pavement design standards of CTB generally employ a mechanistic-empirical design approach to develop the material design models, relating structural response and material properties to distress prediction The effect of PSD on the mechanical behaviour of cement-based materials under flexural boundary conditions has been reported in many experimental studies (e.g. In regard to numerical modelling, several approaches have been applied to characterise the macro-behaviour of cemented materials. The most popular method used to model the flexural behaviour of CTB is the finite element method (FEM). Existing numerical studies based on this method (e.g. Given the aforementioned promising features of DEM, this study combines the experimental method and an enriched DEM model to investigate the effect of PSD on the flexural properties of CTB. Standard experiments of cemented materials are first adopted to characterise the material gradation and obtain data for calibrating and validating the numerical model parameters. Along with the experiments, DEM is employed to simulate the behaviour of CTB. Within the DEM framework, the aggregate size distribution of CTB obtained through a sieve test is replicated by generating an assembly of particles with an identical aggregate gradation. An enriched cohesive damage-plasticity model is then incorporated into contact bonds between these particles. To save computational cost, actual particle shape and surface roughness are not explicitly modelled in DEM simulations. Rather, circular particles are utilised and the influences of particle shape and surface roughness are implicitly lumped into the cohesive damage-plasticity model and a calibration process. Part of the experimental data (i.e. data of one material gradation) is then used to calibrate the enriched DEM model in order to obtain proper constitutive parameters for the material. The validity of DEM model and calibrated constitutive parameters is then validated against the experimental data of the other gradation. After validated, this modelling method is applied to investigate the effects of PSD on the flexural properties of CTB. In particular, samples with different PSDs are generated, while other parameters such as sample porosity, contact properties and boundary conditions remain unchanged. The simulation results generate sufficient data for a trend in PSD effects on the flexural properties of CTB, while also containing micromechanical details for more insights into mechanisms underpinning this trend. The article is organised as follows. The experimental work on flexural properties of CTB using two different gradings is described in The granular material selected for this study was Holcim Road Base (20 mm crushed rock) sampled at the Gosnells Quarry, Perth, Western Australia, hereafter referred to as HRB. HRB is widely used in pavement construction in Western Australia. The parent rock of HRB is granite/diorite (acid intrusive igneous rock). Two different PSDs of HRB, so-called grading A and grading B, were first obtained by passing the original granular material through a 19.00 mm sieve and through a 12.70 mm sieve respectively, following the procedure described in AS 1141.11.1–2009 General purpose (GP) cement manufactured locally in accordance with the Standards Australia specification, AS 3972–2010 Rectangular steel moulds of 200 mm (length) × 50 mm (width) × 50 mm (height) were used to manufacture beam specimens for testing. At first, the granular material (HRB in grading A or B) was preconditioned by adding water to the granular material 24 h prior to compaction and then mixed with 3% GP cement and water at the optimum percentage of moisture content. The properties of the cement stabilised aggregate mixture including its optimum water content were given in The modulus of rupture for cemented pavement materials in accordance with Austroads, (2010) In most existing DEM modelling methods for cement-based materials, microstructural details of the materials are simplified by using circular particles to represent aggregates and contact bonds to represent mortars. Furthermore, the fine grain portion of the material is often ignored in those simulations to reduce overall computational cost. These simplifications together with the use of simple contact models (e.g. perfectly brittle models) in existing DEM modelling methods results in their poor prediction of the cohesive-frictional behaviour of CTB. An enriched contact model is hence needed to phenomenologically account for those missing information and enable DEM simulations to fully capture the failure response of CTB. In this work, a cohesive damage-plasticity contact model developed by the authors The stress-displacement relationships in normal and shear directions of a bonding contact are defined as follows: The development of plastic displacements in normal and shear directions is activated when stress state in the bonding contact reaches a yielding criterion. The yield criterion of this model is determined as follows Also in Eq. where Detailed derivation of this plastic flow rule is given in As damage evolution is described by two different functions for tension or compression modes, the condition of maximum attainable damage is enforced when transitioning from tension mode to compression mode and vice versa to avoid unphysical reduction of damage. The yield criterion is allowed to shrink with respect to damage evolution as shown in The model parameters can be obtained by calibrating numerical results to match their experimental counterparts. More specifically, contact stiffness, In this section, the DEM modelling method with the incorporation of the cohesive damage-plasticity model is applied to simulate the modulus of rupture test of HRB in two different gradings (i.e. gradings A and B). The numerical results are then compared with the experimental results to assess the capability of this modelling method in capturing both the mechanical behaviour and the effects of PSD on the flexural strength and flexural modulus of the material. The numerical tests are conducted using PFC Accordingly, numerical beam specimens for the modulus of rupture test were generated. A specimen with the material in grading A and another specimen with the material in grading B were generated following the procedure described above. Specimen dimensions and boundary conditions in simulations were the same as those in the experiment. Particles were randomly distributed and then allowed to rearrange in these specimen until reaching a balance condition, determined by the ratio of total unbalanced forces to total contact forces acting on all particles in the specimens being less than 0.1%. The model parameters are obtained by calibrating the numerical stress-strain curve with the experimental data of HRB in grading A following the procedure described in To evaluate the necessity of the cohesive damage-plasticity model for the characterisation of CTB behaviour, the existing parallel bond model in PFC is also adopted in the simulations with specimens in grading A. The stress-strain result obtained from this simulation is compared with the same experimental results as shown in Apart from stress-strain curves, the cracking responses of specimens in experiments and simulations using the cohesive damage-plasticity model are compared. The calibrated model parameters obtained in the simulation of specimens with grading A (as given in Additionally, From the above validations, the proposed modelling method has been demonstrated to be able to characterise the mechanical behaviour of CTB. The microstructural properties and behaviour of CTB are successfully reproduced by DEM thanks to its ability to physically mimic the heterogeneous arrangement of particles and mortar matrix in the material. Moreover, given its explicit characterisations of particle responses and interactions, crack development can be naturally captured in DEM simulations without ad-hoc treatments on the model. To further investigate PSD effects on the flexural strength and flexural modulus of the material, three additional gradations, so-called coarse grading, normal grading and fine grading, are defined according to the gradation equation proposed by Fuller & Thompson where For each new grading (i.e. coarse, normal and fine), a set of ten beam specimens with dimensions of 50 mm (height) and 200 mm (length), so-called beam set 1, is generated following the numerical procedure described in  To illustrate this point, normal stress in bonding contacts at the mid-span of samples with coarse and fine gradings when the load applied to these sample equals to 250 N are typically plotted in The above interpretation can be further confirmed via analysing the coordination numbers of numerical specimens with four different gradings. The coordination number of DEM samples is a microscopic factor determining the average number of contacts one particle has with the others and can be used to quantify the quality of sample packing. In this study, the coordination number of DEM specimens is calculated by the equation proposed by Cui & O’Sullivan where Additionally, as a result of better particle packing, the density of contact area in the specimen is likely to increase, leading to the increment of flexural modulus. The results of flexural modulus with respect to four different gradings are depicted in It is noted that specimen size varies in different standard flexural tests of CTB, and varying specimen size would affect particle arrangement, the probability of defects or the volume of strain localisation zone in the specimens. Therefore, it is essential to examine the effects of PSD on the flexural properties of CTB specimens in different sizes. In this section, the simulations of the modulus of rupture test and flexural modulus test are repeated with the same setup as described in  In this study, the effects of PSD on the flexural properties of CTB are investigated using a combined experimental-numerical approach. Standard modulus of rupture tests for CTB are first carried out to characterise the material PSD and its behaviour. In parallel with this, DEM is employed to simulate the response of CTB samples. In DEM, the aggregate gradation of CTB is reproduced by an assembly of polydispersed particles, while the mortar matrix is characterised by an enriched contact model incorporated into bonding contacts. Numerical results are then compared with experimental data to assess the predictive capability of the modelling method. The validated model is subsequently applied to investigate the PSD effects on the flexural strength and flexural modulus of CTB. Based on the numerical results, the following conclusions can be drawn: The DEM modelling method with incorporating real PSD and an enriched contact model is able to reproduce the flexural response of CTB observed in the experiments. The employment of the enriched contact model is shown to be necessary in order to account for the microstructural details of CTB missing in DEM and enable this modelling method to properly capture the mechanical response of CTB. Thanks to the discrete nature of DEM, the material response can come naturally from the simulations without any treatment on the contact model. Therefore, once the model parameters are correctly calibrated, this modelling method can be used to characterise CTB with the same material properties. Numerical investigations of specimens with different PSDs showed that specimens with a greater volume fraction of small particles and smaller volume fraction of large particles (e.g. materials in the fine grading) achieve greater values of flexural strength and flexural modulus. Further analysis of the coordination number of specimens reveals that particles in numerical specimens with fine grading seem to connect better, hence increasing contact density and reducing weaknesses in these specimens. This mechanism accounts for the greater flexural strength and flexural modulus observed in specimens with fine grading as compared to specimens with coarse grading. The results obtained from this numerical investigation have confirmed the presence of PSD effects on the flexural behaviour of CTB and also provide a basis for future research to develop a quantitative relationship between CTB gradation and its flexural properties. PSD effect on the material flexural properties is independent of the specimen sizes. This is demonstrated in simulations as the changes of flexural strength and flexural modulus results with different PSDs (i.e. fine, original, normal and coarse gradings) exhibited the same trends when specimen size increases from 200 × 50 mm to 400 × 100 mm. Although size effect issues in the flexural test were not directly investigated in this study, numerical results have shown that the trend of flexural strength with different beam sizes follows the size effect law specified in theory and experiments. This demonstrates the potentiality of the DEM modelling method for investigating size effect in CTB as well as other cement-based materials. Funding support from the