“ US coal and CBM production is somewhat diminished owing to serious competition from natural gas (shale production) and restricting government regulations, but the global coal production as well as CBM production continues to grow. The energy contained in coal (coal and gas) is 10 times larger than the global known reserves of all oil and gas combined. It is therefore essential to explore the various ways to exploit this vast source of energy for the present and the future. The book covers the subject in the following six sections that has 27 chapters. Origin, geology, and reserve for CBM reserves. CBM reservoir characteristics. Vertical wells and their applications. Horizontal wells and their applications. Production engineering for CBM CBM processing and utilization. The material can be taught in one 15-week semester as a graduate course. The recovery of energy in coal will need expertise in three areas: mining engineering, petroleum and natural gas engineering, and chemical engineering. Coal seams are the source and the reservoir for CBM. Only a fraction of the coal deposit will be mined to a depth of 3000 Secondary recovery of CBM by carbon dioxide sequestration is discussed briefly. Coal has a greater affinity for CO Finally, the remaining energy in coal can be recovered by heating and burning the coal in situ to produce a synthetic gas (Syngas) that is a mixture of methane, carbon monoxide, and hydrogen. The process is known as “Underground Coal Gasification” (UCG) and is also briefly discussed. Processing of almost all CBM and syngas is needed to make it amenable for utilization as natural gas. The essence of the 1st edition is maintained in the 2nd edition by discussing everything from resource to technology to processing and utilization of CBM. The editors would like to thank all the other authors who also contributed to the book. We are indebted to Amy Shapiro for organizing the construction of this book and grateful to Aleksandra Packowska for her guidance and patience in the completion of the text. It is our sincere hope that the book will help in keeping the coal mines safe by degasification and greatly contribute to the production of CBM to meet our ever-growing needs for natural gas and syngas.