United Nations’ members came together in 2015 and agreed on seventeen sustainable development goals which include hundred and sixty-nine targets related to sustainable development into the overall economic, environmental and social contexts of countries to be achieved by 2030. In order to achieve these goals, more effort may be required than the current policies and strategies. This is particularly true for the energy sector as energy is the key enabler for all development activities. Therefore, there is a need to analyse the required effort and energy to implement these goals based on countries’ specific context. The objective of this paper is to assess the indicators of energy-related sustainable development goals and calculate the additional energy requirement to achieve each goal by 2030 for Chile. The key findings of the research indicate that Chile will meet fourteen energy-related sustainable development targets by 2030 under the business as usual scenario. However, Target 2.1, Target 5.b, Target 12.3, Target 13.1, and Target 17.6 require extra energy to meet sustainable development goals in Chile by 2030. Approximately 16 million GJ additional energy is required in order to meet energy-related sustainable development goals in Chile than the business as usual scenario by 2030. This research output can provide insights to researchers trying to assess the achievement of sustainable development goals in other developing countries.Business as usual Compound annual growth rate Capita Energy intensity Real GDP purchasing power parity per capita Gigajoule Megajoule Rural Access Index Sustainable Development Goals Total Primary Energy Supply United Nations (UN) In 2015, 193 members of the United Nations (UN) agreed on the sustainable development goals (SDGs) by targeting to eliminate discrimination and inequality, end poverty, and overcome climate change by 2030 ( Energy is a main empowering factor for the SDGs. Implementation of the SDGs into local and national development of long and medium-term planning is expected to affect the energy sectors, which means for some countries, much efforts and more energy will be required if a country attempts to achieve the SDGs ( Several studies were conducted based on SDGs since 2015 by developed and developing countries all around the world. Studies related to the energy sector and SDGs implementation in the literature are summarized as follows: Santika et al. studied the interconnections between energy and the SDGs. Twenty-four targets of SDGs which has direct links to energy were identified, and they are quantified to see their impact on national energy demand ( In the literature, energy is mostly emphasized with SDG 7 as mentioned above, and studies analyzing energy-related goals or calculating energy demand due to achieving these targets for developing countries are limited. For instance, Santika et al. studied extra demand for sustainable development goals and compared the results with the energy demand of the current policy scenario for Indonesia. According to the main results, current policy scenario requires more energy than SDG scenario in Indonesia ( Therefore, there is a need to identify energy-related goals, analyse the indicators to see how far a country to achieve these goals and calculate the additional energy requirement or savings to implement these goals to national energy plans based on countries’ specific context. This study attempts to fill these gaps in the literature. The contributions of the study are 1) determining energy-related SDGs 2) realizing indicator-based assessment to understand the current situation of the targets in Chile, 3) calculating the additional energy requirement or savings for each target and 4) forecasting the total energy demand in case of meeting energy-related sustainable development goals. This paper aims to evaluate the indicators of energy-related SDGs, calculate the extra energy requirement or savings for each target and predict the total energy demand when an intervention is needed to meet the target for 2030 in Chile. This paper is organized as follows. Section The methodological approach of this research is presented in UN defined a list of the global indicators to measure the SDGs and their targets ( The indicator-based assessment of SDGs may vary from developing country to a developed country. Therefore, the European Union defined a set of indicators to check member countries achievement on SDGs by considering new EU policy priorities, including EU longer-term visions beyond 2020 ( The literature on the SDGs has been widely researched and several articles mentioned SDGs since 2015; however, studies about energy-related SDGs are still limited and only one specific study which worked on the targets with direct links to energy was found. Based on this reference, twelve sustainable development goals were found as having direct links to energy. Also, it mentioned how to quantify these energy-related goals for developing countries ( In this study, the indicators to measure energy-related goals and targets are determined from the literature review (  Therefore, analysis including indicator-based assessment, energy intensity calculation and the total required energy or energy savings to meet each target is realized for Chile. Then, two scenarios and a benchmarking are considered to compare the results to see the impact of SDGs implementation on Chilean energy demand by 2030. Firstly, the energy demand of 2030 for business as usual scenario is calculated based on the available data from the national energy balance of Chile between 2008 and 2017. Then, energy demand for SDGs scenario is calculated by taking into account the additional energy requirement from each target. Finally, benchmarking which considers Targets 7.3. and 8.1. is mentioned to verify the total energy demand for 2030 and compared with two other scenarios. The detailed calculations are presented in the analysis the scenarios were compared in the result and discussion section. The first step of the analysis is the assessment of the indicators for each target. The indicator-based assessment focuses on determining an expected evolution for each indicator, measuring the observed evolution of the indicator, and comparing the observed evolution versus the expected evolution ( Based on the available data for each indicator, CAGR is calculated from the equation   T1: the year for the beginning value T2: the year for ending value After obtaining the growth rate from equation (BAU: Business as usual) Finally, the gap between the calculated indicator value (business as usual) and the expected value to meet the target is calculated from the equation   If the calculated indicator value is the same as the expected value, it is assumed that the target is met by 2030 without any intervention. Thus, the additional energy requirement or saving will be 0 Gigajoule (GJ). On the other hand, if there is a gap between calculated and expected indicator value for 2030, energy calculation is realized for these targets. Therefore, energy intensity (EI) calculation for each target is obtained from the literature ( Additionally, in this section, indicator assessment by using equations Target 2.1: by 2030, end hunger and ensure access by all people, in particular, the poor and people in vulnerable situations, including infants, to safe, nutritious and sufficient food all year round. In order to assess Target 2.1, the indicator “ Source: The figure was constructed based on reference ( In order to meet the target, which is ending hunger by 2030, all people must be nourished. Thus, the energy intensity is calculated based on equation D EC Eon Eoff EI (max) = 0.531 GJ/cap/year (Cap: Capita) Energy intensity can be calculated depending on different food content in countries nourishment plans. In this research, it is assumed based on the potato due to the high amount of potato consumption in Chile. EI is calculated as 0.531 GJ∗cap Target 5.b: Enhance the use of enabling technology, in particular information and communications technology, to promote the empowerment of women. The indicator “proportion of individuals who own a mobile telephone” is proposed to measure the Target 5.b. which points achieving gender equality in technology usage ( The energy intensity requirement for a mobile phone is obtained 0.00519 GJ∗cap Target 7.3: by 2030, double the global rate of improvement in energy efficiency. This target which is measured with indicator The energy intensity level of primary energy (MJ/2011 PPP GDP) for Chile is 3.777 (MJ/2011 PPP GDP) in 2015 based on accessible data ( Target 8.1: Sustain per capita economic growth in accordance with national circumstances and, in particular, at least 7 per cent gross domestic product growth per annum in the least developed countries. Target 8.1. is assessed with the indicator Target 12.3: by 2030, halve per capita global food waste at the retail and consumer levels and reduce food losses along production and supply chains, including post-harvest losses. Indicator The energy intensity which is obtained from the literature as presented in equation Therefore, the additional energy requirement from halving food waste in Chile is calculated as 10,263,968.06 GJ. In order to evaluate this target, This target is essential for Chile due to having active volcanos, biggest recorded earthquakes and potential tsunamis in history. The number of people displaced after the last three biggest earthquakes and tsunamis in Chile is obtained as follows: 1,500,000.00 people in 2010, 970,000.00 people in 2014, and 1,000,000.00 people in 2015 ( Also, the average embodied final energy intensity to build a temporary, post-disaster container house is approximately 1.35 GJ∗cap Target 17.6: Enhance North-South, South-South and triangular regional and international cooperation on and access to science, technology and innovation and enhance knowledge sharing on mutually agreed terms, including through improved coordination among existing mechanisms, in particular at the United Nations level, and through a global technology facilitation mechanism. “Fixed Internet broadband subscriptions per 100 inhabitants” is the indicator to measure Target 17.6 ( Results obtained from the analysis of different indicators suggest that Chile would achieve fourteen energy-interlinked SDGs by 2030 under the business as usual scenario. However, five targets: Target 2.1, Target 5.b, Target 12.3, Target 13.1, and Target 17.6 require extra energy to be achieved by 2030. On the other hand, Target 2.4, Target 11.2, and Target 12.5 are not taken into account due to not having specific targets for sustainable agriculture, use of public transportation and recycling in Chile.  Target 5.b. which aims to enhance the use of enabling technology which is measured with the indicator “proportion of individuals who own a mobile telephone”. Chilean population without a mobile phone in 2030 is calculated to be 5,130,570.70 people. Therefore, additional energy is calculated as Target 12.3, which is about halving food losses, requires maximum additional energy among all energy-interlinked targets. Food loss in Latin America is mentioned approximately 220 kg/cap/year in the literature ( Chile is one of the countries with the highest earthquake potential in the world. In history, it can be found that Chile was affected by drought, floods, tsunamis, volcanic eruptions, forest fires, and earthquakes. Thus, Target 13.1 is a vital target for Chile. It is hard to estimate the number of people displaced after disasters. In the analysis, the average number of people affected by natural disasters is taken into account based on the recent disasters in Chile and the additional energy requirement to meet the target is calculated as The results showed that Target 17.6, which is measured with the indicator “Fixed internet broadband subscriptions” requires additional energy to be met by 2030 in Chile. It is estimated that 12,454,704 people are expected to be without subscription in 2030. The energy intensity to meet the target is obtained 0.284–0.347 GJ/customer from the literature ( Finally, the total additional energy requirement is calculated 16,048,414.24 GJ for Chile to meet considered energy-interlined SDGs. In some cases, there can be overlapping or double counting between targets. For instance, Target 2.1 which is about ending hunger and Target 12.3 halving per capita global food waste by 2030 are related targets. By halving the food loss for Target 12.3, Target 2.1 ending hunger can be achieved as business as usual. However, these are second-order impacts which are difficult to analyse due to a high level of uncertainties and so, have not been studied in this paper. In this study, all targets’ contribution to energy demand is calculated individually because Target 12.3 requires much more energy than other targets. In order to understand the impact of this additional energy on total energy demand, future projections for different scenarios and benchmarking results are presented in In addition to BAU and SDGs scenarios, Target 7.3 and 8.1. are taken into account for benchmarking. When the global energy intensity target (3.422 MJ/2011 PPP GDP) is considered, the total energy demand for Chile is calculated as 1,618.87 million GJ by 2030, which is within the demand values estimated by the Chilean government (mentioned in Section The main findings showed that Target 12.3, which is about halving per capita global food waste by 2030, requires much more energy than other targets in Chile. In the analysis, the prevention of food losses calculation is assumed as a function of energy consumption for storing and retailing which are assumed 2 MJ/kg and 2.5 MJ/kg, respectively ( The benchmarking calculation mentioned in the result section is done by considering the suggested global energy intensity target (3.422) for 2030 ( Additionally, energy use per capita is calculated for Chile for 2015 and 2030 SDG scenario and presented in Moreover, in order to understand that Chile’s current situation to meet SDGs, a similar analysis which is realized for Indonesia ( The energy demand to achieve SDGs can vary significantly across countries, as shown in the comparison between Chile and Indonesia. The reasons for these differences may arise from various factors such as the population of Indonesia is almost fourteen times higher than Chile ( This study has investigated the energy-related SDGs indicators and calculate the additional energy requirement or saving of each target when an intervention needs to meet the target for 2030 in Chile. The main findings of the research are: by considering growth rates obtained from available historical data, Chile meets fourteen targets without needing any interventions by 2030 between twenty-four energy-related sustainable development targets. The main findings show that Target 2.1, Target 5.b, Target 12.3, Target 13.1, and Target 17.6 require extra energy to be encountered by 2030. Energy demand for BAU 2030 is calculated as 1,447.03 million GJ. When SDGs are considered to be met by 2030, it is found that energy demand for 2030 SDGs will reach 1,463.08 million GJ due to 16 million GJ additional energy requirement to meet SDGs. Thus, in order to meet SDGs in Chile, more energy is required by 2030 than the BAU scenario. When benchmarking is considered with Targets 7.3 and 8.1, total energy demand is calculated as 1,618.87 million GJ by 2030. In this study, if there is no target for a specific indicator in Chile, additional energy is not considered. However, Target 2.4 and Target 12.5 may save energy or Target 11.2 may require more energy by 2030, which means that the SDGs scenario could result in more or less energy than BAU by 2030. Additionally, the total additional energy requirement to meet energy-related SDGs for Chile is compared to Indonesia results. Indonesia requires much more effort than Chile to meet energy-related sustainable development goals by 2030. When Indonesia requires almost 474 million GJ extra energy to meet the targets, Chile needs approximately 16 million GJ. Both countries do not have sustainable agriculture target; thus, Target 2.4 is not considered in the comparison. Indonesia and Chile must concentrate on halving food losses and require more energy to meet this Target 12.3. Only Target 13.1 requires more energy for Chile than Indonesia to be met by 2030 due to having the highest natural disaster potential in Chile. By meeting SDG targets in 2030, Chile resulted in consuming much more per capita energy (100.80 GJ/cap) than the expected global average 73.08 GJ/cap when Indonesia is obtained approximately 50.45 GJ/cap. Therefore, when Chile needs to consider reducing per capita energy consumption, Indonesia should increase energy usage per capita until 2030. This study includes some limitations due to assumptions and unavailable information as follows: This study focuses on secondary data and literature reviews. These analyses are formed based on the conditions of the country studied, considered SDG assessment indicators, and energy requirement calculations based on literature review. It may vary significantly from one country to another. In some indicator assessment, data were available for only a few years, and the growth rate is calculated based on existing data sets. The result can vary due to considering data sets for different years. Also, if there is no target for a specific indicator in Chile, additional energy is not considered for that target. However, Target 2.4 and Target 12.5 may save energy, in contrary, Target 11.2 may require extra energy in 2030. This study only predicts the total national energy demand. The current energy policy impact on demand-side in Chile is not considered for scenarios. The methodology including growth rate calculation for indicator assessment can bring very different results if another approach is applied in the calculations. This modelling approach is potentially limiting because it provides results for all Chilean energy demand by 2030, not regional analysis. Also, this study does not consider the impact of SDGs on sub-sectors of energy demand in Chile. Further studies are planned to investigate the contribution of the calculated additional energy from SDGs to the sectors and to distribute this energy according to the fuel type for national energy balance in 2030. Finally, the discussion in this paper can support the provision of recommendations and insights for energy researchers working on implementing energy-related SDGs to the long-term sustainable energy planning of developing countries, and policy prioritization to find the right pathway to meet SDGs.  The authors declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this paper. Y. Simsek acknowledges the financial support of the Chilean