This paper presents the results from a statistical study of a continuous zinc-solution purification procedure. The purpose of the work was to compare varying process conditions and to find out the correlation between the process parameters and the filter pumping pressures in different circumstances. In the first case, a filtration problem is slowly generated and optimal conditions are not found. The second, longer time period consists of clear changes and possibly different process operating ranges. The third part consists of a time period with small pressure changes and conditions close to optimal.
                  Secondly, variations in the direction and strength of the affecting parameters are studied. For this, correlation values between pressure and certain chosen variables are evaluated. According to the results, the correlation of pressure with process parameters is greatly dependent on the process conditions. In addition, significant variables differ between sets of data and it is easy to find parameters apparently affecting the process.Process development and modernisation sometimes leads to unwanted changes in process dynamics, and process control requires updating to meet the new requirements. Generally, in chemical processes this kind of phenomenon appears when the same reaction mechanisms lead to different intermediate phases, or to changes in the physical properties of the same product. In the continuous solution purification process studied here, the equilibrium states that control the deposition process changed slightly. As a result, new components became dominant, changing the process behaviour. In the electrolytic zinc production process, metallic zinc is produced by reducing it electrochemically from an aqueous solution. Before electrowinning, zinc is leached in a sulphate-based process and harmful components are gradually deposited from a water-based acid solution. Finally zinc is deposited electrochemically, stripped from cathodes, melted and cast ( During purification, all elements nobler than zinc are deposited from the sulphate solution. These elements lower the efficiency of electric currents drastically and cause zinc dissolution even in small amounts. Impurities such as copper and cadmium can be removed easily, but the addition of zinc powder alone is not effective in removing cobalt, nickel, germanium and antimony. Therefore, these elements are deposited using zinc powder with cupric ions and arsenic trioxide ( Filtration between purification stages ensures that deposited components will not continue to the next stage of purification. The filtration press is composed from a cloth screen and a pump. Deposit granules form a layer on the cloth screen, while the pump maintains the flow. In optimal conditions, the filtration pressure is stable and does not grow even though the deposit layer gets thicker. However, in problematic situations, even a small amount of deposit may create a nearly impermeable layer. Poor permeability leads to use of high pump pressure and risks of breakage. The problem can be fixed if the same process parameters predominate in all circumstances, and interactions (cause and effect relationships) are easy to find out. Practice shows that this is not the case—the effect of process parameters on the pump pressure is not linear. The non-linear, or in some data sets even the opposite, effect of the controlled factors makes use of intelligent modelling and control methods nearly impossible. Methods like SOM, clustering or neural networks all require representative training data for the calculation of the interaction between variables. If the process operating range and properties of the deposited material change during the training data, results do not even come close to reality. With this in mind, calculation of cross-correlation tables was used to compare different data sets. The purpose of the work was to study the behaviour of the filtration pressure in good and problematic process conditions. The second target was to determine the factors, which have an effect on the pressure during a longer time period. As a consequence, it was necessary to test the interactions of several solution and deposit components. The continuous solution purification process produces an extensive amount of data from continuous analysers and laboratory tests. This work concentrates on evaluating factors affecting the pump pressure (consists several pumps, only the total value is used) in situations where optimal conditions are achieved after process modification. During the research period, filtration pressure varied widely and thus cross-correlations were calculated for three different sets of data ( The calculated correlation values indicate the relationships between variables, and shows how significantly the measured concentrations (of solution and deposit elements) affect the pressure ( In the case of two non-linearly related variables, Pearson’s correlation coefficient is not an appropriate measure for their association. Instead, for example, Spearman’s correlation should be used. Like the There is, of course, some loss of information in replacing the original numbers by their rank. However, the non-parametric correlation is more robust than the linear correlation, in the same sense as the median is more robust than the mean. The composition of the purified zinc-solution fluctuated during this research, causing variations in the solution and deposit components. There were also variations in the amount of the reagents added (arsenic feed, acid feed and zinc feed) and target circumstances (potential in reactors and buffering capacity), in the attempt to achieve optimal conditions. In consequence, it was possible to study the interaction between the different components and pump pressure. Cross-correlations were calculated for all variables, but only the most important ones ( In the case of the whole data set, only acid feed and buffering capacity have a clear correlation to the pump pressure ( As a result, the cross-correlations reveal only which factors have the strongest effect on the pressure in each data set and how strongly the variables depend on each other. The main purpose of this calculation is to eliminate those factors, which affect only some specific process conditions, and to understand the risks of certain variable combinations. For example, the buffering capacity of both reactors 2 and 5 correlates nicely (0.43 and 0.52) with pressure. However, the interdependence of the reactors’ buffering capacities is so strong (correlation 0.92) that only one of these parameters should be used in process modelling and control. After calculating the cross-correlation tables, variations in the direction and strength of the correlation values between different data sets were studied. The correlation values between filtration pressure and variables were collected from cross-correlation tables and plotted ( There are several possible reasons for this variation: The process has drifted from one operating range to another, and the blocking sensitivity of the filter cake differs between these areas ( Variables, which were not taken into account, have an effect on the solution and deposit components and thus on the pressure. The data lacks sufficiently large variations in pressure and process variables The results presented in Interpreting when the correlation between process parameters and filtration problems is reliable is problematic. For example, in the first data set, the Si content in purified solution had a positive correlation value of 0.5, but in the longer time period it had a negative correlation value of −0.2 ( The drifting from one operating range to another and changes in the blocking sensitivity of the filter can be noticed from several process variables. For example, the acid feed has a strong negative correlation with pressure in the largest data set, a weaker correlation in the first set and a zero correlation in the last set ( The acid–pressure scatter plot ( The behaviour presented in A cumulative frequency distribution graph ( The variation in the correlation values illustrates how easily apparently correlating variables can be found by choosing a suitable time period. It also shows that only prolonged research periods and systematic changes in the process create process parameters that influence the larger operating range. One example of this is the buffering capacity of the reactors. Its effect on pressure becomes visible over a longer time period. In the first data set, the filtering pressure and the buffering capacities vary greatly, but still the significance of the buffering capacities is obscured by other variables more important in the prevailing operating range. On the other hand, there are no clear changes in the pressure in the last part of the data, and therefore no interactions between variables and pressure can be found. During a longer time period with changing operation conditions, the significance of the buffering capacities is revealed. The correlation analysis used here applies conversely in process control. By observing the correlation between certain process parameters and the pressure, operators may foresee the sliding of process towards problematic areas and prevent it by making corrective changes before a filtration problem develops. In future research, the classification will be continued by dividing data into more exact operating ranges. The purpose is to choose variables that have an effect on all process conditions. After that, variables that are effective only in certain circumstances will be used to interpret smaller changes, which cannot be explained by the main parameters.