A new analytical approach able to predict the mechanical behaviour of fully grouted rockbolts subjected to pull-out tests is proposed in this paper. Input parameters of such approach are: bolt radius, bolt’s Young modulus, displacement of the free end of the bolt and the constitutive law of the rockbolt–grout joint interface. The limited circumstances under which it is accurate to determine such constitutive law from pull-out tests are also presented. A solution for the load–displacement curve obtained during pull-out tests has been developed and is detailed in the case of a tri-linear bond-slip model. Comparison with experimental results obtained via in situ pull-out tests has led to the validation of this approach.For the past 30 In order to help the rock mass support itself (Rabcewicz This paper deals with fully grouted rockbolts. The three main features of such reinforcement are ( their capacity to stabilize jointed rock masses (thus to support unstable rock blocks), provided their far end is anchored to a stable zone; their confinement role, contributing to the use of the broken rock belt to confine the stable rock mass; the improvement that they induce in the mechanical properties of the rock mass, which restrains its deformation. At the same time, the easy installation of the CMC rockbolts and their low cost compared to that of other reinforcement techniques have contributed to their worldwide spread in the past years. At the present time, the major concern remains the improvement of their design; for such purpose, a better understanding of the mechanical behaviour of fully grouted rockbolts is required, which can be achieved by means of field monitoring, laboratory and in situ testing, analytical approaches and numerical modelling. In the 1970s, Freeman Regarding the numerical modelling, Ivanović and Neilson As for the analytical approaches, Farmer These works are fundamental and have deeply contributed to a better understanding of the behaviour of rockbolts under tension loads, which has in turn led to a higher quality design, a reduction in costs and an increase in safety. Nonetheless, a complete solution able to predict the behaviour of fully grouted rockbolts under tension has not yet been offered. The aim of this paper is to present such a complete solution taking into account a tri-linear constitutive law determined in advance. The pull-out test and the bond-slip model are presented first. Later, a closed-form solution for the prediction of the load–displacement curve issued from pull-out tests is developed. The restricted conditions under which a pull-out test is useful to determine the joint interface constitutive law are then described in detail. Finally, comparisons between the analytical solution and experimental data are shown, and the results are discussed. Pull-out tests are very useful to investigate the anchoring capacity of rockbolts. Design engineers conduct such tests to derive the shear stress as a function of the shear slip, provided the tests are carried out under accurate conditions (see Section Pull-out tests can be executed either in laboratory or in situ. Their principle is as follows: a borehole of radius When failure takes place at either the bolt–grout interface or the grout-rock interface, a shear stress During a pull-out test, at least two measures should be monitored in order to be able to exploit the test results: the axial load and the axial displacement at In practice, laboratory tests are preferred to in situ tests because they are cheaper and easier to control. Besides, laboratory pull-out tests allow studying the influence of different parameters (such as the confinement pressure or the grout quality) on the bond strength. However, in situ tests are very helpful to know whether the bolt and the grout in use are compatible with the mechanical properties of the surrounding rock mass and its degree of damage. The decoupling or debonding mechanism at the interface is represented by a bond-slip model (shear stress–shear slip relationship). A bond-slip model is a rheological characteristic of the joint between the rockbolt and the grouting material (or between the grouting material and the rock mass) and it can be established from pull-out tests results. Within the context of the ongoing Ph.D. thesis, a broad laboratory pull-out test campaign will be soon carried out for such purpose on both rockbolts and cable bolts and the results will be published later. In order to develop analytical solutions to the behaviour of bolts subjected to tensile loads, the bond-slip characteristic should be known in advance. In this paper, a tri-linear bond-slip model has been chosen as the constitutive law of the bolt–grout interface because literature ( Basically, a tri-linear model (see The aim of this section is to determine analytically the full-range behaviour of a grouted rockbolt throughout the duration of a pull-out test. Therefore, expressions for both the axial force and the axial displacement at point Hereafter, the reference axis will be set in the joint interface, so that   Let According to We shall accept henceforth that the shear slip The constitutive law of the joint is Furthermore, in practice S(W) is a continuous function defined as follows: S(W) Combining the last three equations, the governing equation of the pull-out test problem is: Since the aforementioned boundary conditions do not depend on point On the other hand, the condition To sum up, data needed to solve the problem given by The approach to the problem presented above is also valid when failure takes place at the grout–rock interface; in such case, an appropriate joint constitutive law, the borehole radius and an equivalent material Young’s modulus should be used. Anyway, the mathematical problem remains the same. The problem will be solved using Inasmuch as In order to solve the problem easily, Eq. The two last transformations lead to: As long as In short, from the known function A detailed explanation of this new solution is presented in the next paragraph. A tri-linear constitutive law has been considered for the rockbolt–grout joint interface. In the case of a tri-linear constitutive law (see Three scenarios are possible for solving The development of the analytical solution for a given Calculating Finding Calculating Inversing the last expression leads to the determination of In the later case, derivation of A new analytical solution to the pull-out test problem is henceforth available. A prediction of the load–displacement curve is supplied by the last equations applied to point The bond-slip model can be derived from the load–displacement curve obtained in a pull-out test. This is a crucial step in the design of fully grouted rockbolts. The influence of various parameters such as the grout quality, the borehole-to-rockbolt-diameter ratio, the confinement pressure and the borehole roughness can be studied through the realisation of these tests and the most influencing parameters can then be determined. Since the constitutive law is a rheological property of the rockbolt–grout joint (or grout–rock joint), it does not depend on the embedment length. Therefore, the validation of the bond-slip model can be carried out by conducting two pull-out tests under identical conditions but with different anchoring lengths. Monitoring of a pull-out test provides the following data:  The embedment length is long enough, so that  The embedment length is short enough to ensure a uniform distribution of the shear stress As it can be seen, in none of the two situations is the displacement of the free end of the bolt needed. Besides, it is important to note that, in general, in situ pull-out tests do not allow the determination of an accurate constitutive law for the rockbolt–grout interface. The current section is devoted to the comparison between experimental data, issued from pull-out tests, and the analytical solution proposed in Section Chen and Ren As stated in step 1 (see Section This pull-out test has also been studied by Ren et al.  Furthermore, one of the phases of Ren et al.’s analytical approach is characterised by a decrease of both the axial displacement and the axial force. Ren et al. In this case, the pull-out test was conducted by Rong et al. The bond-slip parameters proposed by Ren et al. The comparison between the experimental data (circles), Ren et al.’s A new analytical approach for the mechanical behaviour of fully grouted rockbolts subjected to pull-out tests has been proposed in this paper. This theoretical approach provides a complete solution to predict and to understand the behaviour of fully grouted rockbolts under tensile loads. The originality of this approach lies in the fact that the boundary conditions do not concern the point where the load is applied; they solely concern the free end of the bolt. This allows using the displacement of the mentioned extremity as the only key parameter to predict the load–displacement behaviour throughout a pull-out test. Experimental results issued from two different in situ pull-out tests have been compared to the predictions of the new analytical approach and the results are very satisfactory. A tri-linear bond-slip model has been used in both cases to characterize the rockbolt–grout interface. A compelling insight into the determination of the constitutive law of the joint between the rockbolt and the grout (or between the grout and the surrounding rock mass) has also been presented and it has been demonstrated that only short embedment lengths are useful to the derivation of such law. For such purpose, a wide laboratory pull-out test campaign will be soon conducted by the authors. This research work has been carried out within the framework of the European programme RFCS (PROSAFECOAL Project). The collaboration, discussions and knowledge exchanged between partners, in addition to the technical visits attended during the coordination meetings have invaluably contributed to the fulfilment of this work.