Underground mining is among the most energy-intensive industries and ventilation comprises a significant portion of the energy demands of this important industry. Using the vast volume of broken rock, left in a decommissioned mine pit, as a thermal energy storage mass has enormous potential to lower ventilation-related energy costs in deep underground mines. This approach facilitates moderating seasonal air temperature variations. Seasonal thermal energy storage is a cost-effective solution to improve cooling and heating process efficiencies, thereby reducing associated costs. Temperature gradients observed in the proposed storage system suggest the presence of a natural convection heat transfer mechanism that is buoyancy-driven. The effect of natural convection and a variety of heat transfer mechanisms were modeled and simulation results and field-data measurements were compared. The conjugate heat transfer and fluid flow model that was developed considers the porous rock mass in the rock-pit along with the air (i.e. fluid) blanketing the top surface. The effects of rock size, permeability and porosity were studied. It was observed that, for the range of porosities (from 0.45 to 0.20), these parameters have a small effect on the outlet air temperature and the performance of thermal storage phenomenon. The novel model compares forced (from ventilation fan) and natural (result of buoyancy) convection. Further, it incorporates the effect of design factors, such as air trench positions and flow rate of ventilated air, on energy savings.Local Thermal Equilibrium Local Thermal Non-Equilibrium Seasonal Thermal Energy Storage density density of fluid diameter of the broken rock dynamic viscosity of the fluid generation of turbulent kinetic energy due to buoyancy generation of turbulent kinetic energy due to mean velocity gradients fluid phase fluid velocity gravitational acceleration heat transfer coefficient identity or second order unit tensor Nabla symbol Nusselt between air and rock Partial differential symbol porosity pressure Operating Pressure air pressure at the top of the ambient air molecular weight of the gas universal gas constant Prandtl number turbulent Prandtl number Reynolds number specific heat solid phase specific surface area surface area through which convection heat transfer takes place (rock-pit surface) superficial fluid velocity time temperature surface temperature temperature of the surrounding ambient air that is sufficiently far from the rock surface temperature at top of the ambient air thermal conductivity thermal conductivity of the fluid turbulent kinetic energy turbulent Prandtl number for turbulent Prandtl number for turbulent viscosity Energy intensity is a major hurdle to future development of the global mining industry. It derives from two major issues: (1) the insatiable demand of the mining industry for energy for electricity, heating, and cooling; and (2) unpredictable fossil fuel prices caused by numerous political and economic factors. Mining is among the most energy-intensive industries, along with chemical, petroleum, and base metals Among the energy-intensive activities at a mine, ventilation (fresh air, air heating and cooling) is a top contributor. Studies have shown that 40% of the overall electricity consumption in a typical underground mine is due to ventilation Ventilation energy demands are in form of electricity (needed to run main/booster/auxiliary fans for air delivery or mechanical refrigeration for cooling) or thermal heat (sourced from fossil fuels such as natural gas, propane, or diesel) Ventilation costs cannot be eliminated, but they can be effectively reduced by employing renewable energy sources at mine site As a natural and renewable energy storage technique, STES can help deep underground mines meet refrigeration and air preheating requirements and reduce associated greenhouse gas emissions. For example, employing STES at the Creighton mine in Sudbury, Ontario reduced seasonal variations in the temperature of the intake fresh air passing through the natural heat exchanger unit Since large-scale STES systems have been deployed, ventilation engineers have gained engineering tools with which they can assess STES system capacity and improve system performance. Their research initiated development of empirical relations that are backed by extensive amount of field data but lack the means of predicting the capability of system to satisfy a growing ventilation demand To analyze the storage and extraction of heat in such large-scale STES units, it is necessary to establish a clear understanding of heat exchange and fluid mechanics in the porous structure of the rock-pit. This approach is based on assuming a homogeneous porous medium (i.e. solid rock mass and fluid air) Interphase exchange of heat plays an important role in the performance of STES systems. The local thermal equilibrium (LTE) assumption can be made when the solid phase and the fluid inside the pores are thermally equilibrated in microscopic (pore) scale However, there are other potentially important mechanisms that have not yet been studied. For example, most STES systems are large—hundreds of metres in each length—and exhibit relatively large temperature differences (20–40 °C). The performance of a given STES system depends on several factors, which can be classified as controllable and uncontrollable. The present study primarily considered controllable factors such as number of active trenches, air flow rate through each trench and through the whole system, and pressure drop and air speed in the rock-pit and ventilation trenches. The significance of uncontrollable factors, such as wind speed in the vicinity of the pit, air leakage in closed trenches, solar radiation, and ice formation will be examined in future studies by the authors. According to the findings of To conduct this type of research, equations of heat transfer and fluid flow inside the rock-pit (i.e. porous medium) should be coupled with the air (i.e. fluid) blanketing the top surface. This so called “conjugate” modeling is necessary and considered as an important feature of the current research. The conjugate heat transfer and fluid flow model can qualitatively and quantitatively evaluate the significance of natural convection. The performance of STES system will be studied in three canonical cases: In the absence of gravity, so there is zero buoyancy everywhere In a non-conjugate model that ignores the presence of fluid air on the top of the rock-pit: buoyancy can act in the porous rock-pit but there will be no circulation of air on the top of the rock-pit In a conjugate model where buoyancy can act in the porous rock-pit and the overlying air. Thermal storage performance of the large-scale STES is then evaluated using the developed model and the potential energy savings are quantified and discussed. The 3D mathematical model of rock-pit STES developed by Temperature at the overlying (top) boundary of air is set as a sinusoidal function to represent the seasonal ambient air temperature profile. The lowest and highest temperature values are assumed to be −20 °C (i.e. minimum winter daily average) and +20 °C (i.e. maximum summer daily average), respectively. This temperature gradient between the rock-pit and ambient leads to natural convection flow. The mathematical model comprises two components: the rock-pit and ambient air. The porous rock-pit is assumed to have a laminar and transient flow regime while its interphase heat is deemed to experience LTNE The heat transfer coefficient The specific surface area, In the ambient air, transient turbulent fluid flow and heat transfer with buoyancy are considered. The turbulent mass, momentum, and energy transport equations subject to appropriate boundary conditions are solved. Several temperature-dependent thermophysical properties of air are also taken into account. Conservation equations for turbulent mass, momentum, energy, and species in vector form are: Turbulent flow in the current model was studied numerically to determine which of four turbulence models (k-ε, k-ω, Reynolds Stress Model and Spalart-Allmaras) is best suited to predict the temperature of the air leaving the STES system and approximate experimental data. All four models were in close agreement (<1% relative difference) with experimental data ( Therefore, the most commonly used turbulent model, k-ε, was selected to minimize computational costs. In addition, published literature on numerical modeling of turbulence inside porous media has largely recommended the use of the k–ε model, in which turbulence is characterized by the turbulent kinetic energy (k) and its rate of dissipation (ε), which is coupled to the turbulent viscosity The boundary conditions are listed as bellow:      It should be noted that the specified boundary conditions are defined based on the accurate and detailed experimental data collected from Creighton mine. Ghoreishi-Madiseh et al. The geometry shown in Using finite volume solver ANSYS Fluent 15, the mathematical models given by Eqs. The proposed model was validated with outlet air temperature data collected from Creighton mine by To evaluate effects of buoyancy as well as air-to-porous rock conjugated modeling, the 3D canonical model ( 6 active trenches (symmetric with 3 active trenches on each side) 4 active trenches (symmetric with 2 active trenches on each side at 147 and 260 m depth) It is assumed that air is drawn through each active trench by identical ventilation fans. The second part investigated the effect of total air flow rates of 240, 360, and 480 m This section will include assessment and analysis of the performance of the STES system and its associated energy savings.  Natural convection occurs when the air adjacent to the rock-pit surface is moved by buoyancy forces induced by temperature-related density differences of at least 20 °C between the rock surface and bulk air ( It is worth to mention that in spite of the complicated convection theory, the heat transfer convection rate is related to the temperature difference, and is determined by Newton’s Law as shown in Eq. At the rock-air interface, the air temperature is very close to the rock-pit surface temperature. Natural convection heat transfer on a surface is an experimentally defined parameter that be subject to on all variables influencing convection (e.g., geometry of the surface, orientation), as well as the thermo-physical properties of bulk fluid (in this case air). While natural convection is a well-established heat transfer component, the complexities of bulk fluid movement make it hard to be presented through simple analytical relations. Some analytical solutions have been developed for natural convection, but they cannot be applied as a general solution because they are developed for canonical cases with specific geometries under many simplifying assumptions. Therefore, in this study, according to its very specific and complex geometry, the heat transfer coefficient value (0.061 W/m In winter of Year 1, the simulated mass-average outlet air temperature was similar for conjugate models with and without buoyancy force and for the non-conjugate model ( Compared to the 6-trench design in  When just two pairs of trenches (147 and 260 m depth) were used, outlet air temperature was closer to that of the rock mass ( Auto-compression and the geothermal gradient, coupled with heat generation from mining machines are the main sources of heat load in underground mines. As a result, more cooling loads are required in mine thermal management To study the effects of physical properties of rock mass on the performance of thermal storage system, According to Effects of having 6 and 4 active ventilation trenches (i.e. air draw points) are shown in As shown in Assuming natural gas is the main source of heat in the mine site (i.e. 422 tons CO Preheating and cooling account for 50–80% of annual ventilation operating costs at underground mines. The STES system at Creighton mine in Ontario, Canada is a precious asset that offers natural cooling and heating for ventilating deeper mine levels. STES is a cost-effective strategy to enhance cooling and heating process efficiencies, thereby reducing associated costs. In areas with sizeable seasonal temperature oscillations, this type of natural heat exchanger can be used for cooling/heating purposes in underground mine ventilation systems. A conjugate heat transfer and fluid flow model was developed to better understand the performance of large-scale STES units for application in mine ventilation. Simulation results were compared and validated based on field measurement at ventilation trenches and ambient air temperature. Temperature gradients observed in the proposed storage system suggest the presence of natural convection effects driven by buoyancy. Effects of buoyancy forces on the fluid flow and heat exchange regimes inside the rock-pit were studied, resulting in comparison of forced convection versus natural convection heat transfer mechanisms. The model was also used to study the effects of number and position of ventilation trenches along with the fresh air flow rate. Increasing air flow rate from 240 to 480 m