Flotation cells have an operating gas rate range. A method to define the range objectively using the relationship between gas holdup and gas rate (ε
                     g vs. J
                     g) is introduced. This is made tractable by the necessary sensors becoming available. Examples in three cell types at three plants illustrate the procedure.A flotation machine has an operating range of gas (air) rate; too low and no concentrate is produced or sanding may occur, too high and “boiling” (breakthrough of large bubbles) and a general disturbed look ensues. Operations normally want to keep inside the range. This becomes important, for example, when trying to take advantage of setting a gas rate profile down a bank, which may mean each cell is at a different setting but all should be in their operating range ( Gas holdup ( Gas rate is expressed as the volumetric flow rate of gas (air) ( In use, the two sensors are placed close to the same location in the cell below the pulp/froth interface. The location should avoid baffles, shrouds, booster cones or launders (as examples). The choice may reflect requirements. For example, if cells in a bank are to be compared then an accessible, geometrically similar location in each may be the target. It was when exploring The result at low  This technique of establishing the operating range is routinely used in plant campaigns conducted by McGill teams. Three examples of operating range, with cells ranging from a 4 The trends (and ranges) in each example are different. There are a number of reasons. The Not all cells investigated have shown such a consistent The use of gas holdup vs. gas rate ( Funding for this work was sponsored initially by Inco, Teck Cominco, Falconbridge and Noranda and now including Corem and SGS Lakefield Research under the Natural Sciences and Engineering Research Council of Canada (NSERC) Collaborative Research and Development (CRD) program. Since 2001, the work is also supported under a NSERC CRD sponsored by the Amira P9 project.