Magnetic whole-cell biocatalysts (MWCBs) for enzymatic biodiesel production from soybean oil were constructed by immobilizing Pseudomonas mendocina cells into Fe3O4-chitosan microspheres. The effects of the MWCBs concentration, temperature, the molar ratio of methanol to oil and water content on biodiesel yield were studied. For the MWCBs, a biodiesel yield of 87.32% was obtained under the optimum operating condition (MWCBs concentration of 10wt.%, water content of 10wt.%, 35°C, methanol to oil molar ratio of 4:1 and a four-step addition of methanol) for 48h. The kinetic data followed Michaelis-Menten model (r
                     max, 2.1801mg/min; Km
                     , 0.4272mg/mL; KI
                     , 0.2308mg/mL) with competitive inhibition by methanol. MWCBs had an excellent reusability and still gave a biodiesel yield of 83.57% after 10 cycles, which was higher than that of Fe3O4-uncontained whole cell biocatalysts (74.06%). Moreover, MWCBs could be separated and be recycled easily due to their superparamagnetism. Therefore, MWCBs would be promising for large-scale biodiesel industry.The depletion of petroleum and global warming issues have triggered a growing interest in developing alternative liquid fuel. Biodiesel is deemed to be an ideal substitute for being renewable, nontoxic and biodegradable Some microorganisms can be used as whole-cell biocatalysts for biodiesel production Chitosan has become attractive as a carrier for immobilization due to its characteristics of nontoxicity, physiological inertness, hydrophilicity and biocompatibility. Introducing Fe  FeSO  The reaction using soybean oils as substrate was carried out in a cylindrical glass bottle (50 MWCBs were separated from the reaction mixtures by magnet after each cycle and were directly reused into new reaction solutions for the next cycle. Samples for the measurement of biodiesel yield were collected at designated intervals. The SEM images of MWCBs particles were obtained using SU-8010 equipment (Hitachi, Japan). XRD patterns were recorded by D/MAX-2500 diffractometer (Rigaku, Japan). The magnetic property of MWCBs was observed by LDJ-9600 VSM (LDJ Electronics, USA). 4 Samples of FAMEs obtained from the reaction mixtures were centrifuged at 9000  Crystalline structure of MWCBs was examined by XRD ( As presented in  To decrease the deactivation of MWCBs, stepwise addition of methanol was used for transesterification of soybean oils Based on these results, a four-step addition of methanol is deemed to be an appropriately way to increase the biodiesel yield and to reduce the cost of biodiesel production. Given that, all subsequent investigations were carried out at a four-step addition of methanol. As seen in Control experiment was performed with Fe As indicated in Optimum water content is required to maintain transesterification activity and lipase stability The mechanism of MWCBs-catalyzed transesterification is assumed to follow the Michaelis-Menten and Lineweaver-Burk model With these assumptions, the rate equation of transesterification is expressed by Eq. The double-reciprocal form of the Michaelis-Menten equation is defined by: Kinetic parameters in Eq. MWCBs were separated from the reaction system by using a magnet and reused into the fresh reactants. Magnetic whole-cell biocatalysts were constructed, characterized and applied for biodiesel production from soybean oil. A maximum biodiesel yield of 87.32% was obtained under the optimum operating condition (MWCBs concentration of 10 The authors gratefully acknowledge financial support from