Small diameter hydrocyclones have had an increasing use in performing difficult phase separations in many industries. Further, these 10 mm diameter hydrocyclones also have the potential to be applied to fine particle classification, in particular to collect the sub-micron fraction.
                  The key operating parameters that affect the dewatering and classification performance of 10 mm hydrocyclones are the operating pressure and feed solids concentration, both of which have previously been studied in detail. Previous studies on larger cyclones have modified the viscosity by temperature, solids concentration and sucrose addition. In industrial operations, the role of temperature may be significant, either due to climatic variations, or by active manipulation. In particular, the effect of temperature on the relationship between the water recovery and the bypass fraction has not been described. This is of importance, as fine classification requires both a small bypass and cutsize, while dewatering would benefit from a large bypass, small cutsize and, if possible, a low water recovery.
                  In the present study, the effect of temperature between 10 and 60 °C was studied on low concentration suspensions of silica flour in water using a 10 mm diameter hydrocyclone. It was observed that the phase separation improves for increasing temperatures. The cutsize was decreased from 5.3 to 2.8 μm, while the water recovery decreased simultaneously. The bypass fraction, however, also increased significantly (from 0.36 to 0.48) with temperature, increasing the solids recovery and, importantly, did not follow the same trend as the water recovery. This has not been reported previously.
                  The corrected cutsize changes were successfully predicted using the equilibrium orbit theory, while the solids recovery was interpreted using residence time relationships. These described satisfactorily the relationship with liquid viscosity changes due to temperature.Hydrocyclones can be used for size separations and dewatering applications of solid-liquid mixtures. Small diameter hydrocyclones have the potential to be applied to fine particle (<10 μm) suspensions, in particular to classify and dewater sub-micron particles, due to the very small cutsizes that can be achieved. The potential for altering the performance by changing the temperature is of interest, both from an operating point of view where climatic changes may be significant, and for design, where performance guarantees must be met. Further, there exists the potential to enhance difficult separations by changing the operating conditions. The separation efficiency is determined primarily by the cutsize, the bypass and the water recovery to underflow. The cutsize changes with temperature due to the change in viscosity, and experimental studies have been reviewed in detail ( Less well understood are the bypass and water recovery. Many authors assume that the water or slurry recovery equals the bypass in a separation using hydrocyclones ( Many industries use this type of devices for sub-micron separation or solution dewatering. Since the relationship between cutsize, bypass and water recovery determines the performance, it is important to determine how different operating conditions affect the separation, both in terms of dewatering and classification. Solids recovery is the ratio of the solids rate in the coarse stream (underflow) to the solids rate in the feed: The water recovery, The partition curve shows the fraction of material of a specific size, If the experimentally measured partition curve is monotonic it can be corrected to asymptote to zero at small particle sizes by scaling the partition number. The relationship between the experimental partition curve,  The equilibrium orbit theory is based on a balance of forces under laminar flow conditions. The tangential velocity of the fluid increases towards the centre of the hydrocyclone, resulting in a greater outward centrifugal force on the particles. The radial fluid velocity decreases towards the centre of the cyclone, causing an inward particle motion. In theory, for each particle size these two forces will balance at a particular radial position, with small particles towards the centre, and larger particles near the outside. Since the inner vortex is moving upwards towards the vortex finder and the outer vortex downward towards the spigot, this results in a separation. From the equilibrium orbit theory, the cutsize of a cyclone is proportional to the square root of the viscosity ( It is however unlikely that a particle will reach its equilibrium position during the relatively short residence time within the mini-hydrocyclone (of the order of 0.03 s at a flow rate of 180 l First suggested by If all other operating variables other than the temperature are kept constant, the following expression should therefore hold if the non-equilibrium theory holds true: The decrease in the viscosity will have two effects; increasing the flow turbulence and reducing the drag, so that smaller particles can be expected to be recovered and increase the solids recovery. The experiments used a 10 mm Mozley ceramic hydrocyclone with a 2.6 mm vortex finder and 1.5 mm spigot. The cyclone was in a recycle loop with a Mono pump operating at a constant feed pressure of 3.5 bar. A heating coil with thermostat was used to control the temperature of the slurry. Measurements were taken for every 10 °C temperature interval in the range of 10–60 °C. The solids used were silica flour supplied by Hepworth Minerals, with a Flow rates were determined by timed sampling. The underflow and overflow stream were collected simultaneously using two separate containers while the feed stream was taken by collecting both the underflow and overflow stream together. A 20 ml sub-sample was taken from each stream and weighed wet and dry to determine the liquid content. Sub-samples were also taken for particle size analysis using a Malvern Mastersizer. For each temperature three duplicate measurements were taken. Particle and mass balances generally were within 5%. The solids recovery measured for each temperature is shown in The effect of temperature on the volumetric (slurry) recovery, The results show that more clarified liquid is obtained in the overflow as the temperature increases. This observation is very important when a hydrocyclone is being used as a thickener as it means that by increasing temperature, not only does the liquid recovered decrease, but also the solids recovered increases, resulting in a greater underflow concentration.  Partition numbers were calculated from the solids recovery and size data and the three parameters of the partition equation fitted by minimising an inverse particle size weighted least squares error. As the temperature is increased, the partition curve shifts to yield a finer operating cutsize. The corrected cutsize is shown in   As can be seen in Together with the decrease in cutsize is observed an increase in the bypass, both effects contributing to an increased solids recovery. Since the bypass is generally regarded as being related to the water recovery, this has implications for the dewatering efficiency. This will be discussed in greater detail in the following section.  The water recovery decreases with temperature. As noted above, the combination of increased bypass, decreased cutsize and decreased water recovery with an increase in temperature results in an improved dewatering efficiency. In contrast to most of the previously reported experimental results, particularly for larger diameter hydrocyclones, the by-pass does not equal the water recovery. Further, as is clear from  As noted above, the measured corrected cutsize follows the theoretical prediction of the equilibrium orbit theory, and is proportional to viscosity The solids recovery is shown as a function of the inverse water viscosity in The effect of changes in temperature on 10 mm hydrocyclone separation was investigated. The results obtained when increasing the temperature were the following: The solids recovery increased, as a result of both an increase in bypass and a decrease in cutsize. The water and slurry recovery decreased. The concentration ratio increased, due to the decreased water recovery and increased solid recovery. The water recovery and bypass were affected oppositely by the change in temperature. This has not been reported previously. The bypass was significantly higher than either the water or slurry recoveries. The sharpness of separation was unaffected by the change in temperature. As the temperature increases, the separation improves in terms of dewatering, due to the larger bypass and solids recovery and the smaller cutsize, although the classification deteriorates due to the increase in bypass. The observed change in cutsize could be closely predicted using the equilibrium orbit theory, while the total solids recovery change with temperature and viscosity followed the residence time theory.