The preparation and characterization of spinel LiMn2O4 have been studied. Spinel lithium manganese oxides are prepared by a sol–gel method using LiNO3 and Mn(CH3COO)2 ·4H2O as starting materials in which the obtained gel is heated at various temperatures after pretreatment at 350°C or without pretreatment in air. The LiMn2O4 samples prepared with pretreatment have uniform microsized particles while those obtained without pretreatment have agglomerated particles of irregular shapes. The thermal pretreatment at 350°C improves the electrochemical behaviour in terms of discharge capacity and rate capability. The results can be correlated with an increase in lithium surface reaction sites in these materials, as inferred by this small grain size and large surface area.Lithium transition metal oxides are candidate cathode materials for lithium-ion rechargeable batteries Preparation of LiMn In this paper, we describe a synthetic procedure, using a sol–gel method, which can yield spinel LiMn Manganese acetates and LiNO The thermal decomposition of the gel powders was studied using a thermal gravimetric analyser with simultaneous recording of weight losses (TGA) and temperature variation (DTA). The phase and crystallinity of the products were examined by means of X-ray diffraction (XRD) with Cu Kα radiation. The morphologies of the products were observed using a scanning electron microscope(SEM). The specific surface area of the products was determined by the Brunauer–Emmett–Teller (BET) method. Electrochemical measurements were performed in a Swage lock type cell with EC+DEC/1 M LiPF The TG–DTA curve for gel powders heated at a rate of 10°C/min in air are given in The temperature of formation of the LiMn To assess the effect of temperature, LiMn It has been also reported that the value of the average oxidation state of manganese in the spinel phase is related to the lattice constant of the cubic unit cell LiMn The resulting LiMn A spinel LiMn This work was financially supported by the Korea Science and Engineering Foundations under contract No. 966-0300-006-2.