The liquid–solid heterogeneous non-catalytic reaction between acid and minerals is the foremost principle of matrix acidizing. Previous mathematical models failed to describe the acid etching issue of rock particle clusters with the property of fractal surface in a three-dimensional space. We apply fractal geometry principles to characterize the area and volume of the rough rock particles on the basis of a mathematical model of a single particle. Based on chemical reaction kinetics and mass transfer theory, we present a modified shrinking core model for the acid–rock reaction of a mineral particle cluster that is undergoing a surface reaction. Using logarithmic normal distribution functions to describe the grain distribution of rocks, we describe the variations of the extent of leaching under surface reaction control. Our analysis indicates that clusters with larger fractal dimensions, smaller mean sizes and less disperse particles will be less dissolved when most of the other factors are kept constant.Matrix acidizing has been commonly used as a stimulation technique in both carbonate and sandstone reservoirs. Unlike hydraulic fracturing, matrix acidizing is strongly affected by the reaction process of acid and rock ( The acid rock reaction is actually a type of liquid–solid heterogeneous non-catalytic reaction, which is usually defined by the shrinking core model introduced by On the microscopic scale, it is observed that the interface of the acid–rock reaction is rough with fractal character ( The above reviews indicate that there are not yet any comprehensive studies that investigate the influence of both surface roughness and the size distribution of mineral particles on the acid rock reaction. To overcome this omission, we first consider a piece of rock as a cluster of rough and hetero-granular mineral particles. Then, we describe the structure of the cluster by a fractal methodology and attempt to rationalize the cluster etch model based on an analysis of the reaction and the traditionally used shrinking core model. Finally, we perform a sensitivity analysis of the model to determine the influence of the model parameters on the etching behavior. We consider the mineral particles as rough surfaces of different sizes and simplify the cubic porous structure of a particle cluster, as shown in  In fractal theory, the relationship between the external surface area of a particle and its radius can be expressed as: According to the correlation given by Mandelbrot of the surface area of solid particle During the reaction, the volume of the particles will be reduced gradually with consequent changes to the surface shape and its fractal dimension. Generally, the acid–rock reaction rate is influenced at several stages, including the transfer, absorption and reaction of hydrogen ions on the particle surface. It is clear that the slowest step will be the rate-limiting step. Regarding matrix acidizing, the reaction between limestone and hydrochloric acid is primarily controlled at the hydrogen ion transport stage. However, other acid–rock reactions are controlled at the surface reaction stage, such as the reaction between dolomite and hydrochloric acid at a low temperature and the reaction between hydrofluoric acid and sandstone (including quartz, potassium feldspar, soda feldspar, etc.). In this paper, we mainly focus on the general reaction rate of acid rock that is controlled at the surface reaction stage. The equation of the surface reaction rate for a single particle, which is characterized by the mineral consumption rate, can be expressed in general terms as a rate equation in a power function form: ( In Eq. Based on the mass balance of the chemical reaction, the reaction expressed by Eq. Then, the following equation can be derived by substituting Eqs. Regarding the particle cluster under the control of a surface reaction, the concentration of hydrogen ions on the surface of the particles can be roughly equal to the main concentration of hydrogen ions (i.e., We can then simplify Eq. In Eq. When Thus, the relative dissolution time can be calculated by the following expression: Let According to Eqs. Taken together, Eqs. The initial radius of a certain particle in the cluster is expressed as The fractal dimension of the external surface is The form of our model is identical to the traditional shrinking core model of a liquid–solid uncatalyzed reaction under a controlled surface reaction, which has been introduced previously ( The remaining mass of a particle, with an initial radius of Based on the relationship between the reaction time and the radius of a single particle, the changed particle radius ( Thus, the remaining mass fraction of the particle with an initial radius As for the particles with different sizes, the remaining mass fraction can be expressed as: As we can see from further analysis, the particle will become completely dissolved if the reaction time Thus, the extent of leaching of a particle cluster can be expressed as below via an integral method: Eq. Under the conditions of diffusion and mass transfer, the mass transfer rate of hydrogen ions is much slower than the liquid–solid reaction rate. Although it is possible for particles to come in contact with acid from every direction, the probability that the hydrogen ions and particles will come in contact with each other on the external surface is clearly much higher than on the internal surface. Therefore, most of the hydrogen ions react with the external surface of the particle cluster; however, a certain amount of hydrogen ions do enter the inside of the particle cluster. Thus, the acidizing reaction of the particle cluster under the control of diffusion and mass transfer is nearly identical to the single particle reaction. This suggests that we can regard the particle cluster as a single particle with a much larger size. The fractal mathematical model for such a scenario has been presented by us previously ( Based on the mathematical derivation above, the commercial software Mathcad was used to complete the numerical simulations. For most minerals, the size distribution of the particles depends on the process under which they were formed. Presently, there are more than ten types of grain distribution functions, among which the lognormal distribution function is widely used ( Additionally, to compare with previous studies in which the particles are assumed to be of equal size ( We can see from It is shown in Moreover, we can see that the variation of the extent of leaching of the heterogeneous particles can be significantly different with a change of To compare the extent of leaching of clusters composed of lognormal distribution particles with different In other words, the mineral cluster is dissolved less when the fractal dimension is larger, the mean size of the particles is smaller and the particles are less dispersed. In this paper, we have used lognormal distributions to discuss the influence of five factors on the particle cluster extent of leaching. As shown in  After analyzing the data in 1st surface fractal dimension ( 2nd kinetics constant of surface reaction ( 3rd average equivalent radius ( 4th reaction time ( 5th main concentration of hydrogen ions ( Therefore, the particle surface shape has a significant impact on the acid–rock reaction. By describing the surface shape characteristics of the particle cluster using fractal theory, we can improve the accuracy of the traditional kinetic theory of the acid rock reaction. After considering the effects of surface roughness and the size distribution of the mineral particles on the extent of leaching of the particle cluster, a modified shrinking core model was examined. The study finds that the surface fractal dimension of the particles has the most significant influence on the cluster extent of leaching. The extent of leaching decreases drastically with an increase of fractal dimension. Clusters with larger fractal dimensions, smaller mean sizes and less dispersed particles will be less dissolved when the values of other factors are kept constant. Thus far, the results are encouraging. In future work, the new model will be applied to a real system, and the experimental data will be used to modify the model. Although fractal dimension is typically assumed to be a constant, fractal theory can be used to improve the accuracy of the traditional kinetic theory of the acid rock reaction by describing the surface shape characteristics of the particle cluster.  fractal shape coefficient of the surface particles, dimensionless shape coefficient of the particle volume, dimensionless equivalent radius of the particles, m initial equivalent radius of the particles, m mass transfer velocity of hydrogen ions, m mass transfer velocity of hydrogen ions toward the particle surface, mol/(m amount of hydrogen ions amount of mineral particle reactants, dimensionless fractal dimension of the particle external surface, reaction time of a single particle, s given reaction time of a particle cluster, s concentration of calcium carbonate in limestone, dimensionless main concentration of the hydrogen ions, mol/m hydrogen ion concentration of the surface particles, mol/m stoichiometric coefficient of the chemical reaction, dimensionless rate constant of the chemical reaction, (mol/m reaction order of the reactive minerals, dimensionless reaction order of hydrogen ions, dimensionless This work was financially supported by the