The influence of microwave pre-treatment on grindability of iron ore (Orissa, India) was investigated by grindability tests. SEM analysis characterized the micro-fractures in microwave treated sample. This may be due to the thermal stress cracking resulted from microwave energy pre-treatment. XRD analysis showed the crystalline content of the sample. It was found that the microwave treated iron ore has peak more than that of untreated ore, i.e. the crystallinity increased with the microwave exposure time. The calculation of HGGI indicated increase in the ease of grinding or decrease in grindability index of the microwave treated ore. Grindability test showed that the microwave treated iron ore grinds much more rapidly initially than the untreated ore. The results showed that the breakage function of both microwave untreated and treated iron ore is dependent of the particle size. The grindability increased significantly as a result of microwave pre-treatment with the specific rate of breakage (S
                     
                        i
                     ) increasing by an average of 50%. It was concluded that microwave assisted grinding produced good results particularly for grinding characteristics.Two industrial problems, energy consumption and mineral recovery have dominated research in comminution. Energy consumption by industrial processes is becoming a major issue worldwide. The demand for minerals and metals are increasing Microwave energy is a non-ionizing electromagnetic radiation with frequencies in the range of 300 There is effect of influence of microwave energy delivery method on strength reduction in ore samples and on mineral ore comminution. Using a multimode microwave cavity, it was found that strength could be significantly reduced in 0.5 Thermal expansions of the selectively heated minerals offer the potential to further liberate the ore minerals from the gangue at larger particle sizes. Cleaner liberation of the ore mineral at a larger particle size would reduce the grinding energy requirements as well as improve the concentrate grade and metal recovery after beneficiation. Microwaves used in comminution, including crushing and grinding processes, have the potential to reduce the required energy. The fundamental principle behind this application remains the ability of microwave to heat individual phases within the ore matrix. The constituents of the ore typically having different thermal and mechanical properties develop stress of sufficient magnitude to create intergranular and transgranular fractures during heating and subsequent quenching of the ore. Energy consumed in comminution can be as high as 50–70% of the total process energy. If full-scale application of microwave technology can be accomplished, the addition and operation of a microwave could be an easy and efficient retrograde to reduce the mill power requirements by 25%. In this paper, it is shown that microwave energy is capable of inducing thermal stress cracking to decrease the energy requirements of grinding and leading to possible new applications for mining industries. In the present investigation, therefore an attempt has been made to investigate the properties of microwave treated minerals for grindability characteristics. Iron ore was taken from Joda mines, Keonjhar (India) for this work. The hematite used in this study was a naturally occurring hematite ore averaging iron content of 62% and a density of 4.63 The schematic diagram of experimental setup is shown in Original sample (iron ore) of 15  SEM has been performed by scanning electron microscope and energy dispersive X-ray micro-analyzer. The model specification was JEOL JSM-5800 scanning microscope, OXFORD ISIS-300 micro-analytical system and BIO-RAD E-5200 coating unit. X-ray powder diffraction measurements were carried out using a Philips PW-1710 X-ray diffractometer with monochromatic radiations under Bragg-Brentano geometry at 40 Infrared spectroscopy deals with the interaction of infrared light with matter. The energy of an infrared photon can be calculated using the Planck energy relation. The frequency, The energy dispersive X-ray spectroscopy (EDX) was performed by energy dispersive X-ray micro-analyzer. The model specification was JEOL JSM-5800 scanning microscope, OXFORD ISIS-300 micro-analytical system and BIO-RAD E-5200 coating unit. To fully characterize the grindability of the ore samples, standard hard groove grindability index (HGGI) tests were performed first. This method determines the relative grindability or ease of pulverizing an ore in comparison to a chosen ore (Galena) given as an index of 100. This method is based on Rittinger's law, which states that work done in pulverizing is proportional to new surface area produced. A prepared sample receives a definite amount of energy in a miniature pulverizes and new surface is determined by sieving. Grindability Index is calculated as, HGGI Grinding machine use eight 1 A 12-in. diameter standard Bond test ball mill with standard mild steel ball charge was used to grind the different test sample size fractions, both microwave treated and untreated. For all tests 0.5 Breakage rates can be modeled based on first-order kinetics, which can be expressed according to Eq. Thus, the breakage selection function To determine the selection function for a particle size class, a semi-logarithmic curve of the remained mass on the screen vs. grinding time is plotted. Then, as grinding process of homogeneous ore follows a first-order kinetics, the slope of the line fitted to data points indicates the selection function.   The aim of this study was to investigate the effect of microwave treatment on grindability of iron ore. SEM analysis showed the micro-fractures in microwave treated coal sample and XRD analysis showed the crystalline content of the sample. Grindability test showed that the microwave treated iron ore grinds much more rapidly initially than the untreated ore. As a result of microwave pre-treatment, the rate of breakage increased, which is an economically important change in grinding characteristics. The grindability increased significantly as a result of microwave pre-treatment with the specific rate of breakage ( Consequently, it was concluded that the microwave assisted grinding was produced good results particularly for grinding characteristics. With further work involving higher power levels and shorter exposure times, the benefits of this technique could be established more convincingly. Microwave energy induced thermal stress cracking that decreases the grinding energy. However, based on energy saving alone, microwaving to improve the grindability of the iron ore was not cost effective. By improving the grindability, changes occur in the grinding circuit that may decrease comminution costs. If the iron ore is easier to grind, there would be less wear of the mill, mill liner, and milling medium. Improved grindability would also result in an increased throughput, and the amount of recycled would be decreased. These factors would contribute to reducing comminution costs per tonne of iron ore. Improved grindability may make the use of microwave treatment economically viable in mineral industry. The authors are very much thankful to the sponsor