Objectives
                  Clavicular fractures account for 2% of all fractures, and more than 80% involve the middle third of the clavicle. Various modalities of treatments have been explained for the same in literature, including nonoperative and operative. Plate fixation has been associated with many complications, whereas nonoperative associated with delayed union, nonunion and mal union.
                  We report case series treated with Titanium elastic nail to fix the displaced midclavicular fractures without comminution.
               
                  Materials and methods
                  20 patients with midclavicular fractures without comminution were included for the study. All were male patient with a mean age of 32.05 years (range 24–40 years). The mean course of the disease was 4 days. Patients were followed up at an interval of 2, 6, 12 weeks till fracture union and Constant Score was used to assess the disability of the upper arm. Fracture reduction and healing were followed up by X-rays to analyze internal fixation with the titanium elastic technique.
               
                  Results
                  All patients were followed up till the fracture union with mean of 4.5 months. The mean bone union time was 12.45 weeks (11–14 weeks). The Constant Score of 94.61 was attained at the latest follow-up. None of the patients had any complications. The anatomical reduction, functional recovery and appearance were satisfactory in all patients.
               
                  Conclusion
                  The treatment of adult midclavicular fractures with Titanium elastic nail provides adequate fixation, faster recovery with early return to normal function.The clavicle provides the junction between the chest and the upper limb, so it plays an important role in the whole function of the shoulder girdle. Morphologically, the clavicle normally presents a characteristic S-like shape resulting from the junction of two opposite curves at the level of the midshaft. The bone is thinner and consequently weaker at this junction, which is why most fractures occur at this level ( Fractures of the clavicle are common, and account for 2–15% of all adult fractures and 33–45% of all injuries involving the shoulder girdle. The midshaft is the most frequently affected site, encompassing 69–82% of all clavicle fractures, and most fractures that occur in the midshaft are displaced. In young adults, these fractures are usually related to sports or vehicle accidents, whereas in children and elderly, they are usually related to falls. Intramedullary fixation has emerged as a promising alternative to traditional open reduction and internal plate fixation. Recently, Jubel et al The aim of this study was to report the results of treating displaced midshaft clavicle fractures with Titanium elastic nail in adults. A retrospective review of 20 patients who underwent surgery for displaced midshaft clavicle fractures and treated with Titanium elastic nail were carried out. The patients' data were obtained from the patients' case notes, radiographs, and clinic letters. We used the Allman classification for clavicular fractures.  Age group of 20–50 years Diaphyseal midshaft, non-comminuted displaced clavicle fractures Fractures with imminent skin perforation Fracture with less than 1 week old.  Patients with proximal or distal fractures Presence of associated injury – Floating shoulder Pathological fractures Open fractures Brachial plexus injury Comminuted fractures. All the patients were followed up at an interval of 2, 6, 12 weeks till fracture union and all were subjected for both clinical and radiological evaluation of fracture union at regular follow-up. We used the Constant Score for functional outcome at latest follow-up. After general anaesthesia, patients were placed on radiolucent table in beach-chair position with folded towel under the affected shoulder and injured extremity prepared and draped from midline to upper arm. All patients received single dose of intravenous antibiotic as prophylactic dose. The image intensifier and monitor are placed on the opposite side of the operating table. A horizontal skin incision ( All patients were put in arm pouch post-operatively with early gentle mobilization when pain allows. The arm pouch was discarded at 4 weeks post-operatively and active-assisted exercises were started. Overhead activity and lifting heavy weight object restricted for 6 weeks. A total of 20 patients met with inclusion criteria. All were male patients with a mean age of 32.05 years (range 24–40 years). 12 patients had road traffic accident and 8 patients had fall as cause for fractures. Of these 20 patients, 13 had fracture on right side while 7 had fracture on left side ( Closed reduction was attained in 12 patients while open reduction was required in 8 patients. All patients were followed up till the fracture union with mean of 4.5 months. The mean bone union time was 12.45 weeks (11–14 weeks) without any additional procedures ( There were no cases of infection, nonunion, implant failure, prominent implant under skin, perforation of lateral end and hypertrophic scar. No shoulder asymmetry was observed in follow-up. The anatomical reduction, functional recovery and appearance were satisfactory in all patients. In most non-displaced clavicular fractures, good functional results can be obtained with nonoperative treatment. Several options are available for the surgical treatment of clavicle shaft fractures, including plating and nailing. Plating is the most commonly used surgical treatment; however, plating requires relatively extensive periosteal stripping, which may increase destruction of the blood supply at the fracture site, thus hindering fracture healing. Stress shielding produced by rigid plates can lead to an 8% refracture rate after plate removal. Due to the high complication rate with plate fixation, such as soft tissue infection, implant failure, nonunion, and poor cosmetic appearance of the incision, Titanium elastic nail provides fixation that is more consistent with the physiologic bone structure to permit early functional exercise, leads to faster functional recovery, provides early pain relief and avoids the complications associated with longer operating time, periosteal stripping and other potential benefits of this technique include smaller incision, minimal periosteal stripping. Jubel et al We evaluated 20 patients who were treated with Titanium elastic nail at an average follow-up of 4.5 months. All patients showed union of fractures and there was no shortening of clavicle. The mean time for fracture union in our series was 12.45 weeks. These results are superior to the available results in the literature. Chen et al We did not found any difference in the union rate among the closed reduction and open reduction group. The final Constant Score was 94.61 attained at the latest follow-up which was comparable to the available literature. The better results of Titanium elastic nail might be attributed to the less soft tissue dissection and small incision used for nail insertion. Other complications of plate fixation, such as soft tissue infection, hematoma, or implant breakage are uncommon with the use of a titanium nail. In our study, we found no complications with none of the patients had any additional procedure or any symptoms around the shoulder joint. These complications minimized by appropriate size of nail diameter, proper placement of nail at lateral end, sufficient nail left at sternal end with good burial of nail under the skin and supervised physiotherapy with good patient compliance. Technical points to be considered while doing Titanium elastic nail. The diameter of nail should be correctly determined before insertion. The insertion point to be from sternal end as this side has wider diameter. The nail long enough to reach the lateral end of the clavicle while leaving 1 cm to prevent penetration and flush with the bone at sternal end to prevent irritation. Whenever closed reduction fails, open reduction should be planed. The entire procedure should be done under fluoroscopic control. The treatment of closed displaced isolated midshaft clavicular fractures in adults with Titanium elastic nail provides adequate fixation, high union rate, faster recovery with early return to normal function and a better cosmoses. All authors have none to declare.