Direct recycling of lithium-ion is a promising method for manufacturing sustainability. It is more efficient than classical methods because it recovers the functional cathode particle without decomposition into substituent elements or dissolution and precipitation of the whole particle. This case study of cathode-healing™ applied to a battery recall demonstrates an industrial model for recycling of lithium-ion, be it consumer electronic or electric vehicle (EV) batteries. The comprehensive process includes extraction of electrolyte with carbon dioxide, industrial shredding, electrode harvesting, froth flotation, cathode-healing™ and finally, building new cells with recycled cathode and anode. The final products demonstrated useful capability in the first full cells made from direct recycled cathodes and anodes from an industrial source. The lessons learned on recycling the prototypical chemistry are preliminarily applied to EV relevant chemistries.In the early 2000's, a lithium-ion battery recall became an opportunity for development of direct recycling technology [ Direct recycling approaches include cathode-to-cathode, mechanical, electrochemical, and cathode-healing™ technologies [ In comparison to the other direct approaches, cathode-healing™ is a self-limiting hydrothermal reintroduction of lithium to the spent cathode material, rather than a solid-state stoichiometric addition of lithium [ One of the challenges for direct recycling is isolating the electrode. Organic solvents, such as NMP, can be used to harvest electrodes; however, purification and toxicity issues are persistent. Alternatively, liberating electrode particles through the thermal decomposition of the binder produces HF that can damage the cathode and be a hazard to workers. To improve the cost and safety at the industrial level, this work develops aqueous methods to both harvest and separate electrodes. This paper reports on the comprehensive recycling, including cathode-healing™ of commercial materials from a battery recall, using the process flow diagram outlined in Lithium-ion cells (LG-Chem 2.2 Ah, LCO) from recalled packs [ After extraction of electrolyte, the whole cells were safely shredded (SSI Model 600E, 25 HP, Dual rotor shear shredder) at a rate of one ton per hour. The shredder residue was placed into a blender-vessel with an aqueous wash solution and delaminated from the current collector through action of the blender (i.e. 30 s of activation). The electrode materials were separated from the other components (plastics, metal casing, copper/aluminum current collectors) by filtration. The electrode solids settled with an essentially quantitative yield. The collected electrode material is referred to as “harvested”. Battery casings were removed from a sample subset to compare purity of the end product LCO. This was accomplished using a computer numeric controlled saw (OnTo Technology, Battery-buster). The excised jelly rolls were then shredded in the same manner as described above. The harvested cathode (i.e. 700 g) was sealed in a pressure vessel (Autoclave Engineers, 1 L) with a saturated, high ionic strength, lithium aqueous solution (approximately 4 M with various corresponding anions). After hydrothermal treatment, the electrode material was removed from the vessel and rinsed with deionized water. Harvested material consisted of a mixture of cathode, carbon black, binder, and graphite. Froth flotation of carbon from LCO was employed after the hydrothermal treatment during which the binder is removed. A sample of harvested material (10 g) was placed into a vessel (100 mL) with water and approximately 0.5 g of a surfactant. The mixture was agitated with a homogenizer (Omni International, GLH) for 15–20 s to achieve a visible separation of carbon (float) and metal oxide (sink). The float was immediately decanted. The metal oxide settled under gravity (1G) and was dried under vacuum. The captured, hydrothermally treated cathode was heated under air to 800 °C with a ramp rate of 5 °C/min, dwell time of 9 h, and final natural cooling to room temperature at approximately 5 °C/min. Graphite recovered from the float was rinsed in acid (0.25 M nitric acid) to dissolve trace metals. Subsequent rinses used deionized water and acetone. The product was dried at 120 X-Ray diffraction patterns for baseline, harvested, and healed cathodes were obtained using a Bruker D2 Phaser. The morphology was examined by scanning electron microscopy (SEM) using a FEI QUANTA 600F environmental SEM, and results were obtained using an Oxford X-max 100 TLE windowless SDD X-ray detector and incorporated into the same SEM described above. Half-cells were made in-house at OnTo from harvested and treated cathode materials to evaluate capacity in real-time while developing process steps. To do this, approximately 10 g of cathode was homogenized (OMNI) with a 6% solution of PVDF (Kynar) in Full cells were built using recovered material. The full cells were composed of LCO cathodes coated on an aluminum current collector against graphite anodes coated on a copper current collector. The electrodes were stacked alternately and separated by porous polyethylene separators (PE, Celgard). A typical cathode electrode formulation utilized 3.5% polyvinyl difluoride (PVDF, Arkema), 2% carbon black (Timcal Super-P), 2.5% artificial graphite (SGP, SEC carbon) and 92% active material. Typical industrial electrode mixing and coating processes were employed to build electrodes, but on a smaller, lab scale and detailed as follows. The powder materials and N-Methyl-2-pyrrolidone (NMP, BDH) were mixed in a planetary mill. During the mixing process the slurry properties were tested to compare the healed and new cathodes. Physical measurements including viscosity (Rhe-3000, Brookfield), and lower coating thickness limit without scratch by big or agglomerated particles (Hegman gauge) were very similar between healed and the new cathodes. After mixing, the slurry was slot-die coated onto a current collector foil (aluminum, Sam-A). The NMP was dried out using a convection oven, and the electrode coating was roll pressed to enhance the conductivity and interfacial adhesion between the current collector and the electrode. A negative electrode was built using artificial graphite (93 wt%) and carboxymethyl cellulose binder (7 wt%). The anode was made using the same slurry coating process as the cathode. Prior to coating, the copper electrode was rinsed with oxalic acid to remove oxidation layers and improve the bonding strength between the electrode and substrate. The slurry was cast onto copper foil, dried, and calendered with a warm roll press. Electrode tapes were dried at 120 °C under vacuum for 10 h. Leaves were cut from tapes with a template (3 cm by 4 cm with tabs), stacked with separator, then sealed in a pouch cell with an opening for electrolyte injection. The electrolyte (ethylene carbonate/ethyl-methyl carbonate LiPF Other cathode chemistries were considered here to compare and contrast harvest methods for more broad applicability. Basic, neutral, and acidic aqueous harvesting techniques were surveyed and evaluated for various new cathodes materials, including lithium cobalt oxide (LCO, MTI), lithium nickel manganese cobalt oxide (NMC532, Spear Power), lithium manganese oxide (LMO, MTI), and lithium iron phosphate (LFP, MTI). Cathode samples were stored in an atmosphere controlled dry box and transferred to the laboratory prior to treatment. 2 g samples of cathode were placed into 20 mL vials and 15 mL of aqueous solution was added. The solutions included 0.25 M NH Samples were dissolved ultra-high purity nitric acid (BDH ARISTAR ULTRA®; lot 1214110) and ultra-high purity hydrochloric acid (BDH ARISTAR ULTRA®; lot 4213110). The samples were analyzed for a subset of the elements Li, Al, Cr, Mn, Fe, Co, Ni or Cu by inductively coupled plasma-mass spectrometry (ICP-MS; Agilent 7700×). A custom internal standard (SPEX CertiPrep; lot 27--110CR) prepared at 1 μg/mL In, Lu, Sc, Tb, and Y was mixed in-line with samples to correct for possible instrument drift or matrix differences. The ICP-MS instrument was calibrated using one blank and four elemental standards prepared from NIST-traceable custom reference standards (SPEX CertiPrep; lots 6--79WL and 26--169CR) in 2% nitric acid/0.5% hydrochloric acid diluent. Discharge was done with sodium bicarbonate bath, but to avoid sodium contamination, water management, and corrosion, a solid-state resistor can be used instead [ Toxic electrolyte reaction products such as fluorophosphates, fluoroethanol, hydrogen fluoride, and fluoroethylene [ The extraction apparatus, shown in The removal of electrolyte can be improved to 89% through kinetics (i.e. supercritical carbon dioxide >33 °C and 1200 psi), CO Industrial shredding is widely used in lithium battery recycling [ The iron is sourced from the packaging can, and copper from the anode current collector. Disassembly of batteries is one way to improve the purity of recovered components in recycling [ The harvested electrode material is a mixture of LCO, graphite, carbon-black, and polymers that bind these particles into agglomerates. The entire mixture goes through hydrothermal treatment to (1) reintroduce lithium into the spent cathode material; (2) remove the binder to facilitate separation; (3) remove impurities such as copper and iron; and (4) safely eliminate traces of electrolyte. Hydrothermal methods have been used to synthesize LCO from CoOOH and LiOH (i.e. concentrated solution, 160 °C, five days) [ This provides a viable industrial process with relatively low energy input as compared to original syntheses. There are lower kinetic requirements to maintain an already-formed bulk crystalline lattice than to dissolve, reprecipitate, and form a new one. Trace metal contamination (from shredding and battery use) is removed during the hydrothermal step of cathode-healing™. The hydrothermal step removes the binder without thermal decomposition [  After being washed and dried, the graphite recovered from froth flotation can reused. As measured in half-cells against lithium, electrochemical performance of hydrothermally treated graphite samples improved, with a specific capacity of 340 mAh/g relative to the harvested graphite, which had 300 mAh/g. Hydrothermal processing removes electrochemically inactive materials, such as binder, metals/metal oxides, and washes away the SEI to improve the capacity. The XRD in Used LCO develops cubic-spinel characteristics as a degradation mechanism [ The XRD of harvested material in this work showed a relatively low peak intensity ratio ( The XRD analyses show evidence for transition from a cubic to hexagonal character in recycled LCO as a result of cathode-healing™. The electrochemical analyses show that healed LCO has a full complement of lithium, with ability to be transported to and from the lattice in a cell. These measurements show recovered capacity, power, and rate capability from harvested to healed LCO.  The The full cell composed of new graphite and healed LCO demonstrated good capacity retention. The  Using the case-study for LCO as a starting point, the impacts of processing were applied to other industrial lithium-ion chemistries. The use of water in harvesting electrode materials avoids the hazards and costs of organic solvents such as NMP. For direct recycling approaches a major challenge with water is the potential for irreversible damage to the cathode material. However, this can be mitigated with pH and temperature of the harvest solution. In some cases, cathode-healing™ can reverse damage from the harvesting process. This concluding section summarizes the impact of harvest pH on various commercial electrode types.  Along with dissolution of lithium, the cathode crystalline order degraded. This case study demonstrates the first, industrially scalable direct recycling of cathodes, anodes, and electrolyte from cells sourced from a battery recall. Process steps were developed to minimize environmental/safety hazards and process costs. These include extraction of electrolyte to mitigate toxicity cell disassembly to decrease contamination of iron and copper aqueous harvesting of electrodes to avoid organic solvents, and high pH to avoid irreversible decomposition of the cathodes such as NCM one pot, hydrothermal processing that quickly and safely decomposes binder, allows for facile separation of anode and cathode without dense fluids, reinstates lithium inventory in the cathode, and removes trace metals. The final products demonstrated useful capability in the first full cells made from direct recycled materials. The authors thank the