Compared with mixer-settlers applied widely in the hydrometallurgical industry of rare earths (RE), centrifugal contactors have several advantages such as low hold-up volume, excellent phase separation, high mass transfer efficiency, compact and short pieces of equipment, etc., and have been successfully used in some industrial fields. Yttrium (Y) is an important element and in great demand in many industries. For a variety of uses in many specialized areas, the high purity Y is often required. However, the separation and purification of Y by solvent extraction from RE mixture is widely known to be difficult due to their similar chemical properties. This paper studied both the separation factors of RE ions in the 32% HA (naphthenic acid) −20% iso-octylalcohol–48% kerosene–RECl system and the distribution ratios of RE ions in the 32% HEHEHP (2-ethylhexyl phosphonic acid mono-2-ethylhexyl ester) −68% kerosene–RECl system. Based on these studies, an extraction flowsheet for producing high purity Y with HA and HEHEHP as extractants has been developed. Both the bench scale test and the pilot-plant test of the flowsheet have been performed with ϕ20 mm and ϕ120 mm centrifugal contactors respectively. It is shown that Y2O3 with 99.99% purity was obtained, and the total recovery of Y was about 95%.Yttrium (Y) is an important element and in great demand in astronavigation, luminescence, nuclear energy and metallurgical industries. For a variety of uses in these specialized areas, high purity Y is often required. For example, the fluorescent grade Y At present, mixer-settlers have been applied widely in the hydrometallurgical industry of RE ( Annular centrifugal contactors are efficient extraction pieces of equipment in extraction processes. Compared with mixer-settlers, annular centrifugal contactors offer the following advantages ( Low hold-up volume; Excellent phase separation; High mass transfer efficiency; Compact and short; Rapid start-up, shut-down and wash out of the process liquors. The primary centrifugal contactor, which was the paddle type, had been successfully developed and operated for many years at Savannah River Plant (SRL). In the late 1960s, the paddle-type centrifugal contactor was modified into the annular type at Argonne National Laboratory (ANL), which was reliable, easy to operate and maintain ( At present, the main material of the centrifugal contactors is the stainless steel or titanium that can be corroded by H In this paper, an extraction flowsheet with annular centrifugal contactors for producing the high purity Y developed in our lab is described. Results of both the bench scale test and the pilot-plant test are presented. The mixture of RE oxides was obtained from Shanghai Yuelong Chemical Plant, China. Its composition is shown in The annular centrifugal contactor is shown in Two types of annular centrifugal contactors used in the tests were designed and manufactured at INET: a Both the distribution ratios and the separation factors were important for separation of RE ions, so the separation factors of RE ions in the 32%HA–20% Where The separation factor was calculated by the following equation ( Where The mixture of RE oxides was dissolved in hydrochloric acid, then the total concentration of RE was analyzed by EDTA titration using xylenol orange as an indicator. The concentration of each rare earth element in the aqueous phase was analyzed with ICP-AES (Inductive Coupled Plasma). The concentration of RE in the organic phase was determined by mass balance. A pH meter was used for pH measurement. The mixture of RE oxides was first dissolved with HCl to prepare solution. Then extraction separation of La On the basis of the bench scale test, the extraction flowsheet was improved to guarantee purity and yield of Y in the pilot-plant test. The new extraction flowsheet is shown in Variations of the separation factor of La and Y with the mole ratio of La/Y in the 32% HA–20% Variations of the separation factors of lanthanide (Ln) ions to Y with temperature in the 32% HA–20% Variations of the distribution ratios of some RE ions with the pH of the equilibrium aqueous phase in the 32% HEHEHP–68% kerosene–RECl system are presented in From the above it was established that separation of Y and light RE was difficult with HA from the mixture of RE oxides however was easy with HEHEHP. So in this paper, both HA and HEHEHP were selected for producing high purity Y. The concentrations of some RE elements in the raffinate of the extraction section with HA as extractant are shown in Test results of the extraction section with HEHEHP as extractant are shown in The pilot-plant tests were carried out for four times, with the continuous operation time 79 h, 80 h, 103 h, and 95 h respectively. Results of the pilot-plant test were similar to those of the bench scale test. Y All centrifugal contactors have been operated for about 1400 h in all tests including the mechanical tests, the hydraulic tests and the mass transfer tests. When the rotor speed of the centrifugal contactors was 2200 r/min, the amplitude and the noise intensity of the centrifugal contactors were lower than 10 μm and 85 dB respectively. Meanwhile, the temperature of the centrifugal contactors was lower than 50 °C after 103 h of operation (25 °C of ambient temperature). Both the low temperature and the little amplitude are useful to maintain the normal lifetime of the centrifugal contactors. During the whole pilot-plant tests, other mechanical damages of the centrifugal contactors did not happen except that 28 shafts and 36 bearings were corroded by acid solutions because the seals were not tight; so the operation of all centrifugal contactors was stable and reliable. Moreover, the application of centrifugal contactors in the RE extraction flowsheet brought in obvious benefits for reducing the area of factory building and the liquid hold-up volume, and shortening the time required for reaching the steady-state operation. Based on study of both the separation factors of RE ions in the 32% HA–20%