The Tabuaço tungsten project, located in Northern Portugal, consists of two skarn layers, namely “Main” and “Lower” skarns, which display significantly different mineralogical and geochemical features. Both skarns contain fine-grained disseminated scheelite, but the Lower-skarn gangue is dominated by silicates whereas the Main-skarn gangue contains calcium-bearing minerals including fluorite, apatite, and vesuvianite, in close association with scheelite. Preliminary feasibility studies showed that direct separation of calcium-bearing minerals by flotation with fatty acids, which are environmentally benign, was unsuccessful due to their similar surface properties. Several routes for each skarn type were proposed with a strong focus on the Main skarn that displays the most complex mineralogical associations. Enhanced gravity separation (Falcon concentrator), high intensity magnetic separation, and flotation with fatty acids were investigated for the Main Skarn level with the objective of producing a marketable scheelite concentrate. Flotation was thoroughly investigated in terms of depressants, producing optimally a concentrate assaying 9.2%WO3 at 87.9%WO3 recovery from a ~1.1%WO3 feed, by means of a 1:1 ratio of sodium carbonate and sodium silicate. Fluorite is the most problematic mineral in flotation with fatty acids and, consequently, new fatty-acids-based collector formulations have been developed to improve the separation contrast between scheelite and fluorite, producing a concentrate assaying 14.1%WO3 with 77.1%WO3 recovery for the fully-optimised conditions. Furthermore, the performance of two types of Falcon bowls (SB and UF) were investigated and optimised for gangue minerals rejection. The Falcon concentrator was used as a desliming and pre-concentrating apparatus: one stage of Falcon SB allowed rejection of 84% of the total amount of fluorite, more than 95% of the slimes, and 85 wt% of the mass. Consequently, it improved significantly the performance of the fully-optimised scheelite flotation as the final concentrate, after one Falcon SB stage and 4 flotation stages, assayed 62.9%WO3 with 59.4%WO3 recovery, which constituted a marketable scheelite concentrate. Both the Falcon SB parameters and the number of fully-optimised flotation stages can be optimised to maximise either the WO3 grade or the WO3 recovery, regarding the product specifications. Finally, the high intensity magnetic separation allowed rejection of around 45 wt% of the total yield prior to the milling stage with only 6.0%WO3 losses, which would decrease significantly the energy consumed during the milling stage.Tungsten has gathered considerable interest in the European Union over the past few years due to its high economic importance, low recycling rate and few substitution possibilities ( The Tabuaço tungsten deposit is located in Northern Portugal, at the north of the Central Iberian zone of the Iberian Massif that is part of the Variscan belt ( In skarn ores, scheelite is commonly finely disseminated and associated with calcium-bearing minerals such as calcite, dolomite, fluorite, and apatite ( Nowadays, few routes exist for efficient industrial-scale scheelite flotation ( Additionally, the minerals commonly contained in tungsten skarns, including the Tabuaço skarn, exhibit a large range of specific gravities: 2.7 for calcite, 3.2 for fluorite and apatite, and 6.1 for scheelite while silicates have specific gravities between 2.6 and 3.7, depending on the geological context. Hence, it allows one to perform a gravity separation to eliminate the minerals that are problematic in flotation with fatty acids, mostly the calcium-bearing semi-soluble salts (calcite, apatite, and fluorite). Nevertheless, the frequent fine liberation size make difficult the use of classical gravity separation methods as shaking tables, spirals, or jigs. For a few decades, the ores have exhibited finer and finer liberations sizes leading to a significant decrease of the efficiency of classical gravity separation methods. It introduced the development of special devices such as Multi-Gravity Separators (MGS), Knelson concentrator, and Falcon concentrator to achieve efficient density separation of fine particles ( Also, skarns commonly contain iron that is found within the ferromagnesian silicates of the protolith. After the thermometamorphism stage, iron is often included in the newly-formed dense silicates such as vesuvianite, epidote, and garnets. Due to the iron they contain, these silicates, which are denser compared to the non-ferromagnesian silicates, exhibit significant magnetic susceptibility, ranking them in the paramagnetic minerals class. Hence, a high intensity magnetic separation is possible to eliminate these minerals that can represent high amounts in the skarns, including the Tabuaço skarn. The gangue calcium-bearing minerals often comprise elements such as P, Si, C, and F that are considered (along with sulphur) as penalizing elements either for the scheelite concentrates processed by hydrometallurgy or for the final metal-tungsten product ( This study presents an integrated approach undertaken on a fine-grained tungsten skarn ore from the Tabuaço deposit, which contains scheelite in association with fluorite, apatite, calcite, and calcium-bearing silicates. The deposit and ore characteristics are discussed, focussing particularly on their implications to develop an efficient and environmentally friendly process. Several individual options suggested hereby were tested and optimised in previous studies and have been repeated for this study. Taking also into account the product specifications for the scheelite concentrates and the previous results, different flowsheets combining the optimised separations are investigated to process the ore. The different routes are compared in terms of performances, operating costs, and environmental friendliness. A trenching sampling campaign allowed two bulk samples of 500 kg to be acquired from each of the two mineralised layers for metallurgical testing. These samples were firstly used to characterise the Tabuaço ore in terms of geochemistry, mineralogy, and textures. The bulk samples were crushed in successive jaw crushing steps and, finally, in a gyratory crusher to produce a −4 mm material. This product was wet sieved at 150 µm and the non-passing fraction was ground in a steel laboratory ball mill to reach the liberation mesh. The ground ore was deslimed at 10 µm by means of a 50 mm hydrocyclone prior to flotation and wet magnetic separation testing. All the products were analysed by Energy Dispersive X-Ray fluorescence spectroscopy (ED-XRF) using a Niton™ The metallurgical testing performances were also assessed by optical microscopy, using a Nikon OptiPhot-2, which supplemented the chemical analyses and allowed the results to be evaluated in terms of mineralogy. After the tests, the products were dried and representative aliquots of around 10 g were put in resin to make a 30–µm-thick thin section. Both polarised and cross-polarised lights were used to identify the minerals. High intensity magnetic separation tests were performed in both dry and wet conditions. In dry conditions, the tests were conducted using a PermRoll® magnetic separator equipped with a neodymium-iron-boron permanent magnet (≈1 T) on the −500 + 150 µm fraction, corresponding to the crushed product prior to fine grinding. The angle of the separation flap and the feed belt speed were adjusted to maximise scheelite recovery. Wet magnetic separation was performed on the flotation feed, namely, the −150 + 10 µm product, with a plate type JONES® magnetic separator, operated with an electromagnetic induction of 1 T. The middlings were mixed with the non-magnetic fraction to maximise the scheelite recovery. The Falcon tests were performed using a Falcon L40 laboratory model (Sepro Mineral Systems, Canada) equipped with a 4″ smooth-walled Falcon Two different commercial Tall Oil Fatty Acids (TOFA) were used as collectors for the flotation tests. The first TOFA was RBD15 (MeadWestvaco), composed of oleic acid (36 wt%), linoleic acid (25 wt%), and negligible amounts of palmitic and linolenic acids. The second collector, named LD, was roughly the same but with a significantly higher quantity of saturated fatty acids, namely palmitic and stearic acids. The mixture was prepared in aqueous conditions at alkaline pH, obtained via the addition of sodium hydroxide. The pH modifiers (NaOH and Na Laboratory scale flotation tests were performed using an Agitair LA-500 rotor-apparatus equipped with a 1.5 L cell in which the rotational speed was set at 900 rpm during conditioning and flotation. The cell was fed with 500 g of the −150 + 10 µm material which were conditioned in the cell with tap water at pH The ore types present in the Tabuaço deposit were significantly different in terms of geochemistry, mineralogical association, and tungsten average grade ( The Main Skarn was composed of silicates (85 wt%), mostly calcium-bearing silicates (vesuvianite, zoisite, and grossular) and, to a lesser extent, feldspars and quartz ( The Lower Skarn contained mostly silicates (95 wt%) including significant amounts of vesuvianite, diopside, zoisite, quartz, and feldspars. This layer was poor in calcium-bearing salts, exhibiting low levels of fluorite, apatite, and scheelite. However, higher contents of calcite were exhibited in this facies as well as a few sulphides, mainly arsenopyrite, pyrite, and pyrrhotite, which were not identified in the Main Skarn level. It also displayed finer textures and, thus, finer scheelite liberation size, estimated at around 100–120 µm by optical microscopy. Due to the significant amount of S, often encountered in scheelite-skarn ores, it is common practice to perform a sulphide flotation stage prior to scheelite flotation ( The two mineralised layers both displayed relatively low liberations sizes, especially for the Lower Skarn. The relatively high density of scheelite (inducing high residence times in the ball mill) together with its friability required care in fine grinding testwork to minimize the production of fine scheelite particles, resulting in unnecessarily high losses. The Lower Skarn horizon was less challenging in terms of gangue mineral elimination given the dominance of easily depressed silicates such as quartz, feldspars or pyroxene and the lower abundance of fluorapatite, fluorite, and garnet. Hence, the following results focussed on the Main Skarn ore only.  Gravity separation, which, based on the range of densities displayed by the various minerals, could provide efficient elimination of the light silicates (feldspars, quartz), reasonable rejection of calcium salts (fluorite, apatite), but poor rejection of the dense silicates (vesuvianite, zoisite, and grossular); Magnetic separation that would lead to an efficient rejection of the paramagnetic minerals, namely, the dense silicates (vesuvianite, zoisite, and grossular); Froth flotation with fatty acids, which would collect all the calcium minerals, namely, the calcium salts (scheelite, fluorite, and apatite) and the dense silicates (vesuvianite, zoisite, and grossular). However, the collection of the dense silicates and, to a lesser extent, of the unwanted calcium salts, can be addressed using specific depressants and new collector formulations. The liberation size makes classical physical methods inefficient for scheelite beneficiation ( Prior to the process optimisation, the milling stage was adapted to reach the liberation size avoiding scheelite losses in the fine particles. To attain this objective, the ball mill was fed with the retained fraction of a 150 µm sieve while the −150 + 0 µm fraction bypassed the milling stage. After milling, the product was sieved at 150 µm and the retained fraction constituted the circulating load ( Based on the mineralogical compositions ( Direct flotation, Falcon UF gravity separation, Falcon SB gravity separation, Wet high intensity magnetic separation, Dry high intensity magnetic separation performed on the unground −500 + 150 µm fraction. Each route illustrated in The flotation with fatty acids used without depressant led to flotation of all the minerals, including scheelite, fluorite, apatite, and silicates ( Both the WO The optimised conditions for maximising both WO Previous results suggested that the depressants currently available did not enhance significantly the selectivity between scheelite and fluorite. Hence, under the best depressing conditions, the main focus was put on the collectors: a good separation contrast could not be attained with RBD15, mainly composed of oleic and linoleic acids which are mono- and bi-unsaturated fatty acids, respectively. They are widely used for their vegetal origin and their low fusion temperatures, making them easy to use at room temperature. We reported in a previous study that the introduction of saturated fatty acids in the oleic–linoleic–acids–based formulations significantly enhanced the selectivity between scheelite and fluorite in flotation ( Another beneficiation route investigated for the Tabuaço ore was to take advantage of the significant specific gravity contrast existing between scheelite (6.1) and fluorite (3.2), the latter being the most problematic mineral in flotation with a recovery as high as 35.7% in the fully-optimised-flotation step. Hence, the use of a Falcon concentrator to eliminate the fluorite by gravity separation prior to or after flotation was investigated. Two types of Falcon bowls, Falcon The Falcon The Tabuaço W-skarn contained high amounts of vesuvianite, which comprises iron and magnesium ( The results of the magnetic separation tests are presented in The wet magnetic separation displayed significantly lower performances compared to the dry magnetic separation, despite the different processed fractions ( The Falcon UF exhibited performances significantly lower than the Falcon SB (see Based on the results of each separation performed separately and the previous discussions, several global flowsheets were suggested and tested ( 2-steps flotation with optimised depressants, 2-steps flotation with optimised depressants and collectors ( Falcon SB concentration followed by flotation with optimised depressants, Falcon SB concentration followed by flotation with optimised depressants and collectors ( Flotation with optimised depressants followed by Falcon SB concentration. Results in terms of WO The reverse flowsheet has also been tested where the final concentrate, after a flotation stage with RBD15 followed by a Falcon SB stage, assayed 25.9% Based on the WO The present study aimed to recover tungsten from a typical complex skarn ore, adapting the process to the mineralogy of the ore. The integrated flow-sheet developed here is presented on Moreover, the use of a Falcon SB prior to flotation provided: (1) rejection of around 85 wt% of the total milled feed, (2) desliming with a high efficiency for the flotation feed and, (3) after only one fully-optimised flotation stage, producing a concentrate assaying 37.8% The flowsheets developed here could be adapted to the targeted performance: the operating parameters used for the Falcon SB stage could be defined to maximise either the gangue minerals (mostly fluorite) rejection, Overall, the suggested flowsheets would: Reduce the energy consumption as more than half of the product is rejected before the mill, Reduce the reagents costs, decreasing the ore quantity processed by flotation, Reduce the energy/water consumption as less feed material is sent to flotation, Use only environmental benign chemicals in flotation (Na Produce a marketable WO Adapt the processing route to the product specifications or to the targeted performance (WO Approximatively 375 000 tons/year would be processed in the Tabuaço plant, which represents 45 t/h. The adapted Falcon concentrator has a motor power of 30 kW which represents, given the average electricity price of 0.21 €/kWh in Portugal, 6.3 €/h and thus 0.14 €/t. No water is required after the milling stage as the Falcon can process pulps at more than 30% wt. solids. It represents extremely low operating costs compared to the flotation stage. Even if the flotation cells energy consumption is similar to the Falcon one, flotation needs the addition of water to reach 30% wt. solids in the pulp and requires reagents that constitute an important part of the operating costs. Globally, the implementation of a Falcon concentrator in the process leads to the elimination of around 85 wt% of the total feed flowrate, resulting in a flotation feed stream of only 7.2 t/h instead of 45 t/h. Assuming 250 €/ton for the Na The research leading to these results has received funding from the