The kinetics of leaching laterite with hydrochloric acid has been investigated at dilute solid phase concentrations in a magnetically stirred reactor. The effects of hydrochloric acid concentration and temperature on the dissolution rate of iron are reported. Preroasting of the laterite alters its mineralogical composition and increases its porosity and surface area, thus making it more amenable to leaching. The leaching rates were analyzed with the shrinking core models for reaction control. The leaching data for both raw and roasted laterites fit the diffusion kinetic equation with associated apparent activation energies of 71.7 and 65.2 kJ/mol, respectively.Laterite is a highly weathered material rich in secondary oxides of iron, aluminium or both, nearly devoid of bases and primary silicates but may contain abundant quartz and kaolinite. In addition, laterite often contains minor amounts of nickel, cobalt, and chromium. The high proportion of iron (III) oxide in laterites represents a residual accumulation brought about the removal of silica and alkalis. Leaching of iron from laterites is important for the following reasons: (1) low iron laterites (less than about 2 wt.% Fe Recent work indicates that laterite exhibits a slow reaction kinetics toward hydrochloric acid The present work investigates the kinetics of leaching laterite in dilute hydrochloric acid solutions with a view to elucidating the influence of roasting on the rate and mechanism of iron dissolution. A particular advantage of this leaching process is that hydrochloric acid as a leachant allows comparatively easier recovery of the useful free acid from its waste solution than does sulphuric acid. Moreover, separation of metal chlorides through solvent extraction is much easier than from sulphate medium. Hence, the iron (III) chloride solution generated during leaching can be separated by solvent extraction, and Fe The laterite used in this study was collected from the deposit along Abeokuta Road, about 10 km south of Ibadan (Nigeria). The ore was crushed and screened to produce the −88+53 μm particle size fraction. The chemical analysis of the laterite is given in For the leaching, hydrochloric acid (Aldrich) was used. Roasting of the laterite was carried out in a muffle electric furnace. Leaching was conducted in a Pyrex reaction flask. The flask, equipped with a thermometer and a reflux condenser, was heated with a thermostatically controlled heating mantle. Stirring was done magnetically. The metal analyses were carried out with an atomic absorption spectrophotometer. The mineralogical analyses were carried out with a conventional Phillips X-ray powder diffractometer. After the desired furnace temperature of 500°C had been attained, the laterite placed in a platinum crucible was introduced into the furnace and left for 2 h. Under these conditions, complete goethite-to-hematite conversion was achieved Chemical analysis of the roasted laterite for total iron content showed an increase in value relative to that of the (raw) unroasted. X-ray diffraction spectrum of the roasted ore indicated that the peaks associated with goethite originally present in the unroasted ore had almost disappeared and there was also a marked increase in the intensity of peaks based on hematite. For each run, 200 ml of hydrochloric acid of pre-determined molarity was charged into the reactor and heated to the desired temperature (±1°C). About 2 g sample was added and the contents were well-agitated. Solution samples of 2 ml were withdrawn at appropriate times during a run and analyzed for iron by atomic absorption spectrophotometry. Initially, leaching experiments were carried out in 2, 3 and 4 M hydrochloric acid concentrations at 70°C. The results indicated that the leaching rates of both raw and roasted laterites are influenced by concentration of hydrochloric acid. At all concentrations, the roasted laterite was always leached at a relatively faster rate than the raw one. Evidence of the nature of heterogeneous reactions of this type can be obtained by measuring the temperature dependence of the reaction rate. Consequently, the temperature dependence of the leaching rates was determined by additional experiments in 3 M hydrochloric acid at 80°C and 90°C. The results presented in The leaching of iron oxides (hematite and goethite) from laterite by hydrochloric acid occurs according to the reaction: For the iron dissolution kinetics, two previously established shrinking core models Examination of plots of the above kinetic equations as functions of time showed that only The rate constants,