Our recent data on Mg corrosion has been reanalysed because of the recent criticism that our previous data analysis was inadequate. Re-analysis leads to similar conclusions as previously. The apparent valence of Mg during corrosion was in each case less than 2.0, and in many cases less than 1.0. Moreover, these values were probably over-estimates. The low values were consistent with the evolving hydrogen gas acting as an insulator, so that the corrosion of parts of the specimen could occur isolated from the electrochemical measurement system.The recent paper by King et al. The EIS data analysis proposed by King et al. One possible simple extrapolation is shown by the dashed curve in Alternatively, the polarisation resistance, From the polarisation resistance, Note that If it is assumed that the anodic partial reaction during Mg corrosion involves two electrons as given by This paper involves a number of different evaluations of the corrosion rate. Each is listed below. The proposal by King et al. King et al. The aim of this paper was to assess the implication of a reanalysis of our recent EIS data for Mg corrosion  These values are reproduced in After the immersion period, the weight loss for specimen 19 was measured and the corresponding average corrosion rate was This gives confidence that the instantaneous corrosion rate, The EIS measurements allowed evaluation of the solution resistance,   The values of It is instructive to compare the values of As pointed out by King et al.   An evaluation of the measurement errors was carried out by Cao et al.  The instantaneous corrosion rate, The corrosion rate, EIS were measured during the 7 The values of The corrosion rate, The corrosion rates measured from the EIS data using the RCL equivalent circuit,  The instantaneous corrosion rates from the EIS measurements,   Cao et al. Each cathodic polarisation curve was measured from The hydrogen evolution volume increased approximately linearly with immersion time indicating that the corrosion rate was approximately constant with immersion time. The average corrosion rate evaluated from the total volume of evolved hydrogen,      An evaluation of the measurement errors was carried out by Cao et al. The values of the corrosion rate measured by all the electrochemical methods discussed above all depend on the experimentally measured anodic Tafel slope, Song et al. This means that each of the values of corrosion rate evaluated herein by an electrochemical EIS method is an over-estimate of the actual corrosion rate. As a consequence the values of the apparent valence for Mg are also over-estimates. In all cases, the apparent valence was less than 2.0, and in many cases the value of the apparent valence was less than 1.0. A possible reason, as suggested by Atrens et al.  Alternatively, it is possible that polarisation of Mg in chloride solutions may not be consistent with typical Tafel behaviour as described by Eq. This reanalysis of our recent EIS data leads to conclusions similar to those in the original papers  Analysis fully in compliance with the suggestions of King et al. The corrosion rates evaluated using EIS and the RCL equivalent circuit (i.e. the equivalent circuit proposed by King et al. The values of the corrosion evaluated from EIS data were typically not good measurements of the corrosion rate of Mg as measured by weight loss. Values of the apparent valence were evaluated based on the assumption that the corrosion rates evaluated with an electrochemical technique (i.e. from either EIS data or Tafel extrapolation) were good measures of that part of the total corrosion rate that was under electrochemical control. The value of the apparent valence was in each case less than 2.0 and in many cases less than 1.0. The low values of apparent valence for Mg corrosion could be caused by the evolving hydrogen isolating part of the corroding Mg surface from the electrochemical measuring system. Based on the analyses above, the conclusions of our recent papers  The support of the Australian Research Council Centre of Excellence Design of Light Alloys is acknowledged. The