Hydrodynamic behavior of a newly developed toroidal fluidized bed reactor is studied in this work. The reactor has a gas distributor consisting of angled blades in an annular ring at the reactor bottom. The driving force for particles to move over the distributing blades comes from the velocity head of gas jets accelerated upon entering the blade spacing. Relevant hydrodynamic behaviors are measured with various inert materials in a pilot scale 400-mm toroidal fluidized bed reactor. The observed hydrodynamic behavior is found to be essentially predictable at ambient temperature by conventional hydrodynamic models. Fine particle tracking on the reactor wall is clearly observed through oxidation of zinc dross at a bed temperature of around 1120°C, and is simulated on the basis of a simplified mathematical model. Hydrodynamic issues, such as particle flying trajectory and retention time in the reactor, are discussed based on the developed model.Fluidization has long been widely used in industry for gas–solid processing. Improvements on mass/heat transfer in conventional fluidized bed reactors (FBRs) have resulted in numerous innovative reactor configurations The Torbed reactor is a relatively new thermal processing technology Historically, the toroidal fluidized bed reactor should be considered as a new generation of fluidized bed reactors. For relatively coarse particles, Wellwood In view of the above coincidence of similarity in velocity relationships, it is appropriate to further examine existing hydrodynamic models established for fluidized bed reactors, and make necessary modifications in order to predict specific hydrodynamic behaviors of the toroidal fluidized bed reactor. For the design of a toroidal fluidized bed reactor, it is necessary to determine what range of gas flow-rates allows fluidization and also what flow-rates will begin to carry the particles out of the reactor. The residence time of particles in the toroidal fluidized bed reactor is of importance as well to ensure effective processing. To date, very few publications are available in the literature dealing with the theoretical aspects of the toroidal fluidized bed reactor. The purpose of this work is to make a systematic assessment of the hydrodynamic behavior of the toroidal fluidized bed reactor using well-defined particles, and to estimate particle retention time in the reactor based on a mathematical model. For the hydrodynamic measurement, both fine and coarse fused alumina particles were used as the permanent bed material of the toroidal fluidized bed reactor. The fine fused alumina had a mean diameter of 0.4 mm, and the coarse alumina had a mean diameter of 3.0 mm. Their nominal density was 3970 kg/m In the measurement of fine particle tracking, the raw material was zinc dross consisting of 19 wt.% Zn, 66 wt.% ZnO, and the remainder gangues. The mean diameter was measured to be about 33 microns. The processing purpose was to convert the metallic zinc in the dross into zinc oxide. The layout of a pilot scale Torbed reactor system installed at ORTECH Corporation is shown in The Torbed reactor can be configured for thermal processing of both fine and coarse particles. In processing of fine particles, fluidization occurs in two media, being a horizontal fluidization in a shallow permanent bed with relatively coarse particles, and a toroidal fluidization in a dilute phase with fine particles. It is understood that processing of fine particles is in fact an extension of coarse particle processing. Fluidization in the permanent bed should be controlled in the range of the so-called Torbed regime for effective heat/mass transfer. Such attainable gas velocity is far beyond the terminal velocity of fine particles to be processed. As a result, fine particles are carried out of the reactor top after flash processing. The motion of the fine particles in the dilute phase is believed to be in the fast fluidization regime. Relevant fluidization regimes are discussed in the following section. Generally, when a gas stream flows upward through a bed composed of fluidizable particles, a drag force by the moving gas is attempting to overcome the gravity of particles. Once the drag force is equal to or exceeds the gravity, the onset of fluidization occurs. The following flow regimes are often encountered with the increase of the gas flow-rate: fixed bed, bubbling/slugging bed, turbulent bed and fast-fluidized bed. The bubbling regime occurs at the onset point of fluidization corresponding to the minimum fluidization. Except for checking the gas velocity in order for all particles to be fluidized, this regime is not practically important for the design and operation of the Torbed reactor. The fluidization behavior of the Torbed reactor was checked using some inert materials. In the cold test, fine fused alumina with an average particle size of 0.4 mm was first tested in the Torbed reactor. Particles (1 kg) were gradually dropped onto the blades at a gas velocity enough to sustain particles above the blades. Phenomena of minimum fluidization and toroidal fluidization were closely observed by slowly increasing the gas velocity. Coarse fused alumina was tested at a bed temperature of 750°C, to ensure an effective toroidal fluidization. Typical fluidization observations are summarized in Regarding the transition from fixed bed to minimum fluidization, there is no significant difference between a toroidal fluidized bed and conventional fluidized beds except for an angled gas stream from the blades. In the Torbed reactor, as the blades have an angle This equation is applicable to a shallow bed where the horizontal velocity component change is minor. For the fine fused alumina particles, the vertical component of the process gas velocity was thus 0.076 m/s. Above a critical gas velocity, the bed particles are injected by the angled air jets from the blades, and travel toroidally in a distinct moving bed. This is distinguished as the ‘Torbed regime’ Using 400-μm glass beads with a density of 2495 kg/m For the prediction of minimum fluidization velocity From Wen and Yu's equation, for the fine fused alumina particles with an equivalent spherical diameter of 0.43×0.63=0.27, Previously, the Torbed reactor was developed for the processing of coarse particles in the configuration designated as the compact Torbed reactor. The particles to be processed were held over the blades in a shallow bed. The horizontally fluidized ‘Torbed regime’ was achieved at a gas velocity limited in a narrow range and below the terminal velocity in order to prevent particles from entrainment. Despite numerous efforts in the development of the Torbed reactor technology, no definition of the so-called Torbed regime has been reached. As a safe guideline of operation, to fluidize effectively the above-defined fine fused alumina and glass beads, but still prevent the particles from entrainment, the upward gas velocity should not exceed the terminal velocity of the smallest bed particles. The terminal velocity For a specific gas–solid system, the terminal velocity depends on particle size. Very fine particles, for example Under normal operation conditions, fine particles exit from the reactor top. The corresponding terminal velocity is of less importance for effective transport of particles in the reactor chamber. For example, in ZnS roasting at a bed temperature of 950°C, the gas superficial velocity was estimated to be over 3.5 m/s at the blade annular area In the fine powder operation of the Torbed reactor, one has to consider fine particle transport along the reactor height. There are numerous equations in the literature for predicting transport velocity, which is regarded as the transition gas velocity from the turbulent regime to the fast fluidization. The predicted Thus to transport particles below 75 μm, a transport gas velocity of about 4.7 m/s is needed. In fact, when the gas jets just exit from the blades, the velocity head might be higher than 3.5 m/s as the blade opening is smaller than the annular area (the active opening area 15%). Transport of Geldart particle B needs a much higher gas velocity thereby producing a very short retention time, which is not the case for thermal processing. Fine particle transport in the toroidal fluidized bed reactor was found to be in a swirling motion. Fine particle tracking on the reactor wall was clearly observed through oxidation of zinc dross at a bed temperature of around 1120°C. Both raw material feed and product were in the form of fine powders. Since the bed temperature was higher than the boiling point of metallic zinc (907°C), once the raw material was fed to the bed, quick melting and evaporation of zinc was possible during oxidation. This led to clear tracks of the fine particles flying inside the reactor. In the period of reaction shut down, the particle tracks were carefully measured. The heights of fine particle tracking along the reactor wall are plotted in The above observed phenomena of particle tracking on the reactor wall and fine particle size distribution from the reactor top were also noticed in other operations such as roasting of sulfide concentrates. A short particle track is included in From the particle size distribution shown in In simulating particle flow patterns in a vortexing fluidized bed reactor, Nieh and Yang In the calculation, kinematic viscosity of process gas, Simulation results were obtained by using real parameters for zinc dross processing. At ambient temperature (20°C) with the zinc dross density of 5470 kg/m Particle retention in the toroidal fluidized bed reactor was simulated, as shown in The results obtained with the simplified model seem in agreement with the fine particle tracking measurement described in the last section. Particles with an average diameter of 19.2 μm should fly along an upward toroidal trajectory, thus leaving a clear track on the reactor inner wall after being processed at a temperature near the melting point of some components. It seems that the simulation results are helpful in interpreting the hydrodynamic behavior of the Torbed reactor. However, precise description of particle flow patterns needs a thorough consideration of various factors. In particular, multiple collisions of particles against the reactor wall might exist in the toroidal fluidization zone, which needs to be further investigated experimentally. In conventional fluidized bed reactors, relatively low gas velocity should be used to retain particles in the bed for a certain period to ensure the required conversion. As a result, the reaction throughput is often limited. If a high gas velocity is used, the retention time of upward particles is normally too short to perform a gas–solid reaction with a satisfactory conversion. These limitations are somewhat solved in the toroidal fluidized bed reactor by using a high gas velocity in a toroidal mode. Very fine particles such as Geldart particle C could be processed to a very high conversion in a single pass. Geldart particle B and D could be effectively retained in the bed area until a fragmentation process occurs. The fragmentation of particles during thermal processing could bring a significant increase in particle surface area, as already proven in ZnS roasting Hydrodynamic behavior of a toroidal fluidized bed reactor was qualitatively assessed in the present work by comparing with conventional fluidized bed reactors. A definition was given for the Torbed regime, which should be useful in determining the reactor operating conditions. The driving force for particles to move over the blades in the toroidal fluidized bed comes from the velocity head of gas jets accelerated upon entering the blade spacing. With a pilot scale 400-mm Torbed reactor, relevant hydrodynamic behavior was measured by using well-defined particles, and found to be essentially predictable by conventional hydrodynamic models. The Torbed reactor showed a great flexibility in thermal processing. Fine particle tracking on the reactor wall was clearly observed through oxidation of zinc dross at a bed temperature of around 1120°C, and was simulated on the basis of force balances on particles in a moving fluid. Various operating effects on the particle motion in the Torbed reactor were discussed based on the prediction. J.S. acknowledges the Natural Science and Engineering Research Council of Canada (NSERC) for an Industrial Research Fellowship. The authors are grateful to Professor Alexander McLean of University of Toronto, and Dr R. Sridhar for useful comments. 