Complete experimental investigation on the instantaneous strain-hardening behaviour of powder metallurgy preforms of pure iron and steels containing 0.4% and 0.8% carbon were carried out. The above-mentioned powder metallurgy sintered preforms with two different aspect ratios namely 0.39 and 0.59 were cold upset with graphite as lubricant and their strain-hardening behaviour under triaxial stress state condition was evaluated. For all the above-said preforms the stress–strain relationship was established, instantaneous strain hardening index was determined and its variation with respect to the axial strain and the relative density were plotted, studied and discussed relative to their as-sintered microstructures. Also the characteristics of the instantaneous strength coefficient with respect to the relative density was analyzed and presented.initial diameter of the preform bulged diameter of the preform after deformation bottom contact diameter of the preform after deformation top contact diameter of the preform after deformation force applied on the cylindrical preform for deformation initial height of the cylindrical preform height of the barreled cylinder after deformation strength coefficient instantaneous strength coefficient strain-hardening exponent instantaneous strain-hardening exponent relative density Poisson's ratio true strain effective strain true strain in the radial direction true strain in the axial direction true strain in the hoop direction initial preform density of the preform density of the preform after deformation theoretical density of the fully dense material true stress effective stress hydrostatic stress true stress in the radial direction true stress in the axial direction true stress in the hoop direction Powder metallurgy (P/M) processing is a net or near net-shaped manufacturing technology, which in many instances stamp out the need for most of the secondary machining operations. The parts produced by powder metallurgy methods are also unique and innovative. The automotive and off-highway vehicle applications take over the ferrous P/M structural parts market. Pure iron or very-low-carbon steel is a familiar structural or bearing material The cold upset forging of powder metallurgy composites is subjected to both ductile fracture and the strain hardening. These two predominating mechanisms manage the feasibility of the powder forging operations and help to achieve the good quality in the properties of the final products. Ductile fracture is the common mode of failure, which is a convoluted phenomenon that is reliant upon process parameters such as stress, strain, strain rate, friction, etc., and the material parameters namely the strain-hardening exponent, the strength coefficient, the density coefficient and the strain rate sensitivity. Ductile criteria of metal are broadly investigated by many researchers Strain hardening/work hardening is an imperative phenomenon, which governs the plastic behaviour of materials. This phenomenon occurs during the plastic deformation due to the generation and the interaction of dislocations. The dislocation density increases with increasing degree of deformation. Basically, the larger the number of dislocations produced, the larger their interaction and hence the larger the stress required for the yielding of metal. Inigoraj et al. In the present work the strain-hardening behaviour of powder metallurgy preforms of pure iron and steels containing 0.4% and 0.8% of carbon were completely investigated experimentally. Preforms with 84% initial preform relative density and with different aspect ratios namely 0.39 and 0.59 were subjected to cold deformation with graphite lubricant and their strain-hardening behaviour under triaxial stress state condition was studied. The stress–strain relationship for the aforesaid, three different powder metallurgy preforms having two different aspect ratios was established. Further the characteristics of instantaneous strain hardening index ( Atomized iron powder of −150 The free surfaces of the compacts were coated with an indigenously developed ceramic mixture Sintering of plain iron powder sequentially involves the establishment and growth of bonds between the particles of powder at their areas of contact, grain growth and migration of the grain boundaries formed at the bonds, spheroidization of the pores between the particles, and the elimination of small pores (and possibly the growth of larger pores). As the sintering temperature increases, porosity decreases and shrinkage increases Initial diameter ( Using the measured upsetting inputs the other parameters under triaxial stress state condition are determined by using the following expressions. The state of stress in a triaxial stress condition is given by Narayanasamy et al. The hydrostatic stress is given by: The axial true strain ( It is assumed that the consecutive compressive loads were specified as 1, 2, 3, …, ( Subtracting Eq.     The following conclusions can be drawn from Section As the carbon content increases the pore size becomes smaller. As the pore size becomes smaller, the load requirement and the stress required for plastic deformation increases like in the case of carbon steels compared to pure iron. Because of fine pores as in the case of carbon steels, the geometric work hardening value increases with increasing amount of plastic deformation. The instantaneous strain hardening index value ( In the case of pure iron the instantaneous strain hardening index value ( The instantaneous strength coefficient (