This Special Edition of Hydrometallurgy is dedicated to Mike Slater. Mike was one of the Editors-in-Chief of the Journal from 1981 to 2003. The Journal started in 1975, under Gordon Ritcey and Neville Rice but with the expanding interest of the Journal, Mike Slater took over from Neville in 1981. Gordon Ritcey remained as founding editor until 1993 when Charles Cooper assumed his role to work with Mike. Under Mike's leadership, the Journal's impact factor has grown which is a measure of the Journal's quality and relevance. It has continued to be the journal of choice for researchers and practitioners of hydrometallurgy to publish their work. Mike has a broad range of research interests which are reflected to some extent in the contributions in this Special Edition. His work encompassed fundamental studies on mass transfer and diffusion in solvent extraction systems and in particular within individual droplets. He also studied the novel use of ion exchange and the application of a range of other separation techniques linked to process development. Mike started his research career with particular interests in continuous ion exchange, and worked with Gordon Ritcey at CANMET in the early 1970s to develop the CANMET Continuous Ion Exchange (CIX) unit which was installed underground at one of Eldorado Nuclear Mines to recover uranium from mine water. Yellow cake precipitate was brought to the surface in this complete operation. The pilot plant ran for several months at the 1200-ft level, and sufficient data were obtained to provide scale-up and economics. Mike was also interested in environmental aspects of hydrometallurgy, and whilst at CANMET he used the CIX fluidized bed column to treat effluents from nickel and uranium operations to produce acceptable discharge liquors and marketable by-products. At about the same time he became interested in the performance of SX contactors, both at CANMET and at the University of Bradford. He became an expert in the design and performance of mixer-settlers and of various contactor columns and continued with this interest for the remainder of his career there. His research in the late 1970s and early 1980s led to the development of a Separation Science Group. This industry research group formed with the UK Atomic Energy Commission, and led by Denis Logsdale, together with Carl Hanson and Jim Godfrey, was one of the premier research groups in separation science in the world. During that time, the group at the University of Bradford was one of the strongest. Mike was always ready to try new ideas or approaches to difficult problems. A good example of this was his pioneer work on the use of neural networks for the control of a solvent extraction plant. His major contribution, however, was in the development of quantitative methods to predict the performance of solvent extraction equipment. His contributions to hydrodynamic and mass transfer processes that control the performance of solvent extraction equipment, particularly columns, will stand as seminal works in the field. Mike also had the practical applications in mind that is shown in the direction that the Journal has taken. This Special Edition is to celebrate Mike's involvement in Hydrometallurgy and I thank those authors that accepted the invitation to contribute and dedicate part of their own work to Mike in recognition of the significant and important areas where he has made enduring contributions. I hope you enjoy reading it and will continue to support and foster the Journal as Mike has done over the years.