Spent coffee grounds are being consolidated as one of the most abundant bioresources in the world for use as green energy. Biodiesel, bioethanol, bio-oil and fuel pellet are biofuels derived of this waste. To get them, spent coffee grounds need to be dried due to their high moisture content. This work analyzes their drying kinetics from isothermal drying experiments in a convective dryer at different temperatures: 100, 150, 200 and 250°C, and sample thicknesses: 5, 10, 15 and 20mm. Drying curves were fitted with the main mathematical models in the drying of agricultural products where the Two Term Gaussian model got the best results of fit. Drying rate was calculated and analyzed. Effective moisture diffusivities were calculated in a range between 1.29·10−9 to 28.8·10−9
                     m2/s. Activation energies were 12.29, 12.78, 15.18 and 16.87kJ/mol for each sample thickness: 5, 10, 15, and 20mm, respectively.coefficients of the mathematical models constants of the mathematical models (s effective moisture diffusivity (m pre-exponential factor of the Arrhenius equation (m activation energy (kJ/mol) thickness of the slab (m) universal gas constant (kJ·mol coefficient of determination root mean square error time (s) temperature (°C, K) velocity (m·s equilibrium moisture content (kg moisture/kg dry matter) initial moisture content (kg moisture/kg dry matter) moisture content at time dimensionless moisture ratio drying rate (s Coffee is one of the agricultural products intended mainly for beverage industry. Coffee plants are cultivated in more than 70 countries with an average annual production of 8 However, in recent years spent coffee grounds are positioned as one of the biomass products more attractive due to the generation of waste in the coffee industry Spent coffee grounds have a high moisture content, between 55 and 80% depending on the process used. Generally, the instant coffee industry obtains moisture contents in the spent coffee grounds higher than those generated by the coffee bars from ground coffee. The drying process of the spent coffee grounds is necessary to make biofuels. First, in the production process of biodiesel, bio-oil and bioethanol, elimination of the moisture content is essential for the solvent becomes effective Although there are some specific studies related to the drying and roasted of coffee This paper presents a study about the drying kinetics of the spent coffee grounds in a convective dryer. Sixteen isothermal drying tests were carried out at different drying air temperatures and sample thicknesses with constant drying air velocity. Drying curves were fitted with the main mathematical models in the drying of agricultural products. Two Term Gaussian model obtains the best results of fit. The experimental drying rate and its mathematical function of fit were analyzed and calculated. The effective moisture diffusivity values were found out for each test. Finally, the activation energies were found for each sample thickness. Spent coffee ground samples (grounds obtained after brewing) were kindly provided by a cafeteria and a restaurant in the province of Jaen (Spain). To know the initial moisture content, the samples were dried in an oven (Memmert GmbH Drying experiments were carried out in a convective dryer ( Sixteen experiments were performed. For each sample thickness: 5, 10, 15, 20 The dimensionless moisture ratio was plotted with respect to drying time,  To date, there are no physic models to describe exactly the drying process. Drying is a complex physic process which depends on diffusion and convection phenomena. It is very important to model the stages in the drying process effectively. For that, drying curves are usually fitted with empirical, semi-empirical or semi-theoretical mathematical functions. Drying curves were fitted with the main mathematical models in the drying of agricultural products. Ten mathematical models were used to approximate the drying curves by non-linear regression analysis. The criteria such as coefficient of determination, R The drying rate indicates the amount of evaporated water per time unit. This variable is very important to optimize and control the drying process. The drying rate of the spent coffee grounds can be expressed as the moisture content variation with respect to time (Eq. The drying rate can be plotted with respect to drying time, but drying time is usually replaced by the dimensionless moisture ratio. Thus, the dependence of time is removed and the drying rate can be expressed in function of dimensionless moisture ratio, drying air temperature, sample thickness and drying air velocity. The variation of the drying rate, at constant temperature, with respect to the dimensionless moisture ratio can be explained from drying stages The The In the Finally, in the The effective moisture diffusivity values can be found out for each of the sixteen tests carried out in the drying of the spent coffee grounds. The diffusion phenomenon can be explained from Fick's second law of diffusion (Eq.  If the logarithm is applied on both sides of the equation, its plot can be represented as a linear function whose slope allows calculating the effective moisture diffusivity as (Eq.  Effective moisture diffusivity depends on the temperature and can be calculated from an Arrhenius type relationship (Eq. There are no results in the literature about the effective moisture diffusivity and the activation energy of the spent coffee grounds. For coffee bean, the mean effective moisture diffusivity was calculated in 7.173 The drying process is fundamental for the biofuel production from spent coffee grounds. Their drying kinetics was studied in this work. Drying curves were fitted with the mathematical models proposed by the researchers to date. The Two Term Gaussian model achieved excellent results in all experiments. The drying rate was calculated and its stages were analyzed. Values of effective moisture diffusivity and activation energy were found between 1.29 Results can serve as starting point in other drying systems like: fluidized bed dryers, solar dryers and rotary dryers. Spent coffee grounds from services sector can present different characteristics such as initial moisture content and particle size with respect to those generated in instant coffee industry. For future studies, additional researches with spent coffee grounds from instant coffee industry should be made, and then, compare them with this work. This work has been conducted with the financial support of the Spanish “