Four different fractions of a semi-hard material, limestone, were comminuted batch-wise by high pressure in a die press under defined conditions that eliminated the wall effects of the confinements. As the influence of the acting walls were negligible, the particular interactions were modified by using the additive caproic acid and by variation of the lateral confinements.The influence of the feed size, additive amount and the confinement on the specific surface growth, the energy absorption and the energy utilization was investigated. It could be proved that decrease of internal friction due to the additive exerts a small effect on the comminution process, whereas the material transport out of the stressing zone is decisive. Using the caproic acid as an additive only improves the energy utilization in case the particle bed is not fully confined.Fundamental research on comminution operates mostly with two special cases, namely: comminution of single particle and the idealized compression of particle multi-layers and particle beds. The latter ones have been proved to be suitable for this purpose. Furthermore, a classification of particle beds introduced by Extensive investigations on fully confined particle beds were conducted by The effect of particle bed arrangements on the comminution behaviour was thoroughly dealt with by Some results attained by Experiences in industrial mills regarding grinding aids clearly pointed out an improvement of comminution results, as the movability of the grinding material is enhanced by the grinding aid. This is due to the reduction of the internal friction and the agglomeration affinity of the progeny particles. Mostly, hydrophobing additives proved to be capable of weakening the bonds between the particles, which is caused by added water or simply by air humidity The improving effect of hydrophobing additives concerning the comminution results as well as the transport behaviour of feed material in the mills has been often observed Since the additives affect the particlar interactions, an ideal particle bed is evidently a suitable model for this investigation, in which the interactions between particles and stressing devices can be negligible. The influence of additives on the particular interactions causes changes of the mechanical parameters of bulk solid properties. Unfortunately, these parameters have been measured using a system, in which the applied stressing loads are much lower than those commonly used in comminution technique. Therefore, only assumptions concerning the tendencies for a compressed particle bed could be concluded from the parameters mentioned above. The aim of this investigation is to prove the conjecture, that enhancements of the movability of the particles would improve the comminution results of limestone particle beds. Thereby, the movability of the particles can be modified by enlarging the lateral extension of the press mould as well as by mixing different amounts of caproic acid as an additive into the bulk solid. To ensure the comparability of the results among different mould sizes, ideal particle beds had to be realized. As shown later on, all particle bed arrangements in this study actually appeared to be ideal. The comminution results are described by using well known parameters such as the specific surface area, the energy absorption and the energy utilization—also called as comminution efficiency elsewhere. Furthermore, the amount of material escaping the load through the open gap between piston and mould was estimated. The experiments on the compressive comminution were carried out using a force-controlled press with a maximal adjustable force of 1000 kN. The applied force and the displacement were measured and the energy consumption The particle beds were stressed between two radial-symmetrical plates The progress of comminution is described by using the growth of the specific surface area Δ The feed material was limestone (Calcite) sized in <15, 10–15, <50 and 40–50 μm fractions. Based on the results of the previous work done by In the broad solid fractions, the flowability ff The complete experimental programme is shown in The changes of the end bed height—the one after the particle bed is stressed—as a function of the bed confinement are shown in Variation of the lateral extension of the mould and addition of caproic acid modify the movability of the particles. The lateral extension primarily influences the movement of particles over a wide range as well as the material transport outwards the stressing zone, and therefore causes a reduction in the amount of material being stressed at the end. The additive influences the internal movement of particles into the voids of the particle bed during compaction. Owing to these influences, there are big differences of the end bed heights in fully confined beds if the amount of the additive differs. These differences gradually decline as the confinement is being enlarged. In fully open particle beds, the compression of all fractions used ended up with almost the same and smallest bed height. The end bed heights of the broad fractions <15 and <50 μm in the fully confined particle beds and the slightly open particle beds are smaller than those achieved with the narrow fractions 10–15 and 40–50 μm in the same configurations, respectively. This means that materials with a sufficient large portion of the finest particles, which can fill the voids within the bed, are more compressible in the fully confined beds. This portion of finest particles, furthermore, deteriorates the material transport more intensively, as shown in For the very fine fraction <15 μm, the end bed height was extremely low around 2.7 mm in more or less closed beds. Considering the initial bed height of 10 mm with the feed mass of 4.6 g, the initial volume fraction of solid is computed to 0.25. The end bed height of 2.7 mm corresponded to an end volume fraction of 0.84. This issue appears contradict the results of A critical evaluation of the results shown in In all experiments, the energy absorption Compared to the beds without additive, the presence of caproic acid causes a decrease of the energy absorption for the feed fractions <15, 10–15 and <50 μm in most cases. Only in the case of fraction 40–50 μm, an increase of energy absorption at the coverage Of great significance is to announce that a small amount of caproic acid can increase the energy absorption in fully confined particle beds. An explanation is to be found in a more easily rearrangement of the particles within the bed. As the coverage mentioned above is exceeded, the energy absorption decreases at first and then maintains at a constant level. A more intensive material transport in the open particle beds leads to a decrease of energy absorption. This transport process consumes only little energy, thus, the question about the comminuted material amount arises. The comminution results can be characterized by using the specific surface growth Δ The additive influences the comminution differently, depending upon the particle size of feed. The specific surface growth of coarse feeds for all bed sizes and of fine feeds in fully confined bed generally diminishes as the caproic acid is added. In contrast, the additive enhances the surface growth markedly in open arrangements of the fine particle beds. ( In general, the energy utilization declines when the energy absorption increases. As the lateral extension of the mould becomes larger, the energy utilization drops much faster With respect to the pressure—a measure of the compaction grade—the energy utilization of all used arrangements collapse into the same curve when high pressures are applied, not matter how much additive is added to the bulk. Noticeable differences only emerge at lower pressures, being given that the comminution can still be influenced by the particle movability. At high-grade compaction the particle bed behaves like a solid, whose grindability is not dependent upon the additive and the confinement any more ( Considering the end height of the compacted particle beds, the inequalities according to The greatest growth of the specific surface area Δ The energy absorption is a linear function of the applied force. This linear energy-force relationship holds well even if the mould diameter and/or additive amount are changed. Only the slope has been modified then. Increasing energy absorption leads to decrease of the energy utilization Δ We have attempted to present the behaviour of confined particle bed comminution by single compressive load, as the caproic acid was added as an additive and the confinement was varied for modifying the movability of the particles. Of particular significance is this movability, which determines the energy absorption, and hence, influences the comminution results. These influences are presented and discussed in this paper. Further investigations are following. This research, performed within the special research project SFB 285 was supported by the Deutsche Forschungsgemeinschaft (DFG). The authors gratefully appreciate this financial help.