Fluidized bed combustion (FBC) enables the in situ capture of SO2, but generates large amounts of wastes whose composition and physico-chemical properties make both landfilling and reuse in traditional fields of application (e.g., cement and concrete industries) problematic. Reactivation by water hydration of the desulphurizing ability of these residues is considered a viable mean for their recycling: besides Ca(OH)2, this process can generate other hydration products, such as ettringite. This paper is devoted to a comparison between the behaviour of Ca(OH)2 and ettringite as SO2 sorbents. To this end, synthetic preparations (in the particle size range 0.4–0.6 mm) of the two materials were dehydrated and then sulphated in a lab-scale fluidized bed reactor. Sulphation tests were carried out at 850 °C by fluidizing the bed with an SO2–N2–O2 mixture (1800 ppm SO2) at 0.8 m/s. Calcium conversion degree and fines elutriation rate were evaluated as a function of sulphation time. The propensity of the sorbents to undergo fragmentation was also estimated by particle sizing of in-bed exhausted sorbent particles, with the aid of laser granulometry. Mercury intrusion porosimetry of samples was directed to the assessment of the influence of sorbent dehydration and subsequent sulphation on pore size distribution and porosimetric texture. X-ray diffraction and differential thermal analysis on the synthetic sorbents complemented the characterization. Results showed that dehydration/thermal decomposition brought about a significant increase of the overall porosity for both sorbents, more extensive than it is commonly observed with calcined commercial limestones. Upon sulphation, the two sorbents showed satisfactory degrees of calcium conversion, larger than those usually observed with limestones. Sulphation resulted into a decrease of particle voidage (that of the Ca(OH)2-based sorbent was negligible after the process). Ettringite was more prone to attrition/fragmentation than calcium hydroxide. Results are discussed with a focus on differences between calcium hydroxide and ettringite and on key-parameters affecting the performance of the two materials as sorbents.Sulphur oxides generated during fluidized bed combustion (FBC) of sulphur-bearing fuels can be captured Reactivation by In addition to Ca(OH) To make the picture complete, it should be recalled that substantial changes in the sorbent particles size distribution are brought about by attrition/fragmentation phenomena. The mutual relationships between attrition/fragmentation and the course of calcination and sulphation have been highlighted by Scala et al. The aim of the present study was to compare the performance of two major products of FBC wastes hydration, Ca(OH) X-ray diffraction (XRD) analysis was carried out using a PHILIPS PW1710 diffractometer operating between 5°2   Silica sand was employed as bed material. Gases used in the conduction of experimental tests were SO Sorbent sulphation tests were carried out in an atmospheric bubbling FB reactor ( The reactor is electrically heated by two semi cylindrical ovens (0.6 m high and 0.2 m ID) located around the upper part of the preheater/premixer and the lower part of the fluidization column. Heat losses from the ovens are limited by ceramic fiber insulation. A type-K thermocouple, connected with a PID temperature controller modulating electrical power supply to the ovens, measures the temperature in a zone 40 mm above the gas distributor. The upper part of the fluidization column is unlagged so as to favour rapid cooling of gases and prevent further reactions of elutriated fines. Gases are supplied to the reactor by means of mass flow meters/controllers (BROOKS 0154/5850). The two-exit head of the FB reactor is purposely designed to convey flue gases through either of two 25 mm ID cylindrical sintered brass filters (35 mm high). Alternated use of filters enables time-resolved capture of elutriated fines at the exhaust. On-line analysis of flue gas is accomplished: in particular, SO ET and CH particles (0.4–0.6 mm) were fully dehydrated (dehydrated samples will be hereby denoted as ET-D and CH-D) in an electric oven at 850 °C, and then submitted to porosimetric analysis. The rationale behind this procedure is that the porosimetric texture of dehydrated sorbents, rather than that of the parent ones, is relevant to SO The FB reactor was charged with a bed of 150 g of silica sand particles (0.85–1 mm, resulting into a bed height of about 60 mm), fluidized at 0.8 m/s with an SO The degree of calcium conversion X The elutriation rate After full exhaustion of the sorbents, dehydrated-sulphated ettringite (ET-DS) and calcium hydroxide (CH-DS) were retrieved from the reactor, sieved out of the sand and subjected to particle size distribution analysis by laser granulometry, in order to assess the extent of fragmentation suffered. Finally, ET-DS and CH-DS samples were submitted to porosimetric investigation.  In  The degree of calcium conversion X The increase in the molar volume associated with conversion of CaO (16.9 cm The elutriation rate The propensity of both sorbents to undergo fragmentation was assessed by evaluating the particle size distributions of the pre-processed samples. The ET-based sorbent underwent fragmentation to a larger extent than the CH-based one: the mean Sauter diameter Altogether, the results of the present study highlight the relevance of both the porous texture and the existence of chemically inactive species (with respect to sulphation) to the course and ultimate extent of sulphation in a fluidized bed. In this framework, the porous texture of the dehydrated sorbents is bound to play a leading role. Not only is the overall porosity relevant, but also the pore size distribution: a far larger porosity lies in the coarse pores range (> The presence of chemically inactive phases (like the Al-based phases in the ET-derived samples) is directly reflected by the residual accessible porosity that is left behind upon progress of sulphation. The role of Al-based phases in ET-based sorbents (much like the Mg-phases in the residue of dolomite calcination, The different porous texture of the two sorbents is bound to affect the attrition/fragmentation propensity at the same time as the particle reactivity. The more porous residue from ET dehydration undergoes attrition and fragmentation to a much larger extent than CH-based sorbent, consistently with its larger particle voidage. In this context, the impact of attrition/fragmentation phenomena on the sorbent performances should be considered in the light of two conflicting effects: The reactivation by water hydration of the desulphurizing ability of FBC wastes generates, besides Ca(OH) i) dehydration/thermal decomposition of samples brought about a significant increase in the overall specific porosity of both sorbents; dehydrated ettringite turned out to be much more porous than dehydrated Ca(OH) ii) the ultimate degree of calcium conversion for both sorbents was of about 80% (much larger than values typically found with limestones); iii) the progress of sulphation brought about complete pore plugging in the case of Ca(OH) iv) the ettringite-based sorbent was characterized by larger attrition and fragmentation rates during sulphation in fluidized bed. The analysis of the experimental results highlights the relevance of the porosimetric texture (particle voidage, pore size distribution) of dehydrated sorbents to the sorbent behaviour. On one hand, the porous texture affects the sorbent reactivity and sulphur uptake; on the other, it influences the attrition/fragmentation propensity under the action of mechanical stresses suffered in a fluidized bed ( The Authors wish to thank Dr. Massimo Urciuolo for his help in performing laser granulometric analyses. The contribution of Mrs. Anna Basco in carrying out the experimental tests is also acknowledged.