The kinetics of dissolution of sphalerite with hydrogen peroxide in sulphuric acid solution was investigated. The influence of stirring speed (0–600rpm), dissolution temperature (10–60°C), sulphuric acid concentration (0.5–6.0M), hydrogen peroxide concentration (0.1–6M), and particle size were studied. The dissolution kinetics was found to follow a shrinking-core model, with the surface chemical reaction as the rate-determining step. This finding is in concordance with the activation energy of 43kJ/mol and a linear relationship between the rate constant and the reciprocal of particle size. Increasing concentrations of sulphuric acid and hydrogen peroxide have a positive effect on the dissolution of sphalerite, and orders of reaction of 0.35 and 0.48 were established with respect to sulphuric acid and hydrogen peroxide concentrations, respectively. Stirring speed had no effect on the rate of sphalerite dissolution.Sphalerite (ZnS) is the most important zinc sulphide mineral and is the principal source from which zinc is produced commercially. It associates in nature mainly with other metal sulphide minerals, such as chalcopyrite (CuFeS The conventional process of zinc recovery from sphalerite concentrates involves roasting the concentrate to zinc oxide or sulphate, leaching the resultant calcine with dilute sulphuric acid, and electrodepositing the zinc from the purified leach solution (roast-leach-electrowinning) The elimination of the roasting step is an important advantage, and the high zinc extraction also turned the focus to the importance of hydrometallurgical treatment processes. For this purpose, various leaching studies have been performed by many researchers in basic medium using ammonia solution Hydrogen peroxide is a good oxidizing agent, as depicted by the redox potential of 1.77 However, hydrogen peroxide can also act as a reducing agent in accordance with the following equation: This potential value (1.77 In the present study, the reaction kinetic of dissolution of sphalerite in sulphuric acid solution with hydrogen peroxide was determined. For this purpose, the effects of variables such as stirring speed, temperature, acid and hydrogen peroxide concentration, and particle size on the reaction rate were investigated. In this study, samples of the sphalerite concentrate were taken from the Menka Flotation Plant (Sivas, Turkey) where CuFeS A Pyrex beaker of 1 Each experiment was repeated at least three times and the arithmetic average of the results is used in the discussion of experimental results. One millilitre of solution was withdrawn from the reactor at various time intervals and diluted with distilled water to 100 The effect of stirring speed on the dissolution of sphalerite was investigated at various stirring speeds (0 (no stirring), 100, 300, and 600 Antonijević et al. In the current study, during the sphalerite oxidation by hydrogen peroxide, the generation of bubbles by the reaction was visible to the naked eye; this process mixed the sphalerite particles through “self mixing” a phenomenon caused by bubbles rapidly moving upwards. For this reason, all subsequent experiments were carried out without stirring, which was used only to homogenize the solution prior to sampling. The effect of temperature on the zinc extraction of sphalerite was carried out in the 10–60 The effect of sulphuric acid concentration on sphalerite extraction was carried out by varying concentrations in the 0.5–6.0 The experiments were carried out by varying the initial hydrogen peroxide concentration in the 0.1–6.0 The effect of particle size was studied in the range of −106 The dissolution of sphalerite depending on proceeding reaction can be explained by the shrinking core model If the reaction rate is controlled by diffusion through the product layer, it will be an integrated rate equation, as follows If the reaction is controlled by the surface reaction, Eq. In Eq. Eq. Eqs. We detected no solid products using XRD and microscope analyses of the solid residue after sphalerite oxidation at 40 This result implies that the dissolution reaction is as follows: The results for the effect of sulphuric acid concentration were applied to this kinetic model, and This study has focused on the kinetic model of sphalerite leaching in acidified hydrogen peroxide solution, assessing the effect of sulphuric acid and hydrogen peroxide concentration, reaction temperature, and particle size. It was determined that the leaching rate increased with increasing sulphuric acid and hydrogen peroxide concentrations and increasing temperature and decreased with particle size. The activation energy was calculated as 43 This study was supported by The Research Foundation of Selcuk University.  stoichiometric coefficient of the reagent in leaching solution concentration of the dissolved gas A in the bulk of the liquid (mol diffusion coefficient in the porous layer (L Activation energy of the leaching reaction (M kinetic constant (M apparent rate constant defined in Eq apparent rate constant defined in Eq. molecular weight of the solid (M initial radius of the solid particles reaction time (minute) reaction temperature (K) fraction extracted stoichiometric coefficient of the reagent in the leaching reaction density of the solid