Spirals are used for gravity concentration of minerals and of late these have been extensively and effectively used for iron ore processing. Their widespread use is mainly due to lower capital cost and higher efficiency to treat feed material in the size range of 3mm to 45µm. Although operating a spiral is quite simple its design is quite challenging for specific applications. Here we have made an attempt to develop a simulation tool based on the discrete element method (DEM) to understand the separation process in spiral and later use it for design purpose. We report preliminary results of simulation as to the splitter position on the spiral trough for maximum separation efficiency. It is observed that separation efficiency is maximum corresponding to a specific radial position and height of the splitter location.Spiral concentrator is essentially a flowing film gravity concentrator, where the combined action of gravity and hydrodynamic forces due to the circulating flowing film is brought to separate gangue from pure mineral. Spiral concentrator's full-fledged commercial use started in the early 1940s. Traditionally spiral concentrator has been used effectively in the coal and beach sand industries. Today, it is successfully used to beneficiate a number of ores like chromite, rutile, gold ore, iron ore, coal, beach sand, etc., mainly due to its operational simplicity and cost effectiveness. Recently, there has been an accelerated growth in the use of spirals for iron ore beneficiation. The demand for higher efficiency of separation is compromised by a higher capacity in the size range of 3 Since its inception a lot of work has been done to understand and improve the performance of spiral ( In this work the discrete element method (DEM) is used to model the dynamics of the spiral concentrator. The particles are modelled as smooth round spheres and contacts made by them with other particles and spiral surface are considered to be distinct single-point contacts. Every contact is modeled using a linear contact law, which uses a combination of a spring and a dashpot in the normal, and the shear directions. This concept is described in detail by To study particle separation in spirals, we perform numerical simulations of 3D fluid-particle interaction problem. Particles flowing on a spiral trough experience body as well as contact forces such as gravity, drag, buoyancy, friction, centrifugal and Bagnold force. Out of all the forces the Bagnold force is not considered as it has effect on the separation only when slurry concentration is more than 50% ( Two standard spirals of five turns are considered for the purpose of simulation. The spiral mesh geometry was generated as triangular structured grid with a MATLAB code which uses a dynamic triangulation method. The use of a triangulation method simplified the contact detection problem inherent to DEM. A snapshot of the spiral so developed for simulation is shown in In this section an attempt has been made to study the effect of splitter position on the separation efficiency of the spiral concentrator. The expression used for calculating separation efficiency ( The variation in the separation efficiency with respect to the splitter location on the spiral can be explained as follows. First, the presence of secondary flow separates particles in the radial direction on a spiral trough where heavier ones report to the inner zone and lighter ones to the outer zone. As a result, a mixed particle zone at the middle is created. Initially, when the position of the splitter is nearer to the inner zone, a small portion of the total heavier particles separated is taken into account for calculating the separation efficiency. Then as the position of the splitter moves radially outwards, more and more of heavier particles are taken into account, which increases the separation efficiency. A point is reached with respect to the position of the splitter such that the number of lighter particles begins to influence the separation efficiency which eventually reduces with the shift in radial position of the splitter towards the outer zone. Second, particle segregation along the height of the spiral has a similar sort of influence on separation efficiency. In a spiral feed material is introduced from the top. As the particles flow toward the bottom along the trough of the spiral, separation efficiency increases in response to the extent of segregation of particles. However, after a certain height where maximum segregation is attained, intermixing of particles starts which results in decrease in separation efficiency. The power of the DEM code lies in tracking the position of different particles and this information can be used to determine the extent of separation at any location in response to any change in operating and design parameters. Here we show how the average radial position of two different types of particles with densities 2400 and 4800 A preliminary model validation exercise was attempted by comparing the computational results with experimental data obtained from a laboratory model spiral concentrator (pitch 0.435 A new simulation method of investigating spirals is proposed. The method based on DEM allows tracking of particles on the spiral trough. From the preliminary numerical study carried out in this work, it is observed that splitter position on the spiral trough is one of the important design parameters which affects the separation efficiency of spiral. A maximum separation efficiency of 38.72% is observed if the splitter is placed at a height 0.25 The authors acknowledge the help of Mr. Ashok Chillar, Mr. Abhishek Gupta and Mr. Akash Gupta for their help in writing the dynamic triangulation code.