Steel slags are industrial by-products of an integrated steel plant, characterized by their high calcium, siliceous and ferrous content. They prove useful in many fields, such as civil engineering and in the process of steelmaking for the iron-rich phases. For a better valuation, it is important to optimize the separation of its phases. To separate these phases, mineral processing technologies such as grinding followed by magnetic separation are used. The overall goal of this work is to determine the mechanical properties of each phase to improve grinding performance. The results show that all compounds have been clearly identified and mechanically characterized, which has led to a better understanding of BOF (Basic Oxygen Furnace) slag. Finally, a mixture law using the mechanical properties calculated from each phase made it possible to estimate the overall mechanical properties of the BOF slag.Basic Oxygen Furnace (BOF) slag is one of the main by-products of an integrated steel plants, where the production rate is around 110 kg/ton of steel. The slag contains valuables components mainly iron, calcium and magnesium oxides (FeO The global value calculated by applying mixture laws by using the individual properties of each phases is compared to the results deduced from macroindentation tests. Nowadays, instrumented indentation testing (IIT) is a widely used technique to determine the mechanical properties like hardness and elastic modulus of materials by following the methodology proposed by Oliver and Pharr The elastic modulus is calculated from the reduced elastic modulus ( The reduced elastic modulus In order to obtain more accurate values for the mechanical properties, the contact area should take into account the tip defect. Usually, the tip defect is simply characterized by the length between the ideal pyramidal tip and the truncated one called Note that Eq. The determination of the indenter contact depth Where To evaluate the local deformation during the indentation, Yetna Finally, to complete the corrections to perform before analyzing the results, the frame compliance must be corrected. In nanoindentation, this is usually performed by a calibration of the instrument using a calibration specimen, generally fused silica. However, Chicot The studied BOF slag was obtained from the annual production of a French steel plant. The BOF slag sample was embedded under vacuum in a low-viscosity epoxy resin. The sample is polished by successive grinding with abrasive papers (grades 80, 220, 600 and 1200). Then, final polishing with diamond suspensions (6, 3 and 1 µm) were used to obtain a smooth surface. The sample was coated with a carbon fibre source using POLARON CC7650 Carbon Coater to be observable under the scanning electronic microscope. The film thickness was estimated by Eq. With The film thickness is 11 nm; thus, its influence can be reasonably negligible regarding the mechanical properties measurement. A SEM Schottky emission (HITACHI, Model S-4300Se/N) coupled with an Energy Detector Spectrometer (EDS) with a silicon drift detector (SDD-Thermo Electron Corporation) was used for the characterization of the BOF slag. An accelerating voltage of 20 keV and Back Scattering Electron (BSE) detector were used to analyze the specimen. In this work, the first step was to determine the number of the main compounds present in the material and afterwards to calculate their chemical composition using a point and shoot mode. The live time limit for acquisition was 60 s per shoot. Finally, a spectral imaging mode (using the Xphase software Thermo Electron) has been used to determine the proportion of each phase on the specimen. The nano and microindentation tests were carried out using an instrumented indentation equipment coupled with SEM (  After positioning the indenter above the place of interest, the specimen is brought to the indenter with the help of a “touch down” function. During the rapid approach stage of the indenter toward the surface, the indentation conditions change when a force of ∼0.5 mN is detected by the force cell. Afterwards, the test starts with the imposed conditions. The maximum load is chosen to obtain an indent size between 10 and 100 µm, that corresponds approximately to 25 mN up to 800 mN depending on the hardness of the indented phase. For each indentation conditions, several tests were performed to obtain adequate reproducibility. For each experiment, a load-time sequence was fixed in agreement with the duration recommended by the standard hardness testing, The instrumented indentation tests at the macro scale were performed using the universal hardness tester Zwick ZHU 2.5 (Ulm, Germany). Twenty-five tests were performed at different loads ranging between 50 and 2000 N, the minimum indentation depth was selected according to the components size. The loading and unloading rates were setup to the double of the maximum load in N/min (equivalent to 30 s). The dwell-time at the maximum applied indentation load, Before determining the mechanical properties of each phase of the BOF slag, it was necessary to characterize them by SEM and EDS analysis. Using point and shoot Mode, five main compounds were identified in the material. From this analysis, the following compounds have been identified from their chemical composition (a simplified reference name used in the following is given in brackets): Phase 1 (C Phase 2 (C Phase 3 (C Phase 4 (C): Lime phase (CaO). Phase 5 (FeMgMn): Magnesio wustite with substitution Mn and Ca. In addition to SEM-EDS acquisitions, spectral imaging mode was used to determine the proportion of the compounds in the BOF slag.  After chemical characterization of each phase and identification of their distribution on the surface, the mechanical properties were evaluated by indentation.   For all the compounds, the ratio In general, the results reproducibility was good; the results dispersion is related to the heterogeneity of the material, and to the effect of neighbouring phases under the measured phases, which can interfere into the measurements giving a composite response. However, Some of the obtained results are comparable with the litterature values, however, it was difficult to find information of the mechanical properties of certain phases, highlighting the importance of this study in the understanding of slag components. Velez To determine hardness and elastic modulus at the macroscopic scale of the BOF slag, macroindentation tests were performed randomly at the sample surface. To obtain representative values of the mechanical properties, the indentation loads were selected to create a plastic deformation zone (PDZ) under the indent englobing all the components constituting the slag. Hence, the size of the PDZ volume should be bigger than the representative elementary volume (REV) of the material. Consequently, based on the observation of the phases present in the material and their repartitions (   Some load-displacement curves at different loads, showing the reproducibility of macroindentation tests are exhibit in  The obtained values for the two mechanical properties are approximately constant independently of the applied load, even if some discrepancies were observed for the highest loads due to the pop-in and/or the heterogeneities of the material. Martens hardness was 3.3 ± 0.8 GPa (∼4 GPa when neglecting the displacement increasing due to pop-in effect); and elastic modulus 130 ± 25 GPa. The relatively high standard deviation can be attributed to the heterogeneities of the material. To better understand the influence of the heterogeneities on the hardness measurements, the study of dynamic hardness as a function of the indenter displacement was performed Where To study the dynamic hardness, a load-displacement curve presenting pop-in during the loading ( In Between 0 and 5 μm, the hardness variation is connected to a rough approximation of the contact area due to the influence of the indenter tip defect It is interesting to note in In addition, In order to detect another anomalies during the loading and/or pop-in which are not often visible on the loading curve, the slope variations of the loading part of a load-displacement curve were studied. Regarding the definition of the hardness and by supposing no influence of the indenter tip defect for this range of indenter displacements, the usual Martens hardness is expressed as a function of the indenter displacement as follows: Then, the indentation load is write as a function of the indenter displacement as follows: Consequently, when considering a constant hardness, the indentation loading slope must varies linearly with the indenter displacement according to this expression: Which also allows calculating the hardness from the straight-line slope. For slope calculation, the following methodology was applied: However, due to the frequency of the data acquisition, the slope calculated with Eq.  As expected The global mechanical response of the BOF slag can be determined using the individual phases properties through mixture laws. The most known approaches are the models of Voigt, Reuss, and Voigt-Reuss-Hill (VRH). The Reuss and Voigt models are the bounds for the stiffness of the composite, being Reuss the lower bound based in where  For the calculations, the area fractions are approximated to the volume fraction, assuming that phase distribution is the same in the surface and across the thickness. The order of magnitude of the mechanical properties estimated by the mixture laws agree satisfactorily with the global mechanical response obtained by macroindentation tests ( From an eco-design point of view, the use of BOF slag in different applications is of interest. The knowledge of the mechanical properties is required for optimizing their application. Such BOF slag is a very complex material mainly due to its high degree of heterogeneity. Subsequently, the mechanical characterization is render difficult. That is why we suggest to couple the use of instrumented indentation at different scales of measurement. Macroindentation allowed the determination of the global hardness and elastic modulus. To estimate these mechanical properties at a macroscale from the properties of each phase which composed the slag, a local mechanical analysis is necessary. This has been achieved by means of an original indentation equipment placed inside a scanning electronic microscope. Due to the very precise positioning of the indenter and the low indentation load applied, is possible to chemically identify the phases and to estimate the hardness and elastic modulus of each phase. Based on this local determination and the application of mixture laws, the global mechanical properties are determined. The methodology applied in this work, represents a progress in the mechanical properties knowledge of BOF Slag to increase their potential value. These results provide data to improve the grinding of BOF slag to separate iron phases and silicate phases; optimize the value of iron phases in the steel production process, and the value of silicate phases for recycling in civil engineering applications. None. This research has been supported by the General Directorate for Competitiveness, Industry and Services (