The present work contributes the results of forensic analysis after a methane gas explosion in a block of apartments located in Asturias main coal basin (N Spain).
                  Explosion origin and causes were exhaustively researched. Gas nature and origin were studied, and several hypotheses on explosive atmosphere formation were considered, while little likely or unlikely hypotheses were discarded. Possible ignition sources were also determined and located.
                  The obtained data and completed analyses allow us to determine fire causes and development. Explosion was due to methane gas emissions in areas of natural ground under basements of blocks. Only the degree of deflagration was reached, which prevented personal damage, and limited material damage.On March 15th, 2010, an explosion in a block of apartments in the quarter of San Vicente, in El Entrego (N Spain), generated great social concern in the whole regional press for days. Fortunately, there were no casualties, although several residents were in the houses upon the time of the accident. Thirty residents had to be evacuated and temporally relocated. The buildings date back to 1953. Ground floor is supported on insulated crawl space ( To facilitate ventilation, all basements include little grated holes to the outside across the two longitudinal façades of buildings. In all basements in block no. 10, a concrete girder was built on the natural ground. Indeed, in basements RA and RB in block no. 8, natural ground was completely covered by a concrete girder. In basement LA in block no. 8, no coating was disposed on the natural ground. In basement LB in block no. 8, two areas separated by a brick thin wall perforated to favour ventilation can be observed. In subbasement LBE, the original girder was kept on the natural ground, while in subbasement LBW the original girder was reduced and coated with a concrete girder to subsequently place a gasoil boiler and a fuel tank for boiler feeding purposes. This basement area is accessed through stairs by a trap door on the ground floor. Besides, basements LA and LB in block no. 8 are intercommunicated by a hole in the thin wall dividing them. The first hypothesis considered for the cause of the accident was a gas-boiler explosion. This hypothesis was ruled out after observing that the boilers of the apartments affected had not leaks or damages. Subsequently, a possible gas accumulation in basements was also considered (gas coming from subsoil coal) The day after the explosion, once the building had been evacuated, early inspection of the affected areas was completed. By means of probe-tubes, gas measurements were carried out through ventilation holes in all basements. Besides, basements in block no. 8 were accessed for more detailed gas measurements, which revealed the presence of new methane gas concentrations. The interior atmosphere was sampled for subsequent analysis in lab. Besides, ventilation hole grilles were removed, holes extended, and access traps were also opened to favour gas outflow. After 24 Two gas samples were taken in basement LB, one in subbasement LBE, and another in a pit in the girder in subbasement LBW, which is in contact with natural ground ( Chromatographic analysis was completed with Hewlett–Packard 5890 equipment. Gas composition was quantified by means of individual calibration from pattern mixtures similar to that foreseen for target gases Five days after the second inspection, a new visit was completed to the wrecked basements. During this period of time, all holes remained opened, ventilations grilles removed, and access trapdoors opened to avoid gas accumulation. Although all damage in the affected apartments was assessed, this third visit was focused on basements LA and LB, as methane concentration measurements indicate they may have held the origin of the explosion. Concrete girder was found in basements RA and RB, while no sign of mechanical or thermal effects derived from the explosion were detected. Ground in basements RA and RB is natural and non-excavated. No signs of explosion-derived thermal or mechanical effects were observed either in them. In basement LB, very evident signs of both mechanical and thermal effects were observed. The thin wall dividing the basement into subbasements LBE and LBW fell into subbasement LBE ( On the other hand, thermal effects were observed on the boiler cable and plug, on lights, on plastic pipes, on the plastic part of the gasoil tank, as well as on different plastic bags and packages Analyses seem to indicate that the explosive gas detected in basements LA and LB is mainly methane with very small portions of ethane and propane. Methane and air mixture is explosive 5% and 15% concentration being the lower and upper explosive limits, respectively Methane was assessed to pour out from the natural ground from subsoil coal through basement LA, subbasement LBE, and the small pit in subbasement LBW (see Different hypotheses were considered and studied according to differences among basements in block no. 8. No gas flow was detected in any inspection in basements RA and RB. Thus, gas could only accumulate by migration from basements LA and LB. However, these two basements were separated by airtight walls prior to the explosion, thus rendering this first hypothesis invalid. Basement LA is one of the gas-origin areas and is communicated with basement LB by means of a hole provided with a grille. This area is very likely to have led to an explosive atmosphere. Subbasement LBE is another gas-origin area. It is communicated with subbasement LBW by means of the holes in the thin wall between both subbasements. LBE is also likely to have led to an explosive atmosphere. In subbasement LBW, gas only comes through the small pit on natural ground ( The right-hand ground-floor apartment communicates with basements through a non-airtight trapdoor, although—as in basements RA and RD—there is no gas emission or flow from basements LA and LBM; therefore, the formation of an explosive atmosphere can be discarded. Trapdoor in subbasement LBW would be a possible way for gas migration from basements LA and LB into the right-hand ground-floor apartment, and then through the entrance door lintels to the apartments from the stairs in block no. 8. However, this hypothesis was also discarded, as gas must cover a path full of obstacles to reach this right-hand ground-floor apartment, such as the trapdoor leading from basement LA to the left-hand ground floor apartment, which is usually fairly airtight and commonly closed, as well as entrance doors to both apartments. Besides, once gas reached the landing between both entrance doors, it would find a perfect migration path upwards through the stair shaft. Ground-floor apartment L in block no. 8 is communicated with gas-emission areas through the north-basement access trapdoor. This apartment was lived-in upon the time of the explosion, so sporadic ventilation—together with appropriate trapdoor air-tightness—makes gas accumulations little likely to reach explosive range limits (5–15%). However, gas accumulations close to the ceiling are also quite likely. Basements RA, RB and the right-hand ground-floor apartment in block no. 8 were not lived-in upon the time of explosion, and electrical supply was cut off at the switchboard. Therefore, the generation of an energy source capable of unleashing the explosion is highly unlikely. Basement LA is an area with no kind of installation, so the location of an ignition source can be discarded. The same occurs in subbasement LBE. Subbasement LBW has an electric supply installation that feeds lights and a gasoil boiler. This boiler disposes of a starting and turning off automatism. In the combustion chamber and the front part in the gasoil injection nozzle of the boiler, the generation of an energy source capable of unleashing the explosion of an explosive gas mixture is plausible. The left-hand ground-floor apartment in block no. 8 was lived-in, so it comprised an active electric installation, electrical household appliances, and lights; therefore, it may have also generated an ignition source.  Indeed, explosion onset in the left-hand ground-floor apartment is compatible with the thermal and mechanical effects observed, as well as with those generated in the remaining ground-floor apartments in blocks no. 8 and 10. However, in view of this situation, the thermal and mechanical effects observed in subbasement LBW should have taken place due to the action of the flame and the shock wave from the left-hand ground-floor apartment. These effects should have progressed through the trapdoor communicating both subbasements. This practically-airtight trapdoor was closed upon the time of the explosion, and presented no mechanical effect whatsoever. Since its opening mechanism is based on hinges that allows vertical opening, over pressure applied on its upper part could not have progressed to subbasement LBW with no trapdoor damage. On the other hand, flame and overpressure in this assumption would tend to progress to basements RA and RB, once the thin walls separating them, falls down, through the hole left by the non-airtight trapdoor in the right-hand ground-floor apartment. However, both basements RA and RB present no explosion-generated thermal or mechanical effect. On the other hand, explosion onset in subbasement LBW is compatible with the thermal and mechanical effects observed in it. The presence of a potentially explosive atmosphere agrees with the existence of an energy source. Likewise, this situation is compatible with the thermal and mechanical effects in the affected ground-floor apartments. It is also compatible with flame and overpressure propagation through the basement-access trapdoor with no trapdoor damage, as explosion flows in the same direction of hinge opening. The day of the explosion some very favourable conditions coincided for gas coming from subbasement LBE and basement LA to flow into subbasement LBW. Gas flowed through the holes in the thin wall separating both subbasements and the grilled hole separating basements LA and LB, respectively. Besides, gas also emerged through the small pit in the floor in subbasement LBW ( Over time leads to increasing concentrations from floor to ceiling in subbasement LBW. Due to the gas flow emanated, the quadrangular ventilation grid of the basement, with a length of 30 At one point, at the height of the boiler burner, values reached the gas explosive range and a boiler’s thermostat-regulated start triggered the explosion. This explosion reached the deflagration degree, generated a pressure and flame waves which propagated towards the ground-floor apartments through the trapdoor, producing the afore-described thermal and mechanical effects. The explosion was due to the accumulation of methane gas in basements and apartments. Methane gas came from the coal in the natural ground. Methane filtered through the basements located over natural ground, as no methane flow was observed in the basements located over a concrete girder. The small holes opened in the thin wall dividing the subbasements favoured methane gas accumulation, while concentration obviously increases upwards (from floor to ceiling). Gas flow from basements to apartments mainly took place through the non-airtight access trapdoor to subbasement LBW. The ignition source was a heating burner of a boiler located in subbasement LBW. Explosion was triggered by an automatic thermostat-regulated start. Methane concentrated around the boiler burner reached values within the explosive range of gas and produced deflagration. The explosion did not reach the degree of detonation, which prevented personal damage and reduced material damage. Concrete girders in basements thus prove the best solution to prevent similar events. The authors want to acknowledge the Main Board for Mining and Energy in the Principality of Asturias for their collaboration and the contributed information for the development of this paper.