The minerals industry is currently facing numerous multifaceted challenges spanning the techno-economic, environmental and social spheres. The adoption of sustainability thinking is a holistic approach to addressing these challenges and their relative interactions, rather than just focusing on individual units and processes. The ability to do so requires an integrated modelling framework underpinned by mineralogy, so that the effect of ore complexity and variability on one or more of these factors can be simultaneously evaluated and optimised. This study focuses on the steps towards the development of an integrated framework using a case study of a polymetallic sulfide ore flotation circuit. A unique ore specific element to mineral conversion recipe (EMC) was developed and validated, and after subsequent mass balancing across the circuit allowed the calculation of mineral grade and recovery throughout. By application of a set of mineral mass distribution functions across the circuit, and including a simple mineral-based model for the determination of tailings ARD potential, the integrated framework is used for scenario analysis. Two different scenarios are presented: the first considering the balance between improving copper concentrate product quality at the expense of increasing tailings ARD potential, and the second considering the effect of feed ore variability on tailings ARD potential. The framework provides a conceptual starting point for a new approach to traditional process mineralogy studies to start practising sustainability thinking.The mining industry is faced with numerous multifaceted challenges within the realms of techno-economic, environmental and social issues ( The development of technology and skills that allow for the prevention and mitigation of ARD into perpetuity are therefore pressing concerns for the industry ( The application of a two stage flotation process to the processing of fine coal discards allowing the recovery of a clean, saleable coal product, a small volume pyrite-rich product, and a high volume benign tailings product ( A computational approach in comparing the benefits of different circuit configurations in the flotation of high arsenic ores ( What these and other studies (e.g. The Minerals to Metals Initiative at the University of Cape Town has a research project focused on developing an integrated modelling framework of the entire minerals value chain using mineralogy. Ultimately the framework should incorporate sustainability principles into the technical modelling framework for enhanced decision making ( The guiding principle in developing the larger framework is to keep the approach In the last two to three decades, the inclusion of mineralogical information into exploration, bench marking and optimising of mineral processing operations has been more widely practised (e.g. The element to mineral conversion (EMC) methodology converts bulk elemental compositions into mineral grades by simultaneously solving a set of linear square equations ( In following the guiding principles of keeping the framework simple, cost effective and applicable, is the consideration of the types of models which are incorporated. Therefore the more mechanistic – empirical models that find application in the dedicated optimisation of specific unit operations, (e.g. floatability component model approach; Acid rock drainage (ARD) characterisation and prediction is important, as it allows for the advanced planning for prevention and mitigation of ARD. The practice of ARD characterisation is broadly divided into methodologies that simply determine whether the material has the potential to generate ARD, and if so determines the “quality” of the ARD (pH, TDS, concentration and type of associated deleterious elements etc.); and tests (both experimental and computational) that provide more information on the trajectory of ARD generation over time ( The key steps in the initial development of the integrated framework are as follows: Identification of a suitable case study and associated sampling points around the mineral processing circuit, A sampling campaign to generate samples for subsequent ore characterisation (using the EMC methodology), and A material balance across the circuit after which the various mass transfer functions (models) can be generated that account for the split of material to the different streams. These form the key inputs to the integrated framework as illustrated in A polymetallic Cu-Pb-Zn sulfide ore was used in this study. The ore deposit is a sediment hosted, stratabound and stratiform ore body occurring within an area which has experienced regional metamorphism. The ore deposit shares many similarities to the well-known “Broken Hill’ type deposits of Australia. Sulfide minerals dominantly consist of chalcopyrite, galena, sphalerite, pyrrhotite and pyrite, although minor marcasite, arsenopyrite, cobaltite and pentlandite may also occur. The run of mine ore is treated by crushing and milling, and thereafter the cyclone overflow is sent to the flotation circuit. The circuit consists of three sequential flotation stages to produce a copper concentrate, lead concentrate and then a zinc concentrate. The tailings produced from the flotation circuit are pumped either to the backfill plant, or to the tailings dam, whilst the flotation concentrates are pumped to various thickeners for dewatering and drying. In line with the guiding principles of the integrated framework development, the initial sampling exercise around the flotation circuit focused on key intermediate and terminal streams. These are highlighted in Chemical / elemental analyses of Si, Al, Ca, Na, K, Mg, Mn, Fe, P, Cu, Pb, Zn and Ba were conducted using a combination of inductively coupled plasma optical emission spectrometry (ICP-OES), X-ray fluorescence spectrometry (XRF) and wet chemistry techniques. A combination of different techniques was needed given the wide differences in the element concentrations across the sample set. Sulfur analyses were obtained using a Leco sulfur analyser. These chemical analyses provided the input elemental data for setting up the EMC recipe. Similarly, mineral chemical analyses derived from internal company geology and exploration reports were used in establishing the EMC recipe, using the HSC Chemistry 8 GEO Module. The EMC recipe was validated using a combination of quantitative evaluation of minerals by scanning electron microscopy (QEMSCAN) and quantitative X-ray diffraction (XRD). QEMSCAN samples were analysed in discrete size fractions, prepared as vertical (transverse) sections to minimise settling of the heavier galena and magnetite present in the ore. QEMSCAN analyses were run on an FEI QEMSCAN 650 The feed, intermediate concentrate and tailing streams were initially mass balanced on flow rates, solids and mineral basis using HSC Chemistry 8 software ( Prior to establishing the EMC recipe, QEMSCAN analyses were conducted as The QEMSCAN analysis reported that 16 minerals are present in significant quantities. In line with keeping the analysis as simple as possible, these minerals had to be further grouped. The grouping exercise focused on establishing which minerals were the most important on the basis of economic value, and in contributing to generating or neutralising ARD, and therefore needed to be reported in the framework. Similarly, the grouping exercise focused on which were the likely key elements which could be used to track specific minerals, avoiding a case of the EMC recipe being either over or under determined. On this basis, the EMC method was designed to calculate 9 minerals, namely: sphalerite, chalcopyrite, galena, pyrrhotite, quartz, magnetite, garnet, biotite and barite. Given the dominance of pyrrhotite in the ore, pyrite was considered in the ‘pyrrhotite’ subgrouping since both minerals are Fe and S bearing. Actual mineral chemistry data was used for the majority of minerals, with stoichiometric compositions being used for quartz and magnetite. The EMC method development focused on calculating minerals with unique elements in the early rounds, and thereafter using the residual elements to calculate minerals with common elements in the final rounds (e.g. Fe in magnetite and pyrrhotite). After several revisions comparing which minerals were calculated in which rounds, trialling different refinement methods, a suitable recipe was obtained as given in Mass balanced and experimental data are expected to be similar, however this is not always the case due to propagation of error as Comparison of unbalanced EMC mineral grades versus balanced EMC mineral grades shows a high R The mass balanced mineralogy results determined from the EMC were used to calculate the ARD potential of the tailings using the The purpose of the proposed framework is to assist the mine to improve their metallurgical performance and the ability to identify if the waste material has a potential of causing acid rock drainage. To demonstrate its use, a simple mineral distribution model was used to model the streams out of each flotation circuit. The unit model parameters were percent mineral recoveries of the feed material to the flotation bank concentrate or tailings stream. These percent recoveries were back-calculated from the mineral mass balance of the flotation circuit. In reality, mineral recoveries in the flotation bank vary with changes in equipment settings, operational parameters, and slurry characteristics. The model used in this study does not take this into account. Since the mineral recoveries governing the mineral distribution function were calculated directly from plant data, mineral recovery was not a variable during simulation. In demonstrating the application of the integrated modelling framework, different hypothetical scenarios can be investigated relative to the current operating conditions of the circuit. The valuable mineral grade and recoveries summarised in As An alternate scenario that can be considered is the role of feed ore variability, another major challenge to the mining industry at present. In this scenario (II), the effect of varying pyrrhotite feed grade to the flotation circuit was investigated. The pyrrhotite feed grade was hypothetically varied between 10 These two hypothetical scenarios demonstrate the potential of the proposed modelling framework as This paper has presented the first step in the development of an integrated modelling framework using a case study of a polymetallic sulfide ore flotation circuit. In doing so, it can be concluded that: Mineralogy was integral in building the framework which, in these initial stages, focused on the inclusion of the simplest mineralogy data available through the element to mineral conversion (EMC) method. Once a unique ore specific EMC method was established and validated using complimentary quantitative mineralogical analysis, it proved to be a straightforward and elegant means of including mineralogy into the framework. Similarly, a simple mineral-based model was used to estimate tailings ARD potential from the results of the element to mineral conversion calculations. The use of simple mass distribution functions proved effective in the initial construction of the framework. Application of the integrated modelling framework for scenario analysis demonstrated the value of the approach in allowing simultaneous evaluation of techno-economic and environmental factors at an operational level. For the examples presented, it allowed consideration of the benefits of improving copper concentrate quality at the expense of increasing tailings ARD potential, and considering the effect of ore variability (increasing pyrrhotite feed grade) on increasing tailings ARD potential. The framework provides a means to explore the implications of different scenarios, but additional operational knowledge would still be required to effect the changes of the scenarios (for example, how to proactively improve pyrrhotite rejection from a flotation chemistry perspective). Further development of the integrated framework will focus on the inclusion of more detailed mineralogy data (size-by-size, and liberation), more ore extremes of ore variability and additional unit operations. Ultimately the integrated modelling framework demonstrates the potential for including sustainability principles at an operational level. Grateful thanks to Mussa Lisso, Fredrik Axelsson and Gaynor Yorath for the assistance with site sampling and QEMSCAN measurements. This work is based on research supported in part by the National Research Foundation of South Africa (Grant Number 86054), and by the South African Research Chairs Initiative (SARChI Chair in Minerals Beneficiation) of the Department of Science and Technology and National Research Foundation of South Africa. Any opinions, findings and conclusions or recommendations expressed in any publication generated by the NRF supported research is that of the author(s), and the NRF accepts no liability whatsoever in this regard.