The human trabecular meshwork (TM) expresses many genes that have been associated with physiological (bone, cartilage, teeth) and pathological (vascular systems, kidney) calcification. In particular, the TM highly expresses the inhibitor of calcification Matrix Gla (MGP) gene, which encodes a vitamin K-dependent protein that requires post-translational activation to inhibit the formation of calcium precipitates. TM cells have high activity of the activating γ-carboxylase enzyme and produce active MGP. Silencing MGP increases the activity of alkaline phosphatase (ALP), an enzyme of the matrix vesicles and marker of calcification. Overexpressing MGP reduces the ALP activity induced by bone morphogenetic 2 (BMP2), a potent inducer of calcification. In this review we gathered evidence for the existence of a mineralization process in the TM. We selected twenty regulatory calcification genes, reviewed their functions in their original tissues and looked at their relative abundance in the TM by heat maps derived from existing microarrays. Although results are not yet fully conclusive and more experiments are needed, examining TM expression in the light of the calcification literature brings up many similarities. One such parallel is the role of mechanical forces in bone induction and the high levels of mineralization inhibitors found in the constantly mechanically stressed TM. During the next few years, examination of other calcification-related regulatory genes and pathways, as well as morphological examination of knockout animals, would help to elucidate the relevance of a calcification process to TM's overall function.The trabecular meshwork (TM) is a soft spongiform tissue whose primary function is that of maintaining a physiological resistance to the flow of aqueous humor. Failure to regulate such resistance results in an elevation of intraocular pressure (IOP), the major risk factor for the development of glaucoma ( The aqueous humor flows continuously in the anterior chamber and exits the eye wandering in between the TM's cells and extracellular matrix (ECM). Because of this continuous flow, the TM is the target of numerous biochemical and mechanical factors, which in turn trigger differential expression of its genes. The TM transcriptome is quite diverse and reflects the variety of mechanisms used by the tissue to counteract insults and ensure a physiological outflow facility. Genes expressed in the TM reveal that secretion, cell–matrix interactions, cytoskeletal reorganization and especially ECM functions are key for its proper operation. Expression of genes that affect ECM properties, in particular those affecting calcification in other tissues, has been observed in the TM ( Mineralization is the result of the formation of a calcium–phosphate precipitate (hydroxyapatite crystal). Formation of the first hydroxyapatite crystal takes place in matrix vesicles which are generated in the plasma membrane of the cells and released upon uploading calcium and Pi ( Contrary to the original belief that calcification was due to spontaneous precipitation of hydroxyapatite, it is now known that mineralization is a highly regulated process ( Calcification of soft tissues occurs during pathological conditions and has important clinical implications. Ectopic calcifications are well known to occur in cardiovascular diseases, atherosclerosis, arthritis, end-stage kidney disease and cancers. The molecular mechanisms governing ectopic calcification are pretty similar to those regulating physiological calcification, and mineral formation in the soft tissues depends on a balance of “procalcific” and “anticalcific” regulatory molecules ( There is extensive evidence that vascular smooth muscle cells (VSMCs), which originate from pluripotent mesenchymal cells, transdifferentiate into chondrocytes and undergo chondrogenic commitment leading to vascular calcification. TM cells are derived from the mesenchymal cells of the neural crest and exhibit many of the characteristics of VSMCs ( In this article we review the current evidence of the presence of calcification in the TM with a particular focus on the presence and relative abundance of procalcific and anticalcific regulatory proteins ( ALP is an enzyme that hydrolyzes a variety of substrates that lead to increases of Pi. It is an essential component of matrix vesicles where it leads to increased orthophosphates required for the growing hydroxyapatite crystal. ALP is activated when a pluripotent mesenchymal cell commits to differentiate into a bone-forming cell (osteoblast) and it is significantly elevated in matured committed osteoblasts ( Also known as Bone Gla Protein, osteocalcin is expressed in osteoblasts and in osteoblast-like calcifying vascular cells. Osteocalcin is highly expressed during the last stages of bone formation and is a characteristic component of the bone matrix of differentiated osteoblasts. Osteocalcin is highly induced by vitamin D3 ( Biglycan (alias dermatan sulfate proteoglycan) forms part of the small leucine-rich repeat family of proteoglycans (SLRPs), which are associated with the commitment to the osteogenic phenotype in osteoblast differentiation ( BMP2 belongs to the superfamily of TGFβ proteins. Of all the BMPs, only BMP2 and BMP4 have been shown to induce osteoblast differentiation. BMP2 by itself has the full potential to initiate bone formation and to induce the differentiation of multipotent mesenchymal progenitor cell lines to the osteogenic lineage ( Also known as osteoblast cadherin, cadherin 11 is a calcium-dependent cell–cell adhesion protein which is highly expressed in osteoblasts. It was originally isolated as a protein expressed specifically in osteoblasts ( Collagen type I is an integral component of calcified matrix vesicles ( CTGF plays a major role in angiogenesis, chondrogenesis, osteogenesis, tissue repair, cancer and fibrosis ( Decorin is another member of the SLPRs and contains both chondroitin and dermatan sulfate glycosaminoglycans. It is highly expressed in bone cells and co-localizes to the mineralized ECM of bones ( Fibromodulin is an ECM keratan sulfate proteoglycan and another member of the SLPRs. It interacts with collagen type I fibrils and has been shown to regulate collagen fibrillogenesis ( Bone sialoprotein or integrin-binding sialoprotein is an extracellular glycoprotein synthesized by osteoblasts and osteoclasts ( Matrix Gla (MGP) is a vitamin K-dependent protein found most abundantly in bone and cartilage. MGP is activated post-translationally by conversion of its glutamic acid residues to γ-carboxylglutamic (Gla) by the enzyme γ-carboxylase ( MGP is one of the most expressed genes in the human TM tissue ( Osteoglycin, also known as Mimecan and Osteoinductive Factor, is another extracellular protein member of the SLPRS family of proteoglycans, and thus associated with the commitment to the osteogenic phenotype in osteoblast differentiation ( Osteomodulin, also named Osteoadherin, is a keratan sulfate proteoglycan that belongs to the SLRP's family ( Osteoclast-stimulating factor 1 is an intracellular protein produced by osteoclasts to enhance osteoclast activity and bone resorption (destruction) ( Periostin, also known as osteoblast-specific factor 2 (OSF2), is a secreted protein by osteoblasts ( Parathyroid hormone-like hormone, a secreted peptide also known as parathyroid hormone-related protein (PTHrP), is involved in calcium and phosphate homeostasis. It was discovered as a humoral factor implicated in the cause of hypercalcemia in lung malignancy ( Osteoblast-specific transcription factor 2, also known as Core-binding Factor α1 (Cbfa1), is a member of RUNX family of transcription factors ( Osteonectin, also called SPARC (Secreted Protein Acidic and Rich in Cysteine) and BM-40 (Basement membrane 40), is a calcium and collagen binding ECM glycoprotein ( Osteopontin, also known as Secreted Phosphoprotein 1, is a noncollagenous phosphoprotein associated with biomineralization in bone tissue as well as with ectopic calcification ( Experiments in osteopontin-deficient mice showed that osteopontin is not involved in normal bone development but is important in bone remodeling by influencing the resorption of bone by osteoclasts ( Osteoprotegerin is a member of the Tumor Necrosis Factor receptor gene superfamily. Osteoprotegerin is secreted by osteoblasts and binds specifically to Osteoprotegerin Ligand, an osteoclast differentiation factor also known as RANKL (receptor activator of NFκB). Binding of the two proteins inactivates the ligand, which is an essential factor for osteoclast development ( In order to assess the presence of a calcification process in the TM calcification, studies in HTM cells and intact perfused tissue have been conducted under different aging and glaucomatous conditions using chemical, biological and histological calcification assays. Taken together these studies are very suggestive but not yet determinative. Although evaluation of ALP is the most widely used calcification marker in the physiological (bone) and pathological (vascular calcification) fields, other proteins involved in the regulation of biomineralization (such osteocalcin, osteopontin, decorin, biglycan, etc.) would need to be tested. Although calcium deposition experiments are very encouraging, a greater number needs to be performed. As well, morphological examination of the TM of the knockout mice for the key bone associated genes would be very informative. Our intent in writing this review was not only to report on the calcification studies done in the TM, but also to expose the eye community to the vast literature of physiological and pathological calcification. At the gene level, the similarities with the TM are at times staggering (