In rock engineering, rock strength is regarded as an important rock mass parameter and it is widely estimated using the uniaxial compressive strength (UCS) test. A UCS test in laboratory requires sampling and preparation of core samples, which necessitates time consuming and expensive studies. Furthermore, preparation of cores is almost impossible for a weak rock material taken from foliated, laminated or thinly bedded rock masses of low Rock Quality Designation (RQD) values (0–20%). In this case, determination of UCS by laboratory test may be impossible in compliance with ISRM or ASTM standards. To overcome this difficulty, indirect tests, such as Point Load Index (PLI), Schmidt Hammer (SH) Rebound Number tests are often employed to predict the UCS. However, indirect tests are likely to yield UCS values with large standard deviations depending on the geological origin of the rock mass.
                  The Block Punch Index (BPI) has recently been developed to overcome the drawbacks of UCS and indirect tests and to minimize the errors arisen from the structural deficiencies and large standard deviations. In this study, determination of rock mass behavior in laminated–foliated Bornova Melange (yellowish-brown flysch and grayish-black flysch) and well-jointed Yamanlar Volcanics–Altindag Formation, where the second phase of the Izmir Metro tunnels was excavated is aimed. The BPI ratings were directly used in RMR calculations and indirectly used to estimate the UCS values of rock materials. Then, the obtained results were input into numerical models along with the rock mass strength (UCSRM
                     ) and deformation modulus of rock mass (ERM
                     ). The results obtained from the numerical models agreed with that obtained results from inner tunnel convergence and ground settlement measurements.Rock engineers have implemented various researches in order to determine the behavior and characteristics of rock masses. Hence, a number of rock mass classification systems have been developed. Each system has its own merits and demerits The strength of rock material, which is commonly quantfied by the uniaxial compressive strength ( Although the conversation factor to estimate The type of rock materials encountered in the route of tunnel are Andesite ( Type 1 route tunnels of 64 The tunnel construction route of the second stage of the Izmir Metro Project, which will be integrated with the first one, follows the line in the southwest of Izmir Gulf between Ucyol and Fahrettin Altay. Excavations in the tunnel have been underway through eight service shafts. Dominating rock units in the route of tunnel are low-to-medium altered andesites known as Yamanlar Volcanics; agglomerate–sandstone–siltstone–mudstone sequence known as Altındag formation; yellowish-brown flysch and grayish-black flysch known as Bornova Melange ( In rock engineering, knowledge of the behavior of rock mass is essential in the design of structures in rock Although the strength of rock material is considered as a scaling parameter in many empirical equations used for predicting of rock mass strength, it is one of the basic RMR parameters. As mentioned before, some index tests such as In order to minimize the aforementioned restrictions and difficulties encountered during the calculation of rock material strength required for the The BPI tests were carried out especially for weak-very weak, laminated–foliated Bornova Melange (yellowish-brown flysch and grayish-black flysch), well-jointed Yamanlar Volcanics and Altindag Formations. Therefore, a total of 2317 The rock mass parameters such as deformation modulus ( As seen in In addition to the geological investigations along the tunnel route, a total of forty-five boreholes (1526.32 Rock mass parameters obtained from empirical equations given above were used in the numerical model. Tunnel convergence and ground settlement values were recorded in order to compare with the values obtained from numerical models. Also, the existence of groundwater in tunnel route and its effect on the rock mass in which tunnel behavior was excavated were also integrated into the numerical model. Numerical models were calibrated with the measurements in the locations with and without groundwater. In the numerical modeling, the finite elements based PLAXIS 3D V.2.00 was used. Excavation and support stages were integrated as step-by-step into the models. In The predicted and measured values of ground settlements and vertical convergences are close for Yamanlar Volcanites and Altindag formation ( In this study, the ground settlements and convergence measurements were compared with the values obtained by numerical calculations. For this purpose the strength and deformation modulus of rock masses were determined from the empirical equations of This study was conducted under the scientific project numbered