Winter rapeseed is one of the most important field crops in Germany. In comparison to other crops, nitrogen (N) surplus of rapeseed is usually high and increased values of mineral nitrogen are observed in soil after harvest. N losses via nitrate leaching or emissions of nitrous oxide (N2O) have a negative impact on the greenhouse gas (GHG) balance of biodiesel produced from rapeseed. So far, the effects of different post-harvest management options on these losses after rapeseed cultivation have not been assessed. The aim of this study was to investigate agronomic measures, such as different following main crops (wheat and barley) as well as different catch crops (mustard respectively ryegrass) and varied tillage intensity for their effectiveness in reducing high soil nitrate contents and the associated N2O emissions after rapeseed harvest. A field trial was conducted in Southern Germany at a site characterized by a silty loam soil, temperate climate and high precipitation. N2O fluxes were measured twice a week with the closed chamber method. In 2013/14 and 2014/15 the calculated N-balance (N input – N output) showed a surplus after rapeseed harvest of 61kgNha−1 and 117kgNha−1, respectively. N2O-N emissions were relatively low from August to March in both years, remaining within a range of 0.3 and 2.0kgha−1. The biomass N uptake of the succeeding crops increased significantly in both years and all treatments over winter with the exception of the mustard treatment which lost N due to freezing off. No clear relationship between N2O emissions and the course of soil mineral nitrogen (SMN) dynamics was observed. In both years, there were no significant differences in N2O emissions between all treatments. Our results indicate that as far as N2O emissions under well-managed soils in southern Germany are concerned, there is no need to change the established crop sequence of rapeseed – winter wheat.Winter rapeseed is the most important oil crop in Germany. Due to its economic attractiveness, it is grown on 11% of the arable land in Germany; currently, rapeseed is grown on approximately 1.3 million hectares ( There are several positive effects of the inclusion of rapeseed in cereal crop rotations. It interrupts infection cycles of plant pathogens ( In comparison to other crops, the nitrogen (N) surplus of rapeseed cultivation is usually high, and high values of mineral nitrogen are observed in soil after harvest ( High N In particular, N The objective of this study was to investigate the effectiveness of agronomic measures in reducing high soil nitrate contents and associated N Impact of following crop: How do the differing dates of sowing winter barley ( Impact of tillage: Does reduction of tillage by direct seeding of winter wheat impact nitrogen dynamics and reduce N Impact of catch crops: Can fast growing catch crops such as mustard ( A field trial was established at the Roggenstein experimental station, which is situated 20 Prior to the field trial, winter rapeseed was cultivated on the fields. Concerning the N input it was fertilized with 200 Both measurement periods were characterized by long growing seasons, mild and very dry winters resulting in an early vegetation start ( Measurements started after rapeseed harvest in August and ended in March prior to the first fertilization. N Soil samples were taken weekly from a depth of 0–10 Statistical analyses for N In both investigation periods, winter wheat had the significantly lowest N uptake of all treatments (5  Due to mild air temperatures in winter soil temperature did not went below zero at all in 2014/15 and even in 2013/14 only for short periods. Soil moisture measurements reflected the dry conditions over winter 2013/14 quite well, whereas the following season was wetter. The SMN dynamics in the upper soil layer (depth 0–10 Between the two tillage treatments SMN contents in neither 0–10 Regarding both catch crop treatments, SMN contents decreased more quickly under mustard than under ryegrass after sowing. However, during both seasons, starting from mid-October, SMN contents were consistently higher under mustard at 0–10 Starting in October, several emission peaks were observed from the ryegrass treatment. Even cutting and removing aboveground biomass at the end of October 2013 only resulted in a reduction of N Winter rapeseed has high N uptake rates in order to achieve optimal yields. Consequently, rapeseed cropping often leads to high N surpluses which results in high SMN contents and N Regarding the N Incorporation of harvest residues by tillage can cause temporary immobilization of N ( Our results do not indicate that the common crop sequence of winter rapeseed followed by winter wheat needs to be changed in order to mitigate N This study was supported financially by the