A batch process is developed to separate Sm, Eu, and Gd from the lanthanide hydrous oxide cake produced from monazite mineral of the Egyptian beach black sand deposits after Ce-separation. The process is based on extraction by di-2-ethylhexylphosphoric acid/ kerosene from nitric–hydrochloric acid mixture. Different acid solutions with different pH values for stripping are utilized. A concentrate containing 98% of Sm, Eu, and Gd as a group was obtained with a 78% recovery.Chemically the mineral monazite is an important source of rare earth elements, especially the light lanthanides ( As far as the literature is concerned, different flowsheets based on solvent extraction were reported ( The most effective factors for the separation process under the particular concentration level was studied (extractant concentration, pH of the REEs acid feed solution, number of contacts and type of acid used) followed by analysis with ICP-OES. Separation of the middle RE (Sm, Eu, and Gd) as a group was obtained by using one of the cerium-free filtrate (produced after complete cerium separation as well as complete removal of Th and U contaminants) ( The monazite used in this study was obtained from the black sand deposited on the Rosetta area on the Mediterranean coast, using appropriate upgrading techniques ( The analyses of the lanthanides in Egyptian monazite, the corresponding hydrated oxides concentrate after partial Th and U separation and REEs cake after removal of the oxidized Ce(IV) together with the rest of Th and U by selective precipitation are given in The results in this table indicate that Ce-separation process using bleaching powder is efficient to produce REEs cake almost free of cerium. D2EHPA was selected and utilized as a powerful extractant because it gives a higher separation factor for adjacent elements of the middle rare earth elements than the light ones ( It is found that the feed solution of HCl–HNO From the given data, one can judge that most of the light REEs (La, Pr and Nd) are in the raffinate. The data given in Stripping profile of the loaded extractant is demonstrated in The results show that most of the middle REEs were stripped with light REEs leaving behind in the organic phase the majority of heavy rare earths with yttrium. The stripping percent for each extracted element after the first, third and fifth contacts are given in From The solvent extraction flowsheet presented in A rare earth cake free from cerium containing 93.11% RE The author would like to thank Prof. Dr. H.F. Ali for his continuous help and discussion for bringing manuscript in the final form.