The paper studies the relationship between quality certification, as indicated by the ISO 9001 and 9002 certificates, and the performance of Brazilian firms since 1992. The comparison between the group of certified firms and an especially constructed control group indicated that, as a rule, one cannot discern differential levels of performance across the two groups for different indicators.The increasing degree of competition in several markets following, for example, trade liberalization processes, has underscored the importance of non-price competition in a global market. In this sense, the growing significance of global best practices is emblematic, including the total quality management (TQM) schemes in the modern corporation, and accordingly one can observe a large literature on the topic within the management field. Representative contributions include Garvin The importance of the quality dimension of productive processes, however, has received less attention in the context of economic analysis. Leibenstein In addition to this generic contribution, one should emphasize the work of Barron and Gjerde Having considered the issue of the adoption of TQM programs, it is relevant to assess whether the related firms have experimented superior levels of performance in comparison with their counterparts which have not adopted those programs. Easton and Jarrel Withers et al. The contribution of Easton and Jarrel Having access to the aforementioned sources, the construction of the control group was considered. Following the criterion mentioned before, we were able to generate a control group with two firms for each certified firm. The similarity criterion was considered in terms of five different return indicators: operating income to total assets (OITA), net income to total assets (NITA), sales to total assets (SATA), operating income to sales (OISA) and net income to sales (NISA). The criterion used here for construction of the control group requires the availability of the relevant accounting figures (operating income and total assets) for the year before certification. In addition, we disregarded ISO 9003 certifications because of their reduced number and thus concentrated on 9001 and 9002 certification. Taking these caveats as reference, we were able to work with a sample of 129 firms, 48 referring to the ISO 9001 certificate and the remainder to the ISO 9002 certificate. The sectoral distribution of the certificates appears in Inspection of the table shows that capital-intensive sectors (e.g. Chemicals, Machinery, Metals, Steel and Transport Materials) display a relatively large number of certifications. Moreover, one observes a larger number of certificates in technically advanced sectors in contrast with the remaining sectors in which the number of ISO certificates is very small. The In this section we undertake the sign test and the Wilcoxon signed-rank test to assess statistically whether there is any discernible difference between the performances of the two relevant groups. The former test takes medians as reference, whereas the latter considers differences in the means of the group of certified firms and the control group in terms of the five selected performance indicators. The Wilcoxon signed-rank test is reputed to have more power than the popular sign test because the former only uses the sign of pairwise differences. We first consider ISO 9000 certificates in general. The results are displayed in The results indicate that, except for the SATA indicator, there is no significant difference between the two groups for the two tests. When we consider sub-groups by certification age, as shown in Next, we consider the tests by ISO 9000 sub-type. The general results for the ISO 9001 are presented in Once more the evidence does not favour differential levels of performance and only in the case of SATA can we reject the null hypothesis of the test. If we consider the evidence by certification age, as shown in Finally, we present the results concerning the ISO 9002 certificate. When we consider sub-groups by certification age the results are basically sustained. In the case of firms with less than 2 years of certification the evidence is even stronger, as indicated in When one considers the sub-group of firms certified for at least 2 years the results are very similar, as displayed in The overall evidence of this section indicates that there are no differential levels of performance when one compares certified firms with ISO 9001 and 9002 with a control group of uncertified firms. The paper conducted an empirical study comparing the performance of firms which have received ISO 9000 certificates with a control group of firms which have not been certified. For that purpose, five different indicators were considered and non-parametric tests were computed. As a rule, the evidence indicates that no differential levels of performance can be detected across the two groups. This result is sustained even if we study sub-groups by certificate type (9001 or 9002) or by certification age. Despite the strong evidence, it is possible to question the use of accounting indicators. In fact, ideally one would be interested in comparing the productive efficiency of firms in the different groups. This line of research is problematic as data availability may pose a serious restriction, especially concerning data on input quantities. Finally, it is worth mentioning another research topic that deserves further investigation. The connection between quality programs such as TQM or just-in-time schemes (JIT) and ISO certification requires additional studies, should the necessary data on those quality programs become available. The authors would like to thank Heitor Estevão from ABNT for kindly providing part of the data used in the present study.