Commonly used pre-treatments during e-waste recycling, e.g., manual dismantling, removal of components, size reduction, crushing etc. can cause significant local area contamination and environmental pollution. This study seeks to critically assess the impact of mechanical pre-treatments on average resource recovery, generation of high-value material concentrates and on concentrations of hazardous elements. Two sets of initial processing were carried out on a variety of waste printed circuit boards (PCBs). Electronic components were not removed from these boards. In Set I, PCBs were powdered using sorting, crushing, hammering followed by separation into heavy and light fractions through froth floatation. In Set II, PCBs were cut into small sized pieces. These were heat treated in a horizontal furnace in inert atmosphere at 850 °C for 15 min, followed by in-depth characterization of pyrolysis residues. The average recovery of main metal copper was quite comparable for both sets (Set I: 27.6 wt %; Set II: 26.3 wt %). In case of precious metals, there were higher recoveries for Au and Ti in Set I, whereas Ag, Pd, Pt showed better recoveries in Set II. A mixed trend was observed for minor metals Mn, Zn Sn, Sb and Si. In Set I, most elements showed a mixed presence in the heavy and light fractions after pyrolysis. On the other hand, Set II showed a significantly higher elemental segregation and generation of high value concentrates. Potential toxic hazardous elements (Pb, Cr, Co, Cd, Be) were detected in much higher amounts in Set I as compared to Set II. Waste processing under Set II was found to be more efficient, cost-effective and eco-friendly as compared to Set I. This study suggests a fresh look at traditional labour-intensive e-waste recycling practices towards limiting social and environmental impacts while enhancing the efficiency and cost-effectiveness of resource generation from e-waste.The production, consumption and ultimately the volumes of end-of-life electronics and electrical products (e-waste) continue to grow rapidly in most countries and show no signs of abating. The growth of e-waste is driven by accelerated technological changes, product obsolescence and escalating consumption of electronic devices and equipment. Globally, emerging economies are quickly catching up with developed nations in the consumption of electronic gadgets and products ( E-waste has immense potential as an important materials and urban mining resource in view of increasing demands for metals, declining natural mineral resources, costs and environmental impacts associated with primary mining ( Due to its burgeoning volumes, recycling e-waste can play a major role in resource recovery. Recycling e-waste typically involves collection, the removal of toxics/hazardous materials wherever possible, physical and mechanical pre-processing, and end-stage treatments using a variety of metallurgical and other techniques ( Due to environmental concerns, local regulations and cost factors, a significant proportion of waste electronics from developed nations gets transferred to developing regions of the world on a regular basis ( Resource recovery from e-waste therefore has a significant environmental footprint and associated social impact in developing and emerging economies ( Relatively inexpensive mechanical pre-treatment such as manual dismantling, mechanical size reduction, crushing, powdering, hammering, sorting, separation of components, is a commonly used pre-treatment step during material recovery from e-waste. These mechanical processes can cause significant dust generation, local area contamination, damage to soil, water ways and atmosphere and can be a health hazard to the population, flora and fauna in regions surrounding recycling facilities ( Removal of ECs is generally one of the first steps of PCB disassembly and is carried out either manually in the unorganized sector or automatically in the industrial sector ( The objective of this study is to determine the impact of initial mechanical pre-treatment on resource recovery from waste PCBs, and on the generation of high-value material concentrates, and minimization of hazardous content. Extensive low temperature (<1000 °C) pyrolysis investigations were carried out on waste PCBs with and without initial mechanical processing to determine the impact of mechanical pre-treatment. As ECs removed from waste PCBs are expected to have a very limited reutilization due to obsolete technology and likely damage during disassembly, it was decided to leave ECs mounted on PCBs and use them as a material resource instead. Along with enhancing economic and environmental sustainability of resource recovery from e-waste, optimization of recycling processes can lead to cost-effective and productive resource recovery, procedural upgrades with minimal social and environmental impact. Waste printed circuit boards were collected from a wide variety of sources including mobile phones, mother boards, power supplies, RAMs etc.; these were collected from waste dismantlers/recyclers in as received sizes and shapes. Various electronic components mounted on these boards were left intact and not removed from the boards. Images of various PCBs are given elsewhere ( Detailed experimental plan is shown in In Set II, PCB boards were cut into small sized pieces depending on the size and volume of the furnace used for heat treatments. In this study, PCBs had to be cut into pieces due to the small size of the laboratory scale furnace. The average size of the PCB pieces used ranged between 1 and 2.5 cm. Apart from cutting larger boards into smaller pieces, there was no hammering, crushing, grinding, or powdering of PCBs involved. As large-scale industrial furnaces will be able to accommodate much larger PCBs, even cutting PCBs into smaller sizes may not be necessary. This will further enhance the cost-effectiveness of the recycling process and reduce labour costs and local area contamination. The heat treatment of PCB specimens was carried out in a horizontal resistance furnace with following characteristics: furnace length:1200 mm; heating zone: 630 mm, 54 mm dia., 3 mm wall thickness; heating rate: up to 40 °C/min, Gas flow: Ar gas at 1 L/min ( Weights of the pyrolyzed specimens were recorded before and after the heat treatment. Whereas heavy as well as light fractions were recovered as dark powders in Set I; initially unprocessed PCBs pieces had separated in to red, white and black carbonaceous fractions in Set II ( Experiments were repeated at least five times for both sets to enhance the reproducibility of results, and to compensate for the initial variability in raw waste specimens to some extent. The deviation on the results could be up to ±5%. The chemical composition of these solid products was determined using Inductively Coupled Plasma Optical Emission Spectrometers model PerkinElmer Optima 7300DV ICP-OES. Detailed results and comparisons on material recovery from two sets of studies are presented in the next section. These represent averages from repeated experiments for given set of operating conditions. Detailed results on the recovery of major metals (Cu, Fe, Al. Ni, Sn), minor elements (Mn, Zn, Mg, Sb, Si) and precious metals (Au, Ag, Pd, Pt, Ti) are presented in While average recoveries of various elements are of great significance during recycling, large combinations of elements were present in various pyrolysis fractions. Significant effort and secondary processing may still be required for extracting specific elements resulting in additional costs. It is therefore quite desirable to produce high value concentrates during waste processing. In this section, we take a closer look at the composition of various pyrolysis fractions and relative distributions of elements.  Results for minor elements (Mn, Zn, Mg, Sb, Si) are presented in Results for precious metals (Au, Ag, Pd, Pt, Ti) are presented in The presence of hazardous elements (Pb, Cr, Co, Cd, As) is a key issue in resource recovery from e-waste; their concentrations need to be minimised to the extent possible for limiting environmental contamination during recycling. Other three hazardous elements Co, Cd and Be followed a similar trend albeit with much smaller concentrations: Set I (Co:454, Cd: 27 and Be: 23 ppm); Set II (Co:274, Cd: 0.9 and Be: 3.3 ppm). For Set I, most of these elements were found concentrated in the heavy fraction, with much smaller levels detected in the light fraction. Concentrations of these elements were generally small for all pyrolysis fractions in Set II except for high concentration (1214 ppm) of Co in the white fraction. The concentrations of hazardous elements were found to occur over a wide range from 0.1 ppm to 33000 ppm along with variations across different pyrolysis fractions. A critical comparison of average resource recoveries from Set I and Set II is presented in We focus our attention next on the generation of high value concentrates. A high level of elemental mixing is expected in Set I due to mechanical treatments including hammering, crushing, powdering etc. Even after separation into heavy and light fractions through froth floatation, there was a significant presence of most elements in the two fractions. On the other hand, Set II showed a much higher level of segregation and elemental concentration. For example, the red fraction in Set II contained 87.4 wt %Cu with negligibly small concentrations of Fe, Al, Ni and Sn. The loss of copper in the other two fractions was also quite small. Elements Fe, Al and Ni were found concentrated in the white fraction with much lower concentrations in the other two fractions. Sn was present in all three fractions; however, its concentration was generally quite small. Minor elements (Mn, Zn, Mg, Sb, Si) were distributed fairly evenly between the heavy and light fraction of Set I. A similar trend was observed in Set II as well with a few exceptions, e.g., higher concentration of Mn in the white faction, and Mg and Sn in the black fraction. Precious metals Au, Ag and Ti clearly showed a preference for the heavy fraction (Set I), whereas significant amounts of Au and Ti were detected in the black fraction (Set II). Ag tended to concentrate in the white fraction, whereas high concentrations of Pd and Pt were detected in the red fraction. Set II generally showed significantly higher levels of elemental segregation and concentration. Several factors such as melting points, vapour pressures, surface area, losses during handling, redeposition of released fumes and dusts can also play an important role in material recovery. If the melting point of an element present is below the processing temperature (850 °C) (e.g., Sn, Pb, Al, Sb, Mn etc.), it is likely to diffuse out of its original location and make bonds with surrounding components. Such diffusion is either not likely or will be relatively slower for higher melting point elements (e.g., Cu, Mn, Fe, precious metals etc.). For metals with high vapour pressures (e.g., Zn, Pb, Cd etc.), exposure to high temperatures can lead to their volatilization as metal fumes or release as particulates which may condense as very fine particulates upon cooling. Higher surface areas, local adhesion between powders during mechanical processing may also result in higher material losses. There were two key aspects of this investigation: the non-removal of mounted electronic components and the impact of initial mechanical processing on resource recovery. Precious metals typically account for more than 80% value of metals recovered from waste PCBs; copper is the next high value metal to be extracted (  A critical assessment has been carried out on the influence of initial mechanical and physical processing on resource recovery from waste PCBs, with focus on major, minor and precious metals as well as hazardous elements along with their distributions in various pyrolysis fractions. Key results from this study are: Low temperature pyrolysis investigations were carried on a variety of waste PCBs with or without initial mechanical treatments (Sets I and II). Electronic components were not removed from PCBs prior to processing. Average resource recoveries of major metals, minor elements and precious metals were determined for both sets. The average recovery of main metal copper was quite comparable for both sets. There were higher recoveries for precious metals Au and Ti in Set I, whereas Set II showed better recoveries of Ag, Pd, Pt. Although some elemental segregation was achieved in Set I through froth floatation, most of the elements were detected in the heavy and light fractions. Set II however showed a significantly higher segregation and the generation of high value concentrates. Set II showed consistently lower concentrations of hazardous elements (Pb, Co, Cr, Cd, Be) as compared to Set I. This study has shown that the non-removal of electronic components and bypassing mechanical pre-treatment such as manual size reduction/crushing/powdering etc. had no detrimental influence on resource recovery from waste PCBs and the generation of value-added products. Comparing our results with published data, significantly higher material yields were obtained when electronic components were not removed from PCBs. Processing under Set II is expected to be generally more economical and eco-friendly as compared to Set I. This study presents an environmentally sustainable approach to reduce the labour-intensive component of e-waste recycling, enhancing the link between resource generation from waste and social outcomes. Some of the key future directions for e-waste processing would include, the non-removal of electronic components, minimising crushing and powdering of e-waste unless required specifically by the recycling process, and other non-essential pre-treatments. Along with reducing energy consumption and processing costs, it will a significant step towards minimising the impact of recycling on workers, local area contamination and pollution especially in poor countries without adequate infrastructure and safeguards. The authors declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this paper. Authors gratefully acknowledge The following is the Supplementary data to this article: Supplementary data to this article can be found online at