Posttraumatic osteoarthritis (PTOA) of the knee is a common complication after intra- and extra-articular fractures. Moreover, PTOA may also be a result of isolated cartilage defects, meniscus resections, and ligament injuries. There are various methods of treatment of knee joint fractures. However, in the final stage of a PTOA, when nonoperative treatment fails, endoprosthetic joint replacement is the method of choice. Primary total knee replacement (TKR) for the treatment for a fracture of the knee joint is a rare indication, even at major treatment centers. It is performed in elderly patients with the inability to be mobilized with partial- or non-weight bearing; in cases with considerable bone destruction; in cases with symptomatic osteoarthritis (OA) in the elderly; and, it is often associated with the primary use of a modular implant. However, TKR in the acute situation should always be an individual decision. Secondary TKR after knee joint fracture shows overall good functional results. However, the results are inferior when compared with TKR for primary OA. In addition, the complication rates of TKR for PTOA are much higher. Problems with the extensor mechanism after tibial plateau fractures are common. There are also problems caused by preexisting scars, nonunion (possibly due to a low grade infection), malalignment, restricted movement, or instability.Fractures of or around the knee joint, ligament injuries, resection of the meniscus, and isolated cartilage defects may contribute to the development of posttraumatic osteoarthritis (PTOA). The following factors influence degeneration of the joint: increased load/reduction of the contact area; instabilities/nonphysiological shear stress; and inappropriate mechanical load/axial deviations/malalignment. Up to 45% of patients develop arthritic changes after intraarticular fractures or fractures around the knee joint. Classification of these fractures is essential for determining the epidemiology, facilitating communication between orthopedists, and defining treatment algorithms. In addition to the AO system described by Müller et al Although conservative treatment of knee joint fractures is a valid alternative to surgical treatment, it should be reserved for cases where surgery is not recommended or possible, i.e., in cases of severe closed soft tissue damage or excessive perioperative risks, e.g., cardiopulmonary decompensation. For the reconstruction of a fracture at or around the knee joint, various procedures and fixation devices can be used. In extensive comminuted fractures of the proximal tibia and distal femur, a two-stage procedure is recommended, especially in cases with severe soft tissue damage. The fracture should be stabilized temporarily by an external fixature. Subsequently, the fracture morphology must be analyzed by computed tomography or magnetic resonance imaging in order to select the appropriate internal fixation device and to define the surgical strategy. After reduction of swelling and soft tissue consolidation, the reconstruction of the fracture is most often performed by internal fixation using precontoured periarticular locking plates. In simple intraarticular fractures, a watertight reconstruction of the joint surface is the goal. However, in comminuted fractures it is more important to achieve fracture healing and to reconstruct the (metaphyseal) bone stock for a later joint replacement ( Complications following high-energy fractures of the tibia plateau are avoided by strict adherence to the principles and techniques of gentle tissue handling and limited incisions. The complications can be divided into early (i.e., loss of reduction, deep vein thrombosis, infection), or late (i.e., nonunion, implant breakage, knee stiffness, PTOA). Reduction of knee motion after tibial plateau fractures is common. This severe complication is thought to result from damage to the extensor retinaculum, to the joint surface as a consequence of the initial trauma or surgical exposure for fixation, or to both. Extensor mechanism scarring, with or without arthrofibrosis of the knee joint can lead to restricted knee movement. These effects are greatly magnified by immobilization after fracture, or internal fixation. Immobilization of the knee for periods of more than 3 weeks or 4 weeks usually results in some degree of permanent stiffness. Early stable internal fixation of the fracture, meticulous soft-tissue handling, and immediate mobilization of the knee maximizes the chances of optimal outcomes after most tibial plateau fractures. Patients should have 90° of knee flexion at 4 weeks after surgery. Patients who fail to regain knee motion during the 1 Wound-related problems after operative treatment of tibia plateau fractures are common and devastating complications that may lead to deep infection. Damage to the soft-tissue envelope in the proximal tibia is frequently underestimated. Surgical incisions through contused skin with extensive dissection for the placement of implants often contribute to early wound breakdown and deep infection. Careful timing of surgery, extraperiosteal dissection, and limited dissection of comminuted bone fragments are likely to decrease complications. Preoperative computed tomography scan information, especially with three dimensional reconstruction and preoperative planning, can help to guide subsequent surgical incisions directly to the fracture site. Indirect reduction techniques using a femoral distractor, ligamentotaxis, percutaneous reduction clamps, smaller implants, and percutaneously inserted cannulated screws also decrease the likelihood of further soft-tissue devascularization, wound dehiscence, and deep infection. Should wound breakdown or drainage, occur, aggressive surgical treatment is indicated. Irrigation and debridement of all devitalized bone and soft tissues is mandatory. With intraarticular fractures, the infection may also contaminate the knee joint. To prevent septic arthritis and cartilage destruction, the knee joint should be thoroughly evaluated and irrigated. A deep wound infection with abscess formation should be packed open and closed secondarily, often by split-skin grafting. If a small sinus without frank pus is encountered, the wound can sometimes be closed over suction drains, after irrigation and debridement. In either scenario, appropriate antibiotics are given for 3–6 weeks. Soft-tissue closure within 5–7 days is recommended. If tension-free suture is not possible, we favor a medial or lateral gastrocnemius flap, with subsequent split-thickness skin grafts. In a small percentage of cases, a free tissue transfer may be necessary. Nonunion is most commonly seen in Schatzker type VI injuries, at the metaphyseal-diaphyseal junction. Nonunion is usually the result of severe comminution, unstable fixation, failure to bone graft, mechanical failure of the implant, infection, or a combination of these factors. In a study of 48 patients with 50 severe fractures of the proximal tibia treated with the use of limited internal fixation combined with external fixation and followed prospectively for 2 years, Weiner et al Treatment of nonunion may be difficult because of pre-existing or secondary osteoporosis, proximity to the knee joint, soft-tissue scarring, and prior surgical procedures. Aseptic nonunion in patients with reasonable bone stock should be bone grafted with revision of the osteosynthesis. In patients with significant osteopenia, treatment must be individualized. Internal or external fixation alone, or composite fixation, may be appropriate. Atrophic nonunion requires supplementary iliac crest cancellous bone grafting. In patients with infected nonunion or bone loss, thorough early debridement of all dead and infected tissue, implantation of antibiotic-impregnated beads, free or rotational tissue flaps, and external fixation are the mainstays of treatment. Orthopedic surgeons routinely perform extensive surgical procedures in an effort to restore the alignment and congruity of articular surfaces following intra-articular fractures. Replacement of the joint, so called total knee replacement (TKR), is a very successful procedure in degenerative joint disease, i.e., in osteoarthritis (OA) of the knee. TKR due to a fracture at or around the knee joint can be performed as the primary procedure or secondary following the development of OA. Primary posttraumatic joint replacement is rarely performed. Joint reconstruction by osteosynthesis should initially be considered in any case, since joint replacement can always be performed later, i.e., in case PTOA develops. Primary posttraumatic knee replacement is reserved for specific situations (see below), and it should be noted that the rate of complications is increased compared to TKR in primary OA. Therefore, an important issue is the timing of the joint replacement after the fracture. According to several different studies, there is up to a 15% incidence of secondary knee replacement following primary osteosynthesis of a fracture of the tibial plateau. Wasserstein et al Weiss et al According to published literature, primary treatment of a tibial plateau fracture with a TKR shows good medium-term results in only 55–65% of the cases. Primary TKR after a distal femoral fracture is significantly less performed. There are only a few case studies on elderly patients with multiple diseases. Problems in primary posttraumatic TKR are in particular the bony defect and the instability. Therefore, unicompartmental knee arthroplasty is not recommended and bicondylar resurfacing is rarely possible. Usually, the implantation is performed with a (semi)constrained prosthesis in a cemented technique or by use of a modular revision device. Indications for a primary posttraumatic TKR are: Contraindications are: local or systemic infection; severe soft tissue injuries; nonreconstructable extensor mechanism; severe neurological deficit (such as femoral nerve lesion); metaphyseal bone loss (severe comminution); young patient; and noncompliance. In these well-selected cases, primary total knee arthroplasty (TKA) offers advantages in terms of early mobilization and faster rehabilitation combined with a decreased probability of reoperation. The goal is to limit functional impairment and to allow these patients to return as fast as possible to their prefracture surrounding. A recent review concluded: “In clinical practice, the indication for primary TKR after knee fracture is always an individual decision”. The indications for a secondary knee replacement after knee fracture are similar to those for TKR due to primary OA of the knee, i.e., in the presence of pain and loss of function of the knee joint (PTOA). Failed fracture fixation, axial malalignment after a healed fracture, and complex ligamentous instability are additional indications.  Secondary TKR in PTOA shows different results in the literature, as well as higher rates of complications compared to TKR for primary OA. Gerich et al Scott et al The study by Weiss et al In general, secondary TKR for PTOA shows good functional results but with a higher rate of complications compared to TKA for primary OA. The best results are achieved in patients with isolated tibial plateau fractures. Most difficult are fractures of the tibia and the femur (floating knee) as well as existing soft tissue damage. Dexel et al This observation is supported by a study from Kester et al Bala et al In addition, the outcomes of TKA for PTOA are less reliable than for idiopathic OA. These patients tend to be younger, present with varying degrees of deformity, and often have a history of prior surgery, resulting in a wide spectrum of pathology. Shearer et al Reconstruction of the joint is the treatment of choice for fractures at or around the knee. However, total knee joint replacement (TKR) is a valid alternative. Primary posttraumatic TKR is rarely performed, even at major treatment centers. It is indicated in elderly patients, who cannot be mobilized with non-weight bearing; in cases of substantial bone destruction; and, in cases with preexisting symptomatic OA in the elderly. In those cases, a modular implant is recommended. However, the indication for primary posttraumatic knee replacement is rather an individual decision. Secondary TKR for PTOA shows overall good functional results. However, the results are inferior to TKR for primary OA. In addition, the complication rates are much higher. Problems with the extensor mechanism in patients after tibial plateau fractures are frequently observed. The rehabilitation program during hospital stay should not be different from the standard elective TKA scheme and should include intensive passive motion on a continuous passive motion (CPM) machine and early walking rehabilitation. The authors declare that they have no conflict of interest.