A previously proposed model for describing strain-controlled cyclic plastic deformation is employed to describe cyclic creep behaviour. The model, derived via the evolutionary behaviour of mobile dislocation density, is directly applicable to the case where flow is governed by the glide motion of dislocation through an obstacle field, such as forest dislocations. For the case of stress-controlled loading, the model is modified to account for kinematic hardening and mean-stress shift that occur during cyclic creep deformation. Cyclic creep is modeled as due to the coupled behaviour of the breakdown of dislocation cell structures on the one hand, and the formation and development of new cell structures on the other hand. These two processes oppose each other in that while the former softens the material and enhances flow, the latter hardens the material and tends to decrease flow. The competition between these processes and the relative rate of one to the other during loading determines the overall shape of the strain-cycle (or strain–time) curve. The predictive capability of the present creep model is compared with experimental cyclic creep data of polycrystalline copper subjected to combined cyclic and mean stresses, and agreement between the two is very good.When metals are cycled between constant load (or stress) limits within the low cycle fatigue regime plastic flow occurs as the number of cycles increase. This phenomenon can occur even at low temperatures. In addition, if biased stress limits with sufficiently large range are imposed, the mean strain will increase with number of cycles. This mean strain shift may decrease its rate and stop, or it may establish an approximate constant rate, or it may accelerate and lead to fracture. This transient behaviour is known as cycle-dependent creep or ratcheting and is more pronounced when the cyclic stress is superimposed on tensile mean loads. The accumulation of strain with cycle is similar to the accumulation of strain with time, as occurring in high temperature static creep test, in that primary, secondary and tertiary creep stages may be observed. A major difference, however, is that cyclic creep strain at failure may approach the fracture strain in a tensile test rather than only a few percent as in high temperature static creep. Also, as compared with monotonic loading, cyclic creep may show cyclic stress acceleration Different kinds of cyclic creep may occur as a result of cyclic loading under load control. One of these, e.g. In describing cyclic behaviour of materials, the most popular approaches have been the application of non-linear viscoplastic theories, e.g. In this paper, a previously proposed kinetic model for describing cyclic plastic deformation under strain-control loading conditions is adapted and/modified for describing cyclic creep behaviour for the case where flow is governed by the glide motion of dislocations through obstacle fields, such as forest dislocations. The present model takes into account kinematic hardening as well as mean-stress shift that occurs during cyclic creep. The predictive capability of the model is compared with experimental cyclic creep data of polycrystalline copper subjected to load-controlled cycling with tensile mean loads. In a previous paper During cyclic loading, cyclic hysteresis loops are generated. Each loop may be considered as two different monotonic stress–strain curves which closely follow each other: one of these curves describes the loading/forward cycle with the other describing the unloading/reversed cycle. According to Kwofie During cycling, as deformation continues, the peak shear stress Under stress–amplitude loading with tensile mean stress, the applied stress may be represented as By making the strain-rate the subject of Eq. By combining Eqs. To test the predictive capability of the present model it was tested on experimental cyclic creep data of polycrystalline copper. Copper rods of commercial purity were machined into button-headed specimens having gauge lengths of 25 Axial load-controlled tests with mean loads were conducted in air at room temperature of about 22  In general, creep behaviour is described by a mechanism that softens the material and causing flow at the applied stress. It is likely that cyclic work-hardened structures are meta-stable in character and contain unbalanced internal stresses. When cycled at lower stress amplitudes than the hardened state softening occurs by the action of repeated stress reversals, which cause annihilation of dipoles and multi-poles (especially of the screw type) and also provide the activation energy for the break-up of cell structures A previously proposed model for describing strain-amplitude cyclic behaviour is extended and/or modified to the case of stress–amplitude cyclic loading behaviour. This model is directly applicable to the case where flow is governed by the glide motion of mobile dislocations through obstacles, such as forest dislocations. In particular, this present model is capable of describing cyclic creep behaviour within the primary and secondary regimes and accounts for kinematic hardening and mean-stress shift that occur during stress–amplitude loading. The success of the model to predicting observed cyclic creep depends on the accurate determination of (a) the strain-hardened strength of the material at saturation and (b) the residual mean stress factor The cyclic creep curve could be explained in terms of the coupled processes of the breakdown of dislocation cell structures on the one hand, and the formation and development of new cell structures on the other hand. The predictive capability of the model is compared with experimental cyclic creep data of polycrystalline copper, and agreement between the two is found to be very good. Thus, the single-parameter kinetic flow model of Kocks and Mecking  Supplementary data associated with this article can be found, in the online version, at 