Chalcopyrite heap leaching is not yet a commercial reality, not just because of its lower recovery or slower kinetics, but rather, because of the economic impacts lower recovery and slower kinetics impose to the operating cost of the process. Considering the importance of the financial analysis on the economics of the operation, in this research, the economics of hydrometallurgical treatment of low-grade chalcopyrite deposit at Sarcheshmeh mine as a function of ore grade and extraction recovery were investigated. First, a brief history and theory of chalcopyrite ore leaching has been reviewed, showing that bio heap leaching at a possibly higher temperature with forced aeration is the only viable technique in treatment of low-grade chalcopyrite ores. In the economic feasibility study section, an operating cost estimate, capital cost estimate and economic analysis for a plant with 7000 tons per year copper cathode production capacity as a function of ore grades, acid consumption and heap leaching recoveries were investigated. Preliminary capital cost and operating cost estimates were made within two scenarios for a plant utilizing bio heap leaching, solvent extraction and electrowinning of low-grade chalcopyrite ore. The operating cost, for instance, was shown to be between US$5.99/kg to US$4.29/kg of copper cathode for extraction recoveries of 30% to 50% in a scenario where the construction of new SX and EW plants are required (Scenario 1). The operating cost was shown to reduce to US$5.36/kg to US$3.66/kg, for a similar recovery range, if the current SX and EW facility can absorb the bio heap leaching solution (Scenario 2). Using the operating cost data and the current copper selling price, the ore cut-off grade as a function of copper extraction efficiency was identified. The economic analysis showed that for an ore containing 0.28% copper, 7000 tons per year of copper cathode production requires a total investment of 38 million US dollar. The internal rate of return for such a plant was shown to vary between −2% to 27% for copper extraction efficiencies between 30% to 50% (Scenario 1). The sensitivity analysis of the similar plant showed that a copper selling price of US$5/kg, for instance, can even make the 50% copper extraction efficiency economically unacceptable for scenario 1.In this research, hydrometallurgical extraction of low grade (0.28% copper content on average), high chalcopyrite content (> 80%) from Sarcheshmeh Run of Mine ores at an estimated ore capacity of 100 million tons, was studied from a technical and economical point of view. Sarcheshmeh copper mine located at Sarcheshmeh, Kerman is the largest copper producer in Iran, with about 200,000 ton/year copper cathode production capacity. Like many other copper producers, the majority of the copper being produced at Sarcheshmeh is by using a pyrometallurgical route. The hydrometallurgy plant has a nominal capacity of 14,000 ton Cu cathode/year but due to the oxide ore's depletion, it is currently operating at less than half of its capacity. Providing a solution to the SX/EW assets for which the oxide ores are running out, and where 100 million tons of low-grade chalcopyrite ore is readily available at the nearby site, has been the main impetus to this study. In this regard, two different scenarios were examined. In the first scenario, construction of new SX and EW plants to treat the generated PLS from heap bio leaching was assumed to be required. In the second scenario it was assumed that the 7000 tons free capacity of the SX and EW facility can absorb the solution from the chalcopyrite heap bioleach operation. The main objective of this work is to suggest an approach to calculate the operating cost and capital cost of the copper production plant through the heap bioleach/SX/EW processes. In addition, this study is trying to demonstrate a correlation between the technical variables such as ore grade, extraction efficiency and heap acid consumption, with the operating cost, capital cost, and other financial indicators. This research is divided into two parts. The first part is entitled technical feasibility, briefly reviewing chalcopyrite leaching, and including the review of the commercial plants for leaching of chalcopyrite concentrate and three pilot plants for treatment of low-grade chalcopyrite ores. The second part, economic feasibility, is concerned with the economy of hydrometallurgical treatment of low-grade chalcopyrite ore using heap bioleaching, SX and EW processes. This part included the capital cost estimate, operating cost estimate and economic analysis for leaching recoveries between 10% to 70%. The economic analysis projects the cash position and internal rate of return for two different scenarios that will be discussed in the following sections. Chalcopyrite, as the most abundant source of copper, accounts for about 70% of the world's copper deposits ( Despite copper oxide ores, chalcopyrite and secondary sulfide ores require an oxidizing agent such as ferric ion or oxygen for dissolution reaction to occur. The chalcopyrite Eh-pH diagram shows that acidic dissolution of chalcopyrite takes place through solid transformations via bornite (Cu Oxygen consumption is significantly higher when sulfate is a reaction product and therefore for such processes (TPOX, BioCOP), the extra cost associated for the oxygen plant increase the operational and capital cost of the operation. Acid neutralization or acid disposal cost is lower when elemental sulfur is the leaching byproduct (Albion, ROL, Galvanox™). It should be mentioned that sulfur is not oxidized by ferric due to its kinetical stability. Elemental sulfur, however, increases the cost of precious metals' recovery by cyanidation due to the formation of SCN Among few industrially practiced techniques in hydrometallurgical treatment of copper ores, leaching of copper oxide and secondary sulfide ores with sulfuric acid has found extensive application due to its simplicity, high extraction recovery, controlled corrosion, low operational/capital cost, and the ease of purification and precipitation processes using conventional solvent extraction and electrowinning. In general, the sulfate medium based processes in presence of ferric and oxygen oxidants are the most established copper leaching technologies ( A full list of challenges that resulted in failure to achieve sustained commercial production from chalcopyrite is listed in the paper by The Albion process, which is an oxidative atmospheric tank leaching of finely ground concentrate (P80 of 12–18 μm) was however, recently reported to be commissioned commercially in 2018 ( The Total Pressure Oxidation Process operates under medium to high temperature and high pressure with 1 h retention time in an autoclave and a feed particle size of 37 μm. The reaction product is sulfate ion and therefore high oxygen consumption is expected. The TPOX process has been commercialized at Freeport McMoran's, First Quantum's Kansanshi and Ecometales at Chile. This process has typically been employed where the generated acid can be utilized, for example, in a heap leach operation nearby site ( The BioCOP™ process has been developed by BHP Billiton to dissolve copper from chalcopyrite concentrate. In this process, thermophilic leaching of chalcopyrite occurs at 65 °C to 80 °C. The bacteria involved catalyze the oxidation of ferrous to ferric sulfate. Ferric sulfate oxidizes the chalcopyrite. BioCOP™ process has been commercialized in 2002 at Chuquicamata in Chile in a 20,000 ton per annum Copper plant but was stopped apparently due to few technical problems and high operating cost after few years ( Beside BioCOP™ process, Bactech/Mintek is another low temperature (below 80 °C) atmospheric process among the sulfate media processes that was conducted in a demo plant scale. Bactech/Mintek is a bioleaching process for the leaching of chalcopyrite concentrate using moderate or extreme thermophilic microorganisms. A pilot plant of the BacTech/Mintek process with 500 kg/day cathode capacity was operated at the research facilities of Peñoles in Monterrey, Mexico but stopped after production of 40 tons of copper cathode. The Glencore Albion process, which is an oxidative atmospheric tank leaching of finely ground concentrate, also runs at around 80 °C and was recently (2018) commercialized for chalcopyrite concentrates at the Sable Zinc site, Kabwe, Zambia. The plant has a nominal capacity of 8000 ton per year copper cathode with a reported 99% of copper recovery efficiency ( To the best knowledge of the author, tank bio leaching of chalcopyrite concentrate was not commercialized industrially until recently, where a 50,000 tpa plant was commissioned in 2019 in Kerman, Iran (site visit by the author). MIDHCO process is apparently a combination of the BioCOP™, Albion and Bactech/Mintek processes. The chalcopyrite concentrate is wet milled to about 10 μm and is charged to the primary leach tanks with the solid to liquid ratio of 10%. The slurry pH is kept at about one and operates at 50 °C in the presence of moderate thermophilic microorganisms. The Cu extraction was reported to reach above 97% in 7 days of operation. There are 3 trains of 3 primary tanks in parallel followed by 3 secondary tanks in series with the design volume of 3020m Heap leaching of copper oxide/secondary sulfide ore is a well-established technology and low-cost operation in processing of low-grade ores. 80% of total copper produced through bioleaching is from the secondary sulfide ores ( To overcome the passivation of chalcopyrite ore during the heap leaching process and increase of copper dissolution rate and copper extraction efficiency, oxidative leaching by air injection to promote microbial leaching under low-potential was seen to be effective. To approach recovery rates similar to the heap leaching of secondary sulfide ores, heap leaching at higher temperature was also practiced. Oxygen is often a limiting reagent in heap bioleaching of sulfide ores and therefore forced aeration can increase the leaching rates. Oxygen is the key reagent in heap leach process of chalcopyrite ore. Limits of oxygen diffusion into the surface of a heap can easily confine the bacterial activity to the top 1.5 m of a leach pile. Measurements on nonaerated heaps have confirmed that oxygen levels drop after the first top 1.5 m of the leaching pile to below 5% at the bottom of the leach pile ( Higher recovery rates were also reported for high temperature heaps. In this regard, few column tests in pilot scale were tested using low grade chalcopyrite ore with recoveries between 60 and 70%. For instance, BHP Billiton ( Major development efforts focused on chalcopyrite heap bioleaching were conducted by Mintek/NICICO at Sarcheshmeh, BHP Billiton at Escondida and Inner Mongolia at China. At NICICo, the pilot plant of the test has launched for operation of low-grade chalcopyrite ore from the Darehzare orebody near Sarcheshmeh copper complex, on three 20,000 ton pilot heaps in 2005 ( There are no chalcopyrite bio heap leaching operations at a commercial scale ( The high redox potential of the PLS solution over the leaching period (about 600 mV vs SHE) confirmed the active presence of Fe It is well known that the galvanic effect of pyrite in sulfate leaching of chalcopyrite concentrate increases the copper leaching rate and copper recovery. There are, however, optimum conditions in which the galvanic reaction is favorable such as a suitable solution redox potential, moderate temperature, appropriate solid to solution ratio, proper ferric ion concentration, proper pyrite sample and an adequate pyrite to chalcopyrite mass ratio ( Identifying the acid concentration in the heap irrigation solution is of critical importance. Acid is required as the direct dissolution reagent in chemical reactions (copper oxide ores) or is indirectly involved in progressing the electrochemical dissolution reactions by, for example, keeping the ferric ion soluble in solution. The microorganisms involved in the dissolution of chalcopyrite are sensitive to the acidity of heap irrigation liquor. Furthermore, at higher acidities, a higher extent of acid-gangue reactions occurs, which in turn can facilitate the heap blinding issue by re-precipitation of the solubilized gangues such as gypsum, silica and jarosite. Finally, the acidity of the heap irrigation solution should be adjusted so that the downstream unit operations such as solvent extraction can receive the pregnant leach solution without further adjustment. In summary, ore mineralogy (oxide/primary or secondary sulfide), gangue composition, microorganism activity, ferric ion solubility, jarosite precipitation, irrigation rate, heap permeability and required PLS acidity are parameters that should be considered in identifying the acidity of the heap irrigation solution and its consumption rate. Considering the complexity of quantitatively corelating these parameters to the amount of acid consumed, experiments (bottle roll tests or heap column tests) are usually conducted to estimate the acid consumption values. Heap bioleaching is a low capital, energy efficient process with a high chance of commercialization for low grade chalcopyrite ores, if the economics of operation are proven to be favorable. Considering the last four pilot plant results, (1000 ton Malanjkhand deposit, 20,000 ton pure hypogene ore of Darehzare deposit, 2000 ton and 40,000 ton Sarcheshmeh deposit) in the next section, the economic feasibility of low grade (0.28%) chalcopyrite ore (>80% chalcopyrite) heap bioleaching for extraction efficiencies between 30% to 50% is investigated. This is with attention to the fact that the ore grade and ore mineralogy of none of the four pilot plants are matching with the available 20 million tons of low grade RoM deposit at Sarcheshmeh (see A sustainable operation is the one that is technically simple and robust, economically feasible, and environmentally clean. Generally, heap leaching has lower capital and operating costs compared to other copper extraction methods. However, it has the drawback of low copper recovery and slow leaching kinetics for chalcopyrite treatment. Heap bioleaching is believed to be the future preferred route in processing of the low-grade chalcopyrite ores ( Despite technical studies, economical evaluations are always time variant and involve forecasting product sales, product selling prices, and various costs over an operating time frame. There are not many studies available in the public domain on the economics of the copper extraction processes. In the following, a few available published economic studies in copper extraction operations were reviewed, but the applicability of the majority is outdated. The study by In a few studies, operating cost constituents such as energy costs and consumable costs were compared. For instance, the cost of consumables in the Bactech, BioCOP™ and TPOX processes was calculated for each process with and without bleeding of generated sulfuric acid to the nearby heap leach by In summary, other than the research from For hydrometallurgical treatment the economics of the process is dependent on ore mineralogy, ore grade, acid consumption, copper extraction efficiency and process unit operations. The ore analysis for the low-grade chalcopyrite ore at Sarcheshmeh is presented in Considering the low copper concentration of the Sarcheshmeh ore, its high chalcopyrite content (> 80%) and the particle size (10–20 cm), vat leaching, tank leaching and pressure leaching do not seem to be feasible dissolution techniques ( Operating costs are the direct costs that are incurred during the operation of the heap bioleach, SX and EW plants (labor and raw materials) or the routine operating costs of the equipment (maintenance and consumable items) that is providing services. To calculate the operating cost, the expenses for consumable materials such as sulfuric acid, solvent extraction reagents, diluents, guar, cobalt sulfate, and energy costs for solution transfer, mixing, electrolyte heating, electrolysis as well as maintenance and daily housekeeping for the heap leaching, SX and EW plants should be known. The details of operating costs for heap bioleaching of secondary sulfide ores are provided in At the pre-feasibility study evaluation level, operating cost estimates are usually factored from costs at other similar operations. Considering that the chalcopyrite ore at Sarcheshmeh has lower grade (0.28%), different mineralogy and extraction recovery than the ore its operating cost has been presented in Any change in process, ore mineralogy, ore grade, copper and dissolution of detrimental impurities will obviously affect the operational cost and should somehow be considered and included in the cost calculation. For example, the average recovery rate of the chalcocite ore mentioned above was reported to be around 60%. As a result, to produce 1 kg of copper from this ore (1 kg Cu × 100 kg chalcocite ore/0.5 kg Cu × 100/60) 333 kg of ore is required. Similarly, to produce 1 kg of copper from a mineralogically similar ore but with 0.28% copper grade with 30% copper recovery, 1190 kg of ore is required. It is therefore legitimate to assume that the expenses for heap leach operations, including crushing, agglomeration, solution and air delivery systems, expand comparably with the amount of the ore treated (acid consumption is the function of ore tonnage under irrigation and will be explained subsequently). The increase in the operating cost however, is not linear with the increase in the weight of the ore that is being treated. Former hydrometallurgical projects at NICICo had shown that the increase in the expenses usually follows the economy of scale formula with exponents between 0.7 and 0.8 for the heap leaching (in this paper the average value of 0.75 exponent was chosen) for a same mineralogy but with a different ore grade and recovery. In other words, the cost ratio of the unknown scenario to the known one is equal to the ratio of the amount of the ore being treated to produce one kg of copper in a new project, to the known project to the power of 0.75 (Eq. As is presented in This is the operating cost of the heap bioleaching process, regardless of the target ore being mainly primary sulfide and not secondary sulfide. Stoichiometry of electrochemical reactions, copper extraction efficiency, acid consumption and reaction kinetics are the four major technical differences between chalcopyrite leaching and secondary sulfide ore leaching. These factors are changing the economy of the process, and their impact has been discussed briefly below: The reaction kinetics shows its impact when the Internal Rate of Return and other financial factors are being calculated. The average time for the heap bioleaching of secondary sulfide ores with the pad height of 6 m and particle size of P80 = 1 in. was reported to be approximately 120 days at NICICo (unpublished operational data). The leaching reaction time for 30% to 50% recovery rate of high content chalcopyrite ore however, is about one year ( Basically, the ore gangue and pyrite portion of the ore are the dominant factors that affect the acid consumption, considering the very low percentage of chalcopyrite/chalcocite concentration. Variations in pyrite oxidation and gangue dissolution reflect their impact on the operating cost by changing the copper extraction efficiency and acid consumption values as discussed in below: The presence of pyrite in the chalcopyrite leaching process can promote bacterial activity and galvanic dissolution. Moreover, pyrite oxidation is a strongly exothermic reaction that generates acid according to the Pyrite oxidation is a cheap source of heat and acid in heap bioleaching of chalcopyrite ore that can promote higher copper extraction and lower acid consumption in the heap bioleaching process ( The acid consumption for the current secondary sulfide heap bioleach operation was reported to be between 13.5 and 28.6 kg/ton of ore depending on the ore particle size, acid injection flow rate (lit/m The acid price per ton of under leached ore as well as pricing details and the consumption rates for other consumable reagents per ton of copper cathode produced, are listed in Main adjustments in Eq. According to Eq. Capital costs are normally one-time costs, whereas operating costs recur for as long as an asset is owned. Total capital investment is the summation of fixed capital investment, non-manufacturing capital investment and working capital. Fixed capital investment is made up of direct and indirect costs where direct costs include equipment cost, instrumentation and control, piping, electrical, building, service facilities and land. The indirect costs mostly include engineering and construction expenses. The itemized list of a fixed capital investment for a 3000 ton/year Cu cathode production plant, located in north west of Iran is presented in According to the data presented in In this study, the exponent of the correlation above (Eq. Considering the similar investment ratio of heap leaching, SX and EW for a 3000 ton plant with the 7000 ton plant, an investment of US$14,460,000 for the heap leaching and US$20,176,000 investment for the SX and EW plants is estimated, using Eq. To the fixed capital investment calculated above, non-manufacturing capital investment and working capital must be added to cover the initial operating expenses of the plant. Working capital is the excess of current assets over current liabilities that is usually carried in cash or is cashable in <60 days. Working capital is available to meet day-to-day operating needs and an estimate of 10% of the fixed capital investment is normal for it ( In this study, 10% of the fixed capital was chosen to cover the non-manufacturing capital investment and working capital. As a result, for a plant with US$34,636,000 fixed capital cost investment, US$3,463,600, shall be added to the fixed capital cost. These costs are for a greenfield complex starting on a virgin site with construction beginning in 2018. As a result, and based on a fixed capital investment of US$38,099,600, US$5443 (US$38,099,600/7000 ton Cu cathode/year) per annual ton of copper shall be invested for a 7000 ton plant. Therefore, the finance cost (at 20% finance rate) of the plant is equivalent to US$1089 per ton of copper (US$1.09/kg Cu) in the year 2018. This is the finance cost (US$/kg Cu) for a hydrometallurgical plant where leaching, solvent extraction and electrowinning are all required to complete the production circuit. This scenario was called scenario number 1. Scenario number 2 however is based on the assumption that the current SX and EW plants can absorb the heap bioleaching solution, and therefore the capital cost portions required for manufacturing the SX and EW plants are deducted from the capital cost expenditure and its consequent portion of operational cost. For this scenario, the fixed capital cost for a heap bioleach plant is reduced to US$2065 per annual ton of copper (US$14,460,000/7000 ton/year). Similarly, by applying the 10% working capital, the finance cost for a heap bioleach plant in 2018 with the 20% financing rate is equal to US$0.45/kg of Cu cathode ((US$2065 + US$2065×10%)×20%). As a result, the copper cathode operating cost will be reduced for the portion of the financing cost of the SX and EW plants investment. The ore grade and its extraction efficiency affect the volume of the ore that should be treated to produce one kilogram of copper cathode. The volume of the ore that is treated affects both operational cost and capital cost expenditures. The effect on the operational cost was addressed in this research using the ore equivalent equation (Eq. Considering all of the above mentioned assumptions, the operating cost of a full plant (Scenario 1) with (ton/year) a varying cathode production rate, is calculated as a function of ore grade (Og%), heap acid consumption (AC kg/ton) and leaching efficiency (Ex%) as following: For a second scenario, the fixed capital cost of 19,140,000 in Eq. To the values reported in For a current copper cathode market price of US$6423/ton (LME price reference, 8 April 2019) and assuming at least a US$1 margin for the operation to be economically feasible, the operating cost as a function of ore grade and extraction efficiency for scenario 1 and 2 is depicted in Similarly, 10% leaching extraction efficiency, even for an ore with 0.6% copper content, can be uneconomical. It is worth mentioning that the cathode market price was as low as US$6000/ton at the beginning of the year 2019 and therefore the price fluctuation shall be accounted for in the final decision-making process. As expected, higher extraction efficiencies reduce the operating cost. In As shown in The measurement of investment attractiveness is relatively straight forward using profitability indicators such as net present value (NPV), internal rate of return (IRR), payback period (PbP), cash position and return on investment (ROI). For readers seeking additional information in this subject, reviewing a full chapter entitled “financial and feasibility studies” published in the proceeding of mineral processing plant design, practice, and control is suggested ( 100 million tons of low grade 0.28% Cu, high content chalcopyrite (> 80%) is to be processed through heap bioleach/SX/EW operation. The plant production after commissioning is 4000 tons at the end of the first year and thereafter the production is to reach its nominal capacity of 7000 ton/year. Considering the 30%, 40% and 50% copper recovery for the heap bioleaching stage and 90% copper recovery for the SX and EW operations, the total copper that is being produced from 100 million tons of ore is 75,600, 100,800 and 126,000 tons, respectively. Considering the 4000 ton production of the first year and the 7000 ton production for subsequent years, the plant will be operational for 12, 15 and 18 years for 30%, 40% and 50% extraction recoveries. The total capital cost investment was estimated to be US$38,100,000 and US$15,900,000 for scenario number one and scenario number two, respectively. The capital cost was assumed to be invested in 3 years and therefore in three portions: 20% for the engineering and procurement over the first year, 70% for the construction and commissioning expensed over the second year and the final 10% working capital expensed over the third year. At the end of year three, the plant is assumed to reach to the production level of 4000 tons. The copper selling price was assumed to be constant over the whole operation period for US$6423/ton (LME price reference, 8 April 2019). In the sensitivity analysis section, the effect of price drop to US$5/kg of copper cathode was investigated. The total capital cost value minus the working capital was depreciated linearly over the years that the plant is operational. The 25% tax rate was applied to the taxable income, which is the deduction of gross profit from depreciation. The operating cost data presented in The 30% recovery for scenario No 1 where the new SX and EW plant must be added does not generate revenue. However, interestingly, the case in which the current facility can absorb the heap bioleaching solution is economically viable with 30% internal rate of return. Considering the 18% average interest, this scenario is still economically attractive. The 50% extraction efficiency for heap bioleaching is the most appealing case where 27% of return for scenario No 1 and 70% return with total revenue of about 249 million US dollars (not discounted) at the end of project is generated. The cash position results for the 50% and the 40% extraction recoveries are presented in The effect of the inflated operating cost and copper selling price on the economy of the project is shown in the sensitivity analysis results presented in For a copper price of US$5/kg Cu, the extraction efficiency of 50% for the second scenario seems to be the most appealing case. The second scenario with the 40% extraction efficiency is close to the interest rate of 18% but is still economically viable. For this reason, and considering the high probability of price fluctuation, the second scenario of 50% extraction recovery seems to be the only viable scenario with lower risk included. In this scenario, for an investment of 16 million US dollars, a return of 114 million to 249 million US dollars may be achieved depending on the selling price of copper cathode. The chemical engineering plant cost index (CEPCI) for the past 10 years had a 3.35% average annual raise. Assuming no raise in copper selling price, it may seem reasonable to inflate the operating cost by 3.25%. Results are shown in Inflating the operating cost equal to the average 10 years of chemical engineering plant cost index, 3.35%, lowered both the IRR and the project's cash position, and made the second scenario of 40% and 50% leaching extraction efficiencies the only economically acceptable options. The most abundant source of copper, chalcopyrite, accounts for the smallest proportion of the copper ores that are commercially being heap leached. About a 100 million tons of low-grade high content (above 80% chalcopyrite) chalcopyrite RoM await the development of an economically efficient process at Sarcheshmeh, where low and slow copper recoveries get balanced by low operating/capital costs. In this study, all profitability indicators such as operating costs, capital costs, NPV, IRR, PbP have been studied. The annual operating cost for the bio heap, SX and EW plant was calculated as a function of ore grade, heap acid consumption, copper extraction efficiency and accessibility to the existing SX/EW capacity. The operating cost was shown to be varying between US$2.91/kg Cu to US$5.99/kg Cu cathode for first scenario and a chalcopyrite ore with 0.28% copper content with the extraction efficiency between 70% to 30%, respectively (open pit mining expenses included). A capital expenditure of US$38.1 million (US$15.9 million for Scenario 2) is required for the construction of new bio heap, SX and EW plants with 7000 ton of copper cathode production capacity on a green field in 2018. This cost includes: project management, engineering, procurement, construction, preliminary commissioning, training and a working capital equal to 10% of the fixed capital costs. This equals to a cost estimate between US$2300–US$5400 per annual ton of copper. The lower end of the range is for plants with free operational access to SX and EW capacity, and the high end of the range is for plants for first scenario. A summary of project economics indicated that the total cash position for second scenario which is utilizing an existing SX/EW facility, generates higher cash flows, higher IRR and a shorter pay-back period. A sensitivity analysis showed that a copper price drop to US$5/kg copper cathode can easily make extraction recoveries lower than 50%, uneconomical. None. The author wishes to gratefully acknowledge the National Iranian Copper Industries Company. Special thanks to Dr. Sahraei and Dr. Torabi from the Sarcheshmeh R&D department for their support of this work.