Flow sheet for recovery of Mn values from Mn sludge, a by-product obtained during processing of the Mn nodules through ammonia–ammonium sulphate–sulphur dioxide leaching process route as Electrolytic Manganese Dioxide (EMD) was developed. The unit operations include dissolution of Mn sludge with sulphuric acid in presence of activated charcoal, purification of liquor in two stages—removal of Fe by adjusting pH to ~4 followed by precipitation of other impurities as sulphides by addition of Na2S. The purified liquor was electrowinned for producing EMD. During first stage purification, Fe precipitation was carried out with CaO that resulted in loss of Mn due to its entrapment in the gypsum. The paper discusses use of alternative alkali reagents MgO and NaOH to minimise the Mn loss. Physico-electrochemical characteristics of the EMD produced from the purified MnSO4 solutions obtained by using CaO, MgO and NaOH for Fe removal during stage I purification and subsequent stage II purification of other impurities as sulphides was investigated and the discharge capacities of the EMD samples were found to be 267, 260 and 250mAhg−1 respectively.Manganese dioxide being a low cost material, is widely used as a cathode material for both primary and secondary batteries ( Several studies were reported focusing the reductive leaching of tetravalent manganese present in the manganiferrous ores using organic reductants, such as sawdust ( Impurities removal such as iron removal is one of the major concern in hydrometallurgical processing. Precipitation of impurities as their respective hydroxides by raising the pH of acidic leach liquors is a commonly used technique. This process is as simple as increasing the pH of the solution using lime (CaO), magnesia (MgO) or caustic soda (NaOH) as a precipitator and hence immobilises the metals as their respective hydroxides ( Removal of iron by addition of CaO, MgO and NaOH by raising the pH of acid solutions was studied by Manganese sludge also called as Mn cake was obtained as a byproduct during processing of Mn nodules by ammonia–ammonium sulphate–SO The flow sheet earlier developed ( In the present work, use of activated charcoal as a reductant in place of waste paper cuttings ( Manganese sludge contained Mn as the major element along with impurities such as Cu, Ni, Co, Zn and Fe. The Mn sludge was obtained from the pilot plant demonstration facility of Mn nodules processing located at Udaipur, India. The composition was varying marginally with different batches produced at the plant. Manganese was estimated by titrating against EDTA with erichrome black-T indicator and the impurities were analyzed by Perkin-Elmer 2380 model Atomic Absorption Spectrophotometer (AAS). For dissolving the sludge/EMD, dried sample (5 The leaching experiments were carried out with 10% (wt/vol) pulp density (PD) in 1 Purification of the leach liquor was carried out in two stages—removal of iron by oxidizing with 0.1 The alkali addition in stage I was carried out in steps where the pellets/powders were added slowly, while vigorously stirring the content with the help of a mechanical stirrer. Initially alkali was added till the pH reaches 2.5. Thereafter, the content was allowed to stabilise for an hour under stirring and very small amounts of alkali was added till the pH reaches to 3.5–3.8. With stirring alone the pH raises to 4 without further addition of any alkali reagents. To increase the pH of the leach liquor upto pH4, ~ To raise the pH of the KMnO About 29 After filtration and volume makeup, the solution from stage I purification was taken for stage II purification. In stage II purification, Na The electrolysis was carried out in an electrolytic cell containing purified manganese sulphate solution in presence of sulphuric acid at an elevated temperature of 90 The XRD patterns of the samples (Mn sludge, iron residues and EMDs) were obtained using a Phillips Powder Diffractometer (Model PAN ANALYTICAL PW 1830) in the range of 10–80° (2θ) at a scanning rate of 2°min Discharge/charge study was carried out in a 500 Mn sludge is a mixed oxide material.  Acid leaching in presence of charcoal reduces higher state Mn ions to Mn(II). Amount of charcoal needed depends on the stoichiometric requirement of the high valent Mn ions. Leaching experiments were carried out varying charcoal amount with 10% pulp density, 1.5  The variation of temperature was studied from ambient temperature (27 The typical leach liquor obtained after leaching having a composition of Mn: 59.25 Generally in various hydrometallurgical processes, filtration loss of metal values during solid–liquid separation occurs due to two reasons—entrapment of leach liquor in the solid matrix resulting in volume loss that may be partly recovered by applying positive or negative pressure and through entrapment of metal values in the solid matrix by various physical and chemical processes which can be recovered partially by washing. These losses can be significant in such cases where the leach liquors are produced with high concentrations of metal values. Further, repeated washing needs either repulping–filtration cycles that can result in excess water in the process streams along with possible dilution or by employing counter-current decantation (CCD) systems that will add to capital cost significantly. Stage I purification was carried out using three alkali reagents CaO, MgO and NaOH subsequent to addition of few mL of KMnO As the solid entraps solution in the case of CaO, washing cycles of repulping-filtration to recover the Mn values was carried out. The XRD patterns ( From the XRD study, it is clearly established that iron could be removed by addition of the above three alkali reagents, however significant Mn loss occurs due to local precipitation of Mn as manganese hydroxide by the strong alkali NaOH, whereas the Mn loss in case of lime addition was not due to local precipitation of Mn, as Mn formed precipitate of calcium iron manganese oxide which remains within gypsum and cannot be recovered by washing.  After iron purification second stage of purification was carried out to remove other impurities by sulphide precipitation route as discussed elsewhere ( The purified solution after two stage purification in each case was taken for electrolysis for preparation of EMD. The electrodeposition of manganese dioxide at anode can be represented by the following equations ( Electrodeposition of EMD was carried out at 90 The primary application of EMD is for use as cathode material for primary and secondary batteries. The discharge reactions for EMD cells in aqueous KOH electrolyte are as follows ( The proton–electron pair formed during the discharge diffuses away from the EMD surface to the interior of the material. The proton–electron pair diffusion rate is a function of the structural, chemical, physical and electrochemical properties of the EMD ( The discharge capacities of EMD produced from solutions purified in different routes are very close to each other. The EMD produced from CaO, MgO and NaOH route showed discharge capacities of 267, 260 and 250 The composition of the EMD prepared through three alternative alkali reagent routes during stage I purification is shown in During the electrodeposition of MnO  Thermogravimetric analysis of the different EMD samples was carried out to evaluate the structural stability of the materials. The details of the chemical composition of EMD produced in three alternative routes along with the trace elements present was carried out and are compared with the BIS Standard (  To explain the physical and electrochemical properties of γ and ε manganese dioxides, Where х is the fraction of Mn The theoretical density of the EMD samples can be calculated using the relationship: Where V Where MW is the molecular weight calculated using Eq. The theoretical (maximum) electrochemical capacity deliverable per unit weight (C The tentative flow sheet for preparation of EMD using the three alternative alkali agents during I stage purification is shown in Complete leaching of the Mn sludge was achieved at optimised conditions of 1.5 The authors thank the Director, CSIR-IMMT, Bhubaneswar, for permitting to publish the paper and