The variation of adhesive bond strength of cold sprayed 7075 and 7050 aluminium alloy coatings on 7050-T7351 Al alloy substrate with coating thickness was determined through shear and tensile tests. Generally, without heating the substrate, the shear bond strength decreases with the increase in cold sprayed coating thickness. The thickest 7075 cold sprayed coating produced on rectangular substrates, which were used to measure the shear bond strength, was 1.6mm. Although thicker coating was produced on the end of the cylindrical substrates, which was used to measure the tensile bond strength in accordance with the ASTM C633 standard, increasing the coating thickness from 1.2mm to 2.9mm led to reduction in tensile bond strength from 10MPa to 5.1MPa. However, further increasing the coating thickness to 3.7mm improved the bond strength due to the heating effect resulted from impact of the late stage spray on the pre-formed coating layers. When the rectangular substrates were heated at 175°C during cold spray, not only much thicker coatings were produced, the shear bond strength was also significantly increased. Hence, heating cold sprayed substrate is considered as an effective approach to produce thick and highly bonded coatings.7xxx series (e.g. 7075 and 7050) aluminium alloys are widely used in civilian and military fighter aircraft structure, such as the wing box structure (upper wing skin), spars, stringers, framework and pressure bulkhead In past decades, a number of processes, such as thermal spray In a cold spray (CS) process, fine (generally from 5 to 50 In repairing aircraft structural components using CS technology, it normally requires relatively thick deposition ranging from 0.5 Two types of 7050-T7351 aluminium alloy substrates were used for determining the adhesive bond strength (details are in Cold sprayed coatings were deposited on the substrates using kinetic metallization (Inovati, Santa Barbara, CA, USA) approach with helium as carrier gas. The differences between the convenient CS and the kinetic metallization was described previously According to the ASTM C633 standard, tensile adhesion strength between the coating and the substrate can be determined. Because adhesion strength refers to the bonding between the coating and the substrate, the term of “adhesive bond strength” is used in the present work. To measure the adhesive bond strength, cold sprayed coating deposited at one end of the cylindrical substrate was machined and ground and then was glued to another cylindrical substrate using 3 As stated above, to ensure that the adhesive bond strength is determined even in the case that the tensile adhesive bond strength is higher than the tensile cohesive strength of the coating when the ASTM C633 standard is used, shear adhesive bond strength was measured using the lug shear test method The fracture surface after tensile and shear tests was characterised through scanning electron microscopy (SEM) to understand the fracture mechanisms of the CS coatings, such as cohesive or adhesive failure mode. Although the optimised cold spray processing parameters as listed in The microstructures of the CS 7050 and 7075 coatings are very similar as shown in  In the case of 7050 coatings on non-heated rectangular substrates, as shown in After bond strength test, fracture surfaces on the 7050-T7451 aluminium alloy substrates were examined in SEM. Fracture surface of the heated substrates of 7050 coating also shows the mixture of adhesive and cohesive failure modes as shown in The effect of the cold sprayed coating thickness on bond strength was experimentally investigated through deposition of the 7050 and 7075 aluminium alloy coatings on the 7050-T7351 Al alloy substrates. The following conclusions can be drawn. The shear adhesive bond strength (measured using the lug shear method) of the 7075 and 7050 cold sprayed coatings on un-heated 7050 substrate decreased with the increase in coating thickness. The thickest 7075 coating and 7050 coating produced on the rectangular substrates without peeling off were 1.6 Using the 7075 Al alloy powder, much thicker cold sprayed coating was produced on the cylindrical substrates than that on the rectangular substrate. The tensile adhesive bond strength (measured in terms of the ASTM C633 standard) also reduced with increase in coating thickness and the lowest bond strength was obtained at the coating thickness of 2.9 Heating the 7050 substrate at 175