Cloud point extraction (CPE) was used to extract and separate lanthanum(III) and gadolinium(III) nitrate from an aqueous solution. The methodology used is based on the formation of lanthanide(III)-8-hydroxyquinoline (8-HQ) complexes soluble in a micellar phase of non-ionic surfactant. The lanthanide(III) complexes are then extracted into the surfactant-rich phase at a temperature above the cloud point temperature (CPT). The structure of the non-ionic surfactant, and the chelating agent–metal molar ratio are identified as factors determining the extraction efficiency and selectivity. In an aqueous solution containing equimolar concentrations of La(III) and Gd(III), extraction efficiency for Gd(III) can reach 96% with a Gd(III)/La(III) selectivity higher than 30 using Triton X-114. Under those conditions, a Gd(III) decontamination factor of 50 is obtained.Liquid–liquid extraction is widely used in the hydrometallurgy of base and strategic metals, and especially for the spent nuclear fuel reprocessing Surface-active agents can aggregate in aqueous solution to form colloidal-sized clusters referred to as micelles. During their formation the surfactant micelles have proved to entrap several hydrophobic substances, isolating them from the bulk solution. The solubility of non-ionic or zwitterionic surfactants in aqueous solution is dramatically depressed above a well-defined temperature referred to as cloud point temperature (CPT). By setting the solution at a temperature above the CPT, the solution separates into a concentrated phase containing most of the surfactant, the surfactant-rich or coacervate phase, and a dilute aqueous phase The CP phenomenon is reversible and was tentatively used to achieve the separation of different solutes. In most applications, CPE is used for the extraction, preconcentration of molecules of biological interest Extraction of metal ion by CPE have been demonstrated in the absence of chelating agent All reagents used were of analytical grade. Stock solutions of lanthanum and gadolinium nitrate (Aldrich) were prepared by dissolving appropriate amounts of their respective salts in doubly distilled water. The non-ionic surfactants (Tween 80 and Triton X-114 from Aldrich, Simulsol OX 1006-L and Simulsol NW 900 from Seppic S.A., Paris, France) and 8-hydroxyquinoline (Aldrich) were used without further purification. A thermostated bath (Haake CH, Fison) maintained at the desired temperature was used for cloud point temperature experiments. The concentrations of La 65.3 The CPE of Ln(III) from micellar solutions was evaluated in terms of extraction efficiency Lanthanides complexes with 8-hydroxyquinoline are characterized by a high thermodynamic stability (log When working with the non-ionic surfactants Simulsol OX1006L, NW900 or Tween 80 which lipophilic part is aliphatic, 8-hydroxyquinoline is sparingly soluble in the initial micellar solution. Furthermore, their lanthanides complexes precipitate in the micellar solution. On the opposite, 8-hydroxyquinoline and its lanthanides complexes are soluble in the micellar solution of Triton X-114. A possible explanation is that the solubilisation behavior of the micellar system formed with Triton X-114 arises from the aromatic structure of the lipophilic part of Triton X-114. The solubilisation of 8-hydroxyquinoline, and the lanthanides complexes formed with, is directly related to the existence of microscopically ordered structures of aromatic nucleus in the micelle. The CP of the studied system with Triton X-114 is near room temperature, offering advantages in terms of experimental procedure since the settling temperature was 60 The effect of experimental variables on CP and CPE parameters has been previously studied   In the absence of chelating agent a low extraction, inferior to 10%, of La When using an 8-hydroxyquinoline/lanthanides(III) molar ration of 14, a Gd A liquid–liquid phase separation procedure based on the cloud extraction concept has been developed for the separation of lanthanides without the need of organic diluents. The extent of extraction is markedly influenced by the nature of the non-ionic surfactants and molar ratio of 8-hydroxyquinoline to Ln(III). The results of the study clearly demonstrate the usefulness of this new type of micelle-mediated extraction to selectively extract and pre-concentrate lanthanides. Presently, experiments using radionuclides are in progress to evaluate the possibility of using such a system for lanthanides/actinides separation and to determine its efficiency towards actinides selective extraction.