Understanding landscape heterogeneity is essential for developing reliable landscape planning and design methods. Nevertheless, despite the many advances made in recent years regarding the analysis of landscape heterogeneity, methods that produce useful results that can be applied to design, planning and management schemes are still required. In this study, we explore the use of the Quadratic Entropy Index (Q) as a measure of landscape heterogeneity. Although the Q metric is derived from information theory, the inclusion of a dissimilarity component in the calculation enables analysis beyond the syntactic content of the information and the inclusion of semantic content. Adoption of a multiscale approach to the calculation fulfils the desirable characteristics for a heterogeneity measure, while also producing spatially-explicit results. Application of the index to three landscape areas in NW Spain with different characteristics clearly demonstrated the capacity of the index to differentiate levels of heterogeneity, and their dependence on scale, and to detect scale invariance. The close fit of Weibull II logistic regression enables prediction of pattern-scale relationships beyond the area of analysis. The findings show that Q is a potentially useful support tool for design, planning and management procedures.It is generally accepted that the study of ecological heterogeneity and its organization at different scales is essential for understanding ecosystems and landscapes ( The study of landscape heterogeneity has progressed in recent decades through the use of methods based on the application of landscape metrics ( Despite these important efforts, practical methods of assessing landscape heterogeneity and complexity are still required. Indeed, Indices derived from information theory (i.e. Shannon, Simpson) have been extensively used to analyse the diversity of landscape heterogeneity (see e.g. Finally, the scale component (R) can be integrated by calculating Q on categorical maps at multiple scales, by using a moving-window approach ( The aim of this study was to evaluate the use of the Quadratic Entropy Index (Q) for analysing landscape heterogeneity. The study further investigated the capacity of the index to fulfil the recommendations made by As stated above, from among the different ways of using the dissimilarity distance The moving-window approach used to calculate heterogeneity renders a final continuous representation of the values of the Q index. The continuous representation is the result of a progressively complex interpretation of the landscape pattern (see This gradient-based concept of landscape structure can be considered as a step forward in structural analysis ( The A Mariña Oriental, a subregional, supralocal administrative unit in the Autonomous Community of Galicia (NW Spain), was established as the reference area for the study (see Three different study areas (each 5000 Digital vectorial land cover cartography was obtained in vector format from a previous project, in which interpretation of 1:18,000-scale aerial photographs and subsequent ground truthing were performed using the ArcGIS 9.2 software package ( As the analysis required raster format cartography, a specific tool of the ARCGIS 9.3 software (Spatial Analyst: convert from raster to feature) was used for rasterization. In all three different study zones, the cell size was chosen on the basis of recommendations made by The categorical land cover map was reclassified from its original values, on the basis of the internationally accepted EUNIS ecosystem classification ( The distance The distance between two coincident ecosystems is null: d The distance between two different ecosystems adopts a maximum value of 1: 0 The distance between two ecosystems does not depend on the order: d The produced matrix of distances fulfils triangular inequality: d We thus calculated the semantic dissimilarity between each pair of classes as the Euclidean distance between the values of their structural descriptors. These descriptors are listed in The general expression for the Quadratic Entropy Index was described in Section The method used to calculate As a result of calculating Q Non-Linear Regression (NLR) was used to parameterize the behaviour of Q Once the behaviour of each index was characterized by statistical methods, the slope of the curve was calculated using the following expression: A total of 30 maps (3 study zones A general view of the results is shown in The multiscale graphics, or scalograms, shown in the upper part of Regression results of model [5] are shown in Use of the Quadratic Entropy Index for multiscale estimation of landscape heterogeneity differs slightly from the use of other information theory derived indices. Although the method of calculation and the results may appear similar to those of the Shannon ( The first reason is the initial definition of classes. In addition to the precise description of each of the classes defined by the classification standard (EUNIS) used for the categorical maps, the meaning of each class was further clarified by using a set quality dimensions or descriptors that is comparable for all ecosystems considered. This is essential, as most classification schemes take the meaning of each class for granted, which can lead to some confusion. For instance, in the Spanish language, a specific reference glossary must be compiled ( The second reason for the more meaningful concept of heterogeneity is the interpretation of the results. Integration of the semantic distance component adds qualitative information to the calculation process and also to the results and they therefore resemble “semantic information” more closely. Heterogeneity is more easily interpreted as a numerical value when it is known to represent differences between qualitative descriptors and not between numerical quantities. Simplification of the interpretation of values is critical in planning and management processes, as it also simplifies the management of information ( Addition of the multi-scale component by the moving window approach revealed different levels of heterogeneity depending on the scale. Thus, for the finer scales represented by the smaller window sizes, landscapes represented by Zone 1 and Zone 3 show rather similar levels of heterogeneity as reported by Q Multiscale analysis also enables identification of characteristic landscape scales. This is interpreted in relation to the spatial domain at which landscape heterogeneity, as reported by Q Despite the promising results, a series of limitations must be taken into account. The quality of the results obtained is naturally highly dependent on the accuracy of the values and weights used to calculate the semantic distances. Consequently, correspondence with the actual characteristics of the classes involved in the calculation is necessary. In this study, the three zones considered are small and are all included in a specific geographical area. However, for use of the method in a zone where variation in the structure of a given class is expected, the model should be calibrated. As the method involves bidimensional calculation over a raster file, windows of increasing size involve computing requirements that will increase exponentially. This may limit practical application of the method. Adequate segmentation of data and careful selection of the raster resolution may help to solve such problems. A novel application of the Quadratic Entropy Index to the study of landscape heterogeneity and spatial complexity at different scales is presented. Among the different possible ways of approaching the dissimilarity component of the index, a distance based on the differences in the internal structure of each of the constituent ecosystems landscape is used. We believe that this improves the interpretation of the results, by the inclusion of internal as well as external variables related to heterogeneity. This confers robustness to the index, which complies with the five components described by The results demonstrate the usefulness of the index for detecting differences in the spatial distribution of the heterogeneity depending on the scale. This is manifested by the demonstration of scale dependence of heterogeneity and its values and also by the identification of the levels of scale invariance, providing new knowledge in relation to application of the index. The spatially explicit representation of scale-related variations in heterogeneity (as represented by the mean values of Q Funding for this work was provided in part by the We wish to thank the three anonymous reviewers for their valuable suggestions.