In this study, bench scale dissolved air flotation (DAF) and settling processes have been studied and compared to a novel flotation technology based on the use of glass microspheres of limited buoyancy and its combination with conventional DAF, (Enhanced DAF or E-DAF). They were evaluated as pretreatments for advanced oxidation processes (AOPs) to polish produced water (PW) for reuse purposes. Settling and E-DAF without air injection showed adequate turbidity and oil and grease (O&G) removals, with eliminations higher than 87% and 90% respectively, employing 70 mg L−1 of FeCl3 and 83 min of settling time, and 57.9 mg L−1 of FeCl3, 300 mg L−1 of microspheres and a flocculation rate of 40 rpm in the E-DAF process. A linear correlation was observed between final O&G concentration and turbidity after E-DAF. In order to polish the O&G content of the effluent even further, to remove soluble compounds as phenol and to take advantage of residual iron after these treatments, Fenton and photo-Fenton reactions were essayed. After 6 h of the Fenton reaction at pH 3, the addition of 1660 mg L−1 of H2O2 and 133 mg L−1 of iron showed a maximum O&G elimination of 57.6% and a phenol removal up to 80%. Photo-Fenton process showed better results after 3 h, adding 600 mg L−1 of H2O2 and 300 mg L−1 of iron, at pH 3, with a higher fraction of elimination of the O&G content (73.7%) and phenol (95%) compared to the conventional Fenton process.Produced water (PW) is the name given to the water that is brought to the surface along with oil or gas in extraction operations. It includes the formation water (trapped underground) and injection water that are extracted together with the fossil fuel during oil and gas production ( In addition to its natural components, PW may include chemical additives dosed in drilling, to treat or prevent operational problems and in the oil/water separation process ( Advanced water treatment technologies for polishing such as membrane filtration, membrane bioreactor, thermal evaporators or advanced oxidation processes (AOP) can be applied to obtain a secure source of reusable water from treated PW ( In this work, dissolved air flotation (DAF) was selected as one of the pretreatments as conventionally-treated PW still contains low density solids, which this treatment is especially appropriate for removing. The conventional DAF process aims to remove suspended particles from water by bringing them to the surface, and subsequently separate them from the liquid phase. In this process, air is dissolved into water at high pressure in a saturator, and microbubbles are formed by cavitation when water is released into the flotation tank at atmospheric pressure. These microbubbles become attached to the particles, increasing their buoyancy and allowing them to rise to the surface ( In this work, settling was also studied as a promising pretreatment for PW polishing technologies. Sedimentation is a separation in which gravity separates solids from the water due to their different specific weight. This treatment was tested since there are other related industries, such as the olive oil producing industry, which uses it for oily wastewaters treatment ( In the sedimentation process, high turbidity and O&G removals could be achieved although it is a slow process if only the coagulant is used. Since conventional DAF was not effective in removing turbidity, due to the fact that the rising velocity of the bubbles caused floc breakup, as would be explained later, a new process using microspheres instead of air microbubbles has also been studied (with the added advantage of saving the energy required for air injection on a conventional DAF unit). Microspheres are added into the system during the rapid mix stage (coagulation phase), and then incorporated into the floc matrix to drive the flotation process, replacing the use of microbubbles. Microspheres have been used in other studies for the removal of algae ( In this context, the purpose of this research is to determine the efficacy of four different processes to treat synthetic PW, using the same coagulant. For the flotation experiments (DAF), different concentrations of ferric chloride were tested at different pH levels. In the settling experiments, different coagulant concentrations and settling times were studied. Finally, the efficacy of enhanced dissolved air flotation (E-DAF) was investigated using glass microspheres of limited buoyancy without air injection and using the same process with a subsequent injection of microbubbles. After physical separation, in order to polish the O&G content of the effluent even further, to remove soluble compounds such as phenol (which was not eliminated with these treatments) and to take advantage of the residual iron after these processes, Fenton and photo-Fenton reactions were essayed. The classic Fenton reaction interpreted by Synthetic PW consisted of an emulsion based on filtered seawater (from the Mediterranean Sea, Barcelona), since in certain locations, the type and concentration of salts is similar to that of seawater, to which 50 mg L As the effluent from the treatments that turned out to be more effective, sedimentation and E-DAF, still contained around 30 mg L All experiments were performed using a Platypus™ DAF Jar Tester (Microfloc, Australia) composed of a saturator with a capacity of 1800 mL, where seawater was saturated with compressed air (6 bar) to form an air/water mixture that was released into the jar at atmospheric pressure forming the microbubbles, 2 L jars and vertical stirrers with variable speed for each jar. Different concentrations of coagulant (FeCl After adding the emulsion in the jar, the appropriate amount of coagulant was added and pH was adjusted if necessary. Coagulation consisted of a 1-min rapid mix at 200 rpm, followed by a 50-rpm flocculation stage for 9 min and 30 rpm for 10 min. After the coagulation-flocculation process with FeCl After flotation, a sample was taken and COD, turbidity and phenol were measured and compared with the influent sample. Each experiment was performed in the same vessel that was used in the flotation experiments. In this case, only the stirring was necessary (for the coagulation-flocculation stage). Different concentrations of the coagulant, FeCl Coagulation consisted of a 1-min rapid mix at 200 rpm, followed by a 50 rpm flocculation stage for 9 min and 30 rpm for 10 min. After this, flocs formed and then settled into a sediment; samples from the supernatant were taken at different times (the maximum decanting time was 90 min). The same parameters as in the flotation experiments were analyzed; additionally, the content of O&G was determined. Experiments carried out with microspheres and a subsequent air injection were performed using the Platypus™ DAF Jar Tester. In the experiments without air injection, the saturator was not utilized. As a coagulant, different concentrations of iron in the form of FeCl After adding 1.5 L of synthetic PW to the jar, the appropriate amounts of microspheres and coagulant were added. Coagulation consisted of 2 min of rapid mixing at 200 rpm, followed by a 40 rpm flocculation stage or 90 rpm for 15 min. After this coagulation-flocculation process, in the experiments with air, saturated seawater was injected through a nozzle into the jar containing the emulsion at a recycling rate between 10 and 22%. After 2 min of flotation, turbidity and concentration of O&G were measured and compared with the influent sample. Fenton and photo-Fenton processes were carried out at pH 3 and the reagents used were hydrogen peroxide solution (30% w/w in H The pH measurements were performed using a PH 25 CRISON pH-meter. Turbidity was analyzed using a 2100AN Laboratory Turbidimeter. The Chemical Oxygen Demand (COD) and phenols were determined photometrically using Hach Lange kits, LCK 414 and LCK 345, respectively. The measurement of total iron was carried out using the LCW 902 test, followed by LCK 321 (Hach Lange). Total O&G concentrations were determined by EPA 1664B gravimetric method (  As can be observed, higher efficiencies in turbidity and COD removals are achieved when working at free pH or 5.5. This is reasonable, as the optimum pH range for FeCl A statistical analysis of the presented data was carried out in order to understand the factors affecting the performance of the flotation process, as well as the optimal combination of the factors leading to the highest contaminant removals. In this case, the operational factors considered as playing a role are the coagulant dose and the pH value. The responses that have to be maximized in order to optimize process performance are the COD, turbidity and phenol removal percentages. It has been shown that the only operational factor playing a significant role in contaminant removal was the coagulant concentration (  Preliminary sedimentation tests were carried out with 50 mg L  As the flotation experiments, a statistical analysis of the data presented previously was carried out. In the case of the settling process, the operational factors evaluated were the coagulant concentration and the settling time. The responses that have to be maximized in order to optimize the process performance were, as for flotation, COD, turbidity and phenol removal percentages. It has been shown that both coagulant concentration and settling time played a significant role in COD and turbidity removal; increasing magnitudes of both operational factors cause an improvement in contaminant removal performance ( Because a higher COD and turbidity removals were achieved with a settling treatment compared to flotation, O&G was also analyzed in this case. After essaying this process, it can be concluded that coagulation was the main separation mechanism for O&G removal in settling and DAF. However, settling appeared to be more effective, unlike DAF, where the microbubbles caused the flocs formed to rupture. Similar results for O&G and turbidity removals were obtained by A series of E-DAF experiments were performed. A statistical analysis of the turbidity data was carried out in order to determine the factors affecting the performance of both flotation processes and to maximize turbidity removal. The operational studied factors were microsphere concentration (mg L A Pareto chart for the experiments with microspheres and without air injection is shown in The Pareto chart for the experiments carried out with microspheres and air injection is shown in When using microspheres and microbubbles injection, the statistics indicated that the model as fitted explained only 47.9% of the variability in turbidity removal. As can be seen in the Pareto chart, there was no significant operational factor for turbidity elimination. Nevertheless, it was concluded that air injection was not beneficial for turbidity removal. The elimination percentages ranged from 95% to 45% in O&G removal in the selected experiments, considering both flotation processes. The final O&G concentration of the PW after these treatments was between 10 and 92 mg L Given their similar and positive results, settling and E-DAF without air injection could be considered as suitable alternatives for O&G and turbidity removals. While the main drawback of enhanced flotation could be the costs of the microspheres and their recovery, it could be still the most convenient choice in those cases where the space and time required for the settling process are limiting factors. Despite the noticeable removals of turbidity and O&G obtained after settling and the E-DAF processes, the resultant effluent still contained a residual concentration of O&G (O&G values lower than 30 mg L With the influent prepared as described in section Statistically, the final content of O&G after the Fenton reaction did not follow any trend in terms of the dose of reagents used. However, it could be extracted from the table that the maximum O&G removal achieved after 6 h of Fenton reaction was 57.6% for experiment 2. When lower concentrations of H In general, after 24 h of reaction, no significant differences were obtained in the O&G content of the different experiments compared to shorter experiments, except for the lowest dose of H Further removal of emulsified O&G in this synthetic PW composed by the seawater matrix could be hindered by the presence of salts, since Cl Furthermore, because PW is composed of a heterogeneous mixture, as with the water used in the present study, this prevents the Fenton reagents from mixing well due to the different phases. Given the results obtained for the Fenton process, the corresponding photo-activated reaction was essayed to compare its efficiency. The experiments, with the influent prepared as described in section The lowest quantities of H Comparing these results with those after 6 h of the Fenton process, in which the same doses of reagents were used (  To check the negative influence of salinity in this process, PW in a milli-Q water matrix (instead of seawater) was synthetized and the experiment adding 600 mg L  According to these results, the combination of settling or E-DAF and the photo-Fenton process could be suggested as a suitable polishing process for the reuse of PW. The experiments performed and the subsequent data analysis have shown that DAF processes and settling are good pretreatment options for reducing O&G and turbidity. Further polishing can be obtained with a subsequent advanced oxidation process. For flotation experiments, the coagulant dose only affected removal of COD, while pH levels did not impact on the process performance; this meant that pH control would not be necessary in this type of pretreatment. As phenol was barely eliminated, the optimal coagulation concentration taking into account the COD removal was 70 mg L In the settling process, the removal of COD and turbidity were significantly affected by coagulant dosage and settling time. Phenol removal was not influenced by any operational parameter, as in flotation. The optimal process conditions were 86 mg L Precisely due to the fact that the rising velocity of the microbubbles caused floc breakup, a new process using microspheres instead of air microbubbles was also studied. This enhanced DAF or E-DAF removed 87.2% of PW turbidity and 94% of O&G (similar to the settling treatment but requiring less operation time), using 57.9 mg L In E-DAF experiments it was observed that the turbidity reduction of PW was correlated to its O&G concentration depletion. High O&G removal percentages were achieved (up to 90% of elimination) with this process, comparable with settling. The use of microspheres in the flotation without the injection of microbubbles was shown to be more effective for the removal of turbidity and O&G (which also implies lower energy consumption). After these treatments, in order to polish the O&G content of the effluent even further and to remove the phenol, Fenton and photo-Fenton reactions were essayed. With the Fenton reaction a maximum O&G elimination of 57.6% was achieved, and phenol was removed by up to 80%, adding 1662.5 mg L The difficulty in removing emulsified O&G in this synthetic PW could be due to the salts contained in this water, which hinder the effectiveness of Fenton process. Furthermore, because this water is composed of a heterogeneous mixture, this can prevent Fenton reagents from mixing properly. The photo-Fenton process with solar radiation for 3 h showed that all H According to these results, the combination of settling and the photo-Fenton process could be suggested as a suitable polishing process for the reuse of PW if the reaction time is not a limiting factor. The settling could be substituted by E-DAF technology, without air injection, when there are limitations regarding reaction volumes and times. The research presented here was carried out in the framework of an Industrial Doctorate Programme co-funded by the The following is the supplementary data related to this article: Supplementary data related to this article can be found at