Biofilm plays an important role on chalcopyrite bioleaching and early-stage adsorption of cells are essential for biofilm formation. In this study, the interspecies interaction and the early adsorption behavior of moderately thermophilic consortia (Ferroplasma thermophilum, Leptospirillum ferriphilum and Acidithiobacillus caldus) were investigated. qPCR and Confocal laser scanning microscopy (CLSM) were adopted in this study. The bacterial adsorption experiments showed that three pure culture could attach properly on chalcopyrite within a short time and the equilibrium data was well fitted with both Langmuir and Freundlich models. Meanwhile, compared to Ferroplasma thermophilum, Leptospirillum ferriphilum and Acidithiobacillus caldus showed coadsorption relationship and owned competitive adavantages in the binary culture system. The adsorption of both Leptospirillum ferriphilum and Acidithiobacillus caldus together promoted the attachment of Ferroplasma thermophilum. The intensified bioleaching assays based on this attachment mechanism showed that the bioaugmentation of the advanced leaching stage by adapated Ferroplasma thermophilum significantly accelerated copper extraction. Confocal laser scanning microscopy (CLSM) results confirmed the improved biofilm formation by bioaugmentation with adapted Ferroplasma thermophilum. Furthermore, a mechanism model for intensifying chalcopyrite bioleaching by biofilm was established. The results revealed that attachment was complicated but provided an efficient approach to intensify chalcopyrite bioleaching.Biohydrometallurgy, which utilizes microorganisms for the extraction of metals from ores, contributed to 22% copper production in the 2012 through leaching of cupric oxides, chalcocite and covellite [ Adhesion is critical for the formation of surface-attached microbial communities known as biofilms in ecological niche adaption [ In this study, initial adsorption behavior, the kinetics and equilibrium adsorption of the pure and mixed culture of moderately thermophilic acidophiles of Chalcopyrite used in the studies was obtained from Hunan Provincial Museum. The ores were grinded and then sieved to gain a sample with <74 um diameter. The grinded ores were divided into two parts, one was dissolved by the equal concentration of HCl and HNO The moderately thermophilic culture including Attachment experiment were performed as the method described by Gu et al. [ Langmuir adsorption isotherms are widely-used to describe monolayer adsorptions of bacteria onto particles. The parameters, X Freundlich model reflects both multi-layer and mono-layer adsorption [ To gain deeper insight into the relative between the hydrophobicity and attachment, the hydrophobicity of three bacteria grown on 9 K medium was measured referenced to Jordan et al. [ To elucidate the interspecies interaction of three bacteria during attaching process, comparative studies on the community dynamics of binary mixture of three species when attached on chalcopyrite were performed. The relative proportions of mixed cultures in suspension after adsorption to chalcopyrite were determined by real-time quantitative PCR. The solution containing mineral particles and microorganisms was filtered through qualitative filter paper to remove the chalcopyrite particles and then liquid phase was transferred into a new centrifuge tube. After that, DNA was extracted from the filtrate using a TIANamp bacterial DNA kit (Tiangen Biotech Beijing Co., Ltd., Beijing, China) and 16 S rRNA was amplified by the universal primer (21F: 5′-TTCCGGTTGATCCYGCCGGA-3′; 1492R: 5′-GGTTACCTTGTTACGACTT-3′) of bacteria described by Wang et al. [ Bioleaching experiments were carried out to evaluate the effects of intensified biofilm formation on copper extraction. Taking consideration of The adsorption behaviors of three pure cultures to chalcopyrite as a function of time were shown in Langmuir plots for the adsorption isotherms of The fitted Freundlich isotherms are shown in Based on the analysis above, there are at least two possible explanations for this phenomenon. First, oriented attachment may be governed by high-energy step edges that was reported in the study of attachment on pyrite [ In the binary mixture of   The attachment behavior of ternary mixture adsorbed onto chalcopyrite was investigated and the results were shown in The effects of the bioaugmentation of different leaching stage on copper extraction was illustrated in  On basis of the above results, a mechanism model was established to interpret how the biofilm promoted the chalcopyrite bioleaching ( In the current study, we focused on the adsorption mechanism of the moderate thermophiles and based on it to intensify chalcopyrite bioleaching. The results demonstrated that pure cultures of three moderate thermophiles rapidly attached on chalcopyrite and were well fitted by both Langmuir and Freundlich equation and showed significant interspecific difference. This work was supported by The