Zinc containing flue dusts generated during a copper matte smelting process in a water-jacket furnace was leached in a zinc electrowinning return solution at 55 °C. Ninety percent of the metal was dissolved after 2 h of treatment. The leaching residues contained near 43 wt.% PbSO4.
                  Iron was removed from leaching solutions by precipitation using a saturated lime solution at pH 3–4. The precipitate formed mainly consisted of gypsum CaSO4.2H2O. Iron and magnesium co-precipitated into a chloro-hydroxide compound. No zinc compound had co-precipitated during iron removal. Copper and germanium contents lower than 10 mg/l were achieved by solvent extraction using 10% LIX 64N and cementation. Cobalt contents lower than 1 mg/l in the solution were achieved by cementation on zinc granules for 2 h at 72 to 82 °C in presence of antimony. Cadmium contents of solutions were reduced to 10 mg/l by cementation on zinc granules at room temperature.
                  Electrons transfer regime was identified as a limiting step during zinc electrolysis in a symmetric electrolysis current–continuous circulating system, SEC-CCS. Electrolysis current efficiency higher than 94% and 3.5 kWh/kg of specific energy consumption was achieved under 500–600 A/m2 at 35 to 40 °C in the presence of gelatine.The copper matte smelting in water-jacket furnaces in Lubumbashi plants, south-east of the Democratic Republic of the Congo, yielded three separated phases consisting of a copper matte, a slag and the fume dusts. The dusts naturally collected all the volatile compounds at the operating temperature of the furnaces, at about 1250 °C. They also contained particles resulting from the wear of the agglomerated sulphide concentrates and other additives fed at the top at the mouth of the furnace and drawn out of the furnace by the ascending air current. The mechanically generated dusts had particle sizes ranged from 10 to 500 μm whereas the particle sizes of chemically generated dusts formed by the volatilisation and oxidation of low-melting temperature metals i.e. Zn, Pb, Cd, Ge etc. ranged from 0.5 to 2 μm (  Diverse alkaline leaching processes of zinc from various EAF dusts have also been foreseen previously. It was suggested that optimum conditions would be: 95 °C, 1/7 solid/liquid ratio, 10 M NaOH and 2 h leaching time ( Purification of the leaching liquor is a critical step of the hydrometallurgy of zinc as the electrolysis is rendered inefficient by even low content of some impurities in the electrolyte. Elimination of electropositive ions (Cu The effectiveness of additives in improving the current efficiency to above 94%, the quality of the deposited zinc metal and in developping preferred crystal orientation was also established by The water-jacket furnace flue dusts whose chemical composition is presented in The sulphur content of these dusts is low enough to foresee a hydrometallurgy route as a possible process for the zinc extraction. The iron oxide and magnesium oxide were also present in proportions lower than 2 wt.% and 3.9 wt.% that would lead to low acid consumption and less contamination of the leaching solution by the corresponding ions. The lixiviant used in this work consisted of a return acid solution from the zinc electrowinning cells at the Zinc Plants in Kolwezi (South of the Democratic Republic of the Congo). The chemical composition of the electrowinning return solution is given in The reactor was filled with 700 ml of lixiviant (the zinc electrowinning return solution) and heated up to 55 °C. A mass of 7 g Ferric sulphate was then added and dissolved by vigorously stirring the solution at 900 min Afterward, the leaching residues were separated from the leaching solution by decantation in a 1 l glass container, and filtered on papers under atmospheric pressure. Samples of the initial flue dusts dried for 24 h at 80 °C and those of the leaching residues were prepared for XRD analysis using a back loading preparation method. They were analysed with a PANalytical X'Pert Pro powder diffractometer with X'Celerator detector and variable divergence- and receiving slits with Fe filtered Co-Kα radiation. The phases were identified using X'Pert Highscore plus software. The Reference Intensity Ratio method (RIR) was used for semi-quantitative analysis as not all crystal structures needed for the Rietveld method were available. Amorphous phases, if present, were not taken into account in the quantification. The samples of the same dusts and leaching residues were also prepared for scanning electron microscopy (SEM) analysis by hot mounting in resin, grinding on successive grit papers and polishing on 3 and on 1 µm diamond pasts. Cross sections of the respective powders were analysed in backscattered electron mode and energy dispersive analysis were performed. Particle size analysis was carried out on a representative sample of the dust and of the leaching residues using Saturn Digisizer 5200 V1.12 which is a laser particle size analyser. The purification of the filtrate solution obtained after leaching was conducted in four steps to reduce the contents of ions noble than zinc in the electrolyte. i. Iron was removed from the filtrate obtained after leaching by precipitation using a saturated lime solution at pH 3–4. The precipitate formed at this stage was separated by decantation and filtration, dried at 80 °C for 24 h, and analysed by XRD. The filtrate was taken to the next step of copper and germanium removal. ii. Ions Cu iii. Cobalt was first removed from the electrolyte by cementation on zinc granules at temperatures comprising between 72 and 82 °C, in the presence of antimony. Antimony was added to the solution in three different concentrations, i.e. 15 mg/l, 20 mg/l and 25 mg/l. Three samples of solution were taken at 40 min interval up to 120 min in each case to determine the remaining [Co iv. Cadmium was finally removed from the electrolyte by cementation on zinc at room temperature. Samples of the solution were taken at 40 min interval during cementation, filtrated and their cadmium content determined by AAS method. A schematic representation of the above procedure is shown in The solution hence purified constituted the electrolyte for the zinc electrowinning. The symmetric electrolysis current–continuous circulating system, SEC-CCS cell used for electrolysis is a 280 ml prism made of glass into which the electrolyte is introduced via a series of perforated channels that lie parallel to the base of the prism. A peristaltic pump maintains a forced circulation by injecting and sucking up the electrolyte in parallel flow lines to the electrodes from the bottom of the cell. Hence the electrolyte sweeps across the electrodes. The aluminium cathode is placed in between two anodes in Pb-1% Ag. This arrangement allows the formation of symmetric electrolysis current lines in the electrolyte. The distance between each anode and the cathode is 3 cm. The circuit of the fluid starts in a 2 l container heated up to the required temperature by standing it in simmering water. The aluminium cathode surfaces were readably polished mechanically and stripped in 65% HNO The effects of three variables on the electrolysis process were investigated. The temperature of the electrolyte was varied from 30 to 50 °C, the electrolysis current density ( The electrolysis time was considered as a constant 2 h in this study. One variable (electrolyte temperature, electrolysis current density, electrolyte flow rate) was changed at a time when the other two were kept constant. The cathode polarisation curves The analysis by X-ray diffraction of the dried dusts (starting material) showed that they contained mainly lead sulphate, becherite Zn It is also inferred from the particle size distribution in Leaching these dusts using the return solution from the zinc electrowinning with the composition in The amount of zinc hence dissolved is equal to: The total amount of zinc introduced in the leaching reactor is The zinc leaching efficiency in the above condition is The phases present in the washed and dried residues of lixiviation were identified by diffraction of X-rays. They contained 43 wt.% PbSO No zinc containing phase was detected by X-ray diffraction of the leaching residues. This suggested that zinc was practically fully recovered from the water-jacket furnace flue dusts by leaching in the above-mentioned conditions. The phase distribution in the dust particle cross sections before leaching could not be distinguished in backscattered SEM. The homogeneity hence observed may be a confirmation of the chemical origin of the major proportion of these dusts particles formed by a volatilisation–oxidation and condensation mechanism during copper matte smelting of the sintered complex sulphide concentrates. The zinc peak distinctively observed at about 7.5 keV in the X-ray energy dispersive spectrum of the initial dusts completely disappeared after leaching as it was not present in the EDS spectrum of the residues. This observation confirmed the early XRD results that showed no zinc compounds present above the detection limit in the leaching residues. The SEM of the cross sections of the dusts particles showed a lot of porosity (small dark spots) that might have contributed to the high zinc leaching efficiency from these dusts. The particle size distributions of the dusts and the leaching residues are compared in Iron was removed from the leaching solution in a one-step precipitation by a saturated lime solution at room temperature, at pH value comprised between 3 and 4, within the published limits of pH 3 to 6 by The XRD pattern revealed that the precipitate hence formed was mainly constituted of gypsum CaSO It was observed that the separation of liquid from the precipitate by decantation and filtration on paper was slow. This might be due to the hydration of gypsum, which is well known for its poor decantability and filterability. The total iron content of the solution dropped from 1650 mg/l, in the leaching liquor, to 21 mg/l upon precipitation in the above mentioned conditions. This iron content was too low to affect the zinc electrolysis efficiency; precipitation was therefore assumed complete. The filtrate obtained from the iron precipitation was subsequently subjected to a solvent extraction treatment to remove copper and germanium. The results of this process using LIX 64N in solution in ESCAID 100 are presented The copper content of the solution was reduced to 500 mg/l after 12 solvent extraction cycles, whereas 15 cycles were needed to decrease the germanium content to the same level. However it was not necessary to completely remove copper from the solution as the presence of the more electropositive copper helps in solubilising antimony powder added during the cementation of cobalt on the zinc powder in the next purification stage as shown by Cobalt and cadmium were removed from the solution in two-step cementation on zinc pure powder. The first step of cementation was conducted at temperatures comprised between 72 and 82 °C to remove cobalt and part of the cadmium. The residual cobalt and antimony contents of the solution are given in The cobalt content of the cemented solution decreased from 260 to 1 mg/l after 120 min when 25 mg of antimony powder was added to 1 l of the solution to be purified. The residual Sb Part of the cadmium contained in the leaching solution was also eliminated during this step of cobalt cementation but its residual level in the solution was still very high (744 mg/l). This rendered necessary the second step of cementation at room temperature to decrease [Cd The chemical composition of the purified solution hence obtained is shown in Drawing of cathode polarisation curves enables the determination of working regime and the characterization of the kinetics of the electrolysis phenomenon. The polarisation curves at 35, 40 and 45 °C for three different flow rates, i.e. 60, 80 and 100 l/h are presented in The absence of the diffusion plateaus in this figure suggests that the electrolysis takes place under a electrons transfer regime. This was also shown by the insensibility of the cathode overpotential to changes of the electrolyte flow rate at the three temperatures. The slopes of the Tafel's lines and the current densities It is inferred from The effects of the electrolyte temperature on the overall electrolysis potential, the cathode overpotential, the specific energy consumption and on the current efficiency were first investigated at 500 A/m The electrolysis current efficiency dropped drastically at temperatures higher than 40 °C due to a decrease of the hydrogen evolution overpotential and an increase of the conductivity of the electrolyte that leads to a higher current and higher power loss along the electric wires out of the electrolysis cell. The slight decrease in the overall electrolysis potential The electrolysis current efficiency decreased with the electrolyte flow rate as shown in It is also observed from It ressorted from this investigation that the optimum electrolyte flow rate in a SEC-CCS type cell is somwhere between 80 and 100 l/h. Gelatine was added to the electrolyte to improve the structure and compacity of the cathode metal by controlling the current density on the cathode surface. Experiments conducted at 35 °C, 80 l/h and 500 A/m The effect of the current density Increasing the electrolysis current density up to 600 A/dm Above The overall electrolysis potential The major proportion of water-jacket furnace flue dusts formed during copper matte smelting are chemically generated through a vaporisation–oxidation–condensation cycle. Zinc and lead sulphides contained in the chalcocite–chalcopyrite–bornite concentrate are sublimated at the furnace working temperature, 1250 °C. The oxidation of these fumed sulphides forms a mixture of sulphates and hydroxi-sulphates that solidify out of the furnace to form the dust particles with finely dispersed phases. Indeed the main constituent of the dusts, zinc and lead are present as sulphates and complex hydroxi-sulphates formed during the matte smelting of a complex copper, cobalt, zinc sulphide concentrate. Further hydration of these compounds might have occurred upon interaction with air and rain water in the landfill area. The scanning electron microscopy analysis revealed that the phases present in the dusts were finely distributed beyond the resolution limit of the SEM equipment. This observation supports the thesis of chemically generated dusts. These dusts are leachable in aqueous acid solution, i.e. the return solution from the zinc electrolysis containing 100 g/l H The leaching residues contained 43 wt.% PbSO Separation of the residues from the leaching solution by decantation was fast and there was no need of using any flocculant. Purification of the leaching solution was possible by selective elimination of iron by precipitation using a saturated lime solution at pH 3–4. Iron and magnesium were precipitated in a complex hydroxide Mg Finally cadmium levels were reduced to less than 10 mg/l before undertaking the zinc electrolysis by cementation on zinc granules at room temperature for 40 min. The electrolyte solution obtained after purification contained 91 g/l zinc and 17 g/l H The investigation into the electrolysis process of the purified solution in a symmetric electrolysis current–continuous circulating system, SEC-CCS, the cell revealed an electrons transfer regime as the limiting step. This observation was confirmed by the constant cathode overpotential and the negligible effect of the electrolyte flow rate on the overall electrolysis cell potential. Addition of gelatine to the electrolyte improves the quality of the cathode deposited metal and the electrolysis current efficiency. Optimum conditions for the zinc electrolysis in a SEC-CCS type cell were determined as: – Current density 500 to 600 A/m – Electrolyte temperature comprised between 35 and 40 °C – Electrolyte flow rate 80 to 100 l/h – Gelatine level comprised between 100 and 200 mg/l. Zinc electrolysis current efficiency higher than 94% and the specific energy consumption about 3.5 kWh/kg were achieved in the above conditions.