In this study we investigated the use of sub-micrometer ZnO hollow spheres as anti-reflection layers (ARLs) in dye-sensitized solar cells (DSSCs). The ZnO hollow sphere was synthesized by flame spray pyrolysis (FSP) followed by post-heating treatment. The ZnO hollow sphere was analyzed via x-ray diffraction (XRD), which revealed a hexagonal-wurtzite structure. A scanning electron microscope (SEM) image showed a uniform and spherical hollow particle with a narrow size distribution of the diameter: d
                     
                        av
                      ~900 nm. In this research, the DSSCs were fabricated via manual screen printing with TiO2 nanoparticles (20 nm) as transparent layers and ZnO hollow spheres as anti-reflection layers. The performance of the DSSCs was investigated using a Keithley 2440 source meter under an AM 1.5 G solar simulator with a power intensity of 100 mW/cm2. The addition of the ZnO anti-reflecting layers resulted in a four-fold improvement in the efficiency of these DSSCs. In this study, we also noted that the photocurrent density was dependent on the size of the crystals in the ZnO ARLs. The photocurrent was further improved when crystal size was increased via heat treatment. As a result, the DSSCs using ZnO hollow spheres annealed at 900 °C and coated onto TiO2 film achieved a PCE of 2.61% (Voc of 0.75 V, Jsc of 10.03 mA cm−2, ad FF of 0.35), whereas DSSCs using TiO2 with a non-annealed ZnO ARL achieved a PCE of only 2.18% (Voc of 0.78 V, Jsc of 6.78 mA cm−2, and FF of 0.34), and the DSSCs with only TiO2 showed a paltry PCE of 0.64%.Dye-sensitized solar cells (DSSCs) are a third-generation solar cell that was first reported by O'Regan and Grätzel in 1991. DSSCs are environmentally friendly, inexpensive, and feature a simple production process [ ZnO has attracted attention as an anti-reflecting layer because it has high charge mobility, connects well with TiO In this work, the ZnO powder was synthesized using the FSP method followed by post-heating treatment. We also performed XRD and SEM characterizations to investigate the effect of annealing temperature. The ZnO-based ARL was deposited onto a TiO Zinc nitrate hexahydrate (Zn(NO To prepare the ZnO paste for an anti-reflective layer, 0.2 g of ethylcellulose was diluted in 2 ml of ethanol and stirred for 5 min. Then, 0.8 g of terpineol was added to the solution as a binder followed by the addition of ZnO powder with stirring for 5 min. The TiO The manual screen printing method was also used to prepare Pt film onto an FTO glass substrate for use as the counter electrodes. The counter electrodes were dried at 80 °C for 5 min. After drying, the counter electrodes were annealed at 450 °C for 1 h. The active areas of the photoanodes and counter electrodes were fixed at 1x1 cm The ZnO hollow spheres were further characterized and analyzed via x-ray diffraction (XRD). Scanning electron microscopy (SEM) was used to observe the morphology of the particles. The performance of the DSSC was investigated using a Keithley 2440 source meter under an AM 1.5 G solar simulator with a power intensity of 100 mW/cm The SEM images of the ZnO hollow spheres are shown in We used XRD to investigate the effect that annealing temperature exerted on the crystalline structure of the ZnO hollow spheres annealed at 300 and 900 °C. The XRD patterns of ZnO samples with various annealing temperatures are shown in In equation  The schematic structure and reflecting process of a photoanode with a TiO The ZnO synthesized via FSP using various annealing temperatures has a wurtzite structure and a hollow spherical shape that was applied as an anti-reflecting layer in DSSCs. The anti-reflecting layer altered the optoelectronic properties, which substantially improved charge generation. The J-V curve indicated a 400.81% increase in efficiency and a 583.14% improvement in J  The authors declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this paper. This work was partially funded by the