Background
                  Clavicle nonunions in adolescent patients are exceedingly rare. The purpose of this study was to evaluate a series of clavicle nonunions from a pediatric multicenter study group to assess potential risk factors and treatment outcomes.
               
                  Methods
                  A retrospective review of all clavicle nonunions in patients younger than 19 years was performed at 9 pediatric hospitals between 2006 and 2016. Demographic and surgical data were documented. Radiographs were evaluated for initial fracture classification, displacement, shortening, angulation, and nonunion type. Clinical outcomes were evaluated, including rate of healing, time to union, return to sports, and complications. Risk factors for nonunion were assessed by comparing the study cohort with a separate cohort of age-matched patients with a diaphyseal clavicle fracture.
               
                  Results
                  There were 25 nonunions (mean age, 14.5 years; range, 10.0-18.9 years) identified, all of which underwent surgical fixation. Most fractures were completely displaced (68%) initially, but 21% were partially displaced and 11% were nondisplaced. Bone grafting was performed in 24 of 25 cases, typically using the hypertrophic callus. Radiographic healing was achieved in 96% of cases. One patient (4%) required 2 additional procedures to achieve union. The primary risk factor for development of a nonunion was a previous history of an ipsilateral clavicle fracture.
               
                  Conclusions
                  Clavicle nonunions can occur in the adolescent population but are an uncommon clinical entity. The majority occur in male patients with displaced fractures, many of whom have sustained previous fractures of the same clavicle. High rates of union were achieved with plate fixation and the use of bone graft.The clavicle is one of the most commonly fractured long bones in the pediatric population, with an annual incidence of 13-19 fractures per 10,000 children younger than 16 years. Retrospective data were collected on all clavicle nonunions treated at 9 pediatric hospitals between 2006 and 2016. Patients were included if they were 18 years old or younger and were diagnosed with a diaphyseal clavicle nonunion, defined as failure of radiographic bone bridging 6 months or longer after injury. Fractures lateral to the attachment site of the coracoclavicular ligament or involving the sternoclavicular joint were excluded. In addition, patients with a congenital pseudarthrosis of the clavicle were excluded. All patients identified underwent surgical treatment of the nonunion. Preoperative demographic and clinical variables were documented, including age of the patient at the time of injury, gender, laterality, hand dominance, mechanism of injury, primary sport, and treatment of the fracture preceding the nonunion. More specific nonunion risk factors were also investigated, including prior clavicle fractures, previous clavicle surgery, smoking history, and diabetes. Radiographs were reviewed by attending orthopedic surgeons at each site, all of whom are members of the previously mentioned adolescent clavicle fracture research study group. This study group had developed a series of standardized radiographic measurement techniques and definitions, which were used to evaluate the radiographs. Skeletal maturity was assessed on the injury films, based on the proximal humerus physis being open or closed. Each fracture was classified using the AO ( Intraoperative variables were recorded for the surgeries performed to treat the nonunions, including type of fixation (plate vs. intramedullary device), use of bone graft (defined as local/clavicle callus/autograft, iliac crest cancellous autograft, or allograft), and any intraoperative complications. When a plate was used, its length (number of screw holes), size (screw size), precontouring, and position (superior or anterior) were recorded. Postoperative clinical course was detailed, including length of follow-up, rate of union (defined as advanced radiographic bone bridging on 3 or more cortices), time to union, return to sports, use of physical therapy, range of motion deficits, need for implant removal, and postoperative complications. To identify potential risk factors for nonunion, the demographic and clinical variables of the nonunion study population (n = 25) were subsequently compared with tabulated data from a large population of adolescent diaphyseal clavicle fractures (n = 545) from the Function after Adolescent Clavicle Trauma and Surgery (FACTS) prospective, multicenter cohort study with similar patient ages represented. Meta-analytic statistical methodology was used to compare variables from both study populations (current cohort of nonunions vs. the FACTS database). Analysis of variance from summary data was used for the continuous variables, and Twenty-five patients with clavicle fracture nonunions were identified, with a mean age of 14.5 years (range, 10.0-18.9 years) ( Review of the initial injury radiographs revealed open physes in 54% (13/24) of fractures. The AO classification revealed that 26% (5/19) of fractures were comminuted. A completely displaced fracture was identified in 68% (13/19) of cases, a partially displaced or angulated fracture in 21% (4/19), and a nondisplaced or minimally displaced fracture in 11% (2/19). The mean superior to inferior fracture displacement was 11.1 ± 9.5 mm, the mean end-to-end shortening was 15.4 ± 10.4 mm, and the mean cortex-to-cortex shortening was 8.5 ± 7.6 mm. All 4 cases in the partially displaced or angulated category demonstrated angulation, with a mean angulation of 41.0° ± 20.0°. In comparing the demographic data, injury variables, and radiographic factors between the nonunion study cohort and the larger control cohort of adolescents with acute clavicle fractures (without nonunion), patients with a nonunion were more likely to have sustained a refracture (32% vs. 9%; Surgical management was pursued in 100% of nonunion cases at a mean of 21 months after the initial injury (range, 6-43 months). Plate fixation was performed in 92% of cases, and 8% used an intramedullary compression screw. Plates were almost exclusively fixed superiorly (87%) on the clavicle. Manufacturer-precontoured specialty clavicle plates were used in 65% of patients, with the remainder of plates obtained from general trauma sets, the most common of which were 3.5-mm pelvic reconstruction plates contoured by the surgeon intraoperatively. However, manufacturer-precontoured plates were used exclusively in the last 5 years. Local/clavicle callus/autograft was used in 56% of cases, iliac crest cancellous autograft in 28%, allograft in 12%, and no graft in 4%. Postoperatively, 96% (24/25) of patients demonstrated advanced healing of the nonunion at an average of 12.4 ± 5.6 weeks. One patient (4%) required 2 additional procedures to achieve union. This patient was a 13-year-old boy who sustained a completely displaced clavicle fracture and a closed head injury while riding an all-terrain vehicle. A symptomatic nonunion was confirmed 9 months postoperatively, which was treated with a plate augmented with bone graft substitute. Six months later, the clavicle had not united, so the plate was removed and the nonunion site was regrafted. The patient was lost to follow-up for 3 years, when he presented again with a persistent nonunion. At this point, he was dual plated and grafted with iliac crest autograft supplemented with bone morphogenetic protein. Five months after this final procedure, bone healing was confirmed. No cases of infection, refracture, or motor nerve deficit were identified, although 1 patient (4%) complained of residual anterior chest wall numbness. Another patient (4%) was documented to have a 10° loss of forward elevation but no functional deficit. In 50% of cases, formal physical therapy was used in the postoperative period. Nearly all patients returned to full sports without limitations, and no refractures after the nonunion surgery have been reported. In 4 cases (16%), all superior plates, the patients elected to have their symptomatic implants removed in secondary operations, with no reported complications during or after removal. Although clavicle fracture nonunions in pediatric and adolescent patients are extremely rare, this study describes 25 cases, almost tripling the reported cases in the literature. The primary risk factor for a nonunion identified in this study was a clavicle refracture. Whereas additional consideration could be given to surgical treatment of refractures at the time of presentation, because the current study did not assess the natural history of refractures with different treatment approaches in this age group, we think this is simply a factor of which providers and families of injured adolescent patients should be aware, rather than an indication for surgery. Other studies designed to elucidate the optimal treatment of adolescent clavicle refractures may better inform such considerations in the future. For almost all cases of adolescent fracture nonunion, surgical treatment provided high union rates with few reported complications, although 1 patient required multiple procedures to achieve advanced bone healing. To date, 7 case reports and 1 small case series have been published in which pediatric midshaft clavicle nonunions are discussed ( Despite the limited sample size of this multicenter study, based on the current data, clavicle refracture was identified as a risk factor for clavicle fracture nonunion, with 32% of nonunions occurring after a clavicle refracture. One patient had sustained a total of 8 previous fractures. Although this trend is not well documented in the literature, Wilkins et al identified a similar risk factor in a pooled retrospective series of adult In this series, 100% of nonunion patients were managed surgically, with nearly uniform good outcomes and few complications. The operative approach, however, was found to vary across patient groups and institutions. In general, plate fixation was the preferred technique, but healing was also achieved with use of an intramedullary compression screw in 2 cases. Both the pediatric and the adult clavicle nonunion literature has included more cases of treatment with plate fixation than by intramedullary techniques, but no head-to-head study has compared the 2 approaches for clavicle nonunions. Complications were uncommon in this series. In 1 case, healing was not achieved after the initial nonunion repair, and 2 additional procedures were necessary to ultimately achieve union. To date, no refractures after the nonunion surgeries have been identified, and only 16% of patients have elected to have their plates removed because of implant prominence or irritation. This rate is similar to larger studies investigating this phenomenon in both adults and adolescents. Whereas there is a current national trend toward increasing surgical stabilization of acute, displaced clavicle fractures to optimize fracture healing, to expedite fracture healing, and to improve functional outcomes, even in the adolescent population, data from this study may support a more conservative approach in this younger population. There are several limitations of this study, including its retrospective nature and its lack of patient-reported outcomes. Performing a prospective study to investigate this clinical entity is fairly unrealistic, however, given the rare nature of this problem. Currently, the FACTS study group is conducting an ongoing multicenter prospective study evaluating adolescent clavicle fractures with >550 patients enrolled. To date, no cases of clavicle nonunion have been identified, illustrating the uncommon nature of this problem. This finding represented the impetus for the current retrospective study, which suggests good clinical outcomes, high union rates, few complications, good range of motion, and high rates of return to sports after surgical treatment of the nonunions. Finally, comprehensive acute clavicle fracture data are not available at all of the institutions that contributed patients to the series, and many of the nonunions identified in this study were referred to tertiary referral centers, making it impossible to calculate an accurate incidence of pediatric midshaft clavicle nonunions. However, the incidence appears to be <1% and rare. This study represents a relatively large series of adolescent clavicle nonunions, with no nonunions being identified in children younger than 10 years. Our data confirm that pediatric midshaft clavicle nonunions are exceedingly rare but tend to occur in older adolescent male patients with fracture patterns that are most commonly either completely displaced or significantly angulated. Patients with prior clavicle fractures may be at increased risk of a nonunion. If a clavicle nonunion does occur in this age group, surgical repair and bone grafting provide high union rates with few complications. Donald S. Bae reports that he has received personal royalties from Lippincott Williams & Wilkins for textbook sales and grant funding from POSNA. He serves on committees for AAOS and POSNA. Henry B. Ellis reports that he is a consultant for Smith & Nephew. Jeffrey Nepple reports that he is a consultant for Smith & Nephew. He receives research funding for a different research study from Zimmer. J. Eric Gordon reports that he has received royalties from Orthopediatrics and is a consultant and speaker for the company. Derek M. Kelly reports that he has received textbook royalties from Elsevier Publishing. Nirav K. Pandya reports that he is a consultant for Orthopediatrics. The other authors, their immediate families, and any research foundations with which they are affiliated have not received any financial payments or other benefits from any commercial entity related to the subject of this article.