The grinding kinetics of three newly developed master alloys for steel powder metallurgy applications were investigated using a laboratory ball-mill. Non-first order grinding kinetic is observed for the three master alloys as the breakage rate increases with grinding time due to the work hardening of the ductile phase in the microstructure. Agglomeration of fine particles is observed after a critical time at which d90 reaches its lowest value (~30μm). Critical times are related to the hardness and the microstructure of the different master alloys. Agglomeration of fine particles can be overcome with the use of a process control agent. In this study, the addition of stearic acid to master alloy powders prior to grinding successfully eliminates agglomeration for long grinding times (d90
                     ~16μm after grinding for 270min).Powder metallurgy (P/M) is a near-net shape process allowing the production of cost competitive high performance steel parts. Steel powders are compacted in a die to shape a “green” part which is then sintered in a high temperature furnace to generate solid bonds between metal particles. Sinter-hardening, which consists of rapidly cooling the parts directly from the sintering temperature, allows the elimination of additional hardening heat treatments The use of Cr and Mn as primary alloying elements in steel P/M contributes to enhance the competitiveness of the process. They are lower in cost than Ni and Mo and yield excellent hardenibility to P/M steel parts The development of a new approach to use large amounts of Cr and Mn in P/M steel parts requires the production of fine master alloys. Following their production by a proprietary technique, master alloys are finely ground in a ball-mill, the fineness of the master alloy powder being an important parameter to generate the appropriate hardened microstructure in the P/M steel part. In this paper, the study of grinding kinetics is used to determine the optimal grinding time to obtain a fine master alloy powder. An analytical solution of the batch grinding equation is used to describe the grinding kinetics of three newly developed master alloys Three master alloys were produced by a proprietary technique (M1, M2 and M3). They were then ground using a laboratory ball-mill (Zoz Simoloyer CM01-2 In order to investigate the effect of stearic acid on the agglomeration phenomenon, 1 A Beckman–Coulter LS200 particle size analyzer was used to determine the particle size distributions of powder samples. The d The comminution of particles can be described by the batch grinding equation The integro-differential Eq. In order to back-calculate the grinding parameters from the experimental particle size distributions, it is necessary to linearize the solution proposed by Nakajima. The following mathematical manipulations lead to the linearized form of the solution. The linearized solution is expressed as follows: In addition, it is possible to express the intercept The experimental particle size distributions, The three master alloys studied have a similar type of microstructure. According to scanning electron microscopy observations, the microstructure is an intricate mixture of brittle cementite (Fe  The particle size decreases with grinding time until approximately 75 There is a difference to be made between agglomerates and aggregates. Agglomeration concerns the irreversible adhesion of particles. Cold welding is generally the responsible mechanism leading to agglomeration. An aggregate, however, is a group of particles linked together by weak forces. Electrostatic attraction as particle size decreases, interlocking of irregular shaped particles or capillarity forces caused by ambient humidity are possible mechanisms responsible for the appearance of aggregates Hence, in order to be suitable for our P/M process, the optimal grinding time for M1 corresponds to the grinding time at which d  For the sake of space, the detailed modeling of only one master alloy powder (M1) is presented here. For the two other master alloys, only the modeled particle size distributions and the grinding parameters will be presented. The agglomeration phenomenon is not taken into account in the batch grinding equation (Eq. The linearization of cumulative oversize distributions ( The slope Different explanations to this behavior can be mentioned. First, as the number of fine particles increases during grinding, coarse particles are preferentially hit by grinding media, thereby increasing their probability of breakage. Second, impacts will not necessarily cause fragmentation of the particles. However, we suggest that these impacts will generate work hardening in the ductile phase (austenite) of the master alloy's microstructure. With grinding time, work hardening is increasing so that the ductile phase gradually reaches its breaking point. Hence, the breaking probability of the particle increases with grinding time which could, in part, explain the evolution of In order to fit correctly the data and as a first approximation, we replaced  In a general manner, the value of parameters In order to reduce agglomeration during grinding, the effect of stearic acid was investigated. During the first 90  SEM observations of ground master alloy powders show the agglomerated (M1) and non-agglomerated (M1 In the present study, grinding of newly developed master alloys to produce fine particles was found possible. A nearly constant level of fineness (d For each master alloy, the exponent The use of stearic acid as a process control agent during grinding prevented the apparition of agglomerates/aggregates for longer milling times and contributes to the production of finer master alloy particles (d Financial support from the