Workability behaviour of steel powder metallurgy performs containing 0%, 0.4% and 0.8% of carbon were completely investigated experimentally. Cold upsetting of abovementioned powder metallurgy sintered steels preforms with two different aspect ratios namely 0.39 and 0.59 was carried out with graphite as lubricant and the formability behaviour of the preforms under triaxial stress state condition was determined. The formability stress parameter was evaluated for all the above said preforms and its variation with respect to axial strain was plotted, studied and discussed relative to their as sintered microstructures. Also the characteristics of various stress ratio parameters with respect to axial strain were analyzed and presented.force applied on the cylindrical preform for deformation height of the barreled cylinder after deformation initial height of the cylindrical preform bulged diameter of the preform after deformation bottom contact diameter of the preform after deformation top contact diameter of the preform after deformation initial diameter of the preform relative density Poisson's ratio Formability Stress Index true strain true strain in the radial direction true strain in the axial direction true strain in the hoop direction density of the preform after deformation theoretical density of the fully dense material initial preform density of the preform true stress effective stress hydrostatic stress true stress in the radial direction true stress in the axial direction true stress in the hoop direction Powder metallurgy (P/M) processing a net or near net-shaped production technology, eradicates the need for most of the secondary machining operations. Automotive and off-highway vehicle applications dominate the ferrous P/M structural parts market. However, there are many other fields in which ferrous P/M parts are being used such as lawn and garden structural parts, hand tools, hobby applications, household appliances, lock hardware, industrials motors, controls, hydraulic applications, etc., and satisfies close dimensional tolerance requirements for parts with complex geometries Workability is the ability of a material to endure the induced internal stresses of forming former to the occurrence of splitting of material. It is a convoluted technological perception that depends not only on the material but also the various process parameters such as strain rate, stress, friction, temperature, etc. Workability of porous steel performs was discussed by Aly El-Domiaty and Mostafa Shaker An experimental and theoretical research work with test samples of various geometry for the determination of critical damage at fracture under several loading conditions was carried out by Gouveia et al. In the present work the workability behaviour of steel powder metallurgy performs containing 0%, 0.4% and 0.8% of carbon were experimentally investigated completely. Preforms with different aspect ratios namely 0.39 and 0.59 were subjected to cold deformation with graphite lubricant and their formability behaviour under triaxial stress state condition was studied. The variations of formability stress parameter with respect to axial strain were established for the three different powder metallurgy steel preforms having two different aforesaid aspect ratios. Also the characteristics of various stress ratio parameters such as Atomized iron powder of −150 The free surfaces of the compacts were coated with an indigenously developed ceramic mixture Sintering of plain iron powder sequentially involves the establishment and growth of bonds between the particles of powder at their areas of contact, grain growth and migration of the grain boundaries formed at the bonds, spheroidization of the pores between the particles, and the elimination of small pores (and possibly the growth of larger pores). As the sintering temperature increases, porosity decreases and shrinkage increases Initial diameter ( The various upsetting parameters under triaxial stress state condition are determined with the application of the following expressions. The state of stress in a triaxial stress condition is given by Narayanasamy et al. The hydrostatic stress is given by The effective stress can be determined from the following expression in terms of cylindrical coordinates as explained elsewhere As an evidence of experimental investigation implying the importance of the spherical component of the stress state on fracture, Vujovic and Shabaik The axial true strain ( The hoop strain (      The following conclusions can be drawn from the above results and discussion. As the carbon content increases the pore size becomes smaller. As the pore size becomes smaller, the formability stress value increases. Aspect ratio 0.59 shows higher formability stress value compared to aspect ratio 0.39 because of better densification. The stress ratio parameters ( The stress ratio parameters (