Microwave-assisted ethanol decomposition over pyrolysis residue of sewage sludge (PRSS) was investigated in a multi-mode microwave (MW) oven, and was compared with ethanol decomposition over a commercial activated carbon (AC). The results indicated that PRSS showed higher MW heating performance than AC. Under the same microwave power (MP), the temperature of catalyst bed, hydrogen produc0oij9tion and ethanol conversion over PRSS were higher than that over AC. Both hydrogen production (per unit volume of ethanol) and ethanol conversion increased with the increase of MP, whereas decreased with the increase of the volumetric hourly space velocity of ethanol (VHSVeth). Additionally, comparison between ethanol decomposition by MW and conventional heating was also conducted. Results indicated that MW heating was much more beneficial for hydrogen production than conventional heating, and the energy efficiency of hydrogen production under MW heating was much higher than conventional heating. Finally, carbon nanofilaments formation over PRSS and AC were observed under MW heating. The size and structures of carbon nanofilaments over PRSS and AC were significantly different with each other, which may be strongly correlated with the formation of micro-plasmas during MW heating.Fast depletion of natural reserves of fossil fuels and concerns about the emission of CO There are a variety of technologies for hydrogen production. The more developed are conventional technologies, such as coal gasification, hydrocarbon reforming, water electrolysis, etc. Ethanol has been considered as an excellent bio-resource for hydrogen production, because of its low toxicity, CO Ethanol decomposition is an endothermic reaction, and the direct decomposition of ethanol can produce carbon monoxide, methane and hydrogen through reaction (1), and further decomposition of methane can promote hydrogen formation through reaction (2) The operation of endothermic catalytic reactors is limited by heat transfer (convective, conductive or radial resistances) through the packed bed, which will result in a pronounced temperature profile and thereby affecting reaction rate As one of the main products from sludge pyrolysis, PRSS is mainly composed of fixed carbon and ash, and usually demonstrates an excellent MW absorption ability even better than AC Sludge samples with moisture content of 80 wt% were sampled from a municipal wastewater treatment plant in Shanghai China, and were air dried at 105 °C for proximate and ultimate analysis. As shown in Ethanol decomposition was conducted in a multi-mode MW oven, or in an electric furnace (conventional heating with thermal power of 3 kW, not show in The microstructure variations of PRSS and AC were studied by scanning electron microscope (SEM) S-4800 from Hitachi, equipped with an energy dispersive spectrometer (EDS) detector (Quantax 400) from Bruker. The conversions of ethanol and methane were calculated by the following equations: To reveal the effect of MP, ethanol conversions under MP of 160, 320 and 560 W were investigated with VHSV  It is clear that reactions (1), (2) and (6) are endothermic, thus increasing the MP can promote ethanol and methane decomposition, and enhance hydrogen production. As expected, with the increase of MP, the average hydrogen concentration increased from 49.4 vol% (at 160 W) to 53.8 vol% (at 320 W) and 55.3 vol% (at 560 W), respectively. For comparison purpose, To reveal the effect of flow rate, ethanol conversions under the constant MP of 320 W were investigated by changing the flow rate of ethanol. As observed in As for AC, compared with the average temperature of 715 °C at VHSV The results in Ethanol conversion, gas yield and energy efficiency under different MP and VHSV   The energy efficiency of hydrogen production under different MP and VHSV For comparison purpose, ethanol decomposition under conventional heating (the catalysis bed being heated by the electric furnace) was also conducted. Secondly, as shown in  It should be noted that the growth of carbon nanofilaments did not take place under conventional heating, which indicates that the way in which the carbonaceous materials were heated in MW could promote the formation of the nanofilaments. When MW heating is used, numerous micro-plasmas were formed within the catalysis bed, which did not appear under conventional heating. Therefore, these micro-plasmas must have played a decisive role on the growth of the nanofilaments In this work, the MW-assisted ethanol decomposition has been studied using PRSS and AC as catalysts and MW receptors. The results indicated that AC shows better catalytic activity for hydrogen production from ethanol decomposition than PRSS under conventional heating, which is probably owing to the much higher surface area of AC. On the contrary, PRSS showed markedly higher capability for hydrogen production under MW heating, due to the pronounced higher MW heating performance of PRSS. Ethanol conversion and hydrogen production (per unit volume of ethanol) were promoted by the increase of MP, but they were slightly lowered by the increase of VHSV Thanks for the supports of the