At the beginning of this New Year, I am pleased to announce the appointment of two new editors to our journal staff, Dr. Peter Northover and Dr. Dennis Hetzner.   Dr. Peter Northover is a graduate of the Department of Materials in the University of Oxford and also did his doctoral research there on stress corrosion of martensitic stainless steels. Since 1974, he has been engaged in the applications of metallurgy in archaeology, especially the characterization of non-ferrous and precious metal artifacts. He currently has the title of University Research Lecturer in the Department of Materials at Oxford and heads the Materials Science-based Archaeology Group, as well as working for Oxford Materials Characterisation Services. Dr. Northover has also had brief periods of employment at the Royal Mint and in the corporate laboratories of British Steel (now Corus). In his spare time he is reading for a Ph.D. in archaeology. For the past year, Dr. Northover has also served as a member of the Editorial Advisory Board.   Dr. Hetzner received his B.S. and M.S. degrees in Metallurgical Engineering from the Illinois Institute of Technology, Chicago, Illinois. He received his Ph.D. in Metallurgical Engineering from the University of Tennessee, Knoxville, Tennessee. Dr. Hetzner has specialized in quantitative metallography and performed research and development work in powder metal processing, high temperature mechanical property testing, rolling contact fatigue and laser glazing of bearings. He has used metallography throughout this broad range of disciplines to explain and understand the phenomena observed. Dr. Hetzner has been a member of ASM International for over 35 years and is an ASM Fellow. He is currently the Vice President of IMS and has been a member for over 20 years. He is a member of ASTM, Membership Secretary of Committee E04 on Metallography, and Chairman of Sub-committee E04.05 on Microindentation Hardness Testing. Dr. Hetzner has three U.S. Patents and is the author of more than 30 technical papers. He has presented several papers and tutorial lectures regarding applications of image analysis to problems encountered in quantifying microstructural features in material systems. He has taught several MEI courses on Quantitative Image Analysis, and has assisted in developing new Image Analysis courses for the ASM Materials Engineering Institute. In concert with these two new appointments, I have asked  On behalf of all the editors, I extend a warm welcome to our two new appointees. The journal staff looks forward to serving our readership with broadened technical capacity, and improved capability to review and process submitted manuscripts in a timely manner. CB January 20, 2005