For hemiarthroplasty reconstruction of a proximal humeral fracture, accurate restoration of humeral head position is challenging, and incorrect prosthetic placement is associated with a poor outcome of surgical treatment. The purpose of this study was to validate the pectoralis major tendon as a reproducible landmark for accurate restoration of humeral length with hemiarthroplasty reconstruction. We dissected 20 cadavers (40 shoulders), and the distance between the upper border of the pectoralis major tendon insertion on the humerus and the top of the humeral head was measured (PMT). The PMT averaged 5.6 ± 0.5 cm (with a confidence level of 95%). In only 4 of 40 shoulders did this distance exceed 6.0 cm, and there was no correlation between the size of the patient and this measurement. The PMT is a useful landmark that will aid in accurate restoration of humeral length when reconstructing complex proximal humeral fractures where landmarks are otherwise lost because of fracture comminution.Hemiarthroplasty for proximal humeral fractures is an accepted treatment for patients with 4-part fractures, some 3-part fractures, head-splitting fractures, and impaction fractures of the humeral head with involvement of more than 50% of the articular surface. Little has been published regarding the best method for accurate restoration of humeral length when performing a hemiarthroplasty reconstruction for fractures. The purpose of this study was to test the hypothesis that the distance between the upper edge of the pectoralis major tendon and the top of the humeral head (PMT) is a consistent reference for establishing the correct humeral height in the case of hemiarthroplasty for reconstruction of a proximal humeral fracture. We dissected and studied 40 shoulders in 20 fresh cadavers. Of the cadavers, 11 were male and 9 were female, and the mean age was 55 years (range, 21-93 years). The mean patient height was 1.62 m (range, 1.45-1.78 m). The cause of death was a motor vehicle accident in 5, ischemic heart attack in 7, stroke in 1, cranial encephalic trauma in 2, pneumonia in 1, gunshot wound in 2, and natural death in 2. None of the cadavers had any prior surgery or anatomic alteration of the shoulder that could preclude evaluation. Dissection of all shoulders was done via a 15-cm deltopectoral approach. The cephalic vein was identified in all cases, and dissection in the deltopectoral interval was performed with preservation of the pectoralis tendon insertion. The deltoid insertion was released from the acromion in all cases, and the rotator cuff muscles were also released from their insertions so that the articular surface was completely exposed. The highest point at which the pectoralis tendon inserts on the humerus and the position of the top of the humeral head were determined. The distance between them was designated the PMT ( Statistical analysis was performed with SAS statistical software (version 8.0; SAS Institute, Cary, NC) and Minitab statistical software (version 13.3; Minitab, State College, PA). The Anderson-Darling normality test was used to confirm that the distances measured in our sample had a normal distribution. The Student The mean distance (PMT) was 5.6 cm (range, 5.0-7.0 cm; SD, 0.5 cm). In only 4 of 40 shoulders studied (10%) was this distance greater than 6.0 cm. The remaining 36 shoulders always had a PMT between 5.0 and 6.0 cm ( According to the Anderson-Darling normality test, in our sample (both shoulders), the measured distances had a normal distribution ( This study supported our hypothesis that the distance between the upper edge of the pectoralis insertion and the top of the humeral head (PMT) demonstrates a consistent relationship, even in shoulders of varying sizes. This has significant clinical implications for hemiarthroplasty reconstruction of a complex proximal humeral fracture. Hemiarthroplasty in fractures is a challenge even for the most skilled surgeon, and positioning errors in terms of restoration of correct length are not uncommon. Prior studies have shown that even a small variation in the proximal humeral geometry can lead to severe functional impairment. Anatomic reduction is important to maintain proper humeral offset and, consequently, the lever arms for the deltoid and supraspinatus. This will allow better function. Some authors have recommended using the unaffected arm to determine retroversion and height of the prosthesis. In addition, other surgeons prefer to calculate humeral lengthening during surgery based on the medial diaphyseal calcar. However, in cases of chronic fracture or severe comminution, this calculation may not be either available or accurate. Correct prosthetic placement in terms of retroversion was not the subject of our anatomic study, although other investigators have provided methods for gauging this plane of reconstruction. Only 1 prior unpublished report has suggested that the pectoralis major tendon might be a useful landmark through which one might confirm proper height placement of a prosthesis in fracture. 