Soil has a pivotal role in keeping high the productivity of forest ecosystem but its physical and chemical properties are highly influenced by changes in forest species composition and forest management practices. Thinning is the most effective silvicultural practice used in Europe to increase the ecological and economic value of forest stands. The aim of this study was to identify the most appropriate forestry practice to preserve soil fertility and biodiversity in a beech (Fagus sylvatica L.) forest in Calabria, southern Italy. The effects of innovative (T3) and traditional (T2) thinning on soil properties with respect to unmanaged forest (T1) were assessed by using biological indicators. Results showed that T2 had the highest dissolved organic carbon (DOC) and the lowest water content (WC), organic carbon (OC) and nitrogen (N) amount. The humification index was the highest in T2 as well as fungi, ergosterol, fluorescein diacetate hydrolase (FDA) and catalase (CAT). The highest values of NO3
                     −, SO4−, Na+, Mg2+ and Ca2+ were found in the T2. QBS-ar was significantly higher in T2 and T3 than in the T1. In short, our results evidenced that organic matter, total nitrogen, C/N ratio and water content cannot be considered alone or in combination indices of quality to evaluate the effect of thinning on soils. Rather, is the data crossing of microbiota and ions with organic matter pools (stable and labile) that can give important and accurate information on how thinning can affects soil biological properties that are strictly correlated to soil fertility and quality.Forests provide crucial services for human well-being and economic development. In addition to wood and fiber, they provide numerous non-wood products such as food, freshwater, fuel, or services as climate and diseases regulation, recreation and preservation of biodiversity, driving the sustainable growth ( The study area is located in the Marchesale Biogenetic Reserve (Natura 2000 site) within the highest slope of the Calabrian “Serre“ mountains, in Mongiana (VV) (38° 30′ N, 16° 14′ E). The entire reserve, that covers 1234 ha, is managed by the National Forest Service of Italy and consists mainly of 75-year-old high beech forest “ Being located in the upper part of the mountain system facing the Tyrrhenian Sea (1100 m a.s.l.) and exposed to North-West, its microclimate is influenced by the interception of fog, wet winds and rainfall ( This area is geologically characterized by Paleozoic granitoid deeply fractured and with deep, versus shaped slopes ( Between 2012 and 2013, within an LIFE + project “ManFor C.BD“ ( In the center of each of the nine sub-areas (three for each treatment sites; T1, T2 and T3), one representative plot (1000 m Each soil core (27 in total) used for the chemical-physical and biological analyses, was divided into 2 layers (0-15 and 15-30 cm). The corresponding layers were merged in order to obtain 9 final representative cores (three for each treatment site) and all analysis made tripled. Separate samples (10 cm depth), following the same scheme, were performed to establish the micro-arthropods QBS-ar index. All the samples were air dried and sieved to separate the <2 mm fraction, except for microbial biomass, water content, QBS-ar (fresh soil) and water content (oven drying). Soil water content (WC) was determined within 24 h of samples collection with a difference between fresh and dry weight after oven drying at 105 °C for 72 h; pH was measured in distilled water (soil solution ratio 1:2.5) with a glass electrode. Total water-soluble phenols were determined, after water extraction, with Folin–Ciocalteu reagent according to Total soil organic carbon (TOC) was determined according to Dissolved organic carbon (DOC) was analysed with a visible spectrophotometer (Agilent-8453) at 254 nm according to the method described in Humification index (HI), degree of humification (DH%) and humification rate (HR%) have been detected. In short, humic components were extracted with a solution 0.1 M of sodium pyrophosphate and sodium hydroxide ( Humification index (HI) represents the ratio between not humified and humified extracted carbon, while HR is the percent of humification rate and DH is the percent of humified carbon in the extract. The fungal cell membrane component ergosterol (Erg) was extracted following the method described by Microbial C was determined in fresh soil samples by the chloroform fumigation-extraction method ( FB can also be expressed in terms of the C content of the mycelial mats ( FDA hydrolysis reaction was determined according to the methods of Dehydrogenase (DH) activity was determined by the method of Urease (URE) was determined using the method of Catalase activity (CAT) was measured by the method of Micro-arthropods, included mites and collembola, were analyzed with Berlese-Tullgren selector ( All the arthropods were identified at different taxonomical levels through, the determination of biological forms and calculation of QBS index, using a microscope PCE-MM200. Accordingly, the biological form (morpho-type) that is most adapted to soil was identified. Each morpho-type correspond an ecomorphological index (EMI); as a rule, eu-edaphic (i.e. deep soil living) forms correspond to an EMI = 20, hemi-edaphic (i.e. intermediate) forms have an index rating proportionate to their degree of specialization, while epi-edaphic (surface living) have an EMI = 1. The QBS index value was obtained from the sum of EMI index of all the collected groups ( To test the relationships among soil parameters at two soil depths and for three different silvicultural treatments, datasets were analyzed using Principal Component Analysis (PCA), Multivariate Analysis of Variance (MANOVA) and T test for paired values. The results are summarized in an ordination diagram. PCA was carried out using the soil parameters in plots under different silvicultural treatments using the software PAST ( A MANOVA analysis was carried out for evaluating the effects of thinning, soil depth and their interaction on the set of soil parameters. Finally, since there are only two soil depths (0–15 cm and 15–30 cm), a T test was used for paired values to evaluate significant differences. This last analysis allowed us to verify if thinning affected soil properties according to depth, and if the impacts were similar. Pearson’s correlations for both soil layers and all soil parameters, were carried out using PAST software ( One way ANOVA and Soil parameters, except soil texture (data not shown), changed in respect to thinning intensities and soil depth. All the soils analyzed belong to the sandy-loam textural class, with 25% silt, 13% clay and 62% sand (data not shown). Water content (WC) decreased in both layers ( In the underlying layer, a similar trend was observed for WC ( For PCA analysis the first two components (Eigenvalues > 1) have been extracted. The variance was higher at 0–15 cm (94.6%), than at 15–30 cm (91%). At both depths, the component 1 explained about 55%, while the component 2 explained about 35% of the variability in all parameters ( In the surface layer, the highest values of NO QBS-ar was significantly higher in the T2 and T3 than in the control area ( Pearson’s correlation evidenced that, in the upper layer ( Soil quality reflects the capacity of a soil to promote biological productivity, plant and animal health, and to maintain environmental quality ( In short, our results evidenced that organic matter, total nitrogen, C/N ratio and water content cannot be considered alone or in combination indices of quality to evaluate the effect of thinning on soils. Rather, is the data crossing of microbiota and ions with organic matter compounds (stable and labile) that can give important and accurate information on how thinning can affect soil biological properties that are strictly correlated to soil fertility and quality. It is by using specific and pertinent biological indicators in combination, that we can predict the dynamic behaviour of soil processes and the impact of management practices on soil quality allowing to determine the sustainability of forest management activities. In other words, the possibility to predict short-term variations in soil processes through the use of indicators represents a great advantage in the context of sustainable land management. Using biological indicators, forest management activities will give clear and detailed information on triggering of soil fertility loss. Among the soil properties DOC, FDA, catalase, fungi and pedofauna have been identified as effective tools to evaluate performance and quality of managed soil in a short time. The authors declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this paper. This research was supported by AM conceived and designed the experiments, analyzed the data, wrote the manuscript. FR conducted field work, performed the laboratory experiments, collected the data, analyzed the data, performed statistical analyses. MS critically reviewed and edited the manuscript, GS performed the laboratory experiments, CM conducted field work.