Stochastic rainfall generation is important for a range of hydrologic and water resources applications. Stochastic rainfall can be generated using a number of models; however, preserving relevant attributes of the observed rainfall—including rainfall occurrence, variability and the magnitude of extremes—continues to be difficult. This paper develops an approach to constrain stochastically generated rainfall with an aim of preserving the intensity-durationfrequency (IFD) relationships of the observed data. Two main steps are involved. First, the generated annual maximum rainfall is corrected recursively by matching the generated intensity-frequency relationships to the target (observed) relationships. Second, the remaining (non-annual maximum) rainfall is rescaled such that the mass balance of the generated rain before and after scaling is maintained. The recursive correction is performed at selected storm durations to minimise the dependence between annual maximum values of higher and lower durations for the same year. This ensures that the resulting sequences remain true to the observed rainfall as well as represent the design extremes that may have been developed separately and are needed for compliance reasons. The method is tested on simulated 6 min rainfall series across five Australian stations with different climatic characteristics. The results suggest that the annual maximum and the IFD relationships are well reproduced after constraining the simulated rainfall. While our presentation focusses on the representation of design rainfall attributes (IFDs), the proposed approach can also be easily extended to constrain other attributes of the generated rainfall, providing an effective platform for post-processing of stochastic rainfall generators.Continuous rainfall sequences at a subdaily resolution are important in the estimation of short-duration floods and pollutant load, and are commonly used for planning, design and management of urban water systems ( A number of stochastic rainfall generation approaches have been investigated in the literature, with the most suitable approaches for a particular application depending on the required spatial and temporal scale of the rainfall data ( Prior to using stochastically generated rainfall data for hydrological applications, it is important to test the data against important characteristics of the observed data at various scales of aggregation ( The intended application of the stochastically generated rainfall sequences will inform the selection of the most important characteristics that should be preserved. For planning and designing of infrastructure, accurate representation of extreme rainfall statistics—commonly represented using intensity-frequency-duration (IFD) relationships—is critical. Given the importance of continuous simulation in a range of hydrological applications, the issue of mis-match between selected design attributes that are pre-specified, and the same attributes ascertained through the stochastically generated sequences, becomes important. For instance, design IFD relationships are often prepared through procedures that involve selective spatial and temporal smoothing, correction for geographic factors, and fitting of assumed probability distribution functions to maintain consistency across space. On the other hand, stochastically generated sequences often mimic the historical record while making different assumptions about the underlying probability distribution based on whether or not parametric or nonparametric alternatives are used ( Rainfall rescaling factors for annual maximum and the remaining rainfall data are estimated recursively at multiple durations. A flow chart describing the application of the rainfall rescaling is illustrated in      To estimate rescaling factors for annual maximum rainfall, a ratio ( Finally, the rescaled annual extreme rainfall at each of the ranks is estimated by multiplying the raw annual maximum rainfall by the correction factors ( The ensemble mean of the non-extreme (‘ Estimating Once the minimum rescaling factor ( Since there is no restriction on the value of the minimum non-annual maximum rescaling factor (    The first condition (Eq. An objective function is used to evaluate the adjusted rainfall sequences through estimation of the bias in the IFD before and after rescaling. We use the relative mean absolute error (RMAE) – a dimensionless standardised error measure – for comparison across durations and exceedance probabilities. The RMAE at each annual exceedance probability (AEP) is estimated as the mean of the absolute difference between the target IFD ( The rescaling of rainfall for preserving the IFD relationship is carried out recursively for a number of selected target durations until the relative mean absolute error (RMAE) is below the required threshold. Two important observations can be made from the above discussion: (i) It is necessary to rescale rainfall recursively at a number of durations to make sure that the IFD relationships are improved in all the durations; and (ii) The issue of dependence of higher duration rainfall on lower ones can be minimised if target durations are selected carefully. We use a recursion (R) of two in this study. This duration was selected because a preliminary analysis showed that The analysis involves simulated rainfall data at a 6 For the sake of brevity, we discuss detailed results of only one station, Alice Springs. Results from the remaining stations are provided in the The estimated rescaling factors for annual maximum rainfall for two recursions and three target durations (based on alternative-a) are presented in The rescaling factors generally range between 0.5 and 2.0. The rescaling factors for the non-extreme rainfall are presented in the The RMAE estimates averaged across all the IFD durations (i.e., 6 Detailed results of the RMAE at each of the durations are shown in The IFD estimates before and after rainfall rescaling for the best (second) recursion and target (1 Significant improvement in reproducing the target IFD is also observed in the other four stations. In Sydney, significant improvement is observed in the 30 Overall, the continuous rainfall sequences rescaling approach developed in this paper is found to significantly reduce the biases in the IFD estimates at multiple durations and locations, with the exception of a few durations. This could be due to the dependence of higher duration extreme rainfall on the lower duration extreme ( A number of assumptions are involved in the development of the method to constrain stochastically generated rainfall. The rescaling factors for non-annual extreme rainfall discussed in Section Stochastically generated continuous rainfall can be used for a range of hydrological and water resources applications, such as planning, design and management of urban water systems and estimation of floods. However, reproducing important attributes of the observed rainfall for hydrological applications, such as rainfall variability, extreme rainfall amount and antecedent conditions prior to the extremes, remains to be a challenge. This paper develops an approach to constrain stochastically generated rainfall with an objective of preserving the observed intensity-frequency-distribution (IFD) relationships. Rescaling factors for annual maximum and non-annual maximum rainfall are recursively estimated until bias in the IFD relationships is reduced below a pre-defined objective. The proposed approach is tested at five stations across Australia (i.e., Alice Springs, Sydney, Cairns, Perth and Hobart). It is found that the method significantly reduces biases in IFD relationships in all the stations with better results obtained for Alice Springs and Hobart. A sensitivity analysis using 10 and 50 realisations at Alice Springs as well as 10 and 100 realisations at Hobart stations suggests that the results are not significantly affected by the number of realisations. The main challenge in the development of the constraining approach presented here is the inter-dependence of higher duration rainfall extremes on the lower duration extremes as one may be a subset of the other. Rescaling the higher duration rainfall alters the annual maxima for lower durations, introducing biases if not handled carefully. Although target durations are carefully selected to minimise the dependence, the possibility of an unbiased outcome cannot be eliminated unless systematic modifications are put in place in the rainfall generation approach itself. It should be emphasised here that the approach presented is applicable to sequences from any rainfall generator without significantly altering the key attributed that are embedded. This addresses a long-standing issue that has been criticised as one of the reasons why continuous simulation (or derived design flood estimation) has not been adopted as readily as it should, especially given such sequences offer a markedly better way of representing pre-extreme antecedent conditions that modulate flood extremes all over the world. Finally, we also emphasise that while the proposed method effectively constrains the IFD relationships of stochastically generated rainfall to better represent a defined target, the same logic can also be easily extended to adjust any other single attribute of the generated rainfall (such as spell lengths or within-season extremes) allowing its application for post-processing of rainfall generators in a generic sense. This research was supported by an Supplementary data associated with this article can be found, in the online version, at 