The performance of extraction and stripping of Fe(III) using N,N,N′,N′-tetrabutyl succinamide (TBSA) in different diluents from hydrochloric acid solutions was investigated. The effects of hydrochloric acid concentration, extractant concentration and temperature on the extraction of Fe(III) were studied. The extraction ability of TBSA in different diluents follows the order: kerosene/octanol(v:v=7:3)<cyclohexane<toluene. The extraction distribution ratio increases with an increase in hydrochloric acid concentration and extractant concentration. The extraction reaction is exothermic and the extraction distribution ratio of Fe(III) with TBSA decreases gradually with increasing temperature. The composition of the Fe(III) extracted species was obtained. The partition of Cu(II) was also investigated and the separation factor of Fe(III) relative to Cu(II) is nearly 140 under the studied conditions, which indicates that TBSA is a good extractant for the separation of Fe(III) from CuCl2 liquor in copper hydrometallurgy.Much attention has been given to the purification of minerals and recovery of leached residues due to the scarcity of high grade ore. Chloride hydrometallurgy plays a significant role in refining minerals in current industrial processing because it avoids the release of SO Copper chloride hydrometallurgy is an active research area, not only due to higher copper leaching kinetics and recovery, but also because of environmental concerns when compared to smelting and leaching of other media such as sulfuric acid ( Over the last decade, amide extractants have been developed rapidly ( In this paper, the extraction of Fe(III) and Cu(II) from hydrochloric acid solutions using All the chemicals and reagents used in this study were of analytical grade. Initial experiments on the effect of time on the distribution of metal ions in the two phases showed that 30 Cu(II) solution was prepared by dissolving CuCl The extraction of HCl from HCl solutions without Fe(III) was conducted under the same conditions as that for Fe(III). The concentration of hydrogen ions in the aqueous phase was measured by acid–base titration against standard Na IR spectra were recorded with a liquid cell using a Perkin-Elmer SPECTRUM ONE spectrophotometer in the range of 4000–400 The effect of hydrochloric acid concentration on the extraction of Fe(III) in different diluents was investigated. UV–visible spectra were recorded to establish the structure of the extracted species in the organic phase when toluene was used as diluent ( The results of the extraction of hydrochloric acid show that TBSA cannot extract HCl from a hydrochloric acid solution when iron is not present in the aqueous phase. This is different from the results of the extraction of nitric acid using diglycolamide, in which HNO It is known that metal complexes of Fe(III) with Cl The tetrachloroferric anion [FeCl  Therefore the extraction equilibrium of Fe(III) with TBSA from hydrochloric acid solutions in various diluents can be described as follows: The conditional extraction equilibrium constant is The distribution ratio is defined as: In which, From Eqs. Then we can derive from Eq. When the concentration of HCl and the temperature remain unchanged, the value of Taking the logarithm of both sides of the equation: We can get the value of n determined by the slope of a plot of lgD versus lg The tendency of TBSA to extract Fe(III) in different diluents is shown in The influence of temperature on the extraction of Fe(III) was also investigated in the diluents: kerosene/octanol (v:v The values of the extraction enthalpy, ΔH, can be determined by the Van't Hoff equation: From Eq. The values of enthalpy calculated from Eq.  The back extraction of Fe(III) was carried out with water. The extraction of Cu(II) with TBSA was also studied. Cu(II) was extracted under the same conditions as Fe(III) ions. The influence of HCl concentration on the extraction distribution ratio of copper ions using three different diluents is shown in The separation factors, β (D Fe(III) can be extracted efficiently from hydrochloric acid solution in different diluents by The authors are grateful for the support from the