Electro-thermal-compliant (ETC) microdevices provide arbitrary in-plane displacements through non-uniform Joule heating by virtue of their specially designed topology and shape. In addition to the advantages of embedded actuation, large forces and displacements, and ease of microfabrication, one more attractive feature of ETC devices is their suitability for systematic synthesis directly from behavioral specifications. We and other groups have presented topology optimization methods for similar problems. In this paper, we describe a new design parameterization scheme for the topology optimization problem involving three energy domains, viz electrical, thermal, and elastostatic, and multiple materials for the ETC design problem. We illustrate how multiple materials are useful in obtaining useful in-plane deformations. We also show how topology-dependent modeling such as convection from the side surfaces of internal holes can be dealt with in a topology design technique wherein the number, locations, sizes, and shapes of holes are varied freely. Several examples of optimized designs are included.Moving solids and fluids distinguish the rapidly growing field of microelectromechanical systems (MEMSs) (or MST, the microsystem technology) from the mature field of microelectronics. Therefore, microactuators that are responsible for movement play a crucial role in MEMS. Many of the microactuators developed for microsystems are much bigger than the mechanism or sensing element that they actuate, or they are very hard to fabricate within the constraints of microfabrication. Thermal, embedded electro-thermal actuation in particular, not only gives large forces and/or displacements but also gives rise to compact integrated systems. Any conducting material is suitable for electro-thermal actuation unlike other actuations that involve special active materials such as piezoelectric, electroactive, etc. Therefore, a number of research groups have worked on electro-thermal actuators and their design in recent years Out-of-plane bimorph actuation with a laminate of two materials of dissimilar thermal expansion coefficients is well known and it has been used in MEMS (see Two more variations of the U-shaped electro-thermal beam actuator that are more relevant to this paper were introduced in Topology optimization techniques enable systematic design directly from the behavioral specifications. That is, the number of holes in the structure and its entire shape are obtained as an original new solution without relying upon human intuition. In topology optimization, the structural design problem is cast as a material distribution problem within a given design domain. That is, for the behavioral specifications shown in Proper modeling of convection is very important for electro-thermally actuated devices. It was demonstrated that even qualitative behavior could be significantly different with and without modeling convection Heterogeneous structures in which multiple materials are optimally placed next to each other increase the design freedom, and lead to enhanced performance. For example, in mechanically actuated compliant mechanisms, multiple materials reduce the occurrence of flexural pivots The organization of the rest of the paper is as follows. The basis for handling multiple materials in topology optimization is a new material interpolation technique. This is described in the next section along with a discussion on how this is used to account for convection from top, bottom, and side surfaces of existing and newly created holes of varying locations, sizes, and shapes. In sections following that, the mathematical statement of the design problem, solution procedure, and examples are presented. The topology optimization problem is usually posed as a material distribution problem where a limited amount of material is to be distributed in a larger specified design domain to fulfill certain objectives As indicated in the equation below, by defining a Gaussian distribution type “peak function” for each base material and taking a linear combination weighted by the base material properties, a smooth material interpolation can be obtained with We will now describe how the above “peak function material interpolation function” can also be used for modeling convection. As stated earlier, only 2D problems are addressed in this paper owing to the predominantly planar nature of the microfabrication processes. In a thin, planar structure convection can take place from top and bottom surfaces as well as from side surfaces. Side surface convection, even though limited by small area, is important in the portions of the device with very high temperatures. However, since such portions are not known a priori, side-surface convection too is to be modeled everywhere during the design procedure. As stated earlier and as shown in As shown in The material properties: In order to solve the problem, we discretize the domain using plane-stress finite elements. By writing the Lagrangian of the constrained minimization problem in Using A note on the practical feasibility of heterogeneous microstructures in a plane (as opposed to layered construction that is very common) is appropriate at this juncture. Selective doping makes it possible to make such devices with silicon. A silicon-on-insulator wafer-based bulk micromachining technique, which includes a masked doping step, has been developed for this purpose First, two examples are presented to illustrate that different optimal topologies could result if we include or do not include convection from top, bottom, and side surfaces. In these two examples, a heat flux was specified rather than Joule heating but the observations made here are equally applicable to the ETC design problem. It should be noted, however, that supplying constant heat flux might not be efficient in practice. The latter four examples include convection and are the optimal solutions for the ETC design problem. The data for the examples assumed silicon as one material and SiO The specifications for the first example are shown in As shown in In all the ETC design examples that follow, 30 The modification entails adding a penalty term to the objective function towards the end after a problem converges and has some intermediate density. This term penalizes the intermediate values as can be seen in the equation below. The third and fourth ETC design examples were solved using this modification shown above as they both resulted in intermediate density with the original algorithm. As can be seen in Structures made of more than one material are sensitive to changes in ambient temperatures. In order to see the effect of uniform temperature raise on the behavior of the designs generated using topology optimization, the solution in One disadvantage of electro-thermal actuation is the low efficiency due to continuous generation and loss of heat in the steady state. However, it should be kept in mind that these devices can be designed for any voltage that is available on the chip. This should be contrasted with the high voltages required in other types of actuations such as electrostatic. In those, there could be loss of heat in the drive electronics that give the required high voltages. As a point of reference, the displacement versus power curves are shown for two devices in We presented two significant extensions to the state-of-the-art topology optimization of structures and mechanisms made of multiple materials and involving multiple energy domains for ETC devices. First, with a new design parameterization scheme presented here, any number of properties of any number of materials can be dealt with a single variable that is not bounded above or below. Second, we included convection from top, bottom, and side surfaces in topology optimization even though new holes get created and removed automatically in the iterative optimal design procedure. Topology optimization is most useful in generating conceptual designs for non-intuitive behavioral specifications for which human designers cannot find solutions easily. The support from the National Science Foundation grant #DMI-97-33916 is gratefully acknowledged. The authors thank Nilesh Mankame and Dr. Anupam Saxena for helpful discussions regarding interpolation of convection coefficient.