We have successfully synthesized the spinel LiCoxMn2−xO4−yFy cathode materials by simple sol-gel method using the manganese source that is recovered from spent alkaline Zn–Mn batteries through hydrometallurgy recycling technology. The charge–discharge curves demonstrate that the LiCo0.1Mn1.9O4 exhibited good cycling performance with 94.0% capacity retention after 100 cycles. The LiMn2O3.9 F0.1 possesses the maximum initial discharge capacity of 124.54 mAh·g−1. The LiCo0.1Mn1.9O3.9 F0.1 has the best comprehensive performance. The initial discharge capacity of LiCo0.1Mn1.9O3.9 F0.1 is 120.7 mAh·g−1, the capacity retention is 91.7% after 100 cycles.The issue of environmental pollution and energy shortage is a big challenge to further development of humankind. How to deal with the challenges to implement the sustainable development strategy has become a main problem at present. It is gratifying that recovering industrially useful materials and metals from various secondary sources provides an effective solution. Many literatures have reported that the waste zinc–manganese batteries are a good secondary source to recycle the useful materials and metals Spinel LiMn The reagents used in this study are: nitric acid (HNO The spent alkaline Zn–Mn batteries (Nanfu AA battery, Nanping battery Limited Company Fujian China) were dismantled manually. The main components of spent Nanfu AA battery were shown in The manganese powder was ground in an agate mortar for 2 The MnO The stainless steel sheet detached from the waste Nanfu AA battery was cleaned with brush. After that, it was dipped into anhydrous ethyl alcohol and cleaned with ultrasonic washer for three times. The white slurry was dissolved in deionized water and stirred sufficiently. Then the resulting solution was filtered repeatedly to remove KOH. The filtered residue was dissolved in deionized water and magnetically stirred at 80 Stoichiometric amount of lithium nitrate, manganese nitrate, lithium fluoride and cobalt nitrate (ions ratio Li:Co:Mn:F The structure and composition of the prepared samples were characterized by powder X-ray diffraction (XRD, XPERTPRO XRD with Cu Kα radiation, 30 A cathode electrode was prepared by mixing LiMn  The SEM micrographs recorded for MnO The sample code as follows ( The chemical composition of materials determined by ICP analysis is presented in The effect of cobalt-ion content and fluorine-ion content on lattice parameter of LiCo The XRD patterns of the LiCo where a is the lattice constant, λ is the wavelength of incident wave, h, k and l are the indices of crystallographic plane. The result shows that the theta values of (111) crystal plane increased with the decrease of lattice constant. That's why the curves of cobalt doped LiMn The SEM observation of the synthesized samples is shown in The charge–discharge curves of LiCo In the charge curve, the first plateau means an extraction of Li ions from half of the tetrahedral sites with Li–Li interaction. The second plateau means an extraction of Li ions from the other half of the tetrahedral sites with Li–Li interaction. The first discharge plateau corresponds to the reversible transition between cubic Li In addition to this, the discharge plateaus are little lower than the charge plateaus, which are due to the electrochemical polarization. The polarization also resulted from the manganese dissolution occurred in the discharge stage. The charge–discharge result of LiCo  The chemical composition of LiCo    The spinel LiMn The single Co-substitution deteriorated the initial discharge/discharge capacities but improved the cyclability. The initial discharge capacity of LiCo The single F The F–Co compound substitution overcame the defects of single anion substitution and cation substitution. The initial discharge capacity of LiCo