The Dayingezhuang gold (silver) deposit in the Jiaodong district, eastern margin of North China Craton, is hosted in the NE to NNE-trending Zhaoping Fault along the contact between Precambrian metamorphic rock (Jiaodong Group) and Mesozoic intrusion (Linglong granite). Although many studies have addressed the genesis of this deposit, the mineralization age, the sources of ore-forming fluids and materials, the ore genesis is still controversial, particularly on the relationship between Au and Ag. In this paper, new dating and in-situ isotopic data are presented to provide tight constraints on the timing and ore-forming processes of the Dayingezhuang deposit.
                  Mineral assemblages of Dayingezhuang deposit can be divided into four stages: the quartz-pyrite stage (I), the Au-bearing quartz-siderite-pyrite stage (II), the Ag-bearing quartz-siderite-polymetallic sulfide stage (III), and the quartz-carbonate stage (IV). The Ag mineralization is texturally later than the gold mineralization, and only develops locally in the orebody I. Sericite from sulfide-bearing ores has a 40Ar/39Ar plateau age of 119.1 ± 1.2 Ma, and pre-ore mafic dikes yield a zircon U-Pb age of 122.7 ± 2.6 Ma. The new dating results consistently indicate that the Dayingezhuang deposit formed at ~120 Ma and is synchronous with the regional gold mineralization event in the Jiaodong district. The C and O isotopic values of siderite and calcite from stage II to IV vary from −5.4 to −2.2‰ (δ13CV-PDB) and 7.8 to 12.1‰ (δ18OV-SMOW), respectively, and the calculated values of them for ore-forming fluids are −7.1 to −2.9‰ and −4.1 to 5.7‰, respectively. The δ34SCDT values of pyrite from stage I to III range from 4.8 to 9.0‰. Pyrite from stage I to III has 206Pb/204Pb values of 17.181–17.339, 207Pb/204Pb of 15.414–15.504, 208Pb/204Pb of 37.729–37.984. These isotopic results combined with geological and geochronological evidence collectively indicate that the ore-forming fluids and metals of Dayingezhuang were mainly derived from the deep mantle-derived magma typically represented by intermediate-mafic dikes, and mixed with meteoric water subsequently. These data also indicate that the stage III Ag mineralization was not a late event independent from the stage I and II Au mineralization. The Dayingezhuang deposit may not be related to the activation of detachment faults around the Linglong massif at 130 ± 4 Ma as previously suggested, but a product of the destruction of NCC accompanied with the crust-mantle interaction and lithospheric thinning at ~120 Ma.The Jiaodong district in the eastern margin of North China Craton (NCC) is the largest gold producer in China and also one of the largest gold provinces in the world ( The Dayingezhuang gold (silver) deposit, located in the middle of the Zhaoping fault zone, is a giant gold deposit with proven gold reserves of 283 t ( In this study, we present new Ar-Ar ages of ore-related sericite and zircon U-Pb ages of pre-ore mafic dikes to provide tight constraints on the timing of gold mineralization. We further use in situ sulfur and lead isotopes of pyrite and carbon-oxygen (micro-drill) isotopes of carbonates to constrain the sources of ore-forming fluids and metals. The new dataset allows us to discuss the genesis of the Dayingezhuang gold (silver) deposit and the possible genetic links between Au and Ag mineralization. The Jiaodong district is composed of two Precambrian tectonic units, the Jiaobei terrane in the west and the Sulu terrane in the east ( The Precambrian metamorphic basement is widespread in the Jiaodong district, including the Neoarchean Jiaodong Group, the Paleoproterozoic Jingshan and Fenzishan Groups, and the Neoproterozoic Penglai Group ( Existing geochronological studies suggest that there are three main episodes of magmatism forming massive granitoid intrusions in the Jiaodong district ( The regional tectonic system includes EW-, NE to NNE-, and NW-trending structures. The formation of EW-trending structures was due to the collision between the North China and Yangtze cratons in the early Mesozoic ( The Dayingezhuang gold (silver) deposit is located in the western part of the Jiaobei terrane and in the middle of the Zhaoping Fault ( The Dayingezhuang deposit is mainly composed of the orebody I in the south and the orebody II in the north, which are separated by the EW-trending Dayingezhuang fault ( The metallic minerals mainly consist of pyrite, siderite, chalcopyrite, galena, sphalerite, electrum, and tetrahedrite ( The alteration includes K-feldspar alteration, silicification, sericitization, chloritization, and carbonatization. It is mainly distributed in the footwall, and weaker in the hanging wall. The K-feldspar alteration formed before the Au mineralization, and is widespread in orebodies. The late stage alteration, such as silicification and sericitization, overprinted on the early K-feldspar alteration. The degree of mineralization and alteration gradually become weak away from the Zhaoping fault in the footwall. According to mineralization characteristics and mineral assemblages, the ore-forming processes of the Dayingezhuang deposit could be divided into four stages ( Sericite sample (DYG-36) for Samples from pre-ore mafic dikes were selected for the U-Pb dating to constrain the upper limit age for gold (silver) mineralization in the Dayingezhuang deposit. Sample DYG-20 was collected from the orebody II at −616 m level and 89 exploration line. Sample DYG-55 was collected from the orebody I at −496 m level and 64 exploration line. The mafic dikes are composed of plagioclase (about 45%), biotite (about 45%), pyroxene (about 5%) and amphibole (about 5%). They were partly altered by the late hydrothermal fluids and the contact zones were characterized by weak mineralization ( The preparation and images of zircons from pre-ore mafic dikes were performed at the Wuhan SampleSolution Analytical Technology Co., Ltd., China. Reflected and transmitted light images were obtained by optical microscopy. Cathodoluminescencent (CL) images were obtained by an Analytical Scanning Electron Microscope (JSM-IT100) connected to a GATAN MINICL system. The imaging condition was 10.0–13.0 kV voltage of electric field and 80–85 μA current of tungsten filament. The zircon U-Pb dating was performed at the Wuhan SampleSolution Analytical Technology Co., Ltd., China, using an Agilent 7700e ICP-MS instrument with a GeolasPro laser ablation system. Detailed operating conditions and data reduction are shown in Samples of siderite were collected from stage II and III and samples of calcite were collected from the stage IV for carbon and oxygen isotope analysis. Selected locations of siderite and calcite samples were drilled by micro drills and crushed into powders by agate mortar. The drilled diameter and depth of sampling spot are only 1 mm and 5 mm respectively. Carbon and oxygen isotope analyses were performed at the TPR, Ministry of Education, China University of Geoscience, Wuhan. During the experiment, powder samples of siderite and calcite were held by the Labco sample bottle (12 mL), and roasted for more than 12 h at about 60 °C. In the GasBench II carbonate device, calcite and siderite reacted with acid for 2 and 18 h respectively to produce the CO Pyrite sample for in situ S and Pb isotope analyses were selected from different mineralization stages and orebodies. To make a comparison, several fresh samples of the Jiaodong Group were collected from the hanging wall at −616 m level, 82 exploration line, and 20 m far away from the Zhaoping fault. In situ sulfur isotope analysis was performed at the State Key Laboratory of Geological Processes and Mineral Resources (GPMR), China University of Geoscience, Wuhan, using Nu Plasma II MC-ICP-MS with a Resonetics-S155 excimer ArF laser ablation system. The spot size and frequency of the laser were 40–50 μm and 10 Hz. The ablation process was set to last for 40 s. The values of δ In situ lead isotope analysis was performed on a Neptune Plus MC-ICP-MS equipped with a Geolas 2005 excimer ArF laser ablation system at the GPMR, China University of Geoscience, Wuhan. In the laser ablation system, helium was used as the carrier gas and mixed with the argon (makeup gas) after the ablation cell. The spot size and frequency of the laser was set to 90 μm and 10 Hz. The laser energy was kept at 5 J/cm The results of sericite Under cathodoluminescence, zircons from pre-ore mafic dikes can be divided into two types. Some zircon grains are dark, subhedral and mostly have no clear or banded oscillatory zonation, whereas the others are bright and euhedral to subhedral with oscillatory zonation or uneven rims ( Carbon and oxygen isotopic compositions of siderite and calcite are listed in The carbon and oxygen isotopic compositions of ore-forming fluids in equilibrium with carbonate minerals were calculated using carbonate-CO In situ sulfur isotopic data of pyrite are presented in In situ lead isotopic data of pyrite are listed in The lead isotopic compositions of pyrite from the Jiaodong Group are different from the orebodies, ranging from 15.676 to 16.718 (average 16.394) for Previous sericite and muscovite Fluid inclusions and stable isotopes have been attempted to trace the sources of ore-forming fluids and materials of the Dayingezhuang gold (silver) deposit, but have given constroversial conclusions ( Carbon and oxygen isotopes of hydrothermal carbonate in the massive siderite-sulfide-quartz (stage II and III) and calcite (stage IV) veins provide useful information on the source of ore-forming fluids. Neither abundant CH No sulfates are found in Dayingezhuang and pyrite is the predominant sulfur-bearing minerals, thus the δ Lead isotopic data shows that lead isotopic compositions of pyrite have no obvious variation between different stages ( Numerous previous studies in the Jiaodong district have also suggested close genetic links between gold mineralization and mantle-derived magmatism. D-O-C-S isotopic compositions of ten large to super-large gold deposits (e.g. Linglong, Jiaojia, and Sanshandao) suggested the mantle reservoir represented by diabase and lamprophyre dykes provided the source of materials and fluids ( Previous studies have shown that there was a period of Ag-Pb-Zn mineralization in the eastern Jiaodong district related to the late Yanshanian magmatism at ~110 Ma ( In the Dayingezhuang deposit, the Au-bearing quartz-siderite-pyrite veins of stage II and the Ag-bearing polymetallic sulfide veins of stage III are controlled by the same structural system, and the later veins parallelly intruded or cut through the former veins ( Geological features and geochronological data in our study show close spatial and temporal relationship between orebodies and intermediate-mafic dikes at ~120 Ma. On this basis, carbon, oxygen, sulfur and lead isotopic compositions have indicated that they may share a same deep source. The intermediate-mafic dikes in the Jiaodong district are characterized by enrichment of large ion lithophile elements and LREE, strong depletion of Cr and Ni, and relative depletion of high field strength elements ( Previous researches provide lots of evidences that the Jiaodong area undergone a series of tectonic, magmatic and crust-mantle activities in the Mesozoic, which have a close temporal relationship to the gold mineralization in this area. The collision of the North China and Yangtze cratons and the subduction of the Paleo-Pacific plate caused the regional tectonic conditions transforming from compression to extension during the early Cretaceous ( Combining with our data and previous studies, we propose a model for the ore genesis of the Dayingezhuang deposit as illustrated in Our work of geology, mineralization, geochronology, and stable isotope in the Dayingezhuang gold (silver) deposit can reach these main conclusions as follows: The results of The evidences of geology, geochronology, and C The isotopic data combined with mineralization characteristics indicate that the stage III Ag mineralization was not an independent event of the stage I and II Au mineralization. Underplating of mantle-derived magma in the low crust, related to destruction of NCC accompanying by asthenospheric upwelling and strong crust-mantle interaction, provided the ore-forming fluids and materials for mineralization leading to the formation of the Dayingezhuang gold (silver) deposit. We acknowledge the financial support from the