Potential flow (PF) model exhibits some advantages to simulate granular flow in industrial packed beds such as an iron-making blast furnace. To change the status of solving PF equations in the flowing zone, based on the difference analysis between PF and actual flow, the components of granular flow resistance were confirmed, and a novel potential flow (NPF) model for the flow of packed particles was established. The obvious difference from the PF model is that the NPF model can simultaneously predict the stagnant zone and the distribution of velocities in the flowing zone. The stagnant zone or the flowing zone calculated with NPF model under certain boundary conditions is only determined by a dimensionless parameter group R
                     
                        ⁎
                     . R
                     
                        ⁎
                      has a clear physical meaning, so it’s easy to decide the effect on the distribution of stagnant zone and granular flow velocities. Furthermore, NPF model was validated by experimental data obtained with a two-dimensional flat-bottomed packed bed with centric discharge. Predicted results respectively by PF and NPF models were also compared.Resistance correction factor Flowability correction factor Flowability correction factor for plug flow Constant Resistance vector of granular material Resistance vector for plug flow Resistance vector causing detouring flow Height of packed bed Index for distribution of Index for distribution of Constant ratio of Breadth of orifice Width of packed bed Resistance coefficient Resistance coefficient for PF Resistance coefficient of Dimensionless resistance coefficient Velocity vector of granular material   Dimensionless velocity vector of granular material   Magnitude of discharge velocity Coordinates of point respectively in the Dimensionless coordinates Infinitely small quantities Velocity potential Dimensionless velocity potential of NPF model Dimensionless velocity potential of PF model Detouring flow Plug flow Dimensionless Flowability Orifice Resistance Granular flow Potential flow Packed beds with granular flow inside are more widely utilized in industrial processes. An iron-making blast furnace is the typical example of such application. In upper part of blast furnace, namely furnace shaft, the granular flow is considerably uniform; and especially, packed particles near the wall may slip along wall surface. Nevertheless, limited by operation and discharge conditions, a stagnant zone exists in the center of the furnace hearth, the lowest part of blast furnace, and granular material move outside the stagnant zone to the exit at tuyere level for combustion [ Numerical simulations are very beneficial to be acquainted with granular flow and help control relevant industrial processes [ Nearly in the past five years, the PF model, the stockline formation model, etc., were integrated not only to predict the flow field, but also to predict the distribution of volume ratio of layered materials in packed bed. With mathematical models based on irrotational descending of burden, the influences of radial distribution of ratio of ore to coke in furnace throat, and charging matrix and non-uniform descending speeds on the flow field and the materials distribution inside blast furnace were investigated respectively by Yang [ All in all, PF model is optional to simulate granular flow in packed bed. However, PF model should be used inside the flowing zone to obtain a much better accordance flow field with actual situation. Chen et al [ To change the current situation of solving PF equations in the flowing zone, a novel continuous model which could together predict the stagnant zone and the distribution of particle velocities was built, based on the analysis of differences between the resistant forces of granular flow and PF. Furthermore, the validity of the new model was confirmed by plotted flow fields clearly including the stagnant zone and the flowing zone easily obtained with a two-dimensional flat-bottomed packed bed with centric discharge. In PF model [ Generally, the resistant force of granular material may be expressed as follows In this article, the resistance coefficient independent of Multiplying respectively both sides of Eq. The experiments [ With an increase in | When | namely So, the magnitude of Except for the central streamline, the actual streamlines as schematically shown in where, Substituting the above expression of The granular material in the packed bed without gas flow inside may be assumed to be an incompressible medium [ Eqs.  A According to this definition, and, dimensionless velocity potentials of Eqs. where, Eqs. The experiments of the flow of packed particles were carried out in a two-dimensional apparatus as shown in Two nearly spherical materials were tried for the experiments: edible millets bought from supermarket and porcelain balls frequently packed inside some industrial bed. Properties of the materials are presented in During the experiment, granular material was continuously charged to the stockline to keep a steady flow in packed bed and a stable discharge velocity at orifice. The desired velocity at orifice was adjusted with the discharge valve located at the bottom of the setup, as shown in To solve the dimensionless equations in two-dimensional packed bed with the given coordinate system as shown in The values of Besides the right and left side walls, the bed walls also include the bed bottom except for the segment of orifice (0.5 − 0.5 At the orifice, the actual values of The packed bed was divided into a numerical grid of 160 by 160. The separated iterative solution of   The experimental results in each flow field of For the experimental beds of millets,   The calculated contours of In stagnant zone, The experiments with different discharge velocities had revealed that The six lines respectively at different levels in each bed of With a given In the experimental cases with mutual changes only in discharge velocity, In brief, the results of NPF model are in quite good agreement with the experimental results.  According to Eq. The two-dimensional PF velocity field can be decided by the conditions of irrotational   Similarly, another index representing the difference between The cross-sectional area of granular flow near orifice is much smaller than that far from orifice; on the contrary, the velocity value at close to orifice is much greater than that at far from orifice. As PF resistance is in proportion to velocity, the resistance of PF adjacent to orifice is greater than that away from orifice. Hence, the whole bed contour distribution of Based on difference analysis of granular flow, and plug flow and PF, the resistant force of granular material was considered to include the plug flow resistance whose magnitude was independent of velocity and the resistance causing detouring flow, and a NPF model capable of simultaneously predicting the stagnant zone and the flowing zone in packed bed was established. According to NPF model, the flowing zone or the stagnant zone is only determined by a dimensionless parameter group The NPF model with a given The predicted results of PF model in whole packed bed would differ considerably from real cases; furthermore, no parameter in PF model may be adjusted to fit computed results to experimental ones. This work was financially funded by