The characterization of shale pore structure is extremely important to shale gas exploitation. Various techniques have been employed to characterize the pore size distribution (PSD) in shales. Small angle X-ray scattering (SAXS) is a relatively new technique that can be applied to obtain the PSD of porous materials. However, little work has been done on shales by synchrotron SAXS. In this paper, scanning electronic microscopy (SEM), nuclear magnetic resonance cryoporometry (NMRC), and synchrotron small-angle X-ray scattering (SAXS) were used to comprehensively characterize pore structure in three shales with a total organic carbon content of 0.68%, 3.68% and 4.3%. The processing and postprocessing for synchrotron SAXS data were executed. Based on background deduction, a positive deviation correction of SAXS data was conducted. SEM was combined with synchrotron SAXS to explore whether the sample is a single dispersion. Two models (Gauss distribution model and the maximum entropy model) for calculating the PSD by synchrotron SAXS were compared with the results by NMRC. The PSD from the Gauss distribution presents good consistency with the PSD from the NMRC with a diameter of less than 15 nm. Notably, a PSD obtained by maximum entropy model and NMRC is more consistent for pores with a diameter of 15–48 nm. Nanopore structure was also explored and discussed based on the Porod theory. Methods for quantitative characterization of pore size proposed in this paper are applicable to other two-phase rock media.Shale is a heterogeneous and anisotropic porous medium with complex three-dimensional (3D) morphology. Shale is rich in nanopores that determine gas migration and transport ( A method to effectively determine nanopores in shale through experiments has been a hot topic and a difficult problem in the study of shale microstructures. Until now, various methods have been developed to characterize the pore structure of shales. The techniques can be divided into two types, fluid invasion and radiation methods. The radiation methods include scanning electron microscopy (SEM) ( Moreover, SAXS is one of the main methods for studying the structure of matter on a nanometer scale ( NMR is also a popular method to obtain the nanopore distribution in reservoirs. NMR relaxation signal is related to the relaxation time Although SAXS and NMRC have been applied in many fields, the comparative analysis of synchrotron SAXS and NMRC in shale is rare. Moreover, because the pore morphology and the dispersion system have influences on the scattering results, it is difficult to obtain accurate characterization only by SAXS. Nevertheless, there are also various models to process SAXS data. By using different models, such as Gaussian model and Maximum entropy model, the parameters of pore structure may have no obvious similarity. Thus, we combine NMRC and synchrotron SAXS techniques to investigate the pore structure in three shales with a total organic carbon (TOC) content of 0.68%, 3.68% and 4.3%. Comparative analysis on the PSD of the tested shales obtained by synchrotron SAXS based on a Gauss distribution method and a maximum entropy method is carried out. NMRC results are also used to evaluate the variation of SAXS results processed by different models. SEM combined with synchrotron SAXS is used to identify whether the pore structure of the tested shales belongs to a polydisperse system. SAXS technique has been further explored and developed by Porod's theory shows that the SAXS scattering intensity obeys the following equation: Based on Equations FIT2D software was used to transform a two-dimensional scattering image into one-dimensional scattering data. Based on Equation Gibbs ( Based on Equation Three shale samples with a TOC content of 0.68%, 3.68% and 4.3% were collected from three active shale gas wells in the southwest of China. Sample #1 was collected from the W201 well in the Sichuan Province with a A S-4800 FE-SEM manufactured by Hitachi Limited was used to provide qualitative information on the pore shape. Samples were cut perpendicular to the bedding and thin sections were prepared. Then, appropriate thin sections were selected and mechanically polished. To increase sample surface conductivity, a polished surface was sprayed with a thin layer of gold. Finally, prepared samples were put on a sample table with conductive adhesive. For the NMRC experiment, ∼1 g of pulverized powder was sampled with particle size 20–40 mesh. Each pulverized sample was loaded into a chromatographic bottle for testing. Compared to the SEM and NMRC experiments, the sample preparation is much easier for the SAXS experiments. Each sample was pulverized into powder with 60–80 mesh. SAXS experiments were performed with an X-ray wavelength of 0.154 nm in the 1W2A-SAXS station at the Beijing Synchrotron Radiation Laboratory (BSRF) in China. The SAXS instrument can measure particles of 1–100 nm. It has an angular resolution 0.5 mrad, an energy resolution For the SAXS experiment, the pulverized powder samples were loaded into a sample chamber sealed by Kapton film. Then, the SAXS device was started for a photo test and recorded the photodiode readings. The distance from the sample to the detector needs to be measured to obtain a scattering vector range of 0.09–3.85 nm To convert a two-dimensional image into one-dimensional data captured by a Mar165CCD detector, FIT2D software was used to obtain the relationship between The NMRC measurements were tested using an NMRC pore analyzer 12-010V-T, manufactured by Niumag Corporation Ltd, China. A permanent magnet was used with a magnetic field strength of 0.3 During the test, the NMRC technique was used to monitor the real-time liquid phase transition in shale pores. Pulverized powder was loaded into a chromatographic bottle and vacuumed for 6 h. Then, distilled water was added to a sample container. The sample was initially cooled to −30 °C and then gradually heated to 0 °C. Finally, the sample was an maintained at atmospheric pressure for 12 h for full saturation by self-imbibition. It is noted that compressed air and a low-temperature liquid bath were used as a drying fluid and a cold source, respectively. The waiting duration for each temperature was 5 min, and the data acquisition interval was 2 min. Samples #1 and #3 are black mudstones and Sample #2 is dark gray calcareous mudstone. Basic geological parameters of the shale samples are listed in  A Porod deviation and calibrated curves are shown in Based on the SAXS Equations   Moreover, it was also found that the pore volume of three tested samples overlaps and fluctuates at the pore sizes less than 15 nm. The reason for the stronge fluctuations may be attributed to the heterogeneity of the pore distribution across the micro-to meso-pore size range. For the pore size greater than 15 nm, the pore volumes of all three samples have monotone increasing trend with an increase of the pore size. More results analysis will be given in the following section compared with the SAXS results. The data acquired from SAXS are converted into pore volume distribution d SAXS is a powerful tool to study the micropore structure of shale. However, it is necessary to point out that different processing methods have limitations during SAXS data processing. The Guinier theory mainly reflects pore scale and distribution, while the Porod theory focuses on changes in the relationship between the scattering intensity and the scattering angle, and the Debay theory mainly reflects correlation degree between the pores ( Porous materials such as coal have different pore structure, such that interconnected pores and isolated pores greatly influence scattering behavior. A single disperse scattering system is composed of randomly oriented pores with equal sizes and shapes ( Based on SEM images, it can be seen that the distance between pores is greater than the pore diameter. Therefore, mutual interference between pores can be ignored in SAXS experiments. The SEM experimental results show that shale pores are independent of each other and their pore shapes are similar, suggesting that a single dispersion system may exist in shale pores. However, because irregular pores are interconnected with each other in shale, the shale may present an arbitrary system that is comprised of a single dispersion system and a polydisperse system. However, due to limited samples and beam time, it is necessary to increase the number and variety of shale samples to obtain more detailed results. Shale contains clay minerals and expands after contact with water, resulting in increased intergranular spacing and nanostructural changes in the NMRC experiment. For the typical flaky minerals illite and montmorillonite, pore size decreases and micropore increases ( The pore structures of three shale samples were quantitatively investigated by combining the SEM, NMRC, and synchrotron SAXS techniques. FIT2D processing and postprocessing of SAXS data were done. SAXS scattering deviation correction was conducted to obtain the true pore structure features. Pore structure parameters were calculated by SAXS. Various dispersion systems were discussed by combining SEM and SAXS. Analysis of the results from NMRC and SAXS was compared. Based on the PSD, the SAXS statistical model was also discussed. Based on experimental results and analysis, the following conclusions are made: (1) Synchrotron SAXS can characterize the nanopore structure of shale as an auxiliary method. (2) Electron density fluctuations and air adsorption cause the Porod curve to positively deviate from the ideal two-phase system in the SAXS raw data. (3) The shale may present an arbitrary system that is comprised of a single dispersion system and a polydisperse system. (4) SAXS and NMRC exhibit a good consistency to partially characterize shale PSD. The Gauss distribution has good consistency with the NMRC results in 1–15 nm pore diameters. The PSD obtained by maximum entropy and the NMRC was found to be somewhat consistent in 15–48 nm pore diameters, but the results were not definite. The research is financially sponsored by the