A study of leaching kinetics of djurleite (Cu1.97S) using Cu(II) solutions in a chloride medium was carried out. Copper sulfate and sodium chloride in an acid solution were reacted in order to obtain the aqueous solution medium for the study. Leaching of djurleite occurs as:
                        
                           Cu1.97S+0.97Cu2+
                              (chlorocomplexes)
                              →CuS+1.94Cu+
                              (chlorocomplexes)
                           
                        
                     Where the conditions were: copper concentration=0.02–0.23 M, chloride concentration=0.6–1.3 M, temperature=20–80 °C.
                  At room temperature, a complex solid-phase transformation with formation of intermediate Cu1.97−x
                     S phases is observed.
                  Different variables such as total chloride and total copper concentrations, temperature, and particle size were used for obtaining kinetic data. The concentration of cupric chlorocomplexes using thermodynamic data available in the literature was calculated. The kinetics is governed by chemical reaction control, with activation energy of 35 kJ/mol (8.4 kcal/mol). The apparent reaction orders with respect to the total Cu(II) and total Cl− were 0.23 and 0.53, respectively.Leaching of some species of the type Cu In a laboratory system,  In the first step, the fraction of copper extracted increased over time, following a rate law of type In the second step, covellite was dissolved to Cu Following a rate law of the type 1  On the other hand, leaching processes for copper concentrates in chloride media have recently been proposed [Intec Process, Noteworthy among processes is the Cuprochlor ( The objective of the present study is to evaluate the effects of the concentrations of total copper, total chloride, temperature, and particle size on the leaching of djurleite, using Cu(II) chloride solutions to determine the kinetic control step for the process and propose the chemical reactions involved. The kinetic model used is that of the shrinking core: chemical controlling reaction ( The leaching model was consistent with the effects of particle size, Cu(II) concentration and temperature. When chloride ion and cupric ion occur within the same aqueous system, the composition of the resulting solution is governed by the following equilibria ( All the thermodynamic results and those of the species distribution given below are in the HSC software database. In order to calculate the concentrations of the different species of cupric chlorocomplexes in solution, the following material balance is proposed: According to the values of the formation constants of the chlorocomplexes, the predominant species in the Cu The mineral employed in the kinetic tests originated from the Minera Escondida, Antofagasta, Chile. Uniformly sized particles were used, obtained by crushing and selective screening of the mineral sample. In all experiments except for those testing the effects of variation in particle size, the trials were carried out with a mean particle size diameter of 0.247 mm, and an elemental composition of 58.11% Cu and 14.80% S. Examination using X-ray diffraction showed that the mineral was primarily djurleite (Cu Conventional leaching equipment was used under sealed conditions, including a 1200-ml round-bottom glass reactor, fitted with a 5.5 cm helical Teflon stirrer sealed through an acrylic stopper. The system was also fitted with electrodes which were used to measure the potential in the system (Ag/AgCl, Solutions used in the experiments were prepared by introducing known volumes of copper sulfate into the reaction flask; sodium chloride was added according to the concentration desired, and then a determinate volume sulfuric acid was added in order to adjust the pH. The solution was finally made to 1000 ml using distilled water. All the reagents used to prepare the leaching solutions were of analytical grade. Two grams of sample were then added and the progress of the leaching was determined by taking 10 ml samples of the liquid, with subsequent copper analysis by atomic absorption spectrometry. The fraction of copper extracted was determined as the relation of the copper concentration at time In examination of the types of reactions associated with the leaching of the djurleite, preliminary experiments were carried out at 20 and 80 °C, and the residues were analyzed using X-ray diffraction. At 20 °C (1 h, Based on the preceding results, it is probable that at 20 °C the main reaction types are:  At 80 °C peaks reflecting the original djurleite (and digenite) were again absent, with the clear detection of covellite as the reaction product. This agrees with the recovery obtained of exactly 50% of the copper under these conditions. The overall main reaction was therefore: Nevertheless, it is also possible that the reaction to covellite occurred through quick passages to the sulfides Cu The final oxidation (leaching) of covellite to obtain total copper recovery does not appear feasible in this medium in this range of Cu Experiments were carried out using different granulometric size fractions, stirring at 350 rpm, with 2 g of mineral, Copper extraction was very sensitive to the particle size effect. However, maximum extraction in very fine particles practically stopped at 50%, in accordance with the preliminary experiments. Consequently, the data on fraction reacted were computed according to the global reaction of the formation of covellite (Eq. Application of the kinetic model (  Data on the effect of the total copper concentration in the system were first obtained on the dissolution of the copper contained in the djurleite. Leaching was carried out at room temperature (20 °C), stirring at 350 rpm, Reaction rate increases quickly directly proportional to the total copper concentration with an apparent reaction order of 0.23 (  Data on the effect of the total chloride concentration in the system was then obtained on the dissolution of the copper contained in the djurleite. The experiments were carried out at room temperature (20 °C), stirring at 350 rpm, Leaching rate increases directly proportional to the total chloride concentration.  Data was further obtained on the effect of temperature on the dissolution of copper contained in the djurleite. Experiments were carried out at temperatures of 8, 20, 40 and 60 °C, with stirring at 350 rpm, using 2 g of mineral, The Arrhenius plot of the experimental rate constants are presented in  In the ranges The subsequent leaching of covellite is not produced under these conditions. During leaching at room temperature, a complex solid-phase transformation occurs with formation of intermediate Cu The kinetics of djurleite in a Cu The authors would like to thank the Chilean National Science and Technology Foundation for granting support for this study (FONDECYT 1030046). We would also like to thank the Serveis Cientìfico-Tècnics of the Universitat de Barcelona for their support in the solids characterization.