Zr–2.5wt%Nb pressure tubes, as used in the Indian pressurized heavy water reactors (PHWR), are fabricated through a combination of hot extrusion followed by two stages of cold pilgering and annealing. The present study makes an effort to systematically characterize the textural changes during the fabrication stages. The starting single-phase hcp martensitic structure was textured to start with and it also went through strong texture developments during hot extrusion. First and especially the second pilgering modified the texture. Such modifications were related to local discontinuity of the softer second phase, as an apparent continuity restricted lattice rotation in the primary hcp phase. Annealing caused discontinuity or spherodization of the bcc phase, but did not create recrystallization in the hcp matrix. The combination of two pilgering plus annealing operations, though the latter did not cause noticeable texture changes, however, reverted the final texture close to the parent hot-extruded texture.The fabrication of components with appropriate structure property has always been the real challenge to thermo-mechanical processing (TMP). A classical example is the selected component of the present study, the Zr–2.5wt%Nb pressure tube. This alloy is being increasingly used worldwide as pressure tube material for pressurized heavy water reactors of Candu design The modifications in the TMP, as in The detailed chemical composition of the Zr–2.5wt%Nb alloy is listed in The samples from different TMP stages, as marked in the caption of For peak broadening a 2 Samples were obtained from different stages of the Indian TMP sequence, as shown in  The peak broadening results are shown in  The β-quenched alloy has a non-random texture. Hot extrusion causes significant texture developments ( The subsequent TMP stages retain the semblance of the hot-extruded texture – though there were strong modifications in both texture and ‘texturing’ ( Other than the hot extrusion, first and the second pilgering cause the most significant textural changes ( One of the important aspects of the bulk texture developments on properties is the relative concentration of the basal planes (or so-called basal texture) on the three planes – extrusion/rolling plane (RP) containing RD (rolling/extrusion direction) and TD (transverse direction), short transverse (ST) section containing ND (normal direction) and TD and the long transverse (LT) section containing RD and ND. Microstructural/microtextural observations were mostly obtained from LT plane (long transverse, though limited observations were made in other cross-sections as well). Following is a brief summary on the observations at the different processing stages. The β-quenched structure is discussed elsewhere  As in As in The second pilgering, with only 20–25% reduction in thickness, did bring out the β discontinuity more effectively (see Final autoclaving (see As discussed earlier, the TMP sequence of the 2.5 Nb pressure tube was modified, in the so-called Indian route as given in • • • In summary, texture of the hot-extruded material could be ‘brought back’ by a combination of two-stage pilgering and annealing. The crucial factor for significant textural developments during both the pilgering was the discontinuity in the second phase β. The absence of recrystallization during annealing is related to the relative absence of high-angle boundaries created during respective pilgering and also from pinning by the second phase.  Significant development in crystallographic texture was obtained through hot extrusion. Subsequent two-stage pilgering plus annealing process ‘brought back’ the hot-extruded texture, though there were changes during individual pilgering stages. The hot-extruded microstructure had a bimodal size distribution for hcp α grains – the possible source of fine α grains being β-to-α transformation. The effectiveness of pilgering on texture/microtexture development did depend on the relative presence/continuity of the second phase β. In case of β continuity, the lattice rotations were restricted limiting the misorientation developments (and also developments in bulk texture) of the α grains. Relatively more β discontinuity during the second pilgering explains a strong texture development with only 25% reduction in thickness (as compared to 50–55% in the first pilgering). Other than relative spherodization of β, annealing did not bring any noticeable recrystallization, hence no significant changes in texture and α grain size were observed. Relative softening during annealing, as evident from reduced X-ray peak broadening, was mainly through recovery. The authors would like to acknowledge BRNS (Board of Research in Nuclear Sciences) for financial support and NFC (Nuclear Fuel Complex) for supplying the material. DST (Department of Science and Technology) is acknowledged for the TEM based local orientation measurement set-up and SAIF (Sophisticated Analytical Instrumentation Facility), IIT Bombay, for the support in TEM studies.