Although numerous scoring systems are designed for lower limb open injuries, most of them are based on orthopaedic and vascular injuries and can define only an amputation score. These scoring system lack specificity and sensitivity in predicting the salvage and outcome. Ganga Hospital Scoring system was found to have good specificity in predicting the outcome in Gustilo type-IIIA and type-IIIB injuries.
                  We have validated in our study the Ganga Hospital Scoring system which grades the open injuries based on severity of injury to covering structures, functional and the skeletal units. The score was validated in 40 open injuries of tibia, 11 type-IIIA and 29 type-IIIB. Predictability of salvage and outcome was measured based on this scoring system.
                  Results of our study correlated well with outcome of Ganga hospital study. 38 of 40 limbs with score below 14 and 1 with score above 14 were salvaged. The sensitivity and specificity for the threshold score of 14 was 100% and 95% respectively. Requirement of flaps, number of surgical procedures, time to bony union and infection rates in different groups were similar to original study.
                  The Ganga scoring system was found to have good specificity and sensitivity and reliable in prognosticating the outcome in open injuries of the tibia.With increasing severe open injuries of tibia, an ideal scoring system with good specificity and sensitivity is needed in predicting limb salvage. A misjudgment can result in unnecessary amputation or salvage. Numerous scoring systems have been described for limb salvage. Gustilo and Anderson classification The study was done prospectively in our institute, a tertiary referral centre over a period of 2 years from January 2010 to December 2011. Of the 123 open fractures of the tibia, 71 were types I and II fractures, 44 were type-IIIA and type-IIIB fractures, rest were associated with vascular injuries. Of the 44 patients, 3 were lost to follow up and 1 patient was referred to other centre for follow-up for his convenience. Of the remaining 40, 11 had type-IIIA and 29 had type-IIIB. Patients were followed up for a mean of 24 months (range 10–36). There were 38 males and 2 females with a mean age of 38.15 years (range 16–70 years). The mode of injury was road traffic accident in 36 patients; industrial accident in 3 and 1 had a farmyard injury. 23 patients had associated co-morbid conditions. 21 patients had a single and 2 patients had two co morbid conditions. After the initial evaluation, injuries were classified by Gustilo and Anderson Classification at the Emergency Room by experienced registrars. In the Operation Theatre wound debridement was performed by experienced surgeons at the consultant level and was taken up on an aggressive basis ensuring that no devitalized structure was left behind. After debridement it was graded by Gustilo and Anderson Classification, those who come under types IIIA and IIIB were included in our study and these were further scored and grouped as per All patients aged more than 17 years with open fractures of the tibia irrespective of the fracture site, presenting within 24 The information collected regarding all the cases were recorded in a master chart. Data analysis was done using epi info statistical package (EPI 2010) developed by Centre for Disease Control, Atlanta. Using this software range, frequencies, percentages, means, standard deviations, ‘ Following the debridement in the 40 patients, the injuries were assessed and scored appropriately for the Gustilo classification and the Ganga hospital score by the consultant performing the debridement. All the 40 cases were rated independently in the operating theatre by six observers; three were surgeons with adequate experience, one plastic surgeon and two final year residents who had good understanding of the scoring system. The intra-class correlation coefficient for Gustilo and Anderson was 0.72 and 0.94 for Ganga scoring system. Results of our study were compared with Ganga hospital study with respect to all the quantitative and qualitative variables. A ‘ The final score was less than five in 3 patients (group I), between 6 and 10 in 20 patients (group II), between 11 and 15 in 16 patients (group III) and 15 or above in 1 patient (group IV) ( None of our patient underwent primary amputation. Threshold score for deciding the limb salvage was kept as 14. All the 39 patients with score of equal to or less than 14 had a salvage procedure. Only one patient had a score of more than 15 and attempt at salvage was made after consensus among the senior surgeons. This patient had a Mangled Extremity Severity Score The sensitivity, specificity and accuracy were calculated for the Ganga hospital score with a threshold score of 14. In our series, the sensitivity for threshold score of 14 was 100%, the specificity was 95% and accuracy of 95%. These results were almost similar to that of Ganga study. The sensitivity and specificity were calculated for various scores and found to be compatible with the Ganga study ( Since one case falling into group IV underwent amputation, the requirement for plastic surgery, the total number of in-patient days, the number of surgical procedures required, time to bony union and rate of infection were studied in only in three groups and compared with the Ganga study (  Predictability for requirement of plastic surgery correlated well with the score for the skin and covering structures. No patient had score of one. Two patients with score two (100%) and six with score 3 (75%) were managed by primary skin closure, whereas two patients with score 4 (8.7%) were treated by split skin grafting. By contrast, 21 of 23 (91.3%) patients with score 4 required local flap and all 7 (100%) with score 5 required flap out of which 2 were free flaps. The requirement of the flaps between among the groups were highly significant (     To judge whether to amputate or salvage a limb in severely injured open fractures is a challenging one. Accurate and easily reproducible classification systems are needed for better communication and prognostication of the open fractures Gustilo and Anderson The Mangled Extremity Severity Score was developed retrospectively and then studied prospectively with a small sample size In 2006, Rajasekaran et al. In our series salvage was done in 39 cases and one limb was amputated. This amputated case had a MESS score of 5, indicating the unreliability and lack of specificity for amputation. The Ganga Hospital study showed a high sensitivity and specificity when a score of 14 was chosen as the threshold for amputation. The specificity for a threshold score of 14 in Ganga hospital study was 100%, 83% for 15 and 67% for score of 16. The results of our study are comparable with the Ganga study with a specificity of 95% for the scores of 14 and 15. We considered score of 14 as threshold score. There was one case with score of 16 which we were able to do salvage. The amputated case had a MESS score of 5 and Ganga hospital score of 15, thus clearly indicating the better reliability of the Ganga Hospital Scoring. Application of the Ganga Hospital Score helped us in salvaging 38 out of 40 cases with score 14 or less and one case with score >15. Patient with score 15 underwent secondary amputation. The need for the soft tissue cover and the requirement of complex flap procedures in our series correlated well with the Ganga Hospital Scoring. Mean covering tissue score for the 10 patients who dint require flap was three, compared with 4.17 in 30 patients who required a flap procedure ( This scoring system gave us better guidelines for the soft tissue cover and availability of the full time plastic surgery consultant helped us in giving better outcome in open injuries. In our series, out of the 40 patients, 21 patients had a functional tissue scoring of less than two and all of them returned to pre injury activity status.18 patients had score of 3 or more with significant injury to musculotendinous units. However patients were made to return to activities of daily living and work with the help of orthopaedic appliances. None of the patients had injury to nerves in our series. One patient with a score of 5 underwent amputation. Hence, as recommended by the Ganga studies even the limbs with significant injury to musculotendinous units and neural tissues does not warrant an amputation as suggested in the earlier scoring systems such as MESS, NISSA, and Hannover fracture scale Out of 29 patients who had skeletal score of less than 2, 27 went on to union without any intervention and one each needed iliac crest grafting and bone marrow injection. Average time for union in scores with one and two was 18 weeks and 24 weeks respectively. Patients with score three took longer time (28 weeks) to union and more number of addition procedures of iliac crest bone grafting. None of our patients underwent limb lengthening procedures. One patient with score of 4 had bone loss of 2 One patient had a score of 5, with bone loss of 7 Less number of cases with bone loss, no limb lengthening procedures and use of primary bone grafting in our series when compared with Ganga series is the reason for lesser hospital stay, lesser number of surgical procedures and early fracture union. There was no infection in group I patients, 5% in group II, 50% in group III out of which 3 were superficial and cleared with antibiotics alone. 1 patient in group IV had infection which persisted and ended up in amputation. There was high incidence of infection in group III and IV in our series which was comparable with the Ganga studies. This resulted from the severity of injury to both bone and soft tissues in these groups. Over all, there was similarity in the study groups in our study and Ganga hospital study in various variables. The percentage of group IIIB patients was more in our study, where as average follow-up period was 24 months ( Limitations of our study are the limited number of sample size, it is a single centre study and the number of cases which required limb lengthening procedures are less. An ideal scoring system needs to be more specific and sensitive in deciding the viability of a limb. Results of our study are echoic with the Ganga Hospital study. Ganga Hospital score is a valuable tool in assessing the salvage of a limb in open injuries and in making appropriate treatment strategies and planning soft tissue covers. The high sensitivity and specificity even when limb circulation is intact makes it more accurate scoring system than the existing lower limb injury severity scores. Even though the scoring system is validated in our study, future studies and multicentric trials are needed to evaluate the efficacy of the Ganga Hospital Scoring system. The authors declare there are no conflicts of interest for any of them in this study.