Objective
                  To report the clinical–functional outcomes of the treatment of humeral distal fractures with a total elbow prosthesis.
               
                  Material and methods
                  This retrospective study was performed in two surgical centres. A total of 23 patients were included, with a mean age of 79 years, and of which 21 were women. The inclusion criteria were: patients with humeral distal fractures, operated on using a Coonrad–Morrey prosthesis, and with a follow-up of more than one year.
                  According to AO classification, 15 fractures were type C3, 7 C2 and 1 A2.
                  All patients were operated on without de-insertion of the extensor mechanism.
                  The mean follow-up was 40 months.
               
                  Results
                  Flexor-extension was 123–17°, with a total mobility arc of 106° (80% of the contralateral side). Pain, according to a visual analogue scale was 1. The Mayo elbow performance index (MEPI) was 83 points. Excellent results were obtained in 8 patients, good in 13, medium in 1, and poor in 1. The mean DASH (disability) score was 24 points.
               
                  Conclusion
                  Treatment of humeral distal fractures with total elbow arthroplasty could be a good treatment option, but indications must be limited to patients with complex fractures, poor bone quality, with osteoporosis and low functional demands. In younger patients, the use is limited to serious cases where there is no other treatment option.
               
                  Level of Evidence
                  Level of Evidence IV.Distal humeral fractures (DHF) are rare injuries In this age group poor bone quality plays a major role when deciding on the best treatment. The results of osteosynthesis are variable, although it has a high number of complications. Several authors have reported good results using total elbow arthroplasty. The aim of this work is to report on the clinical–radiological results of a series of patients with DHF treated using total elbow arthroplasty. A retrospective study was undertaken in 2 surgical centres. The inclusion criteria were: patients with DHF operated using the Coonrad–Morrey total prosthesis (Zimmer No patient was lost to follow-up. Two patients died in the year after their surgery and they were excluded. 23 patients were included, of which 21 were women and 2 were men, with an average age at the moment of trauma of 76 years (ranging from 43 to 87 years). The right arm was involved in 12 cases and the left arm in 11, and corresponded to the dominant limb in 12 of these cases. All of the patients were studied using frontal and profile X-rays, and computerised axial tomography was used in the case of intra-articular fractures. According to the AO Under local anaesthesia and in dorsal decubitus the affected arm is placed over the thorax of the patient and a pad is placed under the scapula. An incision of approximately 15 To prepare the cubital component the canal is entered at the level of the coronoid apophosis with a 4.5 The medullar canal of the humerus is then prepared. A bit is inserted at the level of the ceiling of the olecranon fossa and it is rasped until the test component is able to enter. Due to the absence of the humeral epiphysis it is not necessary to use the cutting template. After washing the medullar canals the medullar cap is place in the humerus and the humeral and cubital components are cemented using a pistol. The components can be cemented separately and then joined by corresponding the pin and pivot pin, or they can be put into place already joined together. Once both components have been inserted the elbow is positioned at maximum extension until the cement has set ( A fragment of the bone graft taken from the resected trochlea is use to carve a bone table which is placed between the anterior edge of the humeral component and the diaphysis, to increase the rotational stability of the implant. The mobility achieved is tested and 3 aspects are evaluated: the extension obtained, which if limited requires the need for an anterior capsulectomy; if there is any block between the coronoid apophysis and the anterior fin of the prosthesis the coronoid is partially resected. If there is any friction between the prosthesis and the radial head then a radial head ostectomy is performed. It is closed in planes and the epichondyle and epitrochlear muscles are sutured to the lateral and medial edges of the triceps. The cubital nerve is transposed anteriorly. A suction drain is put into place and the elbow is immobilised at 90° with a plaster valve during 72 Objective postoperative clinical evaluation is carried out by measuring movement with a goniometer and the strength of elbow extension on the scale from M0 to M5. Subjective evaluation used the Mayo Clinic Score (MCS) Radiological evaluation was performed using frontal and profile X-rays immediately after the operation, after one month, and at 3, 6 and 12 months each year until the end of the follow-up. Loosening was evaluated on the scale of Morrey et al., Average follow-up was 40 months (range from 13 to 96 months). The average flexion was 123° (range from 100° to 140°) and the average extension was 17° (range 0–45°), which corresponds to an average mobility arc of 106° (range 140–75°). The contralateral side had an average mobility arc of 133° (range 70–140°), so that 80% mobility was achieved in comparison with the healthy side. Extension force was M4 in 4 patients and M5 in 19. Average pain measured by the AVS was 1 point (range 0–5), and 11 patients reported 0 pain in this evaluation. The average MCS was 83 points (range 30–100); 8 patients had excellent results, 13 good results, one mediocre and one poor. The average DASH score was 24 points (range 8–78) ( Prosthesis loosening was classified as grade 1 in 5 patients, grade 2 in one and grade 4 in 2. No loosening was found in 15 patients. Gross heterotopic calcifications were detected in one patient, while in 2 calcifications were moderate, in 7 they were minimum and none were found in 13. 10 complications arose: 2 patients were operated again due to wear of the polyethylene (it was changed together with the pivot pins of the assembly) ( The average satisfaction with the procedure was 8 (range 4–9). No infections occurred. The classic treatment for DHF is reduction and osteosynthesis. This is the treatment of choice for young patients, and good bone quality often aids fixing. The first indications for arthroplasty in connection with a traumatic episode were for the treatment of sequelae of fractures or pseudoarthrosis, In the year 2004 Kamineni and Morrey Frankle et al. In 2014 Mansat et al. In general, reports on prosthetic replacements cite a functional arc of mobility with a restriction in the final degrees of extension. In our series of cases this was 17° (a little less than is reported by other authors). The patients in our series did not consider this extension deficit to be an important problem ( Conservation of the triceps allowed us to start rehabilitation early, and this may explain the recovery of a mobility arc of 106°; on the other hand, this was aided by the fact that there were no extensor apparatus complications. In these cases we do not believe osteotomy of the olecranon to raise the triceps to be necessary, as some authors describe, In our series it was important to keep good elbow extension strength, given that the majority of the patients are elderly and often need to use a walking stick to walk. We had 2 cases of gross loosening of the humeral component. Both of these were associated with a defect in the cementation of the same. This number is comparable to those in other series. The decision not to repeat the operation was due to the advanced age of the patients and their refusal to subject themselves to another surgical procedure. However, a revision would surely have been necessary in younger patients. Other important complications were permanent paresthesias of the cubital nerve. Careful intraoperative care is fundamental to avoid this, as full neurological non-recovery is frequent, above all in elderly patients. According to several authors wear of the polyethylene is a rare complication (1.3% of 919 implants according to Lee et al. Hemiarthroplasty has been described recently, although series are limited and have short follow-up periods. This implant is indicated to ensure stability when the columns are preserved, or if it is possible to set them. Although complications have been described, this may be a valid option, especially in younger patients. Only 2 patients in our series were younger than 65 years old. Celli and Morrey In spite of the high number of complications and repeat operations in our series, 19/23 patients presented good or excellent results in the final evaluation. This work has certain limitations. It is a retrospective series with a small number of patients operated by different surgeons in different centre and evaluated by different professionals. Nevertheless, there are few other references to the procedure in question in the literature, and there were no losses during the follow-up of this consecutive series of patients. The treatment of DHF using total elbow arthroplasty is a reasonable treatment option, although indications should be restricted to complex fractures in which the internal anchorage may be precarious, in patients with osteoporosis and low functional demand. In young patients this technique is indicated in serious cases in which there is no other treatment option. The authors declare that no experiments were performed on humans or animals for this investigation. The authors declare that they have followed the protocols of their work centre on the publication of patient data. The authors declare that no patient data appears in this article. The authors have no conflict of interests to declare.