The objective was to investigate the relationship between soil suppression of seedling blight of barley caused by Fusarium culmorum (W.G. Smith) Sacc. and the soil cellulolytic activity of β-glucosidase, cellobiohydrolase and endocellulase. Disease suppression was investigated in bioassays with test soils mixed with sand, and barley seeds inoculated with F. culmorum. After 19 days, disease severity was evaluated on the barley seedlings. Soil cellulolytic activities were measured using 4-methylumbelliferyl-labelled fluorogenic substrates, and were expressed as V
                     max values obtained by using the Hanes–Wolf transformation of the Michaelis–Menten equation. Soil samples from 6 to 13cm depth were collected in the early spring as undisturbed blocks from 10 arable soils with different physico-chemical properties and cultivation history. Significant correlations were found between soil suppresiveness and the activities of β-glucosidase and cellobiohydrolase, where soils representing the highest disease suppression had the highest activities. Furthermore, soil suppressiveness, as well as the activity of β-glucosidase and cellobiohydrolase, were significantly correlated with the soil content of total C and N. From the preliminary results obtained, it is proposed that the cellulolytic activity can be used as an enzymatic approach to study the microbial turnover of organic matter in soils and as indicator of seedling blight of barley caused by F. culmorum. Soil samples were obtained from six organically managed fields, three conventionally managed and one field which had not received any kind of fertilizer for a century ( The investigation was based on a bioassay carried out on barley grown in mixtures of soil and sand. Methods for application of inoculum of The activities of β-glucosidase, cellobiohydrolase and endocellulase were measured in field moist samples by the use of different fluorogenic substrates. During hydrolysis of the substrates, aglycone 4-methylumbelliferone (4-MU) is formed which is highly fluorescent at alkaline pH. The activity was determined on the basis of 4-MU, expressed as nmol 4-MU released per hour per gram dry matter of soil (nmol 4-MU Some of the physical and chemical properties of each of the soils used are shown in When The activity of β-glucosidase was higher than cellobiohydrolase, whereas the lowest activity was obtained for endocellulase. This distribution pattern in cellulolytic activity was found for all of the soils studied ( As shown in This project was supported by the Danish Ministry of Food, Agriculture and Fisheries (Research in Organic Farming, 1993–1997). We thank Ewa Hørsdal and Karin Olesen for skilful technical assistance.