Charles Darwin and Vasily Dokuchaev made early and important, but quite different, contributions to pedogenic theory. Their major contributions were both written as books — Darwin's, 1881 The Formation of Vegetable Mould, Through the Action of Worms, With Observation on Their Habits, and Dokuchaev's, 1883 Russian Chernozem. Although most soil scientists are familiar with Dokuchaev's legacy and lasting impact, far fewer know about or value equally Darwin's “worm book.”
                  Dokuchaev's factorial approach to soil science, drawn from observations across the Eurasian steppe, helped map, classify, and place economic value on soils, while also providing key insight into their formation. This approach gained visibility in the 1930s and 1940s, when personnel at the U.S. Department of Agriculture, and some academic pedologists, recognized its utility for soil survey and for interpreting pedogenesis. Jenny's (1941) book, Factors of Soil Formation, helped the model to gain acceptance, and it eventually became entrenched as the core pedogenic model for North America, if not the world. Dokuchaev's legacy is tied to this model. Alternatively, Darwin's main contribution to the field was to shed light on soil processes, particularly faunal mixing (bioturbation) and the textural sorting it can produce. Although Darwin's findings fostered an array of multidisciplinary studies on pedogenic processes during the ensuing 50years, his work languished in the broad shadow cast by Dokuchaev's model. In 1975, Darwin's ideas reappeared in Soil Taxonomy — associated with rudimentary biomantle concepts. Recently, empowered with new concepts and language, bioturbation concepts have gained considerable traction.
                  We briefly summarize the backgrounds of Darwin and Dokuchaev, and compare their fundamentally different approaches to pedogenesis. But insofar as Dokuchaev's approach is more mainstream, we emphasize Darwin's, for balance. We show how Darwin's model, updated with current understandings of biomantle formation, is allowing new questions to be asked about pedogenesis and landscape evolution, and formerly intractable ones to be answered. We stress the profound role of conceptual models in guiding explanatory thought, and end by positing that both Darwin's and Dokuchaev's approaches, while different in their basic structure and goals, provide together a more complete view of pedogenesis than either can do singly. Although quite different in basic nature and approach, both Darwin's and Dokuchaev's ( Dokuchaev's body of theoretical work was initially known as the Dokuchaev School of Soil Science, of which his environmental-landscape context scheme formed the central genetic essence ( In this approach, These ideas and this approach were adopted early in Russia, and later elsewhere, as the guiding explanatory paradigm for practitioners not only in soil science, but also in related fields (archeology, ecology, geomorphology, paleopedology, pedology, Quaternary geology, etc.). The model now forms the foundation for discussions of soil formation in many, if not most, of the post-World War II textbooks, especially in North America ( Darwin may be on record as a groundbreaking evolutionist, but he also was an excellent theoretical pedologist (e.g., Although many in the Earth and allied sciences acknowledge In this paper, Darwin and Dokuchaev's ideas are developed, but more importantly, compared. Our overarching purpose is to explore the notion that Darwin's contributions to pedology are insufficiently recognized, acknowledged, and utilized. To do this, we must first bring Darwin's academic contributions to greater light; perhaps we owe it to established researchers and educators, and especially to students. We show how Darwin's principles, upgraded in recent decades as biomantle theory, are correct, predictive, and can assist in solving otherwise difficult problems in soil science and geomorphology. We also use this forum to illustrate the subtle but profound role of models and theories in guiding explanatory thought. We then conclude with the opinion that these disciplines are better off when armed with To provide a historical context for this paper, we first compare and contrast some facts about Darwin and Dokuchaev, their different backgrounds, research timeframes, and even their ages at different points in their respective careers. Some of these data are from Darwin and Dokuchaev were born in 1809 and 1846, respectively; they died in 1882 (at age 73) and 1903 (at age 57), respectively. Both were university trained, primarily in geology. At the time that Dokuchaev was born, Darwin was ~ Darwin's soil research began in 1837, at age ~ The early research and publishing endeavors of both scientists dealt with geological-soil themes, with Darwin's first published paper (1837/1838) being on soil formation. Darwin's substantive soil work was Dokuchaev's substantive soil work was his Ph.D. dissertation, published as Darwin's book was known during the 20th century more as a worm book than a soils book, whereas Dokuchaev's treatise was always known as a soils book. Dokuchaev had many prolific Russian students and disciples, and, later, overseas governmental-academic organizations (USDA, SSSA) to advocate his soil views; Darwin lacked this type of following. It appears that Darwin's main research motivation was scientific — to understand and explain why Roman, other historic, and recent surface-deposited objects, became buried. (Notably, though, Darwin also did pioneering research on soil erosion, including the construction of the first rainfall simulator.) It appears that Dokuchaev's main motivation was not only scientific, to explain how Chernozems form, but also agronomic and economic — to understand and explain why soils are fertile in some areas, less so in others. Darwin was unaware of Dokuchaev's post-1876 soil research (published in Russian and French), although Dokuchaev was aware of Dokuchaev's soil model became ruling in the late 19th century Russia, and gained popularity elsewhere during and after the 1930s–1940s. Darwin's ideas languished during the 1930s, but were independently re-discovered in the 1975 With the exception of  Still, one has to wonder whether Dokuchaev did not grasp Darwin's main points about biomixing and biosorting. Did he understand these processes but simply choose not to emphasize them? Or is it just that they did not apply to the Chernozen landscape? Further reading suggests that he did understand Darwin's ideas, but simply disagreed with them. After stating that “… one cannot agree with such a broad generalization on the part of the famous scientist, even if earthworm activity is supplemented by the activity of other animals …” Dokuchaev gave three reasons (p. 337) why he actually disagreed with Darwin's work. We quote: For nutrition, animals depend on substances in the soil and above it; thus, on dying they add no essentially new substance to the soil. When unusually abundant crops have grown on fields where large masses of different insects have perished previously, it should be borne in mind that this improvement in the soil is only temporary, since it occurred at the expense of humus from the same or neighboring area; the net result in the total economy of soils is negative rather than positive. If one agrees with Darwin that earthworms raise such masses of earth to the surface that flagstones and foundations may be buried, the remarkably gradual decrease in the amount of volatiles and increase in the amount of other substances unchanged upon ignition, observed in the downward direction in all normally situated soils, is not understandable. If all soils have been formed by worms, it is difficult to understand, then, why some soils are black and rich with organic substances [Chernozems] while others are light-gray, low in humus, some thin, about 1/2–1 Dokuchaev also took issue with Darwin's suggestion that the term “animal layer” might be the better term for soil than “vegetal layer” — an expression then widely used for soil. What exactly, then, were Darwin's main points? As extolled in his publications ( As noted above, Dokuchaev was more-or-less silent on this matter, mentioning only that animal burrowing facilitates particle comminution, soil aeration, the uniform distribution of organic matter, and facilitates bedrock weathering. Dokuchaev did compliment Darwin for his assessments of the role of animals (in Dokuchaev's view) on soil formation, noting Darwin's “highly ingenious observations, experiments, and calculations” on earthworms in redistributing humus and such. However, in Dokuchaev's comments indicate that he was interested in Darwin's work only insomuch as it impacted the redistribution of humus and affected soil fertility; there is no indication that he had an appreciation for the bioturbation/biomechanical aspects of Darwin's work. Hence, Darwin's principal theme, that animals – worms in this case – mix, sort, and thus organize soil into texturally distinct horizons, and in the process cause objects on the surface to drift downward as soil particles are mixed and biotransferred above them, was lost on Dokuchaev. History suggests that Dokuchaev respected Darwin as a scientist and appreciated the soil fertility aspects of his writings, but failed to recognize the biomechanical role of soil fauna. We return to our question — Why would Dokuchaev In 1876, seven years before During his lectures, which he alternated with library research, writing, and fieldwork, Dokuchaev introduced preliminary versions of his environmental-landscape (factorial) model for explaining the fertility of Chernozems, vis-à-vis the lower fertility of other soils. His comments focused on the more obvious environmental factors that appeared to impact soil fertility on the expansive Ukrainian–Russian steppes, i.e., climate, parent rock, topography, and organisms — and especially steppe plants. As his work progressed, he published updates, advocating his interpretations of how Chernozems develop and become more fertile, eventually producing two summaries of this work ( Here we provide some additional, historical insight into this matter. Dokuchaev's approach was to search for order in nature, trying to find a model that could predict the “regularities” of an ideal soil pattern. Thus, he did not need any additional factors that made the picture more complex, especially bioturbation. In short, he did not need the bioturbation hypothesis. Another explanation is more personal and a bit more speculative. Dokuchaev had an older, irreconcilable opponent, Pavel Kostychev. Kostychev was a well-known agronomist and a tough person, who blamed Dokuchaev for ignoring the biological factor. Even at the presentation of Dokuchaev's thesis “ To summarize, we argue that Darwin's mixing–sorting-biomechanical principles eluded Dokuchaev and were only minimally represented in As distilled from Darwin's work, bioturbation principles imply that animals constantly stir, mix, and transfer soil particles, either directly by tunneling, digging, and scratching, or indirectly, as their tunnels collapse ( The lowermost layer of this two-layered biomantle – the basal stonelayer or stone line – is a genetic soil feature often mistakenly attributed to surficial erosion followed by burial. We acknowledge that buried, erosionally formed, stone lines can appear to be basal stonelayers, and vice-versa. Resolution of the genesis of these types of features in the subsoil is difficult and often fraught with uncertainty, which underscores the importance of this discourse (see  Perhaps because Darwin's bioturbation principles were largely missing from Hans Jenny, author of the highly influential book We use Jenny's book as an example, showing how Darwin's principles were largely overlooked historically, especially within the English-speaking geomorphology and soil science communities—with several recent exceptions (noted below). As a result, bioturbation principles remain largely absent from most basic 20th century soil science treatises and textbooks (e.g., If we ask how or why the major players in the soil science community either overlooked or ignored the literature that spotlighted Darwin's bioturbation principles, the answers are likely multiple and complex. They reflect the stochastic and uneven ways in which science develops. We have observed, for example, a pattern where some practitioners cite mainly the mainstream literature of their field, literature that their colleagues cite, usually laden with works by senior gatekeepers. In other words, some researchers appear not to read widely outside their fields, an introverted process that can build on itself over generations and isolate later practitioners from peripheral or non-mainstream ideas, however laudable. This provides one reason why Darwin's work may not have been widely utilized — it simply was not being read. Another line of reasoning is more theoretical. Philosophically, mixing pedogenic processes with state factors – especially at the time in history when pedogenic theory was still in its infancy – would have been analogous to mixing oil and water. As If our assessment is correct, it portends some important, broader, philosophical issues about theories and models. In short, when a scientific theory, model, or approach becomes mainstream, i.e., it becomes conventional wisdom in a practitioner's mind, that model plays a key role in influencing perceptions and observations, in generating questions, and in influencing decision-making about what is useful or not. Concepts and theories can and do play modulating, mediating, and at times controlling roles in science, which in a sense is partly their purpose. Importantly, the level to which observations and perceptions are modulated and filtered is likely also partly controlled by the inherent agenda of those who employ them. To this point Our essay, this historical example, shows the power of ruling theory in directing subsequent thought, especially if a theory becomes established as conventional wisdom. After attaining such status, a theory or paradigm can marginalize, render unimportant, or even exclude anything not framed or covered within its conceptual domain. Taken to the extreme, scholarly hostility towards competing theories is a not uncommon outgrowth of science. Several factors worked against Darwin, in the “race” to develop a popular and useful pedogenic model. First of all, Darwin's word choices and communication style, unfortunately and inadvertently, weakened his overall message. For example, with Darwin's international profile as a preeminent life scientist, the title chosen for his book, A point can also be made in defense of Darwin's emphasis and focus on worm bioturbation per se in soil formation. First, a careful reading shows that although he described worms as key bioturbators in the genesis of soils in England, he also used them as observable analogues for the importance of burrowing animals more generally in soil formation (disclaimers not withstanding — cf. A second factor that weakened Darwin's message was again related to language and word choice. Darwin could not know how terminology might change with time. For example, the terms vegetable mould, mould, and vegetal layer – all 19th century synonyms for topsoil – would be later exclusively replaced by discrete soil horizon terminology such as A and O horizons. Even in the mid 20th century and probably before, the words soil and soil profile carried instant resonance with soil scientists, whereas antiquated terms like vegetable mould and mould simply did not. Word choice came back to hurt Darwin's message in another way, because he did not coin descriptive and genetic terms (jargon) for the processes about which he wrote. Perhaps if he had, his message would have been strengthened. He chose instead to describe the processes he inferred and experimentally observed in clear, non-technical language, typical of his personal style, and normal for this period in history. Although he expressed it using terms different than the ones used today, the mixing processes and the soil morphologies described above were front-and-center to Darwin's message. It was a consistent message delivered throughout his four decades' investigation of soils, from his first published paper in 1837 (a soil process paper) to his 1881 “worm book.” Unfortunately, failure to coin appropriate descriptive and genetic terms can sometimes be deadly in science, even though many scientists (and most laymen) complain about jargon. Defined scientific terms, however, are not only useful, but are also essential for crisp, clear, and exacting communication ( Another factor that may have diminished Darwin's role and import was his model's focus and perceived narrowness. His model focuses on soil mixing (bioturbation), which is a key Continuing on with this theme, unlike Dokuchaev, Darwin failed to formulate an easily remembered and teachable In sum, the title of Darwin's book, its perceived focus on worms, his disinclination for coining usefully supportive terms, and his failure to package his theory in an easily remembered and teachable framework, all collectively led to his work being nearly invisible for decades. On the other hand, the agronomic success of Dokuchaev's landscape context (five factors) approach, its simplicity, teachability, wide utility, and ease and simplicity of explanation, from broad landscape to catenary scales, all add up to the reasons for its success. Dokuchaev's landscape context model is geographical, factorial, and as designed, agronomic. In it, climate, parent material, topography, age, and plant factors explain the formation and distribution of most soils. The approach has proven invaluable in soil survey and mapping, in studies of soil genesis and classification, for land valuation, and for soil chronosequence work. We do not mean to undermine its utility or importance. Indeed, largely for these reasons, and especially because of the obvious practical agronomic applications, the model established itself early on as the guiding framework for soil research of all kinds. And for most soil scientists, it still is. To reiterate, Dokuchaev's main research question, prescribed by his sponsors, the Free Economic Society of Russia, was: How can we predict where good agricultural land can be found for mapping, classification, yield, and taxation purposes? By providing answers to these questions in an elegant yet simple and understandable way, the five factors approach became the nucleus of the Dokuchaev School of Soil Science. During and after the 1930s, it also came to form the basis of government-sponsored programs in North America, most notably the USDA, often cooperatively with university programs. By the late 20th century, it had become the theoretical anchor of most soil-geomorphic and soil-climatic research of all kinds ( Conversely, Darwin's approach had far less obvious agronomic and practical applications. It was animal-focused, experimental, and process- (bioturbation-) based. His research was driven by the question: How did cinders and Roman coins end up at depth, when they had originally been on the surface? Dokuchaev's book had quickly “caught on” with the soil science community; indeed, it may have In sum, Darwin and Dokuchaev's contributions were scientifically lofty and have long proven their utility, although in entirely different ways. We argue that soil practitioners who draw on Biomantle theory is an expansion and integration of Darwin's bioturbation principles and Thorp's biomantle concept ( We will demonstrate how biomantle principles can help explain the origin and nature of For decades, buried stonelayers have been observed in soils around the globe. Hence, the variety of monikers associate with them is voluminous: stone line, stone zone, pebble band, pebble concentrate, pebble belt, pedisediment, nappe de gravats, a linha de cascalhos, carpetolith, cascalhão, biogenic marker horizon, gravel/stony horizon, nodular layer, boulder line, chert line, quartz émoussés, concentration de quartz, graviers et cailloux, steinlage, basal gravel, basal schotterbändem, graviers et cailloux, colluvion, linea de piedras, ligne de pierres, quartz émoussés, lit de cailloux d'epaisseur, and gravel sheet, among others. The genesis of stonelayers has been fraught with controversy and confusion ( Stonelayers are particularly common in tropical soils, which typically have complex, highly polygenetic geomorphic histories. Hence, no two of these old, tropical surfaces, technically, ever have similar geomorphic histories. And yet, stonelayers are common to almost all tropical soils formed in residual and transported materials, so long as they contain coarse fragments. The 20th century literature contains a vast number of papers on “stone line” formation. In almost all of them, the interpretive void left by Darwin's bioturbation principles is obvious, for the explanation for the stone line usually revolves around climatic or erosional–burial scenarios. Thus, many stonelayers have been conventionally interpreted as erosional lags that have subsequently become buried. Commonly, the burial is assumed to have occurred as materials from upslope areas (slopewash) are deposited onto the lag deposits ( We propose that bioturbation is the best first explanation for stonelayers in soils that contain coarse fragments, and where bioturbation is or has been present. Under theory like that first proposed by Darwin, soils that bear stonelayers are explained as the lower part of a two-layered biomantle ( As with stonelayers, the longstanding controversy surrounding Mima mounds ( Before the plows of modern agriculture, natural mounds and heaps of all sizes and shapes were a common element of humid midlatitude landscapes, particularly across central-western North America and Eurasia (e.g., The deep controversy and striking appearance of some moundfields ( Biomantle theory not only straightforwardly explains Mima and other dominantly faunal-produced mounds in all of these settings, but it consistently predicts the one key attribute of their internal morphologies that human agency or other physical agents cannot (for those mounds formed in gravelly soil) — a basal stonelayer. Wherever Mima mounds form in gravelly soils, they predictably exhibit an upper, locally thickened, zone of fines, i.e., the mound itself ( Burrowing mammals are widespread, but mounds are not. Mounds are generally formed where periodic flooding is common, or where a restriction to burrowing exists in the subsurface, either a high water table, bedrock, or a dense and hard soil horizon, i.e., a hardpan of sorts. The animals live where the soil is thickest, or on high, drier ground. On sites where deep burrowing is precluded, mounds are formed as the mammals move soil in the biomantle laterally; the mounds lend a distinct survival advantage to the burrowing fauna ( Application of Darwin-type biomantle theory confirms that Mima mounds are neither mysterious nor enigmatic, as has been claimed, but simply locally thickened biomantles produced by highly territorial, burrowing mammals. Where such mounds are formed in gravelly soils they are predictably two-layered, with a basal stonelayer. Where formed in non-gravelly soil they acquire the morphology of locally thickened, one-layered biomantles, and the basal stonelayer is absent. Both Darwin and Dokuchaev made monumental contributions to soil science and pedogenic theory. In most settings, the factorial model of Dokuchaev provides an excellent theoretical framework within which to study and evaluate soil formation and landscape evolution. However, the examples we provide show how it, alone, cannot always provide the necessary framework for explaining all situations and soils. In our discussion, we have emphasized how careful application of the bioturbation principles espoused by Darwin would have led to the solution of two significant and widespread soil-geomorphology questions. For science to advance, explanatory holes in ruling theories must be filled, and Darwin's work does that. Although some have said as much, Darwin's work is not narrowly focused, because his bioturbation principles, upgraded and expanded as biomantle theory, apply broadly. A careful reading of The non-gravelly nature of loess-derived Chernozems on which Dokuchaev focused. Except for krotovinas, bioturbation is not overtly obvious in such soils. The state factor approach he favored coupled with the inherent filtering power of domain-limiting theories. In this case the domain-limiting element was bioturbation, a key soil process in most ecosystems. The five factors model sets the “factorial landscape stage” to explain soils generally, but it is not well designed to shed light on soil mixing or other complex processes. Like most pedogenic processes, bioturbation occurs in most, if not all, soils. It is a matter of the degree of expression that leads us to attribute the properties of a soil to a certain process or set of processes. In order to develop a complete, accurate and thorough understanding of soils, pedologists must recognize that there are often multiple processes and pathways that lead to similar end results. To that end, both the factorial and biomantle approaches provide different explanatory strengths, interpretive possibilities, and pedogenic utility. They are highly complementary, and that is our point. Each model leads users to different, more diverse and creative ways of unraveling complex pedogenic pathways. Biomantle principles in textbooks have been long needed, were way overdue, and may have finally arrived. Physical geographers, geoarcheologists, pedologists, ecologists, and others can only benefit by drawing on both five factors and biomantle approaches as explanatory tools in reading Earth's complex landscapes. In retrospect, there are two historical “Masters” of pedology and soil science: Charles Darwin and Vasily Dokuchaev. Darwin's body of scholarship on bioturbation fills a hole in Dokuchaev's “o” factor, leaving contemporary pedologists and soil scientists with a more complete set of tools to understand soil landscape formation. We can learn much about the world from This paper is dedicated to an extraordinary scholar who prematurely left us in 2007, Geoffrey S. Humphreys. In the 1980s–1990s Geoff, with Macquarie University colleagues, effectively (re)introduced the term bioturbation and thereafter a host of related nuances ( We thank Diana Johnson, Brad Miller and Jenny Horwath Burnham for comments on a previous version of this manuscript.