Although separation processes are widespread in technology, in recent decades no special progress in the creation of novel separation facilities has been observed. The main cause of such a situation is that until the present time, no clear unified methods of the evaluation of separators efficiency have been developed. This impedes their mutual comparison for choosing the most perspective designs. For instance, more than 70 various methodologies are applied for evaluating the quality of beneficiation of minerals. Their analysis from the standpoint of unbiased evaluation of problems solved by separation showed their insufficiency and one-sided character. The problem of finding unbiased quality criteria for separation processes has been discussed in special literature for at least 100years. Although there exists acceptable methods for separating binary mixtures, they are totally absent for multicomponent separation.Quality Criteria Generation Other Indices of the Process Completion Criteria Differing From Hancock's Method Criteria-Free Methods of Separation Processes Optimization Optimization of Separation Processes by Fractional Extraction Curves Properties of Fractional Separation Curves Processes of separation of materials consisting of various components into fractions are widespread in modern industrial practice. These processes are realized with solid bulk materials, liquid, and gaseous media. Rather frequently, one deals with a solid component separation from liquid or gas. As specific examples of separation processes, we can mention rocks and coal dressing by density, classification by particle size in various technologies, petroleum cracking into components, centrifugation of gases for nuclear fuel production, isotopes separation, industrial dust collection, waste water treatment, etc. It is hard to find a branch of modern industry (either conventional or newly formed), which does not use processes of components separation into pure fractions. By way of example, we can mention metallurgy, chemical industry, ceramics production for electronics, crystal growth, food industry, building, perfumery, pharmacology, power generation, agriculture, and many more. Despite the widespread occurrence of such processes, no serious progress in the creation of novel separation facilities has been observed in recent decades. The main reason is that until today, no efficient and unified methods of comparing separation ability of various separation devices have been In this respect, the processes of bulk materials dressing and separation are “luckier”. To assess the separation quality, more than 70 formulas and methods reflecting various aspects of this complicated process are applied. Their analysis from the standpoint of assessing the solved problems has demonstrated their narrowness and helplessness. This is, obviously, the reason of the fact that in the 21st century, large modern companies are still producing centrifugal separators, whose main idea was formulated in the middle of the 19th century. In parallel with the Gibbs paradox, approximately at the same time, aside from thermodynamic problems, another problem connected with the search for criteria and methods of separation processes optimization was formulated. Its idea is as follows. It is impossible to realize any separation process in an ideal way, i.e., to separate in full the initial mixture into absolutely pure components. Products of separation with respect to the desired boundary are always dirtied, to a certain extent, by the material passing over this boundary. For example, at mineral dressing, there is always a certain amount of waste rock in the concentrate output, and some amount of the target product always remains in the waste rock. This puts on the agenda the problem of assessment of the process completion, i.e., its efficiency. This parameter is important because of two aspects. On the one hand, separation process should be controlled in its optimal regime, so as to perform it with the greatest possible effect. On the other hand, such a parameter is necessary for unbiased comparisons of different designs of separators used for separation of analogous materials. Its absence is an obstacle to the development of separation methods. It is noteworthy that this problem is being solved for about 130 This problem has been solved more or less successfully for binary mixtures. Just to imagine how complicated the problem is, we consider material redistribution in a binary mixture. We examine this separation using an interpretation applicable for powder separation based on the particles size ( In real processes it is impossible to obtain an ideal result, because a part of the fine product falls into the coarse product and vice versa. Assume that at a certain set of technological parameters, a fine product is obtained, whose fractional composition is described in this plot by     The following equalities follow from Fig. 4: To formulate the quality criterion, boundary conditions should be specified. For a criterion objectively reflecting the problems solved by separation, they must satisfy at least the following four conditions: Numerical index should be higher for a process resulting in a greater difference in fractional compositions of both products, other conditions being equal. For ideal separation providing a complete separation by the required boundary, the efficiency index should reach the maximal value possible for given conditions. It is convenient to take this value as 100% or unity. Efficiency index should be unconditionally zero when the fractional composition of separation products does not differ from the initial one. This takes place when the separation effect is absent, and the material is simply divided into parts. Note that when the entire material falls into one of separation products, its value is also zero. It is desirable to obtain an unambiguous assessment of the separation process irrespective of the product (fine or coarse) it is determined by. Even a binary evaluation of the process makes an unbiased comparison of separation results of two different apparatuses practically impossible. We try to formulate the efficiency parameter under these conditions on the basis of fractions distribution shown in The greater the fractional difference of separation products, the more complete the target product extraction from a mixture. The extraction implies a share of the separated target size product with respect to its content in the original material: for fine fraction, Meanwhile, it is clear that the separation precision decreases because particles whose size is beyond the specified separation boundary fall into each of the products. The fine product contamination is It is clear that the higher the separation process efficiency, the greater the extraction and the smaller the products contamination. Neither the extraction value nor the contamination value give a complete idea of changes in the fractional composition of separation products with respect to the original one. The point is that the extraction characterizes fractional composition on one side of the specified boundary, whereas contamination characterizes fractional composition on the other side of the specified boundary. Only a combination of these values reflects fractional composition change. The efficiency is expressed by the following ratios: for the fine product: Such an idea of the interrelation of the mentioned indices is proved by the fulfillment of the edge conditions. We check it starting with the last, fourth condition. For checking, we subtract one efficiency expression from another: Thus, these expressions are identical and show the same efficiency value irrespective of the separation product (fine or coarse) it is determined by. According to the first condition, separation efficiency is defined by the difference in the products compositions. The greater this difference, the higher the extraction and the lower the target product contamination. According to the second condition, at an ideal separation, products contamination is absent, i.e., According to the third condition, at the material separation into parts without changing fractional composition, we can write for fine product In this case, separation efficiency is Thus, expressions Other indices of separation processes are known from technical literature on ore dressing. The best-known one was formulated by Hancock in the form of a relation for the fine product Ideal separation: Separation without changing fractional composition: We make use of the dependencies Taking this into account, we can write It can be shown that Hancock's formula is similar to the relations A certain number of formulas that can be reduced to Hancock's relation are known. They were offered in different periods of time by Luyken, Dean, Madel, Tyurenkov, Chechot, Lyashchenko, and others. We do not analyze them here because it would take much place and readers' attention. Besides, they do not carry any new information because they give estimated parameters of the process similar to Hancock's criterion. Those interested in details of this problem can be referred to special literature. Many other criteria differing from Hancock's method have been suggested. We will analyze those used in practice, such as Diamond's method, in which the efficiency of separation process is interpreted as a half-sum of target products extractions We test this criterion for boundary conditions formulated above: at the ideal separation, at the separation without changes in fractional composition. In this case, Diamond 's dependence gives a nonzero result. In literature on coal dressing, Fomenko's formula Tsiperovich's formula has a similar drawback: Drakely suggested the use of Hancock's formula in the form Stevens and Collins offered a somewhat different dependence as a criterion for separation processes: We analyze this expression: at the ideal separation, at the separation without changes in fractional composition, This dependence is not unambiguous, because Thus, it does not correspond to the second and fourth boundary conditions. Lyashchenko suggested another parameter, which he called dressing degree, for the process quality assessment: For the analysis using We analyze this expression: at the ideal separation, at the separation without changes in composition, single-valuedness conditions are not satisfied. Formulas suggested by Trushelevich, Chapman and Mott, Hamilton, Goden, Rozen, Cohen, and others have the same drawback. Owing to the revealed drawbacks, all these dependencies cannot be recommended for the optimization of separation processes. Hence, the only method satisfying all boundary conditions is Hancock's method. However, as we show later, Imperfection of methods of criterial evaluation of processes caused the appearance of methods of direct determination of separation quality without calculating specific indices. Due to limited capacities of such determinations, they do not allow fixing arbitrary parameters of a process, being intended for finding optimal efficiency conditions. The latter ensures fractional difference in both separation products, which is maximally possible for a specified apparatus. These methods connect the process quality with the boundary size value, for which the assessed separation conditions are considered optimal. Rubinchik determines the value of optimal separation boundary by the fine class whose content in the initial material equals the fine particles output We transform these parameters Then we can write based on It is totally unclear why this condition is optimal. Bond determines the optimal boundary by the equality of narrow classes in the fine and coarse product, i.e., For the separation diagram shown in Finally, we can obtain This value by no means proves the optimality. Povarov has suggested an optimal boundary size as the value of a narrow class whose contents in the initial material and in samples of both separation products are the same: The value of the narrow fraction extraction is Thus, according to Povarov, the optimal boundary is determined by the distribution of separation products outputs We elucidate the formation of fractional extraction curves using Particles of intermediate size classes are divided between these products with different fractional extractions. This distribution pattern is confirmed by everyday industrial practice. To a certain accuracy, the curves If this assumption seems insufficiently correct, to make it mathematically rigorous, it is enough to replace the integral sign by the sum sign in subsequent derivations. Such a replacement will not affect the final result. Examine a small range of sizes in the initial product in the fine product in the coarse product It follows from these relations that Hence, the validity of the following two expressions is clear: It follows from these dependencies that We can take the derivative of such function on the basis of Leibniz–Newton theorem of differentiation of a definite integral with a variable upper limit. According to this theorem, the desired dependence is a continuous function of this limit, which is primitive with respect to the subintegral function, i.e., Revert to Fig. 4. It has been established that the higher the extraction and the lower the contamination of products obtained in the process of separation, the greater its efficiency. To define conditions of the optimal fractional difference, it is necessary to maximize the relation Optimization conditions by these dependencies are One can easily see that both relations give the same result. We define it: In accordance with Hence, the true sense of the criteria-free optimization is that the optimal separation boundary corresponds to Only one value in Thus, the method of determining optimal separation by the relation Let us prove this. Optimality condition determined using Hancock's criterion should be expressed by the relation The efficiency by the fine product can be written as The efficiency by the coarse product can be written as Using After certain algebraic transformations, we obtain: The final relationship gives Direct optimization methods of Rubinchik, Bond, Povarov also do not lead to the equality of fractional separation parameters in the determined or optimal regimes. Therefore, they should be considered erroneous. Thus, it is revealed that fractional separation can be used for determining unbiased optimality conditions. The method of obtaining this parameter It is clear that at any intermediate point These curves cover the range of sizes from A complete mirror symmetry of these curves with respect to the horizontal axis passing through the ordinate point with the value 0.5 follows from the relations It is perfectly clear that the narrower the zone between At the same time, it is well known that at a fixed separation boundary, the value of optimally achievable separation efficiency can be different and depends, other conditions being the same, on the apparatus design. Therefore, to assess the process quality, besides the boundary size value In most cases, the dependencies are found proceeding from S-shaped form of this curve by approximating the latter by the normal distribution law. Here one of the characteristics of the Gaussian distribution curve is accepted as a quantitative criterion of the process. From such approximation, far-reaching conclusions are made and the correspondence of bulk materials separation curve to the normal law is considered like a general law. However, it is hard to agree with such ideas. A true curve reflecting the character Such an approach to the process analysis, with experimental data fitted into preestablished frames, is rather harmful for science, because it is pseudophysical. In this respect, we can completely agree with Mayer who has noted that the resemblance between the separation curve and the integral Gaussian curve of normal distribution leads to erroneous interpretations and erroneous parameters. Numerous papers devoted to this interpretation are absolutely useless despite complicated mathematical methods applied. The character of fractional separation curve is determined, in the first place, by physical basis of the process (screen sizing, air, water, magnetic or electrical separation, centrifugation, jigging, floatation, etc.). It is hardly possible to fit them into the same framework. Separation practice convincingly points to basic differences in the structure of these curves for different processes. Besides the normal distribution, there are many other It is generally accepted that the notion of the boundary size is conventional and does not actually exist because in a real process separation is performed by a range of sizes from Such an opinion cannot be totally accepted because the notion of boundary size has an explicit physical sense. Namely, in any specific conditions, this boundary corresponds to optimal separation of products at specific technological parameters of the process, and only changes introduced into these parameters can lead to a change in the boundary value. This is an important parameter for controlling separation processes in optimal regimes. There are several methods of determining the process efficiency irrespective of the separation curve approximation. Terr suggests accepting the value. This index has the dimension of the abscissa and does not cover the entire range of the curve. Experimental study of this parameter does not provide a basis for computing the process. Such drawbacks are characteristic of other indices of this kind, for instance, Attempts have been made to determine the separation efficiency by the slope angle of the tangent at the point These indices provide a certain estimation of the process but are totally devoid of the capabilities of generalization because their physical sense is rather vague and is not connected with the separation process mechanism. Thus, the analysis of various methods of separation efficiency assessment performed on the basis of the analysis of separation curves shows their obvious unfitness for practical purposes. Their principal drawback is that they are based on the separation curve that is not, strictly speaking, unambiguous. Thus, it is impossible to obtain unbiased indices of the process from the separation curves. Note that all these formulations by the quality criteria are related only to the separation of binary mixtures. Today's industrial needs require multicomponent mixtures separation into components. This problem has not been practically covered in the technical literature, although it is rather urgent for industrial practice. Therefore, we are making an attempt to apply the ideas on the assessment of the composition of mixtures of components obtained when solving the Gibbs paradox. Thus, here two serious problems formulated at approximately the same time intersect. Several generations of scientists have been working at their solution in completely different branches of science for more than 100