This paper explores the relationship between energy and the generation of minus 75 micron material. Rittinger's law of comminution states that the energy input is proportional to the generation of new surface area. An accurate and consistent measurement of surface area, applicable across multiple size ranges, is required to apply this practically. The amount of new −75μm material generated has previously been proposed as a proxy for surface area. This has been demonstrated to some extent on a range of different laboratory equipment, but not in a manner suited to equipment-independent ore characterisation. To this end the JK Rotary Breakage Tester (JKRBT) and Schönert breakage device have been used to measure the progressive production of fines from cumulative single impacts starting with 37.5mm particles down to 250μm. As per expectation, the generation of −75μm material was found to be proportional to the specific energy, but there was a secondary influence of size. A model was developed to describe the breakage and it was found that the standard t10 relationship could be used to effectively calculate the size specific energy. Measuring the intrinsic competence of an ore in this way can then be used to assess the energy efficiency of full-scale mills in relation to a lab scale test. It is envisaged that this relationship also has the potential to be used in the design of new comminution circuits. The methodology and the results from its application are presented for discussion and review.The relationship between energy and size reduction is of primary importance in the field of comminution. This paper proposes the use of the energy required to produce new − Currently, the standard method for calculating comminution unit energy efficiency is the ratio of operating work index and the Bond work index. This gives an indication of the efficiency of the milling circuit in relation to the The relationship between input energy and generation of − The specific kinetic energy (kWh/t) of the particle before impact was determined by half the velocity of the particle squared. Theoretically, when the particle exits the rotor, its tangential and radial velocity components equal the tip speed. However, in practice the transfer of energy is not 100% efficient. For the JKRBT, these calibration factors have been established through high-speed video analysis ( The breakage testwork procedure started with 90 particles between 37.5 and 26.5 Previous work has shown linear relationships between cumulative comminution energy consumption and material generated below 75 When the breakage was extended to finer sizes using the Schönert breakage device, the relationship visibly deviated from linearity. As the smaller particles were broken, the generation of − The results for the second ore are displayed together with the first sample in The cumulative generation of − A model was developed to describe the results generated through the experimental programme. The model was based on the breakage (appearance) function developed by  Plotting of the degree of breakage (t Combining these t-family modelling techniques provides a robust methodology for determining the progeny from single particle impact tests over a wide range of input energies and initial particle sizes. Double parabolic interpolation functions were used to calculate the t-values from the experimental size distributions, the t-values that corresponded to the fitted t The model was tested to its limits by the predicting the size specific energy and its variability with initial particle size ( The SSE consumption is a useful metric for the determination of the practical comminution energy efficiency. Thermodynamic milling efficiencies are typically calculated as below 2%, a value so low as to be useless ( The SSE calculation has a key advantage over the use of t The SSE decreases with particle size—a result opposed to the traditional t Single particles from 37.5 A simple model relating the t The authors would like to acknowledge the support of