Choosing materials for orthopedic implants often imposes strict requirements for the mechanical properties. Poly-L-lactide (PLLA) is widely employed for this purpose, however toughnening schemes are necessary for its suitable application. Blending of PLLA and biodegradable poly(L-lactide-co-ɛ-caprolactone) copolymer (PLCL) showing a thermoplastic-elastomeric behavior has been performed in an effort to toughen the PLLA without compromising its biodegradability and biocompatibility. The miscibility state of PLLA/PLCL blend system is studied by means of Differential Scanning Calorimetry (DSC) and Dynamic Mechanical Analysis (DMA). The mechanical properties will be also discussed, as well as, phase morphology observed by Scanning Electron Microscopy (SEM).
                  Blends of PLLA/PLCL show different miscibility degrees depending on the blending process and the copolymer content. Blends prepared by melt-quenching show a miscibility window for compositions ≤30 wt% of PLCL, while a phase separation occurred in the rest of compositions. The toughness of PLLA was considerably improved by the addition of PLCL. The elongation at break was significantly increased.In the past decade new researches have further expanded the feasibility of bioresorbable polymeric fixation, eventually leading to clinical application as devices. Choosing materials for orthopedic implants usually focuses on the material and structural properties of the bone or skeletal defect to be replaced which often imposes strict requirements for the mechanical properties. Usually high mechanical strength and stiffness are extremely important in designing biodegradable devices, such as, screws, plates or pins, for bone fracture fixation (osteosynthesis procedures). In this sense, poly(L-lactide) (PLLA) and its composites have been reported to be suitable for designing bone fracture fixations From a clinical point of view, a ductile mode of deformation is desirable, since a brittle breakage of an implant before union of a fracture results in bone redisplacement and loose of material fragments, which might cause irritation or some adverse reaction Many strategies have been developed to alter the properties of a polymer. The chemical synthesis of copolymers is an interesting method in order to design new polymers with special properties. However, this method is generally more expensive, as well as, less-industrial-practiced method than the blending operation. A proper selection and combination of polymeric components in a certain ratio might result in a blend material with optimal properties for a specific application. Numerous attempts have been made to toughen polylactides trough blending with different commercial thermoplastics and rubbers In this work, a novel polymer blend system composed of PLLA and PLCL copolymer, PLLA/PLCL, is presented as an alternative biodegradable and bioresorbable material to tune the properties of PLLA. The aim of this work is to study the miscibility state, phase morphology and mechanical properties of this polymeric system. Poly(L-lactide) (PLLA) was supplied by Biomer (Germany). The weight average molecular weight (M Poly(L-lactide-co-ɛ-caprolactone) (PLCL) of approx. 70:30 L-lactide/ε-caprolactone in molar ratio was supplied by Purac Biochem (The Netherlands). The weight average molecular weight (M The composition of this statistical copolymer and its chain-microstructural features were well resolved with the determination of several parameters such as the randomness character (R = 0 block character to R = 1 random) and the number average sequence lengths of its constituent L-Lactide (LA) and ε-caprolactone (CL) blocks (l In both cases, the molecular weight distribution was analyzed by gel permeation chromatography using a Waters 1515 chromatograph apparatus equipped with a Waters 2414 refractive index (RI) detector. Chloroform at 35 °C was used as the eluent and the Styragel columns were calibrated with polystyrene standards. Blends of PLLA/PLCL systems were prepared in three different ways. Solution/precipitation method: Chloroform solutions of polymers and their blends were prepared at concentration of 5 wv%. Large excess of methanol was used for precipitation of polymer solutions. The precipitants were then air dried for 1 day in air and 2 days at vacuum. Solvent Casting method: Films of neat polymers, PLLA and PLCL, and their blends were prepared using solvent evaporation method from 5 wt% solutions in chloroform. The resulting polymer films were first air dried for 48 h and then dried for 7 days at vacuum at room temperature in order to assure the complete solvent evaporation. Melt mixing method: Sheets of neat polymers and their blends were prepared by melt-mixing by DSM Xplore micro-compounder (Netherlands) at 200 °C and speed of 100 rpm for 4 min and then conformed by compression moulding in a Collin P 200E hydraulic press (Germany) at 200 °C followed by water quenching. The resulting sheets had a thickness of 1 mm. The miscibility state of the PLLA/PLCL blend system was evaluated according to the unique glass transition temperature (T Thermal behavior was analyzed by a Q200-Differential Scanning Calorimeter (TA Instruments), calibrated with pure indium and sapphires. Two subsequent scans were performed from −60 °C to 200 °C at 20 °C min Dynamic mechanical measurements were carried out using a DMA/SDTA861e (Mettler Toledo) in tensile mode. The PLLA/PLCL samples were heated from −20 °C to 90 °C at a heating rate of 3 °C min Tensile tests were performed at 22 °C and 50% of relative humidity (RH) with an Instron 5565 testing machine at a crosshead speed of 5 mm min A JSM-6400 (JEOL) Scanning Electronic Microscope was used to observe the fracture surfaces of the broken specimens after tensile tests and analyze phase morphology of the blends. Previous to observation the polymeric specimens were coated with a thin layer of gold using a BAL-TEC SCD 004 sputter coater. The miscibility of any blend system mainly depends on the behavior of the blend components. Three different miscibility behaviors can be expected in any polymeric blend system: The components demix at all blend compositions in the pure components (fully immiscible); the components exhibit phase separation with partial solubility of the components or a miscibility gap depending on composition (partially miscible), or the components form an homogeneous phase in the whole compositional range (fully miscible). Blends of PLLA/PLCL were obtained by solution/precipitation in a chloroform/methanol pair, by solvent casting from chloroform solutions, and by melt mixing, leading to different results.  Regarding PLLA/PLCL blends, all compositions show two distinctive T Regarding the cold crystallization process, ΔH As a comparative purposes the amorphous phase behavior of blends prepared by solvent casting method were also analyzed. The results obtained were in agreement with those of the solution/precipitation method in terms of thermal transition values and behavior (The second DSC traces and the corresponding thermal transitions of PLLA, PLCL and PLLA/PLCL blends of different compositions obtained by solvent casting are shown in The above mentioned blending methods are really useful at laboratory scale in order to evaluate the miscibility behavior of any polymer blend. However, from the industrial point of view, as a previous step of any final conformation process melt-blending of components is required. Generally, melt-blending processes imply high temperatures; hence mixing at high temperature can trigger a series of chemical processes leading somewhat to different results obtained by other blending methods. Therefore, the evaluation of this PLLA/PLCL system prepared by melt-blending is considered especially important in this work.  A single T As mentioned before from 70/30 composition on a phase separations is observed. Whereas T To verify the results obtained by DSC, Dynamic Mechanical Analysis (DMA) tests were also performed. This technique is particularly sensitive and useful for measuring transitions, such as T  Considering the difference in the miscibility behavior of this system when exposed to high temperature blending, the chemical mechanism responsible for such behavior has to be studied. In this work the hypothesis of the existence of transesterification reactions is supported. According to the literature, ester interchange reactions (generally called transesterification reactions) can occur in polyester blend systems at the melt state Following these hypothesis, it is believed that the fact to find a single T Generally, to quantify the role of the hypothetical transesterification reactions occurring during the mixing step, experimental technique directly sensitive to chemical structure such as Nuclear Magnetic Resonance (NMR) is required. For this purpose In order to prove the transterification reaction to be the responsible of the miscibility behavior of this polymer blend the following strategy was followed. Solutions of 5 wv% in chloroform were prepared from melt-quenched PLLA/PLCL sheets of different compositions. Films of these samples were obtained by solvent casting method and let them dry in air for 48 h and 7 days at vacuum. DSC measurements were performed as described in the materials and methods section and then compared with the results obtained for melt-quenched samples. Moreover, we have observed that Tg signals of transesterificated phases are broader and the shape of the melting peak corresponding to PLLA crystals for PLLA/PLCL blends changes with respect to pure PLLA (see The stiffness, the strength and the elongation at break of the melt-quenched PLLA/PLCL blends were analyzed by means of tensile tests. Neat PLLA displays a brittle fracture showing a distinct yield point with subsequent failure immediately upon the tensile load. Its tensile strength is 71 MPa, while elongation at break is only 12%. On the contrary, PLCL behaves as an elastomeric material exhibiting an absence of yield point and a large elongation at break of 837%. As it is shown in Two different tensile behaviors are easily observed for PLLA/PLCL blends. While the stress-strain curves for 80/20, 60/40 and 50/50 compositions are typical of thermoplastic polymers showing a clear yielding behavior upon stretching, the curves for 40/60 and 20/80 compositions are typical of thermoplastic elastomeric rubbers. This result can be attributed to phase inversion phenomenon where PLCL turns into the matrix from 50/50 composition on. In general, the elongation at break increases with increasing PLCL content, while the tensile strength and the elastic modulus decrease with the addition of the copolymer. These tendencies are illustrated in This trend may be attributed to the phase inversion at this range of composition where PLCL acts as the matrix or simply to the fact that the elastic moduli were calculated using different criterions as explained above. Another important fact found that should be pointed out is the strain recovery observed after the specimens were broken in the tensile tests. It was observed that PLCL copolymer specimens have the ability to recover practically its original size after being stretched. Strain recovery values (ɛ As a summary, In order to get better interpretation of the blend morphology, surfaces after tensile fractures of PLLA/PLCL blends were observed by means of Scanning Electron Microscopy (SEM). The corresponding micrographs are shown in The characteristic and morphological features of fractures surfaces of PLLA/PLCL blends are dependent on the amount of each component. SEM micrographs show one-phase behavior of 80/20 blend and rather smooth surface according to DSC and DMA results. Though not very clear for 60/40 composition, from that composition on (50/50, 40/60, 20/80) blends appear phase separated, in agreement with the results of DSC and DMA measurements and much rougher surfaces can be observed as a result of the plastic deformation underwent during the tensile tests. The morphology observed for 60/40 and 50/50 compositions suggest a co-continuous phase structure. From these compositions on, discrete domains in a continuous matrix can be easily distinguished. These domains are homogenously dispersed in the matrix, but the size of the dispersed phase decreases as the copolymer content increases. This is particularly evident when comparing blends with 60 and 80 wt% of PLCL. Moreover, by comparing the micrographs it is concluded that the phase inversion occurs for the corresponding 50/50 blend. It has to be pointed out that no clear distinct interfaces are observed in phase separated blends. This is an indicative of a good interfacial compatibility between the two phases. This is most likely attributable to the presence of the PLCL In this work the miscibility state, the mechanical properties and the phase morphology of PLLA/PLCL blends were presented and discussed. The miscibility state was evaluated according to the unique T We found enough evidences to suggest the transesterification reaction occurring in the blend transformation process to be the responsible of the amorphous phase behavior of melt-blended samples. If our hypothesis is correct, the new PLCL The toughness of PLLA was improved by the addition of PLCL copolymer. Blends with lower content than 50 wt% of the copolymer show a typical tensile behavior of thermoplastic polymers, showing clear yielding behavior upon stretching, tensile strength (σ Although more precise measurements are required for full understanding of the mechanical response of this PLLA/PLCL blend system at service, these preliminary results shed light on the possibility of some of these blend compositions to be used as orthopedic implants for bone fracture fixations. The authors are grateful for funds from the  