The discrete element method (DEM) is widely used as an optimization tool in the design of tumbling mills. Nevertheless, the experimental validation of DEM codes is an important step to guarantee that the system is well described and that the predictions are close to the real operating conditions. The power draw is the principal parameter used to validate DEM codes, but using this as the only reference can be inappropriate. The power draw can be fitted by simply changing the model constants until the predicted values are close to the experimental data, when the charge profile looks similar to the real operation and there is no experimental velocity profile with which to compare. This paper presents an experimental validation of a 2D DEM code by digital image analysis of the velocity profiles of the balls, the toe and shoulder angles and the predicted power draw. The experimental values were compared with the simulated data using different charge lifters and charge levels. The DEM simulation clearly shows that the velocity charge changes with a modification of the lifter profile. An accurate map of velocities at each location in the mill was obtained by digital image analysis and compared with DEM calculations. The simulated and experimental values are very close, leading to the conclusion that such DEM predictions represent an accurate description of the process in a tumbling mill.Poisson ratio of particle position vector of particle relative velocity vector of particle interaction force between particles normal force (N). tangential force (N). radius of particle effective radius (m). tangential relative velocity (m/s). tangential damping constant. mutual compression of particles angular velocity of particle coefficient of friction. dissipative constant (s). energy (J). number of total collisions. mill power draw (W). time (s). shoulder charge angle (°). toe charge angle (°). critical angle (°). young’s modulus. time step (s). The size reduction process is one of the most important processes in raw material transformation. In the mineral processing area, particle size reduction is accomplished primarily by ball mills. For instance, in the cement industry, grinding is the key process determining the quality of the final product. Between 60% and 90% of the total cement production cost is due to energy consumption ( Usually, the optimization and design of grinding circuits are based on costly and time- consuming laboratory experimentation and pilot plant testing. Additionally, the velocity and energy impacts inside the mills are very different between the laboratory scale and an industrial mill. The scale-up process modifies the fracture behavior of the particles ( Nevertheless, experimental validation is the most important step in the process of testing codes. The most frequently used validation methodologies are ball trajectory tracking and power draw monitoring in laboratory scale mills ( The code is written for a two-dimensional system with interaction forces between the particles of a granular material. This system is represented by spherical particles that are in mechanical contact. The contact is described by the following equation Effective contact between particles is present when The force has two components, one in a normal direction  Once the DEM can predict the power draw that is consumed in the ball–ball and ball–wall collisions. For each collision, the fraction of the energy lost is modeled by the dissipative part. Therefore, the product of the normal and tangential dissipative force for the respective displacements gives the energy lost at the collision. During this calculation, the energy associated with each of the collisions is maintained in a record, which finally constitutes the total energy loss as calculated by the following equation ( In the Eq. A steel ball mill with a single chamber where a layer of balls fits perfectly was used to generate 2D videos of the charge motion under different operating conditions. Uniform-sized 1-in. balls with a density of 7850 The lifter face angle changes from 0° to 22.5°. The charge motion is greatly affected by this modification. The DEM code must be able to capture the modification in the charge profile and accurately describe the experimental velocity field generated from high definition videos. The mill is placed on the top of the rolls, as shown in The rotational velocity of the mill was kept constant at 52.75% of the critical speed (37.31 After the 16 videos were generated using the operating conditions in Using the image analysis tool, the angles can be measured from the high-resolution images extracted from the video. For each operational condition, 20 frames were selected at different times from the video, and the average angle is reported. In The video is made up of a finite number of images; therefore, it can be transformed into a sequence of frames. For each test, 1 The time between frames and the position of the object is known in each frame. Thus, the instantaneous velocity can be calculated as shown in In The simulated data are in close agreement with the experimental values. These simulations verify that the DEM code can successfully predict the location of the charge profile. The effect of the face angle of the lifter is also predicted. A lower face angle brings the charge higher as expected. This modification in the charge trajectory due to the configuration of the lifter can be reproduced by the DEM calculations. The charge profiles reach a steady state at two revolutions. The video was processed to obtain discrete images of the movement of the balls. Once the ball velocity was obtained, the data were plotted and compared with the simulated ball velocity, as shown in The simulation of one ball can be controlled, but the aim of any simulation is to represent the interactions between the balls inside the mill. The next set of experiments tests the 20% charge level and compares the experimental and simulated results. These data are presented in The cascading and cataracting phenomena are present in both the experimental and simulated cases. Increasing the ball charge level modifies the velocity of the balls. Because the distance between the charge surface and the shoulder has been reduced, the velocity of the balls impacting the toe of the charge is also diminished. This effect will decrease the kinetic energy of the balls hitting the charge surface. Increasing the charge level to 60% further reduced the cataracting effect. In all cases, the profiles predicted by the DEM code appropriately describe the charge position and velocity profiles of the balls. This is a more reliable validation of the simulated data. The last stage of validation is the power draw prediction. This is the most important validation parameter that is supported by an accurate description of the charge profile. The simulated power draw can be calculated by recording energy loses due to ball–ball and ball–wall collisions over a given period of time. The experimental set up was run for 10 The experimental power draw presented in this paper is the difference between the power drawn by the empty mill (313 These two data sets can be compared to validate the ability of DEM to predict power consumption, and this can be used as a validation tool. The power draw can be correlated as shown in When the charge level is from 40% to 60%, the simulation deviates from the experimental data on the order of 10%. This error is attributed to the lack of modeling in the third dimension. Nevertheless, the simulations provide an excellent description of the power draw of the system. Digital image analysis is an excellent tool to measure system parameters such as toe and shoulder angles and the ball velocity and location. These parameters provide enough experimental data to validate the DEM codes. The power draw is generally used to validate the codes, but this parameter can be easily fitted by simply changing the model constants, whereas ball trajectory and velocity are not easy to compare with the experimental data. Most of the tools used to measure velocity profiles are difficult to use and expensive. In contrast, digital image analysis can be applied at very low cost and can precisely determine the trajectory and velocity of the balls in the system. The code used in this work successfully predicts changes in the charge using different lifter profiles and various charge levels. This code can only predict the system in two dimensions with an accurate description of the trajectory and power draw. Some other authors ( The authors thank CONACyT for financial support through the Project SEP-CONACyT No. 83158 and scholarship No. 171419.