 John Ralston retired on March 16th 2012 after eighteen, outstanding years as the founding Director of the Ian Wark Research Institute at the University of South Australia in Adelaide. He now holds the highly distinguished title of Emeritus Laureate Professor (in Physical Chemistry and Minerals Processing) at that University. He is widely recognised internationally for his many pioneering scientific contributions to the field of surface and colloid science. This article has been written, in celebration of John's 65th birthday, by four of his closest and longest-standing colleagues and friends. The article is in three sections. The first section recalls John's personal history and achievements, and the two sections thereafter review John's scientific work. It seemed to us appropriate, if somewhat arbitrary, to divide John's scientific work into two broad themes: surface science (including wetting) and particle science (including mineral recovery, flotation and aggregation). John celebrated his 65th birthday on 20th June 2011. He was the only child of James William and Edna May Ralston. His family ran a chicken farm in Harcourt, Victoria. John has had a personal aversion to eating chicken ever since! He attended Melbourne High School and then Melbourne University, where he obtained a B.Sc. (1968). For his honours year project, John joined an “old-style” colloid science group in the Department of Physical Chemistry, led by Tom Healy. All students were expected to talk about their work with one another, whether they were working on the oxide–water interface, ion adsorption at interfaces, semi-conductor colloids, surfactant adsorption or interfacial monolayers. John's own B.Sc. (hons.) project work was published in John's ambitious M.Sc. project, undertaken in 1969 at Melbourne, also in Tom Healy's group, was subsequently published in the Following his M.Sc., John moved to Swinburne University of Technology in Melbourne, first as a temporary assistant lecturer in 1970 and then as a tenured lecturer in 1971. He retained his connection with Melbourne University, however; he was awarded a diploma in education from Melbourne University in 1971. Somehow, he was able to convince both universities that he was “full-time” at both institutions simultaneously! John married Ann in 1969 in Geelong. His stag party was amazing. One hour after all had assembled, John announced that he was going to go to sleep on the couch at the pub. Next morning he was awake, bright eyed and bushy tailed, while all his colleagues were hung over: an early indication of John's smartness, perhaps? John and Ann went to London for two years in 1972 and 1973. Encouraged by Tom Healy, and prior to starting his PhD with him, John had applied to work with one of the then international doyens of mineral processing, Dr Joe Kitchener, at the Royal School of Mines in Imperial College. Funded by a UK Science Research Council fellowship, John studied the surface chemistry of amosite asbestos; he was awarded a Diploma of Imperial College in 1974. John and Ann remained good friends with Joe and Phyllis Kitchener, right up to the time of Joe's death in 2009, aged 93. After this period in London, John returned to work with Tom Healy for his PhD, awarded in 1978. His research appeared in three landmark papers in 1980-81 in the Early on during that period, in 1975, John and Ann had their son, Matt (who married Natasha in 2010 and recently presented John and Ann with their first grandchild, Holly Ann). Then it was back to Europe for two post-doctoral spells. The first (six months during 1978) was spent in the University of Bristol, in the U.K., with Professor Ron Ottewill where John worked on microemulsions. The second (nine months during 1979) was at the Agricultural University of Wageningen, in the Netherlands, with Professor Hans Lyklema where he investigated ion-binding to polyelectrolytes. After this, John and his family returned to Australia and to a lectureship position, again at Swinburne Institute of Technology (later Swinburne University of Technology). He was promoted to senior lecturer in 1981. At that point he started, and was the first head of, the Centre for Applied Colloid Science in Swinburne. As part of this centre, John initiated a very successful master's program in applied colloid science, similar to the one he had gained experience of whilst in Bristol. In 1984 John began his long association with the University of South Australia, although at that time it was the South Australian Institute of Technology (it received university status in 1991); John was appointed Professor of Chemical Technology. This department was located at the old Levels campus in the suburbs to the north of Adelaide. He revitalized the department, attracting money and students from many sources. After some time, he came to the decision that a new research institute was needed, separate from the department of chemical technology, concentrating principally in the area of mineral processing science and technology. He managed to convince the University hierarchy and, in 1994, the Ian Wark Research Institute (“The Wark”) was founded, with John as its first Director (Sir Ian Wark, 1900–1985, had been a leading light in minerals and materials research in Australia and was responsible for the founding of the CSIRO division of industrial chemistry). A new building for this purpose was erected by the University, next to the department of chemical technology. Later, this old department was subsumed into the Wark. In recent years the Levels site has been considerably developed by the University of South Australia and the State, into a modern, thriving outrider to Adelaide, and renamed Mawson Lakes. Alongside this, the Wark itself has developed and expanded, in size, people and reputation, under John's dynamic vision and leadership to become the world-famous institute it now is. It currently employs around 160 academic staff and research students, with an annual budget in excess of 20 mAUD. There have been numerous outstanding achievements by the Wark under John's leadership. For example, in 1999, John led the successful bid for a nine-year, Australian Research Council Special Research Centre, for Particle and Material Interfaces. This has underpinned the basic science being carried out in the Wark in support of the more applied areas, principally in mineral processing, but also more recently in bio- and medical materials. In 2006, John was the principal researcher who led the initiative to establish the Australian Mineral Science Research Institute (AMSRI). AMSRI is a virtual institute in particle science and engineering, with its headquarters at the Wark and involves collaborative research at the Universities of Queensland, Melbourne and Newcastle. Major international companies are involved, through AMIRA International, along with overseas collaborators. More recently, due in no small part to the success and reputation of the Wark, the University of South Australia received the top grade (grade 5), for both chemical sciences and physical chemistry, in the Excellence for Research in Australia assessment exercise. Currently, the Wark plays a leading, central role in the 73 mAUD Materials and Minerals Science Learning and Research Hub at the Mawson Lakes Campus. A brand-new building for this has been completed in early 2012, with a bridge to the current Wark buildings; this houses teaching facilities as well as space for new research equipment. John has been a driving force in this initiative as well. It is worth stressing that, though a sticker for sound science and the development of fundamental understanding, John has never lost sight of the industrial purpose of his work, as attested by his numerous publications in industry-focused journals, his patents and over 100 industrial reports. John is equally at home in debate with an academic theoretician as he is with a plant engineer. This breadth of interest, knowledge and empathy have also greatly assisted in the cut and thrust of the academic-industrial geopolitics so important in ensuring continued funding for The Wark. In recognition of his outstanding scientific contributions, John has received many honours down the years. He was elected a Fellow of the Australian Academy of Technological Sciences and Engineering in 1993, and in 2009 received its Clunies Ross Lifetime Achievement Award. In 1995 he received the R.K. Murphy medal in Industrial Chemistry/Chemical Engineering from the Royal Australian Chemical Institute. In 2003 he received the Australian Federal Government Centenary Medal and in 2005 was chosen as the A.E. Alexander Memorial Lecturer by the Royal Australian Chemical Institute Colloid and Surface Chemistry Division. Also in 2005 he was elected a Fellow of the Australian Academy of Science. 2006 was a “bumper” year in terms of awards to John: he was elected to the Council of the Australian Academy of Science, was appointed Laureate Professor by the University of South Australia, was awarded the Chemeca Medal for Outstanding Service and Contribution to Chemical Engineering (Australia's highest award in Chemical Engineering), and gained the South Australian Premier's Award for Research Leadership. In 2007 he was elected South Australian Scientist of the Year and also South Australian of the Year. In 2008, John received his “crowning glory” award in Australia, being made an Officer of the Order of Australia (AO). John has contributed generously to international societies, such as the International Association of Colloid and Interface Scientists (serving on its Council and organizing its triennial conference in Adelaide in 1994), and the International Union of Pure and Applied Chemistry (serving as President of its Physical and Biophysical Chemistry Division, 2002-2004). He has established very strong international links in every continent across the World, and has received numerous awards to spend time overseas. In 1986 he was awarded a Senior Fulbright Fellowship to visit the University of Utah in the Department of Metallurgy and Metallurgical Engineering, for six months, with Jan Miller. In 1997 he was awarded a U.K. Royal Society of Chemistry Australasian Lectureship. In 1998 he was a South African Chamber of Mines Visiting Professor, and a Benjamin Meaker Visiting Professor in the University of Bristol, in the UK, in 1999/2000. In 2002, for his many contributions to the Åbo Akademi University in Finland and, in particular, through his long association with Jarl Rosenholm there, he was awarded an honorary degree, Doctor Next we review, in more depth, John's scientific contributions. John's research career is associated, first and foremost, with the science that underpins mineral flotation technology. Themes include: the characterization of mineral surfaces, modification of their properties by adsorption of ions, surfactants and polymers; adsorption of surfactants at gas–liquid (bubble) interfaces; stability and rupture of thin liquid films; the measurement of surfaces forces between particles and surfaces, and the processes of wetting and dewetting, especially their dynamics. Inevitably, given the interconnectivity of these phenomena, many of his publications overlap several of these themes; they also demonstrate an impressively wide-ranging expertise in disparate areas from electrochemistry to crystallography and in advanced analytical techniques like Scanning Tunnelling Microscopy and ToF-SIMS. No brief survey of his contributions to surface science can do justice to the vast research iceberg that floats below the visible expression of more than 300 publications. Here, we select just some of his achievements in the study of thin films and wetting. John's first paper on thin films, “Thin films and Froth Flotation,” appeared in Another important and continuing theme in John's career has been his enthusiastic study of wetting and, especially, dynamic wetting, i.e. the process by which a liquid front moves across a solid surface. Since 1987, he has published 56 papers on this topic, more than two per year, with several others in the pipeline. The early work was concerned principally with the measurement of equilibrium contact angles on particles and plates and the influence of surface charge — a strand of interest that remains current. With Diggins in 1993 he developed a method of assessing particle wettability by equilibrium pressure measurements. Such techniques were applied to systems of interest in mineral flotation, such as sulphides (with C.A. Prestidge) and surfaces with adsorbed polymers. Later focus switched to photo-responsive wetting of adsorbed organic layers and titania surfaces, electrowetting and the associated phenomena of contact angle saturation at high voltages, and, most recently, contact angle hysteresis on very carefully engineered rough or heterogeneous surfaces (with R. Sedev, C. Priest, M. Fabretto, and R. Fetzer). This work has provided a critical assessment of the classical Wenzel and Cassie and Baxter theories and highlighted the way in which the specifics of surface structure and topography markedly affect wetting equilibria and dynamics. This attention to detail and careful experimentation has also characterized John's work on dynamic wetting and dewetting. His emphasis on first constructing a variety of well-defined surfaces with the option of high uniformity, controlled heterogeneity or specified roughness over a variety of scales has proved a major asset. Dewetting is of critical interest during the establishment of bubble-particle contact in flotation, but John's contribution has extended well beyond such applications and into our fundamental understanding of the mechanisms involved. Though he has been rigorously impartial in his assessment of rival approaches, the work of his group has provided the largest body of experimental evidence in support of the molecular-kinetic model — some 23 papers; the first in 1992, but with near exponential growth in the last 5 One of John's most original contributions has been to use ionic liquids as tools to understand dynamic wetting and electrowetting. Their low volatility, wide variation in structure and properties (it is estimated that there are about 10 We should also mention the new microfabrication centre that John has recently established at the Wark. This is now providing opportunities to study wetting and flow in both open and confined complex geometries and the ability to specify the wettability of the internal surfaces, e.g. to generate gradients and patches. It seems certain that this facility will play an important role in future wetting studies, especially in relation to microfluidics and applications such as lab (or factory) on a chip. John's research on particle–bubble interaction and its application to mineral flotation is internationally recognised. Since 1983, 57 papers from John's group have been directly related to mineral flotation. His earlier fundamental study on particle–bubble interaction includes the elementary steps of collision, attachment and detachment which were published in several key papers (with Z. Dai, S.S. Dukhin, D. Fornasiero and D. Hewitt) and culminated in the development of the Wark flotation model in 2003 which was successfully applied to the flotation of mineral particles in ores in turbulent systems (with J. Duan, D. Fornasiero, S. Grano and B. Pyke). This flotation model predicts optimum flotation performance for particles with an intermediate size, in agreement with plant results, and lower flotation for finer and coarser particles due to their low particle–bubble collision and stability efficiency, respectively. These results confirmed his earlier work with R. Crawford (1985) and more recently with C. Gontijo (2007) on the critical particle size and hydrophobicity required for particle flotation in quiescent or turbulent conditions. In particular, they demonstrated that large homogeneous particles (0.6–0.8 John has made significant contributions to research on the surface chemistry of metal oxides and sulphides, including the effect of organic and inorganic reagents, and their impact on particle–particle and particle–bubble interaction and mineral flotation (with J. Addai-Mensah, D. Beattie, D. Fornasiero, S. Grano, R. Hayes and C. Prestidge). Quartz was often used as a model of the mineral surface because of the ease of surface modification with silane molecules to accurately control surface hydrophobicity (with P. Blake in 1985). Various John has had a long-lasting research collaboration with the mineral industry combining fundamental and applied science. Through this collaboration, he has delivered successful research and technology transfer outcomes to industry for more than 20 John has been outstanding as a leader and innovator in our field, and has gained deeply-felt respect from all of us who have interacted with him down the years. His creation and sustainability of the Wark speaks for itself. That institution is a wonderful gift to Australia and to the global world of science and engineering. One can, of course, attempt to quantify a person's success as a scientist using the modern fad of “metrics”. In John' case one could mention (at the last count): over 200 mAUD raised in competitive grant funding (from the Australian Research Council, the Department of Education, Science and Training, and national and international private industry); 80 PhD and M.Sc. research students successfully supervised; over 300 research publications in referred journals; 10 patents; some 220 plenary or invited lectures around the World. However, such figures do not fully reflect the “real man” behind them. Like many of us, John's first “love” (professionally!) has always been actually doing and discussing science, and, in particular, interacting with, and encouraging, his PhD students and co-workers. Now John is about to undertake two new directions: retirement (although we are sure this will only be partial), and grandparent-hood. We wish him (and of course Ann!) every success for the future in these latest ventures.