Hollow microspheres should be characterized in terms of physicochemical aspects to understand the flotation effect principle. There have been insufficient studies on the effect of hollow microspheres in water treatment in terms of flotation. In this study, various analytical and experimental approaches were utilized to identify the flotation characteristics and understand the effect of hollow microspheres on flotation. These approaches included analytical methods such as particle count and zeta potential measurements, scanning electron microscopy-energy dispersive X-ray spectroscopy analysis, X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy, a floc breakage experiment, and a collision efficiency model. The hollow microspheres were spherical shape with an average size of 50 μm. The microspheres were identified to have a higher negative charge (−69.1 mV) than microbubbles (−51.1 and −30.5 mV). The binding energy of Si–O from the hollow microspheres showed the highest peak at 103.18 eV and 61,503.7 counts/s. Si–O binding structure and the molecular structure of the SixOx series were considered to be a structure in which 
                        
                           
                              
                                 Si
                              
                              
                                 3
                              
                              
                                 2
                                 −
                              
                           
                        
                      is bonded to oxygen ion. The optimum floc breakage condition was determined to be 15 min. The number of particles increased because the average particle size is increased with the concentration of hollow microspheres injection. The turbulent flocculation (TF) model was confirmed to be consentient to the experimental data in comparison with the white-water bubble blanket (WWBB) model. As a result, the hollow microspheres had the characteristic of increasing floc size so that flocs can be floated easily.Flotation technology was used in 1920 to purify water, and dissolved air flotation (DAF) systems began to be used for water and wastewater treatment ( To test the coagulant/flocculation reaction, a Jar-tester (PB-900™, Phipps & Bird, USA) was used. The Jar used in the experiment was circular acrylic reactor of diameter 100 mm and length 200 mm. The sampling for flotation obtained by treated valve installed at 10 mm from bottom, and the sampling for CGS was by another valve installed at 40 mm from bottom. When injecting hollow microspheres, the flocs with lower density were found to be floating and the turbidity of the treated water gradually decreased. To test particle size, the digital online particle counter monitor (PCM) (PC 2400D, Chemtrac, USA) was used in the experiment. The measurement ranges were used with nine channels. The particle size was measured from 2 to 100 μm at an interval of 10 μm. The sample flowrate was adjusted to 100 mL/min in order to measure the number of the particles in 100 mL of the sample using a master flux pump. Each time of the sample was replaced, the tube was cleaned with distilled water. The data were used when a stable detection was made. All data were obtained as the average value through three experiments. Information provided by the manufacturer (3 M Company) indicated that the hollow microspheres (K1 glass bubbles, 3M™ Microspheres, USA) were spherical type and had a density of 0.125 g/cm The zeta potential for pH changes of pure hollow microspheres was analyzed by a zeta analyzer (Nano particle analyzer SZ-100, Horiba, Japan) based on the laser Doppler electrophoresis technique. The pH range analyzed was from 2 to 10. Each pH was controlled with 0.1 M HCl and 0.1 M NaOH. As the removal efficiency of the floating process depends on the surface process, the surface potentials of the microbubbles and the hollow microspheres were analyzed and compared. It was also necessary to investigate the tendency of change in the zeta potential of the microspheres after the coagulation reaction. The raw water consisted of dissolved organic carbon (DOC; 4.3 mg/L), turbidity (7.3 NTU), and hollow microspheres (60 mg/L). DOC and turbidity were used from natural organic matter based on humic acid sodium salt (Merck, Germany). TOC (TOC-L, Shimadzu Co., Japan), turbidity, and the ultraviolet 254 nm band (UV The surface features and surface element composition of the hollow microspheres, as well as the physicochemical properties of the adhesion with the floc were investigated. The surface of the hollow microspheres was coated with platinum and analyzed using FE-SEM (S-5200, Hitachi, Japan). Additionally, for surface element analysis, EDS was used (Noran 4700, USA). In SEM, the particle size and surface characteristics (roughness) can be determined. With EDS, it is possible to determine the surface distribution of various components and estimate which substances have an effect. The operating condition of EDS showed that accelerating voltage, takeoff angle, lifetime was 20 keV, 30, and 57.57s, respectively (see XPS (K-Alpha, Thermo Fisher Scientific, UK) analysis was used to determine the ionic structure composition on the surface of the hollow microspheres. XPS analysis of Si and O was performed. In general, Si in hollow microspheres could be detected at 2p ( Floc breakage experiments were conducted in the laboratory. The 2 L square reaction tank was made of transparent acrylic. The solutions used in the experiments were kaolin (200 mg/L) and DOC (4 mg/L) using humic acid sodium salt. The humic acid sodium salt was dissolved in distilled water, filtered at 0.45 μm, and diluted in tap water to adjust for alkalinity. Rapid and slow mixing were performed at 150 rpm for 1 min and at 50 rpm for 15 min, respectively, and the floc was floated for 30 min. After coagulation and flocculation by a jar tester, the number of particles and average size were analyzed by PCM while stirring at 300 rpm. The breakage time was set to 5, 10, 15, and 20 min. The concentrations of the injected hollow microspheres were 5, 10, 20, 50, 100, 200, 400, 800, and 1000 mg/L. The parameters measured for raw water were: kaolin 200 mg/L, DOC 1.4 mg/L, turbidity 45.5 NTU, and UV For theoretical approach based on statistical analysis, the collision efficiency model by MATLAB software (2018a, MathWorks, USA) was used for simulation of size distribution, rising velocity, retention time, and removal efficiency by hollow microspheres, flocs, and floc-bead aggregates. The observed turbidity removal efficiency by the hollow microspheres was compared with the theoretical model value for validation. First, the WWBB model (Eq. Second, the TF model means that collisions between particles and bubbles occur by turbulent mixing in the contact zone. The coagulation efficiencies of the particles and the bubbles are determined by the mixing speed, as described by Eq. In this study, the bubbles used in the WWBB and TF models were calculated to replace the hollow microspheres, and a model similar to the actual experimental value was found. The WWBB model was analyzed by injecting hollow microspheres at 20, 40, and 100 mg/L, and the TF model was set at stirring speeds of 450, 600, and 1500 rpm. The variable values for the models are illustrated in The average size of the hollow microspheres and those distribution were investigated by particle size analysis, and the results are listed in The hollow microspheres were identified to have a charge that was strongly more negative than the bubbles ( The surface of the hollow microspheres was physiochemically examined using SEM-EDS (see The XPS analysis of Si (Si 2p spectra) is shown in A larger number of particles was detected in large flocs regardless of the floc breakage time. There were many large flocs because of the cohesion force of the floc itself. An average particle size of 85 μm was detected at 5, 10, 15, and 20 min, and the number of particles was 625, 564, 534, and 505 counts/ml, respectively ( The number of particles was determined by analyzing the average size of particles in the broken floc according to the concentration of hollow microspheres injected through the PCM at 15 min after the floc breakage time. Because the average size of the hollow microspheres was 56 μm, as the injection amount increased, the number of particles increased from a particle size of 50 μm ( During the flocculation, floc–microsphere aggregates are formed by collision and attachment. These functions affected the treatment efficiency. The turbidity removal rate according to retention time is shown in The performance of WWBB and TF model with the experimental datasets are summarized in When algae blooming occurs in summer, the flocculation efficiency is lowered, which causes problems in water purification plant operation. The hollow microspheres applied in this study can be applied as an effective technique in terms of algae removal. When injecting hollow microspheres before rapid mixing, huge flocs that were made with hollow microspheres can float with algae. In flotation processes such as DAF, high concentrations of algae can be treated before flotation, allowing for low-load DAF operation. Hollow microspheres are applicable to water treatment through various processes in climate change. The properties of hollow microspheres were studied through analytical experiments. Since the surface of the hollow microspheres is negatively charged, it was found to be effective in colliding with the floc. When compared with the existing micro-bubble, it was found that the effect of colliding with the floc is large. These collision efficiencies were understood by the single-chain of Si:O and the silicate structure of Si This paper is supported by The following is the Supplementary data to this article: Supplementary data to this article can be found online at