Synthesis of ordered mesoporous ceria-zirconia (CeO2–ZrO2, M-CZ) solid solution in water-based conditions have challenged scientists for a long time due to the extremely different chemical properties of cerium and zirconium cations. This study discuss the synthesis of highly ordered mesoporous Ce0.5Zr0.5O2 solid solution in aqueous solution through a new complex and de-complex method using di-cationic Gemini as the template. The method takes advantage of the coordinative capability of citric acid (CA) to allow the coexistence of inorganic resources in mild basic solutions and uses the strong oxidic capability of H2O2 to precipitate Ce and Zr cations homogeneously. Through this strategy, the combination between inorganic–organic groups in aqueous solution was avoided, whereas coordination between inorganic–organic species was realized. Mechanisms show that the formation of peroxycarboxylic groups (–COOOH) from the reaction between metal-CA molecular and hydroxyl radical (OH) was the key process. Meso-scale micelles were formed during hydrothermal treatment, while hexagonally arranged pores with narrow size distribution were obtained in the calcination procedure. The surface area of the calcined product was 228 m2 g−1 with a pore volume of 0.7 cm3 g−1, whereas oxygen storage capacity was 652 μmol g−1. The M-CZ product illustrated fairly good pilot-scale three-way catalytic (TWC) performances thanks to the thin pore walls in the mesostructures. A complete (100%) conversion of CO and NO
                        y
                      at 340 °C was detected in the engine pedestal tests. The complex and de-complex strategy may provide a new route for the preparation of ordered mesoporous composite oxides.The synthesis of ordered mesoporous composite oxides is of vital importance for various catalytic applications. However, the lack of effective sample preparing method hinders researchers from investigating this area. The difficulty in the synthesis of composite oxide solid solutions with highly ordered mesoporous structures lies mainly in the different chemical properties of the involved metal cations. Homogeneous gel suspensions should be obtained to facilitate the self assembly of inorganic matters onto organic surfactants. However, different sedimentation requirements in basic solutions for various metal cations hinder the homogeneous gelling of composite cations. Considering Ce CeO This study focused on the preparation of ordered mesoporous CeO The complex and de-complex strategy was introduced in this work to avoid the rapid sedimentation of metal ions and to provide an opportunity for the slow and homogeneous gelling of inorganic matters around the templates. Ce  (1) Material preparation Raw resources were of analytical grade and used without further purification. The di-cationic (2) Structural and pore characterizations Nitrogen adsorption–desorption isotherms of the samples were measured by an ASAP 2020 system (Micromeritics Co. Ltd.) using liquid nitrogen as the medium at 78.3 K. Data were collected in relative pressure from 0 to 1.0. The Barrett–Joyner–Halenda (BJH) pore size distributions were deduced from the adsorption branch of isotherm curves. Brunauer–Emmett–Teller (BET) specific surface area was deduced by nitrogen adsorption at 78.3 K, which was performed after degassing the sample at 573 K overnight under vacuum. Small angle X-ray diffusion (SAXRD) and common X-ray diffraction (XRD) were collected by a Bruker D8 Advance powder diffractometer with Cu (3) Reduction performances tests The H In the TWC performance testing experiment, 50 g of the as-prepared M-CZ sample was dispersed into 0.05 mol L A diffraction peak at approximately 1.87 was observed on the SAXRD of the as-prepared product (before calcination), as is shown in TEM images of the precursor before calcinations in Nitrogen adsorption–desorption isotherms of M-CZ shown in The H Designing structure or composition of CZ solid solutions is often aimed at actual applications. Thus, after the 50.0 g sample was accumulated, the pilot-scale performances of the as-prepared M-CZ sample were tested on an engine pedestal system. First, 1.0 wt% Pt was loaded on the sample to facilitate measurement. The introduction of a noble metal to gas phase catalysts often promotes performance because such metal serves the functions of charge collector, active center, and absorbing sites. Considerable researches have reported the enhanced adsorption of CO on noble metal-loaded CZ catalysts Although the samples contain some disordered structures, the complex and de-complex strategy have successfully yielded ordered mesopores. To prepare better mesostructures, the discussion of the mechanism and scientific aspects in the synthesis process is necessary. Key factors in the successful preparation of ordered M-CZ via complex and de-complex procedure lie mainly in three aspects. The first aspect is the avoidance of strong coordination between metal ions and OH The aim of complexing treatment is to prevent the rapid precipitation of Zr species and to make this species co-exist with Ce The second key factor dominating the process is the slow and efficient de-complex of the already-complexed metal ions, which is also the most important process in the experiment. The aim of de-complexing is to allow the complexed metal ions dissociate slowly from the CA monomer to react with hydroxyls in the solvent. H PCA may separate from the newly formed inorganic M(OH) The third dominating factor is the initiation of the coordination between inorganic compounds and organic templates (I In summary, ordered mesoporous CZ solid solution was successfully prepared by using a new method which combines the complexing of metal ions by CA and de-complexing by H This work was supported by the