The uniaxial compressive strength (UCS) of rock is an important parameter required for design and analysis of rock structures, and rock mass classification. Uniaxial compression test is the direct method to obtain the UCS values. However, these tests are generally tedious, time-consuming, expensive, and sometimes impossible to perform due to difficult rock conditions. Therefore, several empirical equations have been developed to estimate the UCS from results of index and physical tests of rock. Nevertheless, numerous empirical models available in the literature often make it difficult for mining engineers to decide which empirical equation provides the most reliable estimate of UCS. This study evaluates estimation of UCS of rocks from several empirical equations. The study uses data of point load strength (Is(50)), Schmidt rebound hardness (SRH), block punch index (BPI), effective porosity (n) and density (ρ) as inputs to empirically estimate the UCS. The estimated UCS values from empirical equations are compared with experimentally obtained or measured UCS values, using statistical analyses. It shows that the reliability of UCS estimated from empirical equations depends on the quality of data used to develop the equations, type of input data used in the equations, and the quality of input data from index or physical tests. The results show that the point load strength (Is(50)) is the most reliable index for estimating UCS among the five types of tests evaluated. Because of type-specific nature of rock, restricting the use of empirical equations to the similar rock types for which they are developed is one of the measures to ensure satisfactory prediction performance of empirical equations.The uniaxial compressive strength (UCS) of rock is one of the most frequently used rock properties in civil and mining engineering practices. The direct laboratory method for determining UCS of rock (i.e. using uniaxial compression test) was proposed and standardised by the International Society for Rock Mechanics (ISRM) ( These advantages have led to an increasing popularity of the use of various indirect tests to estimate UCS. The possibility of little or no sample preparation by some of the tests used to indirectly estimate UCS through empirical equations makes them more attractive ( The indirect estimation of UCS helps mining engineers to overcome the difficulty in using the direct laboratory tests for estimation of UCS. However, using empirical equations may lead to underestimation or overestimation of site-specific UCS. Apart from type-specific nature of rock, rock properties are also site-specific which may vary within the same deposit or differ from deposit to deposit ( When mining engineers and practitioners request the use of empirical equations, only data of a specific type of rock test may be available. Therefore, use of simple regression is important in mining engineering. This paper investigates the performance of empirical equations when estimating UCS of rock by measurements of index and physical tests. The approach proposed in this study is to investigate those empirical equations which use results of specific test type (i.e. simple regression). Firstly, this study reviews the index and physical tests as well as empirical equations commonly used in indirect estimation of UCS. Then, the estimations of UCS based on the results of index and physical tests on three rock types, e.g. granite, schist, and sandstone from India, are carried out. Finally, statistical analyses are conducted to compare the performances of empirical equations and assess the suitability of index and physical tests to produce satisfactory estimations of UCS. Results of different index and physical tests have been tried to estimate the UCS, as the index and physical tests are generally less expensive and simpler to perform than the uniaxial compression tests (  The point load strength index ( The SRH is obtained from SRH test, which is a semi-non-destructive test used to provide an index for estimating UCS. The SRH test makes use of a Schmidt hammer consisting of a spring-loaded mass inside a piston that is released when the hammer is pressed orthogonally onto a rock surface. The rebound height of the piston gives an indication of the strength of the tested material ( The BPI obtained from block punch strength index test is also intended as an index for strength classification of rock materials. Rock samples of thin cylindrical discs prepared from cores or blocks are placed into an apparatus designed to fit the point load device. Then, the rock samples are broken by applied load through a rectangular rigid punching block ( Effective porosity ( To evaluate empirical estimation of UCS of rock, index and physical test measurements of three types of rocks are used. Also, three different performance indicators are employed to compare the estimated UCS from different empirical equations with measured UCS. Details of the database of rock data and performance indicators are discussed in subsequent subsections. To investigate the effectiveness of empirical equations for estimation of UCS, three rock types, i.e. granite, schist and sandstone belonging to igneous, metamorphic and sedimentary rocks, respectively, were considered in the evaluation. The rock samples were collected from Malanjkhand Copper Project, Malanjkhand (in the state of Madhya Pradesh, Central India), UCIL mine at Jaduguda (in the state of Jharkhand, Eastern India), and Singareni Collieries Company Limited, Kothagudem, Khammam (in the state of Andhra Pradesh, South India), respectively ( The technique employed to evaluate estimation of UCS from index and physical tests results using empirical models is to compare the estimated UCS values with the measured (i.e. experimental) UCS values reported for the same rock type. The trend, statistics and probability distribution of estimated UCS are compared with measured UCS. Then, three performance indicators are used in this study to evaluate the prediction performance of the empirical equations. Absolute average relative error percentage (AAREP), root mean squared error (RMSE) and variance accounted for (VAF) are adopted as indicators to assess the UCS prediction. AAREP is a measure of prediction accuracy of estimation method in statistics. RMSE measures the deviation of predicted or estimated values from the observed or measured values. RMSE is calculated as  VAF is another statistical method used to measure preciseness of prediction methods. High VAF denotes high prediction performance for a given dataset ( The VAF method is often used to verify the correctness of a model, by comparing the observed or measured values with the predicted or estimated values of the model. If the two values are the same, the VAF is 100%. If not, the VAF will be lower. The higher the difference between measured and estimated values, the lower the VAF, and vice versa. Empirical models 1–27 were used to estimate UCS from their respective input data. The estimated UCS values are plotted with measured UCS values in Visual examination is not enough to evaluate the estimated UCS from the empirical models and input data. Hence, statistics and probability distribution of estimated UCS are presented and compared with those of measured UCS in this subsection.  AAREP, RMSE and VAF are used to statistically analyse the performance of each regression equation when estimating UCS. From the statistical analyses using AAREP, RMSE and VAF as prediction indicators, no model emerges as the best in all three analyses. However, each of Models 1, 2 and 3 has two best performances from the three statistical analyses. In addition, Model 1 has the best prediction performance in both AAREP and RMSE analyses. From the three statistical analyses performed in this study, the models with the best prediction performance are the empirical equations using The UCS is one of the basic inputs required for designs and analyses of most mining engineering projects. Uniaxial compression tests are tedious, time-consuming and expensive when they are used to obtain UCS of rocks. However, at the early stage of many practical applications, and in many small to medium-sized projects, UCS may not be available. Hence, it is necessary to estimate UCS without having uniaxial compression test data. In the absence of measured UCS, mining engineers often estimate UCS based on empirical equations and results from index and physical tests. However, using empirical equations comes with the possibility of overestimation or underestimation of UCS caused by site-specific nature of rock properties, type-specific nature of rock and data that are used to develop empirical equations. Therefore, this study evaluates the prediction performance of 27 empirical equations in estimating UCS. There are 60 data of uniaxial compression tests in total from three project sites in India, with 20 data each for igneous, metamorphic and sedimentary rocks. The prediction performances of the empirical equations in estimating UCS from index and physical test results are evaluated using statistical analyses. It is found that the empirical equations can underestimate or overestimate UCS. Only about 5 out of the 27 investigated empirical equations produce satisfactory performances in estimating UCS. Also, point load strength ( It is suggested that experiments to obtain rock data for development of empirical equations should be performed with utmost care and precaution. This will reduce experimental and measurement errors that will propagate from the data to the empirical equations. The data for development of empirical equations should cover a wide range of rock data, so that the disparity is minimised when it is used for a wide range of rock data. In addition, mining engineers and practitioners should restrict the use of empirical equations to similar rock types from which they are developed. For instance, using empirical equations developed from igneous rock data to estimate UCS of igneous rock reduces some uncertainties which may occur when they are used to estimate UCS of metamorphic or sedimentary rock. Also, the use of machine learning and soft computing techniques is recommended when multiple types of input data are available at rock or project site, and when there is a need for use of multiple regressions to estimate UCS. The author wishes to confirm that there are no known conflicts of interest associated with this publication and there has been no significant financial support for this work that could have influenced its outcome.