Purpose
                  The primary goal of this study is to create a frequency map of a series of the quadrilateral plate fractures, explore the characteristics of fracture map and to further propose a new classification.
               
                  Methods
                  We used a consecutive series of 238 quadrilateral plate fractures to create 3-dimensional reconstruction images, which were superimposed and oriented to fit a model hemipelvis template by aligning specific pelvis landmarks. Fracture lines were identified and traced to create a quadrilateral plate fracture map.
               
                  Results
                  Fracture location corresponded with fracture line distribution. Of 238 fractures that met the criteria for inclusion, most fractures involved the “A + B” zone (n = 156; 65%), whereas the remaining minority of the fractures involved the “A” zone (n = 59; 25%) and the “B” zone (n = 23; 10%). Correspondingly the incidence of C-type fracture (“A + B”zone) was significantly higher than that of A-type fracture and B-type fracture. Additionally the most common pattern was demonstrated by coexisting fracture lines; nearly half (48%) of the fractures involved the upper section of the quadrilateral plate traversing both zones, 46% traced almost vertically to the arcuate line, and 25% extended to the posterior aspect. Furthermore, the high fracture line intensity (n = 172; 74%) formed a Gun-shaped pattern, which pointed to the ischial tuberosity.
               
                  Conclusions
                  The map shows that the comminution is prone to traverse the quadrilateral plate in the sagittal direction among nearly two-thirds of all fractures. Moreover, Surgically treated quadrilateral plate fractures display very common patterns. The most common pattern is the upper fracture in nearly half of the fractures. Knowledge of these patterns can aid surgeons during diagnosis, preoperative planning, and execution of surgical strategies.Management of acetabular fractures remains a challenge for orthopedists [ Quadrilateral plate fractures represent a heterogeneous group of acetabular fractures. As a thin relatively bony structure, medial migration of quadrilateral plate with central fracture dislocation of the hip is reported to be more common in the osteoporotic acetabular fractures [ However, despite improvement in surgical technique and various implants, it can be difficult to achieve congruous hip with a comminuted or free floating medial wall fracture. More importantly, there is no practical classification system specially for quadrilateral plate fracture in the existing literature, which affects the treatment of fractures in the quadrilateral plate to some extent. And accurately ascertaining the fracture type, selecting the appropriate surgical approach and proper internal fixation are all paramount in the success of surgical treatment of acetabular fractures. Therefore, after having studied the imaging data of a large number of patients with quadrilateral plate fractures and considering the anatomical characteristics of the quadrilateral plate and distribution of fracture lines, we put forward a specialized classification system for fractures in the quadrilateral plate in order to help them understand Letournel classification. At one level I trauma center, a search in the hospital database showed three hundred and thirty patients with acetabular or pelvic fractures were admitted into the trauma department from January 2009 to May 2017. Inclusion criteria was as follows: (1) Age greater than or equal to 18 years; (2) Fractures involving the quadrilateral plate; (3) Complete imaging information, including X-ray and Computer Tomography assessments. Exclusion criteria included: (1) fracture lines or anatomical landmarks obscured by foreign bodies; (2) severe comminuted fractures which were difficult to determine fracture line conditions; (3) poor quality CT data. Digital Imaging and Communications in Medicine (DICOM) format data of the CT scans that had been selected was obtained from the Picture Archiving Communications System(PACS)database and then imported into the 3D Slicer (version 4.7.0; Boston, MA, USA). 3D Slicer is a free software for the analysis and visualization of medical images. We then went on to use the "volume rendering" function in the software to generate a three-dimensional reconstruction of the pelvis, further rotating and cropping to form a hemipelvis, and to fully expose the quadrilateral plate. A standard pelvis was selected and the same method was applied to form a left hemipelvis model for reference use. Selection of a 3DCT view was based on sufficient evaluation of all of the images available, and these views that allowed the best visualization of the quadrilateral plate in the plane represented by the standard hemipelvis were collected for each patient. All CT scans had a slide thickness between 0.62 mm and 1.25 mm. Utilizing the method of Cole et al. [ In addition, Zones were defined on the basis of pelvic anatomy and/or key muscular origins and insertions ( The analysis of the fracture maps was descriptive. Patient characteristics were summarized with frequencies and percentages for categorical variables and with means and standard deviations for continuous variables. The fracture maps were assessed for recurrent patterns of fracture lines and zones of comminution. A total of 232 patients met the inclusion criteria, among which were 164 male patients and 68 female patients, with an average age of 43 years. Besides, six patients had bilateral fractures. 230 patients underwent surgery, and the remaining 2 patients were conservatively treated due to poor general condition and severe coronary heart disease. The most common injury mechanism was motor vehicle collision ( The line between ischial spine to iliopubic eminence just divided the quadrilateral plate into two parts : the rear aspect (“A”zone) and the anterior aspect (“B”zone) ( Consistent fracture lines were identified and deemed major fracture lines by critically reviewing all these images. On the basis of the initial overall patterns (i.e., the fracture lines), the findings were divided into three groups: (1) the upper border with the fracture traversing both zones, (2) the medial section with the fracture tracking approximately perpendicularly to the arcuate line, and (3) the rear section with the fracture extending from upper to posterior. The quadrilateral plate fracture maps illustrating these groups along with representative three-dimensional computed tomography images are shown in Furthermore, most (one hundred and seventy-two; 74%) of major fracture lines exited in four directions as if to replicate a Gun-shaped pattern ( A suitable classification system should contain most of the fracture types and provide some guidance for clinical treatment. It should also ensure that the classification is not too complicated so as not to hinder consultation between orthopedic surgeons of different experience. In general, only a comprehensive judgment of fracture morphology can select the correct treatment plan. At present, the clinically used acetabular fracture classification include the Letournel classification and the AO Classification of fractures. Letournel proposed the widely accepted theory of an inverted Y shaped two-column support in 1964 [ Fracture mapping, as initially described by Cole et al. [ In this study, our classification is clear and easy to understand and remember. Of course, we do not challenge the current classification system for acetabular fractures. On the contrary, our classification may help to understand complex acetabular fractures and have a better knowledge of the current classification system. In our study, utilizing the anatomical features of the pelvis and the characteristics of fracture distribution in the quadrilateral plate, we divided the fractures in the quadrilateral plate into three types. On the one hand, the difference in the incidence of three new fracture types may help to remind the surgeon to optimize safe placement of appropriate internal fixation device and try to avoid the areas susceptible to fracture. On the other hand, associations between three new fracture types and Letournel patterns can be further analyzed, which may be conducive to diagnosis of acetabular fractures involving quadrilateral plate. In addition, we have discovered three main fracture line orientations ( This study was also subject to several limitations that need to be considered in interpreting our findings. First, patients without a complete radiographic assessment in our hospital and a large number of patients with conservative treatment were not included, which might have limited the generalizability of the study results. Second, our analysis did not account for potential variability in function, anatomy and injury mechanism, which were standardized for each patient. Therefore, the relative position of the pelvis landmarks (the arcuate line, ischial spine and ischial tuberosity) with respect to the sacrum might have been changed. Third, owing to great anatomical variability of the pelvis and especially the hemipelvis process, some images of the hemipelvis did not match the hemipelvis model perfectly. Consequently, fracture lines drawn on the hemipelvis model could slightly differ from true fracture morphology. However, we believe that it was the visual appearance of a frequency of the quadrilateral plate map that was also the power of this study. In conclusion, data here elucidate the characteristics and a new classification of quadrilateral plate fracture. These data may help orthopaedic surgeons gain a better understanding of 3D morphology before embarking on the treatment of quadrilateral plate fractures. The benefits include an enhanced ability to plan surgical approaches, reduction, and fixation strategies. Additionally, fracture mapping may aid in implant designs for quadrilateral plate fractures and preclinical testing. In spite of that, surgeons planning operative fixation should be aware that there are different degrees of variation in the fracture maps, and CT scans are recommended if further characterization is in demand for surgical plan. We also suggest further study of this topic with the inclusion of a larger cohort, more radiographs to review, implant design, and evaluating the associations between three new fracture types and Letournel patterns in detail. This project (Ref: AOTAP17-17) was supported by The authors declare that they have no conflict of interest. We thank Lei Li for his contribution toward the data collection necessary for this study.