The kinetics of leaching of a Chinese laterite containing maghemite and magnetite in sulfuric acid solutions was studied in a batch autoclave at temperatures ranging from 230 to 270°C. Temperature, acid concentration and particle size had significant effects on the leaching rate while the influences of solid/liquid ratio and agitation speed greater than 450rpm were negligible. The leaching kinetics followed the shrinking core model, with surface chemical reaction as the rate-controlling step in the early and middle stages, changing to acid diffusion control in the later stage. The leaching of magnetite consumed sulfuric acid, causing the decrease of acid concentration in the early stage. After magnetite had completely dissolved, the leaching of maghemite did not consume acid and the acid concentration kept constant. This resulted in the change of kinetic model in the early and middle stages. The activation energy was 61.710kJ/mol for the early stage, 57.258kJ/mol for the middle stage and 11.174kJ/mol for the later stage. The variation of rate-controlling step was mainly due to the sheet hematite being deposited randomly in the early and middle stages and the formation of a dense hematite layer around the unreacted grains of maghemite in the later stage, as observed by scanning electron microscopy.frequency factor number of moles of sulfuric acid consumed when one mole solid reactant is leached concentration of sulfuric acid during leaching (mol/L) initial concentration of sulfuric acid (mol/L) coefficient of diffusion (m activation energy (J/mol) reaction rate constant apparent rate constant in Eq. apparent rate constant in Eq. apparent rate constant in Eq. apparent rate constant in Eqs. molecular weight of solid reactant (kg/kmol) molecular weight of solid product (kg/kmol) reaction order total number of moles of solid reactants in the initial ore feed (kmol) number of moles of FeO in magnetite in the initial ore feed (kmol) density of solid reactant (kg/m density of solid product (kg/m initial radius of solid reactant ideal gas constant (8.314 correlation coefficient time (min) temperature (K) volume of the solution (m volume of per unit mole solid reactant (m volume of per unit mole product (m number of moles of solid reactant consumed when one mole of solid product forms fraction of nickel extracted volume of solid product formed from unit volume of initial solid reactant With the increase of nickel demand all over the world, nickeliferous laterites have become the primary resources for the extraction of nickel. Among all the technologies, pressure acid leaching is a promising technology for nickel leaching from laterites because of its advantages of low acid consumption, rapid leaching rate and simultaneous separation of nickel and iron. Nickel is not found as a native metal but generally exists as the substitute of iron or magnesium in the minerals of lateritic ore. Consequently, the recovery of nickel from laterite is largely dependent on the leaching of nickeliferous minerals in laterites ( Kinetic study of any chemical reaction is an essential part in designing a chemical process and this is true for leaching. Most of the leaching processes are reactions between liquid and solid phases. The major models that have been developed for kinetics of non-catalytic liquid–solid reactions are the shrinking (including shrinking particle and shrinking core), homogeneous, grain, uniform pore and random pore models ( The shrinking core model includes three steps: diffusion through the liquid film, diffusion through the ash/product layer and chemical reaction at the surface of the solid particles. The rate of the process is controlled by the slowest of these steps ( Some studies of high pressure leaching of laterites have focused on the leaching kinetics of limonitic laterite containing mainly goethite. The nickel extraction from limonitic feeds or mixtures of limonitic and saprolitic feeds at temperatures ranging from 230 to 270 The laterite used in this study is from the primary Chinese laterite ore located in Yuanjiang County, Yunnan Province. The main minerals of this ore are maghemite, lizardite, magnetite and goethite. Previous studies have shown that lizardite and goethite are easily dissolved in sulfuric acid solutions at atmospheric pressure, whereas maghemite and magnetite can only be completely dissolved at 250–270 In the literature, no study was found regarding the leaching kinetics of maghemite and magnetite in sulfuric acid solutions at high pressure. The process of the dissolution of maghemite and magnetite occurring inside an autoclave is not yet clear. The purpose of this study was to investigate the leaching kinetics of the Chinese laterite containing mainly maghemite and magnetite. The kinetic analysis was performed based on the shrinking core model, and the best fitted equations for the different leaching stages were determined. The effects of several important parameters including temperature, pulp density, stirring speed, particle size and acid concentration were discussed. The laterite used in this study was a brownish-black soil, with traces of filemot rock slivers. The mineral composition of the ore was analyzed using a D/max 2550 X-ray diffractometer (XRD) with Cu Kα radiation between 10° to 80° (2θ) and a LEICA DM4500P optical microscope. The mineral composition of the ore sample was calculated according to the results of chemical phase analysis of iron. The results showed that the ore consisted of 69% maghemite (γ-Fe The ore samples were firstly dried overnight in an oven at 100 The leaching experiments were carried out in a 1-L titanium autoclave, equipped with an acid injection device. Temperature was controlled within ± Fe Where Some grains of residues were mounted on an adhesive carbon-tap and coated with a thin film of Au, and then were analyzed by a Quanta 200 field environmental scanning electron microscope (SEM) at 30 Within the examined temperature range (230–270 Iron exists predominantly as Fe The ferric sulfate in the leach liquor then hydrolyzes to hematite, the hydrolysis reaction is: Combining Eqs. Nickel, aluminum, magnesium, manganese, cobalt, chromium, etc. displace iron existing in maghemite, magnetite and hematite. They will also react with sulfuric acid accompanied by the dissolution of maghemite, magnetite and hematite. Assuming that the existing form of nickel is NiO, the reaction of NiO and sulfuric acid is: Therefore, at the end of dissolution reaction, the residues consist mainly of hematite. Nickel and other metallic elements in the ore are dissolved and exist as the form of metallic sulfate in the leach liquor. In order to investigate the variation of the product morphology during leaching, the ore feeds and the residues obtained from different leaching times were observed under a scanning electron microscope. As nickel, cobalt, magnesium, aluminum, manganese, etc. substitute iron existing predominantly in maghemite, magnetite and hematite, the dissolution of these minerals will liberate nickel, cobalt, magnesium, aluminum, manganese, etc. into the leach liquor, and thus the fraction of these metals extracted into the leach liquor will reflect the leaching extent of maghemite and magnetite. To simplify, the fraction of nickel extracted will be used when discussing the leaching kinetics in this study. To investigate the effect of agitation on the leaching rate, experiments were carried out using four different agitation speeds in the range of 150–600 A series of runs with varying solid/liquid ratio from 0.02 to 0.25 Leaching experiments for temperatures ranging from 230 to 270 The effect of the initial sulfuric acid concentration was examined at 270 The influence of particle size, in the range of 10–50 Taking into account that the ore consists of essentially dense grains which could be viewed as nonporous particles, and that the ore grains gradually shrunk and the product layer formed around the unreacted grains during leaching ( If the leaching process is controlled by the surface chemical reaction, the rate of reaction at the surface of a sphere may be expressed by the following equation ( Where Eq. Where For the case where If the leaching products form on the surface of the unreacted grains and the volume of products is the same as the volume of the reacted solids, the particle size will keep constant and the radius of the particle is equal to Where If particle size changes during leaching, Eq. Where In order to determine the kinetic parameters and rate controlling step for the leaching of the Chinese laterite in sulfuric acid solutions, the experimental data were fitted using the above equations of shrinking core model.  According to Eqs. Therefore, in the early stage of leaching, The Arrhenius plot, which describes the relationship of rate constant The time for completely dissolve magnetite also varied with initial acid concentration and particle size, and thus, when plotting According to the above result, Where The Arrhenius equation obtained from Then Substituting Therefore, for the laterite leaching in the early stage, the semi-empirical kinetic equation is After magnetite had completely dissolved, acid concentration in the solution was kept constant. Experimental data from To study the reaction order with respect to acid concentration, four initial acid concentrations, 0.19 The reaction order with respect to particle size was determined under the conditions of 270 According to the above result,  Where The Arrhenius equation obtained from Then Substituting Therefore, for the laterite leaching in the middle stage, the semi-empirical kinetic equation is It can be seen from It has been recognized that there may not be a single rate-controlling step in liquid–solid reactions and the rate-controlling step can change depending upon reaction conditions ( In this study, the main product is hematite and the main reactant is maghemite in the later stage of leaching. According to Eq. Data from Generally, a diffusion-controlled process is slightly dependent on temperature while the chemically controlled process is very sensitive to temperature ( For the case when Data from According to the above results, Where The Arrhenius equation obtained from Substituting Therefore, for the laterite leaching in the later stage, the semi-empirical kinetic equation is The variation of rate-controlling step is consistent with the results of SEM analysis. In the early and middle stages, there were no products forming a dense layer around the unreacted grain, causing the rather fast rate of acid diffusion and acid contact to the surface of the unreacted grain. As the reaction proceeded, the unreacted grain gradually shrunk and the spherical hematite gradually built up around the unreacted grain. Since only spherical hematite formed around the unreacted grains and not all hematite products were spherical, whereas the sheet hematite distributed far from the surface of the unreacted grains, the change of chemical reaction control to diffusion control only occurred in the later stage when the amount of spherical hematite was high enough to form a dense layer around the unreacted grains, causing diffusion resistance exceeded the resistance to surface reaction. The shrinking core model was found appropriate to describe the leaching of the Chinese laterite containing maghemite and magnetite in sulfuric acid solutions. The leaching rate was dependent on temperature, sulfuric acid concentration and particle size in the range of 230–270 According to the results of kinetic analysis, the leaching of the laterite containing maghemite and magnetite should be carried out at 270 This work is financially supported by the