Size-segregation and stratification (layering of ore into zones of different hydraulic characteristics which results from commercial stacking practices), are commonly believed to affect heap leaching performance. However, little systematically collected data has to date been published on the subject. This first part of the study reports on the effects of deliberate segregation observed under laboratory conditions.
                  An ore sample was segregated on an artificial slope and the geophysical and hydrodynamic properties were determined of the resulting Upper, Middle and Bottom fractions of the segregated ore bed. The same was done for a stack composed of these three fractions layered on top of one another.
                  It was found that the three-layered stack exhibited less favourable bulk density and hydrodynamic conductivity than un-segregated ore (i.e. ore which had not been deliberately segregated). It is therefore suggested that when those parameters are determined for the purpose of heap design, it would be conservative to conduct the tests on a stack of segregated layers of the ore, instead of the un-segregated ore.
                  However no statistically significant difference could be observed in column leaching performance (770 mm high, 153 mm diameter), either between the individual segregation fractions, or between the un-segregated column of ore and the column composed of Bottom, Middle and Upper layers. It therefore follows that segregation cannot account for the differences reported between laboratory column tests and commercial heap leaching results. Furthermore, laboratory column leaching tests cannot emulate commercial scale leaching performance more realistically by merely segregating the ore samples prior to column leaching.pearson correlation coefficient gangue acid consumption sum of squared residuals mass fraction of species effective diffusivity, m copper leaching rate constant, h GAC rate constant, h molar mass of species uniformity constant in the Rosin-Rammler size distribution expression radius of spherical regime through which diffusion occurs, m. rate of production of species time, s immobile moisture content as mass fraction of wet solids. particle size, or average of a size range, in any convenient units of length. characteristic particle size in the Rosin-Rammler size distribution expression. extent of extraction of species mass fraction of particles with (average) size mass fraction of mineral that is liberated and reactive to the lixiviant in the particle-scale kinetic rate expression. diffusion time, days Immobile moisture content on dry-mass basis, kg_moisture/kg_dry_solids. immobile moisture content as a volume fraction of the moist bed. power of the unreacted fraction dimensionless radial distance. bulk density, t/m true density, t/m The rate of metal extraction observed during laboratory column leach tests usually provides an over-optimistic indication of heap leaching kinetics to be expected at commercial scale. Experience-based scale-up factors are therefore applied to column leaching data. For example, authors such as Many differences exist between laboratory column leaching tests and commercial heaps that could contribute to the differences in rate of leaching observed between the two, such as channelling along column walls that is absent from commercial heaps, and a minimum unavoidable amount of human and sometimes vehicle traffic that (depending on design) might be required on top of commercial heaps for ore stacking, ripping, levelling and installation of the irrigation systems. The homogeneity of the heap is furthermore influenced at commercial scale by both segregation (separation of particles by size) and stratification (layering of ore into zones of differing hydraulic permeability) as an inevitable consequence of current stacking practice, as noted by such authors as Deliberate attempts are usually made to avoid, as far as possible, segregation and stratification during the loading of columns in preparation for laboratory column leaching tests. Columns are usually filled using homogenously mixed ore while taking care to ensure the ore is homogenously distributed in the columns. Admittedly, the larger the diameter of the columns or cribs becomes, the more difficult it becomes to avoid segregation and/or stratification of the ore. Furthermore, This part 1 of the study aims to isolate the extent to which specifically segregation contributes to the difference between laboratory- and commercial-scale performance, so that its effect can be accounted for rigorously, eliminating the need for empirical scale-up factors. The manner in which segregation occurs is illustrated in As the stacker advances, each layer of ore being added to the side slope contains a larger proportion of fines along the top and a larger proportion of coarse particles towards the bottom, and the entire heap inventory becomes vertically segregated by particle size. The visualisation of segregation as shown in There are limited studies on the effect of segregation on heap leaching. Formal studies on segregation and stratification and attempts at modelling these in the context of solids conveying include those by  Segregation alters the particle size distribution which could in turn conceivably affect such ore properties as the hydraulic conductivity, extent of moisture retention, internal angle of friction and therefore extent of compaction. Changes in these geophysical and hydrological parameters can affect the efficiency of contact between the ore and leach solution ( Computational fluid dynamic (CFD) modelling by However as with any modelling undertaking, the selected model has to be simple enough to allow computational manipulation, while mimicking sufficiently the responses of the system being studied. The success with which the HeapSim model, (which is based on the dual porosity concept), has been applied by The work described here aimed to elucidate the effects that segregation might have on the geophysical and hydrodynamic ore properties, and thereby on heap leaching performance. Furthermore, since segregation is a phenomenon associated with commercial-scale stacking and while it is typically prevented from occurring in laboratory-scale column leaching as far as possible, it is investigated to what extent the differences observed between laboratory column leaching kinetics and large-scale kinetics could be attributed to segregation. If deliberate segregation is found to have a significant effect on leaching performance, it would mean that laboratory column leaching could be made more directly applicable for drafting large-scale heap leaching specifications if the ore is artificially segregated in preparation for laboratory column leaching experiments. Finally, if segregation is found to have a material effect on heap leaching performance, a better understanding of segregation might suggest ways in which current stacking practices could be adapted to eliminate or reduce the extent of segregation occurring during stacking. An oxide copper ore sample of southern African origin was used for the experimentation described here. It possessed a D The segregation of ore on the advancing slope of a heap during stacking was simulated in a purpose-built box with a sloped bottom. The global dimensions and relevant details are shown in The bottom was built with a 30° slope, which is slightly less than the natural angle of friction of stacked ore. For the final adjustment of the slope, just enough ore was poured in to form a layer on the bottom. The box was then lifted on the left-hand side of the box (the side on which the ore was introduced) to increase the slope of the bottom until further small quantities of ore being added were found to form layers parallel to the sloping bottom. It was necessary to lift the left-hand side by about 100 mm, which increased the angle of the slope to 39°. This angle was subsequently used for all further segregation. The procedure used in this study for determining more accurately the internal angle of friction of the ore is discussed further below. Before segregation, the ore was agglomerated by manually rolling it around on a plastic sheet while a coarse spray of water was being added. This was continued until the ore surface was glistening with moisture and started sticking to the sheet. The agglomerated ore was poured into the segregation box from a bucket holding 5–7 kg agglomerates, until it reached the top as indicated by the outline of the ore surface (5), to form a bed about 200 mm deep, holding about 36 kg of ore on a dry basis. After segregation, the segregated ore obtained from the Upper and Middle sections of the box was found to contain around 6.3% moisture, while the ore from the Bottom contained 4.6% moisture. Only clean tap water was used for agglomeration, with no acid added, to ensure that no acid leaching occurred prior to, or during the segregation step. Note that no percolation or leaching or any other testing on the ore was performed in the segregation box. This box was used only for the purpose of segregating the ore. For the purpose of the study, segregation was considered as forming three layers in a heap, namely Upper, Middle and Bottom. Therefore after filling the box, the Upper, Middle and Bottom portions of segregated ore were individually retrieved by removing consecutively the left-most, middle and right-most removable side panels. The three removable side panels were sized to yield equal volumes of Upper, Middle and Bottom segregated ore fractions. All subsequent measurements and tests were conducted on the Upper, Middle and Bottom ore fractions after having retrieved them from the respective sections of the segregation box. A flow diagram of the testwork conducted appears in A total of 118 kg ore (dry basis) was required for completion of all the testwork, of which 90 kg was segregated. Since the segregation box held a maximum of 36 kg, the segregation required for all testwork was completed by filling and emptying the segregation box three times. In addition, the same testwork was conducted on an ‘un-segregated’ sample which was agglomerated but not segregated in the box (as per the flow diagram in Furthermore, a column leaching test was also performed on a 3-layer bed prepared from equal volumes of Bottom segregated ore at the bottom, followed by a layer of Middle segregated ore on top of it, followed by a layer of Upper segregated ore on top. This was termed the ‘Layered’ sample. This 3-layered bed was built to exhibit as close as possible the same initial height of ore in the leaching column as that of the other (Upper, Middle, Bottom and un-segregated) samples in their respective columns. There were therefore 5 columns leaching tests performed, one each on the unsegregated sample, Upper segregation fraction, Middle segregation fraction, Bottom segregation fraction and the (3-layered) Layered sample. Where appropriate, some of these parameters were determined both before and after column leaching. Metallurgical accounting for leaching tests was performed by recalculating the head value from the summation of the amount of metal reporting to solution and that detected in the leach residue. After leaching, the entire leach residue was finely milled to ensure representative sampling thereof, which is of course an option that is not available for the assay of the head sample prior to leaching. Percentage extraction is therefore calculated as the amount of metal detected in solution, as a fraction of the recalculated head value. Grab samples from the coarse fractions prior to leaching were also analysed as a comparison, although these results were not used. The assays thus obtained on the grab samples corresponded within 10% with those of the recalculated values, except for that of the Bottom fraction which was within 20%. As shown in The samples for the PSD tests were collected while emptying the segregation box for the first time (out of three). Ten kg of each of the Upper, Middle and Bottom segregated fractions was collected for the PSD tests. After all 118 kg of the ore had been segregated, the entire procedure of splitting ore from the bulk sample in storage, segregation and determination of size distribution was repeated another three times to verify the repeatability of size distribution. For possible future modelling work of the effect of segregation, a mathematical expression might be required of the PSD’s of the Upper, Middle and Bottom fractions. The ore fractions after segregation exhibited size distribution trends that could not satisfactorily be fitted by a (commonly used) Gaudin Schumann plot. That was particularly true of the Bottom segregation fraction. It was found that the PSD’s could be characterised better in terms of the parameters of the Rosin Rammler equation ( The angle of internal friction was determined by placing a hollow open-ended cylinder of 320 mm diameter on a flat level surface, filling it with ore and then slowly lifting the cylinder, allowing the ore to come to rest in a cone. The angle of the cone relative to the flat surface is taken as the internal angle of friction of the ore. The tests were repeated on a smooth floor and on a layer of ore, since The wall friction, being the angle of friction between the leach residues and column walls in which the percolation leaching experiments had been conducted, was determined after completion of leaching and draining of the samples. The columns were removed from their supporting structures and laid down horizontally on a level concrete floor. The drainage-end of the column was then slowly lifted. The ore was found to remain stationary in the columns until it was lifted sufficiently, when abruptly the entire mass started sliding out through the open end of the column. (The sample was collected on a plastic sheet placed under the column to keep the sample off the floor). The angle at which it was lifted could be calculated as the arcsin of the lifted height divided by the column length. The height to which the discharge end had to be lifted before the sample slid out was measured within, conservatively, +/− 5 mm, yielding the wall friction angle within +/− 1 degree. True densities ( The bulk density under compression, simulating conditions at the bottom of an ore pile, was determined in a proprietary uniaxial compression apparatus similar to that described by Bed voidage (including voids between particles as well as porosity within particles) was calculated from: The saturated moisture content is the amount of solution required to fill all voids and porosity thereby flooding the bed, while the drained moisture content is that which remains in the ore after drainage under gravity, the latter being regarded as the immobile moisture. The saturated and drained moisture contents of the column leach residues were determined both in a compression chamber under uniaxial compression equivalent to the weight of a 6 m heap of ore, and immediately after leaching in the leaching columns. (A 6 m high heap would be typical for a commercial heap leaching operation). For the ore samples before leaching these determinations were done only under compression, they were not done in the columns prior to leaching for fear that it might affect the columns leaching performance. During column leaching the prevailing solution content of the ore at any given time was determined by mass balancing between the weight of the irrigation reservoir, the column under leach and the drainage collection vessel. The irrigation reservoir and leaching columns were suspended from load cells, as per the apparatus described by For various purposes the immobile moisture content may be required in terms of different sets of units. It is most commonly determined experimentally in terms of a mass fraction and: The saturated hydraulic conductivity is the rate at which solution drains through the ore at saturated moisture content (i.e. under flooded conditions), in terms of litres per hour per square meter. This was determined on the ore samples before leaching under uniaxial compression (equivalent to 6 m of ore), on the column leach residue under the same uniaxial compression and on the column leach residue in the column after leaching. Again, the equipment, procedures and software used for these tests were obtained from HydroGeoSense Inc. Samples of the various segregated fractions were leached in duplicate in rolling bottles using a liquid-to-solid ratio of 4:1. The target pH value was maintained throughout the test by the addition of sulphuric acid initially after 1 h, then after 3 h, then after 6 h and thereafter once per day. By the sixth day the pH in all tests had stabilised to the extent that the pH varied only in the second decimal over the 24 h between acid additions. These tests therefore represented conditions under which there was no limitation in acid supply at the scale of individual particles. From these results, the kinetic rate constants could be obtained as inputs to the leaching model, thereby reducing the number of model parameters than needed to be fitted to the experimental data. While acidity control was done towards a target pH value, the acid concentration was also determined in terms of g/L by titration. Column leaching was conducted in 770 mm tall columns of 153 mm diameter. Each column was loaded with 18.4 (+/− 0.3) kg un-segregated ore (dry basis), except for the column of ore from the Bottom section which accepted 16.9 kg ore (dry basis). It is normal practice to provide a means of distributing the irrigated solution evenly over the cross-sectional area of the column when performing column leaching tests. However, in this case the irrigated solution was deliberately concentrated at a single point on the vertical axis, being dripped into a cone folded from filter paper to prevent the solution from impinging a cavity into the ore sample to encourage preferential solution flow down the irrigation axis. It was anticipated that the solution would be spread naturally better in those ore portions with more favourable geophysical and hydrodynamic properties, thereby accentuating differences in hydrology that would appear as differences in model parameters fitted to the column leaching data. The leaching conditions are tabulated together with the results in For the purposes of this study heap leaching performance is evaluated in terms of the parameters of a heap leaching model exhibiting dual porosity behaviour of the solution content. ‘Dual porosity’ refers to the fact that some (the minority) of the voids in the aggregate contain solution that flows, while the balance (the majority) of the voids contains solution that is immobilised by capillary forces. Solubilised species move through the immobilised solution by diffusion only. That model has been found by hydrologists to correctly describe the asymmetrical peak (exhibiting a longer tail after the peak than the ramp-up ahead of the peak) observed when washing a tracer from an unsaturated aggregate ( The accumulation of soluble species where in the case of the acid heap leaching of ‘oxide’-copper minerals (such as malachite and chrysocolla, requiring one mole of sulphuric acid to solubilise one mole of copper sulphate), Eq. Although the concept of diffusion time eliminates the direct comparison (in units length) of the diffusional path lengths of different cases, one diffusional path length ( The validity of the assumption of the invariance of The source term for the appearance of Cu into solution is: Analogous to For modelling purposes it is convenient to express the rate of GAC in terms of rate of disappearance from solution that is first-order with respect to acid concentration in solution. That implies that the rate at which acid disappears from solution, and therefore the GAC rate constant It follows that: It follows further that whenever the GAC rate constants Several of the parameters that appear in the dual porosity model can, in principle, be determined experimentally such as the values for The same approach does not hold for the diffusion time The dual porosity model parameters were fitted to the column leaching kinetics observed on the segregated and un-segregated ore samples, to observe whether significant changes occurred in the diffusion time ( The two independent variables that the model was most sensitive to, namely The particle size distributions (PSD) of the Upper, Middle and Bottom sections of ore obtained during the execution of the work flow of  The reproducibility of the segregation effect obtained in the laboratory apparatus is also illustrated by means of the confidence intervals of the Rossin-Rammler parameters appearing in As shown in This is consistent with The angles at which the various residues slid out of their respective columns were mostly similar and much higher than the internal angles of friction of the head samples. This suggests that the ore was adhering to the column walls, meaning that during leaching their weight was partly supported by the column walls, supposedly due to a combination of stickiness and of expansion and/or settling very tightly into place during leaching. It seems fair to assume that on a heap, in the absence of column walls to support part of their weight, these sample fractions would have settled to higher densities than they did in the columns. The exception was the (coarser) Bottom fraction which slid out of the column when the column was tilted at the internal angle of friction (about 33°), indicating that it was not adhering to the column walls. The true solids density is required to calculate such parameters as the voidage, and the value around 2700 kg/m The highest bulk density was according to almost all test procedures found in the Layered ore bed, in two cases the highest bulk density was shared with the Upper fraction, the only exception being the head sample under compression in which case the Upper sample exhibited the highest bulk density. In all cases the Bottom sample exhibited the lowest bulk density. Both the Upper and Middle portions yielded consistently higher bulk densities than the un-segregated sample, which in the Layered stack more than compensated for the lower bulk density of the Bottom fraction so that the Layered material exhibited a net increase in bulk density compared to the un-segregated ore. The bulk density of the solids in each column was calculated daily during the course of leaching and was in all cases found to increase for a short period through consolidation upon wetting, followed by a long gradual downward trend as solids mass was being lost by the leaching of the oxide-copper and soluble gangue minerals. The ‘peak’ value was the maximum observed during the entire leaching cycle. More or less the opposite was found in the voidage and saturated moisture content values as would be expected, with the Upper and Layered ores sharing places for lowest and the Bottom sample exhibiting the highest voidage and saturated moisture content. The trend in drained moisture contents (assumed to represent the immobile moisture content) is not as consistent. The compressed head sample and in-column leach residue sample of the Upper fraction exhibited the highest drained moisture content as would be expected since it should exert the strongest capillary action as a result of exhibiting the finest size distribution. Of the compressed residues, that of the Middle fraction and the Layered sample shared the highest drained moisture content of 14% but that was very close to the 13% in the compressed residue of the Upper sample. As would be expected the Bottom sample, with the coarsest average particle size and hence lowest capillary action, retained the lowest drained moisture content except in the case of the compressed head sample in which case it retained 11% moisture which was very close to the 10% retained in the compressed head sample of the Layered ore. The ‘Operating’ moisture content of the ores samples during column leaching exhibited the expected behaviour of namely the highest moisture content in the Upper sample and the lowest moisture content in the Bottom sample. An unexpected trend was that the un-segregated sample exhibited the highest saturated hydraulic conductivity. The expectation was that the coarse Bottom fraction would exhibit the highest conductivity by far. The head sample of the Bottom fraction exhibited a hydraulic conductivity that was only slightly lower than that of the un-segregated sample. However the hydraulic conductivity of the residue samples of the un-segregated ore (both in the column and compressed) were significantly higher than those of the Bottom sample. And also surprising was that both compressed residue and in-column residue of the Bottom sample (containing the biggest proportion of coarser particles) exhibited the lowest conductivity, with the in-column residue of the Layered sample exhibiting close to the same conductivity as that of the Bottom fraction. Therefore, the low conductivity of the Bottom fraction at the bottom of the Layered ore bed is suspected of limiting the conductivity of the Layered bed as a whole. Hence the Bottom fraction of ore exhibited the most significant drop in hydraulic conductivity with the head sample being the most conductive and its leach residue sample being the least conductive. It might be expected intuitively that the large voidage created in the Bottom fraction, by the removal of much of the finer fractions during segregation, reduces mechanical support within the ore and offers more space within which the coarse Bottom ore particles can deform if it were to decrepitate in contact with the acidic leach solution. However none of the bulk density or voidage results suggested that densification during leaching of the Bottom ore fraction was any more significant than what occurred in any of the other ore fractions. In fact the Bottom ore fraction retained the lowest bulk density and highest voidage of all ore fractions throughout the leaching process. The reason for the surprising reduction in conductivity of the Bottom fraction must therefore be related to another phenomenon, such as the accumulation of impermeable layers of fines from decrepitation that inhibit flow despite the material exhibiting an over-all high voidage. The effect of such a phenomenon is much easier to observe than the direct physical evidence for it, since the structure of the ore bed is disturbed upon discharging from the column, so that the mechanism responsible for this reduction in conductivity has not been confirmed by direct observation. It should further be significant to executers of laboratory testwork to note that the compaction occurring during leaching in the columns yielded lower hydraulic conductivities of the residues (i.e. the “in col.” results), than compression simulating the bottom of a 6 m heap (i.e. the “comp.” results), despite compression compacting the ore to higher bulk densities (See The rates of copper extraction and GAC observed on the various ore fractions are shown graphically in The Bottom fraction seemed the fastest reacting fraction with respect to both copper extraction and GAC. This was evident during the leach tests in agitated medium that yielded a combination of ( The model fitting to the column leaching results also yielded the shortest diffusion path length for the Bottom fraction. However, this was by a relatively modest margin considering that the model fits to the experimental results was not perfect as shown in According to Despite the differences in the kinetic parameters between the various fractions, the observed effective rates of extraction and of GAC were little different for the various cases. If seems therefore that segregation did not change the leaching kinetics inherent to any particle fraction, instead the separate leaching of individually segregated fractions has merely revealed the contribution made by each fraction to the observed kinetics of the un-segregated ore mixture. The quality of the correlations between experimental and fitted model simulations for the un-segregated and Layered ores, that appear in From It is suspected that some water-soluble copper must have been present in the Layered sample, leading to the appearance of copper in the drainage solution for which no acid needed to be added and hence the calculation of the apparently negative GAC shown in The same phenomenon was observed during agitated leaching of the Bottom sample, so it appears that nuggets of water soluble copper may be randomly distributed throughout this ore. During modelling of the timing of the appearance of the minimum turning point of the GAC curve for the Layered sample it was concluded that this water-soluble copper must have occurred in the Upper ore fraction. (Recall that this column was loaded by stacking a layer of Bottom segregated sample in the bottom of the column, then a layer of Middle segregated ore on top of it, followed by a layer of Upper segregated ore on top of that). The modelling of the GAC trend for the Layered column, shown in In The “Copper extraction to drainage” is the cumulative extent of copper extraction calculated from the cumulative amount of copper having reported to all drainage solution collected to each point in time. The “GAC” is the cumulative gangue acid consumption calculated from (a) the cumulative amount of acid added by irrigation, minus (b) cumulative amount of acid reporting to drainage, minus (c) the cumulative amount of acid attributable to the cumulative copper extraction. The diameter of the leaching columns used (153 mm), provided a diameter-to-particle size ratio of 153/20 = 7.65, which comfortably satisfies the 4 times maximum particle size prescribed by To avoid preferential flow of solution along the inner wall affecting the results, some reliance is placed on the unplasticised polyvinyl chloride (UPVC) material the columns were made from being naturally hydrophobic, and hence solution running between the ore and the walls should be more strongly attracted into the capillaries between the ore particles than tending to wet the wall surface. A counter-argument to that is that the random packing of the ore is disturbed immediately adjacent to the column walls which can be expected to cause the hydraulic conductivity of the ore adjacent to the wall to differ from the ore away from the walls. However However the much delayed breakthroughs of acid observed in Another effect to consider is that of the column walls effectively supporting part of the ore mass, which prevents the ore from compacting under its own weight to the same extent that it would occur in a large heap, unsupported by side-walls. Texts such as that by The angle at which the leached residues slid from their respective columns equals the angle of friction between the leach residues and the column walls. The larger this angle, the larger the proportion of ore mass that was being supported by the column walls by the end of the leach cycle. All leach residues exhibited relatively large angles of friction with the column walls, in the range of 47–57°. An exception was the Bottom fraction with a much smaller angle of friction with the column walls of 32.7°, in which case therefore a much smaller proportion of the ore mass was being supported by the walls. While it is not attempted here to estimate to which bulk density the ore would have settled in the absence of wall-support, the fact to note is that the ore samples did not compact to the extent they would have in large heaps. Using larger columns will not fully overcome this weakness, even in 2.4 m × 2.4 m cribs, ore crushed to <38 mm was found by It has been clearly observed that the Upper and Middle fractions of segregated ore exhibit higher bulk density and lower hydraulic conductivity than that of the un-segregated mixture. As a result the bulk density and hydraulic conductivity of a stack prepared by layering of the Upper, Middle and Bottom fractions (to simulate a heap upon which segregation occurred during its stacking) were also respectively higher and lower than that of un-segregated ore. Elevated bulk density has been associated by others with suppressed metal extraction, and of course reduced hydraulic conductivity could lead to inoperability of a heap. For the ore sample used for the test work presented here, even the raised bulk density and reduced hydraulic conductivity of the Layered ore were still within safe boundaries and hence did not affect the column operability or the leaching results. However for an ore sample with properties that are only marginally better than critical, it is conceivable that the hydraulic conductivity of an un-segregated sample tested in the laboratory might appear acceptable, yet in commercial practice the segregated ore might exhibit insufficient hydraulic conductivity. Column leaching of the individually segregated Upper and Middle fractions and of a Layered column yielded copper extraction results that were, within the accuracy and precision of the methods employed, indistinguishable from the performance of a column of un-segregated ore. Only the leaching results of the Bottom fraction was (surprisingly) somewhat faster yielding a higher ultimate extent of both copper extraction and GAC. The Bottom fraction is suspected to have been mineralogically slightly different from the other fractions since it also exhibited the fasted rate of copper extraction in agitated media. The differences in the diffusional path lengths of the various segregated fractions were quite modest and could not be correlated with any of the other physical parameters. Those differences cannot be concluded to be statistically significant until repeated test work has shown the same trends. Published information suggests that the leaching kinetics of commercial heaps are generally slower than would be predicted by direct extrapolation from column leaching results. The differences in leaching time and diffusional path length between that of un-segregated and Layered ore (or any of the other fractions) obtained during the test work presented here were not sufficient to lead to such differences, hence the slower leaching kinetics of commercial heaps cannot be attributed directly or only to segregation. If segregation aggravates preferential solution channelling on heaps, it is an effect that cannot be reproduced in columns, even by exaggerated simulated segregation. Therefore it is concluded that performing laboratory column leaching experiments on layers of segregated ore, instead of uniformly mixed un-segregated ore, would not provide a more realistic indication of commercial heap leaching performance. There also does not seem to be merit in attempting to change current stacking practices to eliminate segregation. However it is recommended that the bulk density and hydraulic conductivity tests should be performed on segregated ore fractions and/or on an ore stack composed of layers of Upper, Middle and Bottom segregated fractions, because in segregated form the ore exhibits less favourable values of those two parameters. This paper is published with the permission of