Calcaneal fracture can lead to long-term disability and have a considerable economic effect. Most calcaneal fractures are intraarticular fractures involving the posterior facet of the subtalar joint. Treating displaced intraarticular calcaneal fractures is complicated because of the lack of an optimal treatment option. Internal fixation typically involves screw-and-plate implants, which can be unfavorable owing to the lack of an anatomic design and the intraoperative bending required for the plate to contour to the irregular surface of the calcaneus. We assessed the outcomes of 30 patients treated using innovative, anatomically designed calcaneal locking plates and the perceived advantages for surgeons. Postoperative computed tomography images of the affected feet were obtained, and the functional performance was recorded. The mean average Böhler angle had increased significantly from 16.8° ± 14.9° to 28.5° ± 9.4° (p < .001). The mean average maximal fracture gap and maximal step-off in the posterior facet of the subtalar joint in the coronal computed tomography images also decreased significantly from 2.8 ± 3.7 mm to 0.8 ± 1.3 mm (p < .01) and from 3.3 ± 2.8 mm to 0.8 ± 1.2 mm (p < .001), respectively. The mean average American Orthopaedic Foot and Ankle Ankle-Hindfoot scale score was 93.9 ± 7.1 at the final follow-up visit. In addition, the surgical time was reduced because bending the plate was not required and the quality of reduction could be assessed easily by examining the gap between the cortex and the plate. The results were promising, revealing that the anatomic locking plate can be used effectively in the treatment of displaced intraarticular calcaneal fractures using simple reduction techniques with a potentially shortened operating time.Calcaneal fracture accounts for 2% of all fractures The optimal treatment of displaced intraarticular calcaneal fractures (DIACFs) remains unclear because the currently available evidence has failed to demonstrate substantial benefits for any single treatment option. The risk of requiring subtalar arthrodesis is substantially lower when DIACFs are treated surgically The institutional review board of our institution approved and monitored the present study. The plates were made of a Ti-6Al-4V alloy and were anatomically based using a database of computed tomography (CT) images of 100 Asian patients To further prove the concept of the plate, finite element analysis was performed under the assumption of a reduced comminuted calcaneal fracture with a 0.5-mm gap between fragments. The cortex was 0.5-mm thick, and a friction coefficient of 0.2 was assigned between the fractured segments. After completely constraining the posterior end of the calcaneus From March 2012 to May 2014, 30 consecutive patients with DIACFs were treated and included in the present study (C.H.C., Y.Y.C.). All patients were recruited from the emergency department and outpatient department from a single institution. Of the 30 patients, 25 (83%) were male and 5 (17%) were female, with a mean average age of 44.8 (range 20 to 59) years. The cause of the factures was vehicle collision for 7 (23%) and falls for 23 (77%). The mean average interval from injury to surgery was 1.5 (range 0.25 to 10) days, and no patient had concurrent lumbar or thoracic spine injuries. Frontal, lateral, and calcaneal axial radiographs were obtained for the affected feet of all patients. CT images in the horizontal and coronal planes for the affected feet were also obtained. The surgeries were performed by the first and second authors (C.H.C., Y.Y.C.). The patients were administered spinal anesthesia and were placed in the lateral decubitus position with the affected limb facing upward. A standard The implants were removed from all patients ≥1 year after surgery because it is popular to remove metallic implants in our country (as well as in other countries). Postoperative standing radiographic films of the affected foot and CT images were obtained and the functional performance was recorded for evaluation ( The outcome measures were assessed by the first and second authors (C.H.C., Y.Y.C.). We obtained plain radiographs of all patients immediately after surgery and CT images of the operated feet approximately 1 year after surgery. The Böhler angle Of the 30 patients, 24, including 21 males (87.5%) and 3 females (12.5%), completed the postoperative follow-up protocol. Six patients (20%) were lost to follow-up either because they had died or were abroad. The mean average patient age was 41 (range 21 to 60) years. Of these 24 patients, 14 (58.3%) were identified with Sanders type II fractures, 9 (37.5%) with type III fractures, and 1 (4.2%) with a type IV fracture. The mean average follow-up period was 22.4 (range 12 to 38) months. The mean average interval to surgery and the mean operative time was 32 (range 6 to 120) hours and 74 (range 55 to 93) minutes, respectively. The mean average Böhler angle had increased significantly from 16.8° ± 14.9° preoperatively to 28.5° ± 9.4° postoperatively ( Regarding complications, 2 patients (8.3%) experienced delayed incision wound healing and 1 patient (4.2%) developed a superficial infection around the incision. No deep infection or major soft tissue complications developed in these patients. Two patients (8.3%) developed posttraumatic arthrosis in the posterior facet of the subtalar joint, with Sanders classification type III and IV and AOFAS Ankle-Hindfoot scale score of 90 and 79, respectively. No subtalar arthrodesis surgery was performed in any patient during the postoperative observation period. Whether DIACFs should be treated surgically or conservatively remains controversial. However, irrespective of the intervention, no significant differences were observed in the functional ability of the patients 15 years after DIACF To reduce displaced fractures of the calcaneus, we viewed the sustentaculum tali as a “constant fragment,” such that all other fragments must be assembled around it Anatomic plate fixation for the calcaneus can be useful in the treatment of DIACFs, because the plate could potentially serve as a template during reduction. Using this approach, the articular surface of the posterior facet of the subtalar joint is reduced first, followed by a rough reduction of the calcaneal length and anatomic angles. The construct is temperately fixed using multiple Kirschner wires. The anatomic plate is then fixed, and the key fragments are pulled toward the plate using 3 to 4 lag screws to complete the reduction, which is inspected fluoroscopically. It is not necessary to bend the plate to fit the reduction, and the quality of reduction can be easily assessed by examining the gap between the cortex and the plate. If a gap exists between the cortex and plate after lag screwing, it is likely that malreduction of key fragments has occurred. The relatively short operative time in the present study, compared with that reported in previous studies The plates were anatomically designed according to the lateral bony contour of the calcaneus in the CT images obtained from a database of Asian patients. Because the trabecular structure of the calcaneus is relatively dense in the periphery and porous centrally in the body, the plate body was circular, allowing for fixation and bone grafting through the central window of the plate. Three specifically designed fins were used to facilitate fracture reduction and fixation, including the Achilles, sulcus calcaneus, and plantar fins. The Achilles fin holds the posterosuperior calcaneal tuberosity in tongue-type fractures, and the distally directed locking screw on the Achilles fin helps to fix tongue-type fractures and control the coronal plane alignment of the heel. The sulcus calcaneus and plantar fins are designed to facilitate the reduction and fixation processes of the anterior calcaneus. Furthermore, the predesigned trajectories of the locking screws aim to support the posterior facet of the subtalar joint, sustentaculum tali, and calcaneocuboid joint. Their use could potentially reduce the use of fluoroscopy during surgery, because it is difficult to verify the screw direction from a lateral approach without fluoroscopy. In contrast, the anatomic plate controls the trajectory of the screw. The use of supporting screws in the posterior facet of the subtalar joint can maintain the reduction of the joint surface, a key element affecting surgical outcomes A potential disadvantage of this locking plate is that its fit to the surface of the calcaneus could be suboptimal if the reduction is not anatomic. The design of the plate makes it difficult to bend. In a conventional calcaneal plate approach, surgeons can bend the plate to fit the lateral cortex of the calcaneus. In contrast, surgeons can use the anatomic calcaneal plate as a reduction reference and use lag screws to reduce the fragments toward the plate. Because the plate is anatomically shaped, surgeons must first examine the reduction to eliminate an improper fit during surgery. Just as with many retrospective analyses of a series of surgical patients, our report has a number of methodologic limitations that could threaten the validity of our conclusions. We appreciate that surgeons measuring the outcomes of their own patients are likely to record measurements that have been influenced by bias. Moreover, we did not compare the anatomic plate with any other form of fixation; thus, we could not conclude whether the anatomic plate is any better or worse, beyond our understanding of previously reported results and our experience with other methods of calcaneal fracture repair. Still further, we realize that it is relatively easy to show statistically significant differences when comparing continuous numerical variables (e.g., AOFAS scale scores, angular measurements) using parametric tests, even with samples of <30. In conclusion, our results revealed that the anatomic locking plate for the calcaneus can be used to effectively treat DIACFs with a relatively short operative time, using a straightforward reduction technique in which the fragments are reduced toward an anatomically contoured plate. Future studies with a higher evidence level are encouraged.