We report a case of ceramic liner fracture in a 34-year-old man that occurred 1 year 9 months after total hip arthroplasty with a BiCONTACT (Aesculap, Tuttlingen, Germany) ceramic-on-ceramic prosthesis. The ceramic liner was found within the metal shell in 4 large pieces and multiple small fragments in the peripheral portions. Its condition indicated that the possible mechanism of late ceramic liner chip fracture was repeated episodes of impingement between the prosthetic neck and the edge of the ceramic liner. Squatting, kneeling, and sitting cross-legged caused impingement. These positions are more common in Asian populations than in Western populations. After the joint was thoroughly irrigated, a new modular ceramic liner and a 28-mm ceramic head were implanted.Ceramic-on-ceramic articulation has been used to minimize the wear of bearing surfaces and subsequent osteolysis. Past experience with ceramic bearing was disappointing because of increased component loosening primarily due to design issues. The primary design concerns were neck-socket impingement, which could lead to cup rim fracture, debris generation, and loosening There have also been reports of another form of ceramic liner fracture—late fracture due to the stress concentration at the rim of the liner in an acetabular component of a ceramic liner covered with polyethylene A 34-year-old man with a weight of 67 kg and a height of 164 cm and with advanced osteonecrosis of his right femoral head underwent a primary total hip arthroplasty in March 2003. A transgluteal approach was used to place a ceramic-on-ceramic bearing implant (Plasma cup, BiCONTACT system, Aesculap, Tuttlingen, Germany). The acetabular cup had a 52-mm outer diameter, roughened titanium plasma-sprayed exterior, and a machined interior that accepted a ceramic insert (Biolox Forte, CeramTec, Plochingen, Germany). The ceramic liner did not have a lip on it. The metallic shell was not recessed to protect the rim of the ceramic liner. The femoral stem was cementless with a proximal porous coating (BiCONTACT, Aesculap). A 28-mm short Biolox (−3.5 mm) head was used. The cup abduction angle was 39°, and the anteversion angle was 22° ( Fourteen months after surgery, the patient felt crepitation without pain during hip motion. There was no history of trauma. A radiograph of the pelvis showed a comminuted fracture of the ceramic liner with fragments around the stem neck ( Several factors increase the risk of fracture of a ceramic insert. Trauma, a high level of activity, and obesity may increase the risk of breakage by increasing the load across the joint surface The locking mechanism of the ceramic insert with conical sleeving appears to be safe and reliable, but careful technique is required to correctly position the liner. Malpositioning of the liner may generate uncontrolled peak stress in the ceramic, which may result in fracture Another possible mechanism is edge loading when the hip is flexed, as with rising from a chair or climbing a high step The cause of the ceramic liner fracture with a sandwich insertion (ceramics-polyethylene-titanium) is the stress concentration at the rim of the ceramic liner, thin ceramic (<4 mm), and impingement between liner rim and the prosthetic heads The ceramic liner retrieved from our patient showed multiple chips on the rim. Repeated episode of impingement between the prosthetic neck and the edge at the ceramic liner was the most likely cause of fracture. Squatting, kneeling, and sitting cross-legged are body positions that are more common in non-Western populations. The increased range of motion required to support these positions can result in impingement and liner fracture The treatment of a ceramic liner fracture must include meticulous retrieval of all fragments to avoid third body wear