In this research we introduce a new, facile, and economical system for fabrication of tungsten carbide (WC) nano particle powder. In this system WO3, Zn, and C have been ball-milled for several hours, which led to the synthesis of tungsten carbide nano particles. The synthesized WC can successfully be separated from the ball-milled product by subjecting the product powder to diluted HCl for removing ZnO and obtaining WC. X-ray diffraction (XRD) analysis indicates that the reduction of WO3 will be completed gradually by increasing milling time up to 36h. Scanning electron microscope (SEM), and transmission electron microscope (TEM) images show that after 36h of milling the particle size of the fabricated powder is nano metric (about 20nm). Results have shown that this system can surmount some main problems occurred in previous similar WC synthesizing systems. For example carbothermic reduction reactions, which lead to the synthesis of W2C instead of WC, would not be activated because in this system reactions take place gradually.Tungsten carbide (WC) and its composites have a lot of industrial applications such as wear resistant parts used in hot rolling mills and drawing dies, mining and cutting tools, fine drilling tips, and sand blast nozzles. Recently WC has been used as a substitute for noble metals like palladium (Pd), platinum (Pt), and iridium (Ir) in catalysis industries Sherif El-Eskandarany et al. and Bolokang et al. have reported the synthesis of WC via mechanical milling of W and graphite powders In this work, Zn has been used as the reducing agent of WO In this research, powders of WO Extra 10 The reactions progress was characterized by X-ray diffraction (XRD) analysis (Philips Analytical X-Ray B.V.) with Cu Kα radiation ( It is obvious that thermodynamic calculations cannot predict the reactions’ behavior during the milling process completely, but it is necessary to have a general view of reactions. The reaction In mechanical milling the effect of thermal energy produced by the exothermic reactions should be considered, because in some cases this energy can activate some side reactions, which have higher activation energy than the first reactions. For instance carbothermic reduction reaction has been observed in the milling of WO  As it was mentioned above tungsten trioxide WO  WC nanoparticles can be successfully synthesized by mechanical milling of WO