A simple procedure was described for routine measurements of the degree of anionicity of polyacrylamide-based flocculants. The method relies on determining the total organic carbon content and assaying ion concentrations in a dilute solution (in distilled water at natural pH) of the tested flocculant. While the total carbon content in solution gives the total number of acrylic and acrylamide units in the polymer, the concentration of the counter-cation provides a measure of the number of acrylic units only. Thus a degree of anionicity can also be obtained from a simple equation. Five commercial flocculant samples of similar molecular weights but of different degrees of anionicity were then used for evaluating the proposed procedure, and the obtained degrees of anionicity were in excellent agreement with the data provided by the manufacturer of the flocculants. Potential advantages and limitations of the method were also discussed.The majority of flocculants employed in mineral processing are polyacrylamide-based high molecular weight polymers. Polyacrylamide (PAM) is nominally a nonionic uncharged polymer. However, industrial polyacrylamides are in fact partially hydrolyzed to yield a number of acrylic units along the main macromolecule chain. These acrylic units containing carboxylic groups make such co-polymers weakly- to moderately-anionic. The ratio of the number of acrylic monomer units to the total number of acrylic and acrylamide units is known as the degree of anionicity ( The degree of anionicity of flocculants is usually vaguely provided by polymer suppliers. The terms “weakly anionic” or “moderately anionic” do not really explain much about the actual degree of anionicity. It is, however, rather easy to understand that this parameter must be of critical importance to every flocculation application of PAM-based polymers. The surface chemistry of minerals (e.g., wettability, surface charge) to be flocculated varies widely by application, and the adsorption of PAM and the resulting bridging of fine particles by PAM must also depend on the chemistry of the flocculant itself. Each mineral system works best only with a given type (i.e., degree of anionicity) of flocculant. Along the same lines, it should also be recognized that nonionic (e.g., pure PAM) and anionic (e.g., hydrolyzed PAM) polymer chains behave differently in process water under a given set of physicochemical conditions (pH, ionic strength, temperature) in terms of their conformations in solution: the bridging mechanism of flocculation depends not only on flocculant adsorption but also on whether the flocculant macromolecule is coiled or stretched in solution, which again is a strong function of the degree of anionicity of the flocculant. The above-mentioned aspects of flocculation chemistry have led to several attempts to accurately quantify the degree of anionicity of PAM-based polymers. The most relevant methods, and combinations thereof, usually employ infrared spectroscopy ( Infrared spectra offer qualitative information at best, unless calibration of band intensities using polymers of known degrees of anionicity is carried out. Alternatively, a separate determination of the degree of anionicity of the tested samples needs to be performed in order to verify the infrared data. Typically, infrared data are limited to a range of Therefore, the main purpose of the presented study was to propose a straightforward method, not requiring sophisticated instrumentation for directly determining the degree of anionicity of commercial PAM samples by revisiting some of the approaches and ideas. Five commercial polyacrylamide samples of the Superfloc series were obtained from Cytec Canada Inc. Their trade names and charge densities, as given in a Cytec chemical handbook ( The viscosity-average molecular weights in All FTIR measurements were performed on polymer films prepared from solutions in distilled water following the procedure described by The proposed method for measuring the Main ion concentrations in the same solutions (two sub-samples, natural pH) were assayed by ultra-trace ICP–MS analysis (inductively-coupled plasma – mass spectrometry) and ion chromatography. Blank corrections were taken by subjecting distilled water used to prepare the PAM solutions to the same suite of chemical assays for a total of 38 elements. The natural pH of the different flocculant solutions was 6–7, and no effort was made to remove dissolved carbon dioxide since it was found that blank corrections eliminated its contribution. Since the determination and use of TOC values is an essential part of the paper, the evaluation of analytical data to obtain the degree of anionicity will be presented in the discussion section.  The spectra exhibit peaks and bands characteristic of polyacrylamides. Band assignments can be found in It was initially thought that high-intensity peaks of carboxylic (−COOH) and amide (NH The presented IR spectra illustrate some of the basic problems associated with using infrared spectroscopy for determining the The TOC content in a PAM solution can readily be re-calculated to the number of moles of carbon in solution. When the number of moles of carbon is divided by 3 – the number of carbon atoms in acrylamide and acrylate units – the total number of monomer units (acrylamide plus acrylate, or  It can be seen from Perhaps the most controversial aspect of this analytical approach is the well known fact that PAM samples may contain significant amounts of contaminating inorganic salts – almost all of which are sodium salts (residual catalysts, residual hydroxide used for hydrolysis, etc.) – so assaying counterions in solution will give a total ion concentration: a portion associated with acrylic units and a portion from the contaminants. In the case of the Cytec samples, the only other important cations ( It is important to observe that by using Eq. ( The degrees of anionicity obtained from infrared spectroscopy (Eq. ( Interestingly, neglecting all other ion concentrations except sodium, the The method can be expected to be inaccurate if the contaminants contain high amounts of ions such as calcium or magnesium which are known to strongly bind to carboxylic groups and these ions may not appear in solution in free form. However, the presence of substantial amounts of such ions in PAM samples is highly unlikely. Along the same lines, it is also important in this method to measure the natural pH of the tested PAM solution. If the pH is relatively high from the presence of residual hydroxides (or carbonates), then again a correction can be taken for the equivalent excess amount of metal cations (almost certainly sodium) associated with the residual base by including in Eq. ( Infrared spectroscopy can also be used for detecting typical contaminating salts such as sodium sulfate or sodium carbonate ( As seen from Overall, the TOC-based method offers several convenient features that make the method very attractive for routine characterization of the The total organic carbon (TOC) content in a dilute solution of a PAM-based flocculant in distilled water can be used as a basis for accurately measuring the degree of anionicity of the flocculant. Since anionic polymers are available in a salt form, the TOC data have to be supplemented by assaying the concentrations of the main ions in the same flocculant solution in order to obtain the concentration of the counter-cation, which in combination with the TOC results defines the degree of anionicity of the flocculant. Simple corrections based on ionic equilibria can be taken, if necessary, to account for the presence of contaminating salts so that only the amount of the counter-cation associated with the anionic/carboxylic groups of PAM could be obtained. The described method has several important analytical advantages: it does not require any prior calibration, the samples do not have to be purified, the concentration of PAM in solution does not need to be known, and only a small amount of polymer is needed. The analytical approach proposed in this study can potentially be applied to measuring the degree of anionicity/substitution of other polymers used in mineral processing, such as carboxymethyl cellulose, or other anionic derivatives of polymers with well defined composition. Financial support for this study through a Collaborative Research and Development Grant between Canadian Natural Resources Ltd and Natural Sciences and Engineering Research Council of Canada (NSERC) is gratefully acknowledged.