Lead complexes of benzohydroxamic acid (Pb-BHA complexes) have been successfully applied to the industrial separation of scheelite from calcite and fluorite minerals. However, the separation of scheelite from calcite using Pb-BHA complexes in the absence of fluorite is difficult. In flotation tests, both sodium fluoride and fluorite particles have been shown to depress calcite but not scheelite. Therefore, fluoride ions from the dissolved fluorite particles play an important role in the flotation separation of scheelite from calcite. In the current study, the results of zeta potential analysis confirmed that fluoride ions are strongly adsorbed on calcite surfaces and that the point of zero charge for calcite shifts to that of fluorite. X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy and atomic force microscopy analyses clearly indicated that the fluoride ions are adsorbed on the calcite surface to form a fluorite film. Thus, this type of surface transformation shows promise as a strategy for the flotation separation of semi-soluble minerals.Scheelite, calcite, and fluorite are calcium-containing minerals that are difficult to separate owing to the similarity of their surface properties ( Calcite exhibits good floatability in single-mineral flotation, and it is therefore difficult to separate scheelite from calcite/scheelite mineral mixtures. Therefore, it is remarkable that Pb-BHA complexes were successfully employed for the separation of minerals from the Shizhuyuan Mine, as they are generally low grade and characterized by high calcite contents. It may therefore be reasoned that some minerals in the Shizhuyuan deposit play an important role in flotation separation. However, the identity of the mineral(s) responsible is currently unknown. In previous work, both scheelite and calcite were efficiently collected using Pb-BHA complexes, but fluorite could not be collected. A hypothesis proposed was that fluorite may play an important role in the flotation separation of scheelite from calcite. Scheelite, calcite, and fluorite minerals are semi-soluble and dissolve in aqueous media, releasing different ions. A surface transformation occurs to calcium-containing minerals owing to their similar surface characteristics. It has been found that surface transformation is a common phenomenon and causes difficulties in flotation separation because the dissolved calcium-containing minerals interact with other minerals, leading to changes in surface hydrophobicity ( Many studies have focused on ameliorating these surface transformations through the addition of surfactants and/or depressants in order to achieve selective separation. Such materials include Na In the present study, the effect of fluoride ions and fluorite particles on the flotation separation of scheelite from calcite was studied. Flotation studies using pure minerals were conducted to evaluate the floatability of calcite and scheelite in the presence of fluorite or sodium fluoride. Zeta potential, X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS), and atomic force microscopy (AFM) analyses were conducted to elucidate the fundamental mechanism of the adsorption of fluoride or fine fluorite particles onto the calcite surface. We believe that our findings may provide a new strategy for the flotation separation of calcium minerals. Pure scheelite crystals were purchased from JWFU, Shanghai, China. Pure calcite and fluorite were purchased from the Mineral and Gem Market, Changsha, China. The mineral samples were ground in a pottery ball mill, and the <74 μm fraction was used in flotation tests. For zeta potential and XPS analyses, the mineral samples were ground to <37.4 μm using an agate mortar. Analytical grade benzohydroxamic acid (BHA) was purchased from Guangfu, Tianjin, China; analytical lead nitrate was purchased from Sinopharm Chemical Reagent Co., Ltd, Shanghai China; analytical sodium fluoride was purchased from Xilong chemical Co., Ltd, Shantou, China. The BHA was mixed with lead nitrate in a 50 mL beaker to prepare the collector before adding to the flotation cell, and the pH was adjusted with HCl or NaOH stock solutions. Deionized water with a resistivity of over 18 MΩ cm was used throughout the pure-material flotation experiments. Pure-mineral flotation tests were carried out in an XFG flotation machine at an impeller speed of 1650 rpm using a 40 mL Plexiglas cell. The mineral suspension was prepared by adding 2.0 g of the single mineral to 35 mL of deionized water and agitating for 1 min. Mixed-mineral experiments employed 1.0 g scheelite combined with 1.0 g calcite. A small amount of fluorite or low-concentration sodium fluoride solution was added as a flotation reagent, and the mixture was agitated for more than 3 min. BHA mixed with lead nitrate at a mass ratio of 1:2 was then added, and the mixture was agitated for a further 3 min. The pH was measured and adjusted before flotation. After 5 min of flotation, the floated and unfloated particles were collected, dried, and weighed, and the recovery was calculated. Zeta potential measurements were conducted at 20 °C using a zeta potential analyzer (ZetaPlus, Bruker, Germany). The three single-mineral samples (scheelite, calcite, and fluorite) were ground to <2 μm. Mineral suspensions containing 0.02 g of solids and 40 mL of KNO XPS measurements were conducted using a Thermo Fisher Scientific K-Alpha 1063 X system. The samples were ground to <74 μm before tests. The <74 μm fraction of pure scheelite and calcite were treated using the same procedure as that used for the flotation tests with and without the addition of sodium fluoride. The prepared mineral suspensions were stirred for 10 min and washed three times with deionized water. Finally, the samples were filtered and dried in a vacuum oven, with the temperature maintained below 50 °C AFM observations were performed using a Multimode V microscope (Veeco Metrology Inc.). The sample was naturally cleaved calcite that was polished in order to meet the requirements for AFM. The prepared sample was used to obtain a surface image. The sample was then soaked in a sodium fluoride solution with a concentration of 200 mg/L for 3 days, and a surface image of the treated sample was also obtained. The two images were then compared. Previous work has revealed the different floatabilities of fluorite, calcite, and scheelite in the Pb-BHA flotation system, as shown in As mentioned previously, we propose that fluoride or fluorite may play an important role in the flotation separation of scheelite from calcite. Accordingly, the effects of fluoride and fluorite on the floatability of scheelite and calcite were studied using Pb-BHA complexes as the collector, as shown in The curves for flotation recovery vs pH demonstrate that fluoride ions, whether released from fluorite or added artificially, depress calcite recovery and allow efficient separation. Further flotation experiments were carried out in order to study the effect of dosage and stirring time on the floatability of calcite and scheelite, and the results are shown in   Fluorite is a semi-soluble mineral, and several hours or days may be required to achieve chemical equilibrium. However, at high solid concentration, the chemical equilibrium for fluorite in aqueous solution is achieved rapidly, which needs less than 2 h ( The results of these single-mineral flotation tests demonstrate that the addition of fluoride ions and fluorite particles depresses calcite much more significantly than it depresses scheelite. However, for these results to be meaningful, this phenomenon must be exhibited by a mineral mixture (1 g scheelite combined with 1 g calcite). Accordingly, similar experiments with a mixed mineral were conducted, and the results are shown in  Similarly, the influence of fluorite also influences selective separation, as illustrated in Calcium-containing minerals dissolve in the pulp and release anions and cations, such as Ca It is worth noting that the equilibrium constant K is different between fluorite-calcite system and fluorite-scheelite system. Comparing formula  XPS analysis was conducted to investigate the mechanism for the adsorption of fluoride ions on the calcite surface. As shown in The Ca2p and O1s spectra of the scheelite surface in the absence and presence of F  To confirm the different adsorption of fluoride ions in the surface of calcite and scheelite, an extra band is added to the spectra of Ca2p. As shown in AFM reveals the microscopic structures of the surfaces or interfaces of solids, making it a powerful tool for investigating the changes to the calcite surface upon adding fluoride. It is difficult to perform selective separation of scheelite from calcite in a Pb-BHA flotation system with the absence of fluoride ions or fluorite particles. In the present study, zeta potential, XPS, and AFM analysis revealed that fluoride ions adsorb on the calcite surface, forming a fluorite layer. The surface properties of fluoride-adsorbed calcite are similar to those of fluorite, promoting to the separation of scheelite from calcite. In previous studies, surface transformation among semi-soluble minerals was deemed to hinder flotation separation. However, this work demonstrates that surface transformation can be beneficial for flotation separation in some cases. Another interesting result is that fluorite particles are much better than fluoride particles for flotation separation, indicating that the interactions between the fluorite and calcite particles also play an important role. The exact mechanism will be further studied in the near future. This work was supported by