Shot peening is a surface treatment commonly used to improve the fatigue behaviour of mechanical components. It consists in bombarding metallic surfaces with spherical shots to induce plastic deformation in the surface layer of the material. Recent studies have shown that, if applied with unconventional parameters, namely severe shot peening, it can be considered a severe plastic deformation surface treatment, able to strongly modify the microstructure of the surface layer of material by generating grains in the scale of nanometers. In this paper, different shot peening treatments with conventional and severe parameters were performed on aluminium 6063 alloy in order to assess the differences induced in the microstructure of the surface layer, and to evaluate their effects on fatigue behaviour. Rotating bending fatigue tests were performed on shot peened hourglass specimens. Specimens’ microstructure, surface roughness, microhardness and residual stress profiles were carefully characterized. The obtained results evidence the notable influence of shot peening parameters on surface layer microstructure, which at the same time influences fatigue behaviour.Recent industrial advancements require developing more functional and high-tech materials. Reduction of size and weight of work pieces with maintained or even improved mechanical properties are demanded by various technological fields, particularly automotive and aeronautic industry. Attempting to obtain material with enhanced functionality, researchers have paid special attention to severe plastic deformation (SPD) techniques; since besides introduction of compressive residual stresses and work hardening, these methods are able to modify the grain size down to ultrafine grain range (grains with at least one dimension smaller than 1 Various SPD methods have been suggested for obtaining grain refinement including equal channel angular pressing (ECAP) The shortcoming of these approaches is that it is difficult to produce bulk nanocrystallized material especially in case of large industrial components; having in mind that in most cases the damage (no matter if this is due to wear, corrosion, fatigue,…) initiates from the surface and propagates to interior, it is interesting to obtain the nanostructure in the surface layer of components leaving unchanged the bulk material. Severe shot peening (SSP) is one of the most versatile SPD methods that work on the surface layer of treated material and can be applied without any strict restriction with respect of the dimension and of the complexity of the geometry. SSP is derived from traditional shot peening Although there are several studies that show the possibility to obtain nanostructures by mean of SSP The material used in this study is aluminium alloy Al-6063 (Alcoa S.A., Asturias, Spain) provided as extruded bars, with chemical composition shown in Disk shaped specimens of 12 The shot peening treatments were performed on the aluminium alloy by means of a Guyson Euroblast 4PF machine. In order to assess the influence of coverage on the surface microstructure, two different coverages were applied: 100% (conventional shot peening treatment, CSP) and 5000% (severe shot peening treatment, SSP), keeping the rest of the treatment parameters unchanged. This high coverage value was chosen bearing in mind previous results to be sure to induce grain refinement in a adequately thick surface layer It is important to clarify that these treatments have been performed using a laboratory shot peening machine. We used these high coverage levels with the aim to transmit a large amount of energy to the treated material; however, in industrial scale, the same quantity of energy can be induced at lower coverage levels, using higher Almen intensity. Shot peening treatments introduce plastic deformation on the material surface. Depending on the extent of deformation, different microstructural alterations take place on the surface layer. Optical, scanning and transmission electron microscopy were used with the aim to analyse such modifications. Disk shaped CSP, SSP and RSSP specimens were cut along a transversal section to analyse the evolution of the microstructure from the treated surface to the inner layers. The cross sections were impregnated in mounting resin, polished and etched with hydrofluoric acid (40%) reagent. A Nikon Epithot 200 microscope connected to a computer with Omnimet-Enterprise program was used for imaging. In order to observe the dimension of the grains on the top surface layer, specimens were analysed by means of an Ultra Plus Carl Zeiss FEG-SEM provided with HKL Channel 5 system from Oxford Instruments that permits obtaining images with EBSD (electron backscatter diffraction) technique, also known as backscatter Kikuchi diffraction (BKD). EBSD is a microstructural-crystallographic technique and can be used to index grain boundary and grain misorientation. Maps were obtained using a potential of 20 For EBSD analysis the specimens were subjected a similar preparation as optical microscopy samples, i.e. going through different grinding stages, subsequently polished with polycrystalline diamond water based suspensions of 9 and 3  TEM cross-sectional specimens were prepared for surface imaging and phase identification. Specimens of 1.4 TEM analyses of CSP and SSP specimens revealed the presence of nanocrystals on the topmost surface layer of the material after shot peening treatments. It is to be noted that although EBSD technique did not reveal a grain refinement on the surface layer of CSP specimens, TEM observations bring to light nanocrystals around 60–100 Shot peening is known to change also the surface topography. Main roughness parameters, R Vickers microhardness tests were performed on the cross section of the specimens. Measurements were performed following ASTM Residual stress profile was measured in specimens by means of a XSTRESS 3000 G3R diffractometer from Stresstech using Cr Kα radiation, circular irradiated area of 2 By X-ray diffraction measurements also it is possible to obtain additional important information related to the surface state of material in terms of the width of the diffraction peak at half the maximum intensity (FWHM). This quantity is assumed as an index of hardening of the material Rotating bending fatigue tests (stress ratio R In other words it is assumed that the fact that SSP treatment did not result in further improvement of fatigue strength when compared to CSP treatment can be due to the notable surface damage introduced by multiple high energy impacts, which could have favoured crack initiation by acting as stress raisers on the top surface layer of SSP treated specimens. Anyway, RSSP, while allowing a limited decrease in the roughness, is not able to get any appreciable improvement of the fatigue strength. This means that the surface state after the second shot peening treatment has not changed enough and that the re-peening effect was not able to diminish the negative influence of the surface defects. Previous studies showed notable fatigue life enhancement after SSP treatment with notable difference between fatigue strength of CSP and SSP treated series for other materials as cast iron and low alloy steel The microstructural analysis of the surface layer of Aluminium 6063 alloy proved that severe shot peening treatment is able to induce significant grain refinement on the surface layer of the treated material and affect a thick surface layer with considerable compressive residual stresses and work hardening. On the contrary, CSP is not able to induce an appreciable grain refinement while inducing compressive residual stress state, as expected. Since the Almen intensity was maintained the same for all of the shot peened samples, it can be argued that the generation for a surface layer with ultrafine grain size can be achieved by increasing the coverage, that is the total time of treatment. At the same time, the surface topography of the different series of specimens reveals that SSP strongly affects the surface state by increasing roughness and introducing notable surface defects. This effect is much less pronounced for the CSP specimens. As regards the RSSP series, it is noted that the surface roughness is reduced with respect of the SSP specimen even if the final roughness values still remain largely superior than CSP sample. The results of the fatigue tests show that the three treated series of specimens (CSP, SSP and RSSP) have a comparable fatigue strength. This can be interpreted as the result of the different aspects related to the applied treatments: grain refinement (more pronounced and deeper in the SSP and RSSP series), residual stresses (deeper in the SSP and RSSP specimens) and the surface topography and roughness (more pronounced in the SSP and the RSSP series). While the first two factors play a positive role with respect of fatigue strength, the latter is deleterious, and based on the obtained results, is found to be more relevant with respect of the other two factors. It can be concluded the aluminium alloy used in this study, which presents high ductility and low surface hardness with respect of other materials previously tested in the same conditions, is very sensitive to the applied combination of coverage and intensity. Another conclusion is that, in spite of the higher surface roughness, the generation of a surface layer with ultrafine grains and a deeper compressive residual stress profile are able to balance the negative effect of the increased roughness. This leads to the final conclusion that the research effort on SSP applied to aluminium alloys must be steered toward the definition of a set of Almen intensity and coverage able to generate a grain refined surface layer at nanoscale and a deep compressive residual stress field, not excessively increasing the final roughness of the surface and possibly improving the general surface topography, avoiding surface defects that can act as preferential sites for crack initiation. This work was financially supported by