Amine-based carbon dioxide (CO2) capture is still limited by high desorption energy consumption. Fixing CO2 into carbonate is a safer and more permanent method. In this work, calcium oxide (CaO) is introduced to perform chemical desorption instead of thermal desorption on 1,8-diazabicyclo [5.4.0] undec-7-ene (DBU) aqueous solution after CO2 absorption. The X-ray diffraction (XRD) patterns of solid products show the formation of calcite calcium carbonate (CaCO3), which prove the feasibility of this method. The effects of reaction temperature, reaction time and Ca2+/CO3
                     2− molar ratios on the related reactions in CO2 absorption–mineralization process and CaCO3 precipitation are discussed, and purer CaCO3 is obtained by ultrasonic treatment. The CaCO3 content can be increased to 95.8% and the CO2 desorption ratio can achieve 80% by 30 min ultrasonic dispersion treatment under the conditions (40 °C, 180 min, Ca2+/CO3
                     2− molar ratio = 1.0). After five cycles, DBU aqueous solution shows stable CO2 absorption and mineralization ability. Fourier transform infrared spectroscopy (FT-IR) spectra of the reaction process also indicate the regeneration of the solvent. Compared with thermal desorption, this process is exothermic, almost without no additional heat.Chemical absorption method is one of the efficient and economical carbon capture technologies at present, and amine-based CO Integrated CO The selection of amine solution is crucial in the development of IAM process. It is found that the use of different amine solutions (MEA, DEA, PZ, AMP, MDEA)[ Heldebrant Combining the excellent absorbing performance of a novel absorbent and the low energy consumption of mineralization will contribute to more economical efficiency for CO DBU (>  CaO was added to the reactor containing about 50 g CO CaO was added to the reactor containing about 50 g CO To study the stability and loss of DBU in the reaction process, five cycles of CO The content of CaCO Particle size distribution (PSD) of CaO and some products were characterized by dual-use laser particle size analyzer (JL-6000, Chengdu Jingxin equipment). The products were characterized by X-ray diffraction (XRD) technique to determine the crystal structure of products. At room temperature, samples were scanned on X-ray diffractometer (DX2700, Dandong Haoyuan Instrument) in steps of 0.06 2 The whole process ( In an aqueous solution, the N atom on the DBU double bond is protonated, and the positive charge is delocalized by interacting with the π-electrons of the double bond and the n-electrons of the second N atom (Reaction (1))[ A small part of HCO The mineralization process is the most important step. Reactions (4) and (5) indicate the CaO dissolution and Ca(OH) The recycling of the solution. Two OH Reactions (4), (5) and (6) are the key to the whole process. Many parameters will affect the reactions and the degree of reactions will determine the purity of CaCO Therefore, in the mineralization process, the effects of reaction temperature, reaction time and Ca Reaction temperature affects not only the dissolution and dissociation of reactants, but also the morphology and particle size of the CaCO The elevated temperature is beneficial to reduce the proportion of CaCO The products were characterized by SEM and PSD to further explore the influence of temperature on the formation of CaCO The position and height of peaks on the PSD diagram ( So, the CO In the crystallization process, prolonging of reaction time will promote the continued reaction of unreacted Ca(OH) The PSD of the products is closely related to the content of CaCO  It can be seen from the above discussion that when CaO with 0.9 molar ratio is added, Ca(OH) SEM images ( To further facilitate the reaction, the mixture of CaO and DBU/CO It is important to investigate whether the absorbent can efficiently and stably mineralize CO  The mineralization products in the cycle process are also relatively stable, mainly CaCO In conclusion, this study explored the CO Obviously, compared with the traditional thermal desorption, this process can avoid the desorption process with high energy consumption and yield more stable CaCO The authors gratefully thank the The following are the supplementary data related to this article. Supplementary material to this article can be found online at