In this submission we introduce the notion of under-cited influential publications and show that these publications are like “wake-up switches” for significant follow-up research. To be considered an under-cited influential article we require an article to meet three requirements. One is on the level of received number of citations (first generation citations), while the two other ones take subsequent citation generations into account. In general terms these three conditions are:
                  1) The article is reasonably well-cited (a basic requirement to be influential)
                  2) Citations of citations (second generation citations) are rather highly cited, so that the original one is influential in an indirect way (a more refined token of influence);
                  3) Given condition two, the article received fewer citations than expected (being under-cited).
                  We claim that the phenomenon of under-cited influential publications is important and should receive more attention. Moreover, one may say that under-cited influential publications belong to the group of truly foundational scientific discoveries acting as promoters of influential research as shown by significant follow-up research.The publication of the first Science Citation Index (SCI), more than fifty years ago, can be considered as the result of a systematic effort to track citations over major scientific publication outlets ( The Chinese scientist Youyou Tu received the 2015 Nobel Prize in Physiology or Medicine. Her case is a clear example that in science it is more important to make truly foundational discoveries rather than receive thousands of citations. Searching for Tu’s publications in the Web of Science (WoS) one finds only four articles (of the 43 she wrote) and these are not heavily cited. This phenomenon suggests that “success is not always what one sees”, and indeed, many publications can be said to be under-cited by the current research evaluation system. Most research leads to small, but necessary and useful contributions to scientific progress. Yet, every now and then a truly foundational contribution sees the light, such as In this contribution, we focus on the type of phenomenon as illustrated by the work of Youyou Tu. Some publications are really influential but do not receive as many citations as one expects. This is not a blank statement, but one we will illustrate and try to quantify. A definition will be provided for such influential articles. Recently, informetricians have come to realize that in citation research not only direct (forward) citations or references (backward citations) of a record should be considered, but also its indirect citations and references ( To be considered an under-cited influential article we require an article to meet three requirements. One is on the level of received number of citations (first generation citations), while the two other ones take subsequent citation generations into account. In general terms these three conditions are: The article is reasonably well-cited (a basic requirement to be influential); Citations of citations (second generation citations) are rather highly cited, so that the original one is influential in an indirect way (a more refined token of influence); Given condition two, the article received fewer citations than expected (being under-cited). These three general requirements will be operationalized further on. In the next section we have a closer look on one of Tu’s articles, introducing a concrete example of what one may call, at least in an intuitive way, an under-cited influential article. In the next section we operationalize the three requirements for being an under-cited influential article. We do this in two ways, one more suited for high profile fields, and one more suited for the ‘average’ field. Then we come to some case studies of fundamental work ahead of transformative research, and general articles in applied science. Finally, we discuss our approach and compare it with the scientific “gems” as found by ( Although Youyou Tu began her work on the development of antimalarial drugs in the early nineteen seventies, the earliest publication of Youyou Tu included in the WoS is one published in the year 1982, entitled “Studies on the constituents of artesimia annua, Part II ( However, we observe an unusual phenomenon related to this second article: many of the citing articles have a better citation performance, and this, as they are younger, in a shorter citation window than Tu’s article, referred to as article T, see There is nothing uncommon when an article, say article B, is cited by another one, that later turns out to become more highly cited than article B. Yet, when this is not just an exception but B is cited by a significant number of articles that each are more highly cited than B, then one may consider B to be a foundational article, that, for whatever reason is under-cited. It may even be under-recognized, although recognition and highly-cited are not the same, as illustrated again by Tu’s work. Transformative research plays an essential role in scientific progress, pushing knowledge ahead. Examples include: DNA manipulation (restriction endonuclease, polymerase chain reaction), genome sequencing, evolution theory, microscopes and telescopes, atomic fission and fusion. This type of scientific results restructures and revolutionizes our means of inquiry and leads to a more complete understanding of the universe ( However, some fundamental work ahead of transformative research may be forgotten. When tracing the reference lists of the two articles mentioned above we see that an earlier article by Sanger and his colleagues ( Another typical example is an article by ( It is clear that these three fundamental precursor articles are under-cited when compared to their highly-cited follow-up articles. This phenomenon is illustrated in The examples mentioned above suggest that many publications can be said to be under-cited by the current research evaluation system, i.e. they are really influential but did not receive as many citations as one may expect. Next we propose a definition of the notion of an under-cited influential article as an article whose citations satisfy three inequalities. In formulating these three requirements we use percentiles and medians, and not averages, taking skewness of citation distributions into account ( The definition of an under-cited influential article uses values obtained through the Top 1% Citations Median (TOPCM) and the Top 10% Citations Median (TTPCM) algorithms. These algorithms are applied to a single publication and result from the following procedure. Starting from a target publication A we take the following steps. Step 1. Collect all articles (any type) citing publication A (in the chosen database). This is set CIT(A). Step 2. Determine how many times these citing articles are cited (during the citation window). Note that in this step we use second-generation citations. Step 3. Rank all articles in the set CIT(A) according to the number of received citations. From now on we make a distinction between the TOPCM (a) and the TTPCM (b) case. Step 4a. Next we take the top 1% (rounded up) from CIT(A). This operation is explained in more detail below. Step 4b. We take the top 10% (rounded up). Step 5a. This top 1% list is denoted C1 and consists of articles C1(1), C1(2) and so on. Obviously, this set is a subset of CIT(A). Step 5b. This top 10% list is denoted L1 and consists of articles L1(1), L1(2) and so on. Also this set is a subset of CIT(A). By definition it contains set C1. Step 6a. Steps 1, 2, 3 and 4 are applied to each article in set C1. The resulting top 1% lists (one for each article in C1) are denoted as C2a, C2b etc. and consist of articles C2a(1), C2a(2), …. C2b(1), … Step 6b. Steps 1, 2, 3 and 4 are applied to each article in set L1. The resulting top 10% lists (one for each article in L1) are denoted as L2a, L2b etc. and consist of articles L2a(1), L2a(2), …. L2b(1), … Next we explain steps 4a and 4b. This procedure uses the ceiling function. This function, denoted as ceil, when applied to a real number x returns the smallest integer which is larger than or equal to x. Hence ceil(3.9) Finally, explaining step 6a, we consider article C1(1) and collect all articles citing C1(1). They are all second-generation citing articles of A. This is set CIT(C1(1)). Next we determine how many times each of the articles in CIT(C1(1)) are cited (making use of third-generation citations). Now the articles in CIT(C1(1)) are ranked according to the number of citations they received. We are only interested in the top 1% of this list and the number of times each is cited. This set, denoted as C2a, is a subset of CIT(C1(1)) and consists of articles denoted as C2a(1), C2a(2), …… This procedure is repeated for sets C1(2) and so on. In step 6b a similar procedure is followed except that instead of the top 1% we use the top 10%. This ends the data collection for the TOPCM and TTPCM algorithms. Based on these sets and numbers we apply the actual algorithm. First we calculate the median number of citations received by the articles in set C1. This median is denoted as μ Next we calculate the median number of citations received by articles in the sets C2a, C2b and so on. This leads to #(C1) medians, denoted as μ This is a convex combination of μ Although we do not think that Formula Definitionof an under-cited influential publication on the 1% level, using the TOPCM algorithm. If Moreover, we do not want our definition to depend on just one or two other papers. This natural requirement implies, however, that an under-cited influential publication is cited at least 201 times (as ceil(201*0.01) Bringing the first two requirements together leads to: Although these requirements seem severe, we will show that a non-negligible amount of articles meets them. In order to be able to consider the notion of an under-cited publication in fields with lower numbers of citations, or for articles with a low number of citations, even in fields with generally high numbers of citations we consider the following alternative definition. This definition uses where Definition, using the TTPCM algorithm If As a consequence of the choices made above we have two types of under-cited influential articles: those according to the TOPCM algorithm and those according to the TTPCM algorithm. If a publication has more than 200 citations we apply the TOPCM algorithm, otherwise, and when the publication has more than 20 citations, we apply the TTPCM algorithm. Applying these extra requirements makes sure that in order to refer to an article as influential it has a reasonable amount of citations. Finally we still have to choose how to define the field. In our examples, where we use the WoS as database we chose the WoS subject category to which A’s journal belongs. If a journal belongs to several categories this may result in an article that is under-cited when considered as belonging to field F1 and not under-cited when considered as belonging to fields F2 and F3, for example. When using this choice it is, admittedly, less meaningful to state that an article is under-cited when belonging to the category In this section, we will show some real examples of two types of under-cited influential publications and their “under-visible” influence on follow-up research, using the Restriction enzymes have proved to be invaluable for the physical mapping of DNA. The biotechnology industry would certainly not have flourished without it ( Clearly, these three articles are all under-cited influential publications on the 1% level according to our definition. By the citation paths displayed in As In Obviously in contrast with the highly cited follow-up research, the three original articles ahead of them ( A reviewer remarked that our figures show few co-citations. This is true. There is a co-citation in In the 1950s William Fowler developed a theory for the formation of the chemical elements in the universe, showing how these nuclear reactions also account for the formation of various elements. These processes created the elements that make up our earth and other heavenly bodies in the universe ( Two papers displayed in the map of top decile most-cited articles ( Another case is Ernst Ruska. Although he developed the first electron microscope and received a Nobel Prize in 1986, his key paper ( One may think of that the phenomenon of under-cited influential publications is restricted to older work. Yet, this is not true at all. Indeed, also one of Emmanuelle Charpentier’s articles ( This article, entitled “CRISPR RNA maturation by trans-encoded small RNA and host factor RNase III” and published in 2011 received 415 direct citations in total. However, its top percentile most-cited articles, received respectively 1650, 1437, 1201, 599 and 515 citations. Especially the first three ones by ( Contrasting with fundamental research of Nobel Prize winners, we hypothesize that the under-cited phenomenon is not common in the general scientific literature. We recall that one requirement to be considered an under-cited influential publication, is that the publication under consideration received itself a non-trivial amount of citations. Concretely, we used the thresholds of 21 (and 201) citations. Only a minority of publications in the WoS reaches this threshold. For instance, restricting ourselves to the SCI and to publication of ‘article’ type only 25.4% of the articles published in 2008 are cited more than 20 times. Therefore, under-cited influential publications are a minority in the set of all publications. To further test our hypotheses and the rationality of the algorithms used in this study, we determine the share of under-cited influential publications in three journals. Articles in these journals have generally low numbers of received citations, hence we apply the TTPCM algorithm. Results are shown in  ( The existence of gems in the ( In any citation study one has to use a citation window. The standard impact factor calculation, for instance, uses a one-year citation window (and a two-year publication window). Besides a one-year citation window the most simple one consists of taking the period between publication and the moment the investigation has been performed. This is what we did. However, our scheme can equally well be applied if one wants to study if an article was 5 or 10 years ago under-cited (and maybe not anymore today if its real value has been recognized since). Such studies need an adapted citation window. The exact definition of an under-cited influential contribution as presented here depends on a number of ad hoc thresholds. Social sciences, such as the information sciences, have no rigid borders and phenomena cannot be characterized in a strict yes-no fashion. Yet, similar observations can be made for many biological or mental functions. The importance lies in the recognition of their existence and in the observation that some targets under study undoubtedly exhibit the phenomenon of interest. Strict borders are of less importance. In this article we considered the question if a ground-breaking scientific contribution is always visible through citations and pointed out a new type of scientific contributions referred to as under-cited influential publications. One may say that under-cited influential publications belong to the group of truly foundational scientific discoveries, promoting transformative research as shown by significant follow-up research. Because of their originality, one expects these contributions to receive more attention in terms of received citations. We like to compare influential under-cited articles to promoters in genetics. These promoters consist of base pairs initiating the copying process of parts of DNA. Indeed, also these influential articles start a transformative process with significant consequences. Our work shows that scientific contributions are not always what they look as seen from a direct citation perspective. Taking more than one citation generation into account may help peers to recognize true originality and find the linchpin of a network of new developments. Xiaojun Hu—Conceived and designed the analysis; Collected the data; Contributed data or analysis tool; Performed the analysis; Wrote the paper. Ronald Rousseau—Conceived and designed the analysis; Performed the analysis; Wrote the paper. This work is supported by a grant of the