Explosion gas pressure, combined with the action of an explosive stress wave, has a significant effect on the production and propagation of cracks in deep rock without a free surface. Thus, it is necessary to investigate the corresponding fracturing mechanisms and contributions of the shock wave and detonation gas towards inducing rock damage during blasting. In this work, the rock stratum is simplified as a square model with a circular borehole at its centre and modelled as a particle assembly based on the discrete element method. The shock wave is simulated as a time-varying pressure applied to the particles of the borehole. The action of the detonation gas is imitated as a quasi-static pressure on the fractures connected with the blasthole. To distinguish the role of the detonation gas in the formation and development of cracks, two primary simulation scenarios are studied: first, both the shock wave and detonation gas are simultaneously considered to simulate the blasting-induced rock damage; second, only the explosive stress wave is considered in rock blasting. Moreover, the coupling charge and decoupling charge are simulated in each scenario. In particular, based on the undirected graph theory, the authors present a new approach to efficiently determine the fracture clusters connected to the blasthole at each time-step to apply the quasi-static loads on the cracks. The results show that the shock wave plays a major role in crushing the rock near the wall of the blasthole and manufacturing a few primary radius cracks further away from the blasthole, whereas the detonation gas further extends the fractures to increase the crushed area (the additional stress caused by detonation gas is greater than the tensile strength of the rock) or separates the already formed rock fragments to increase the aperture of the cracks (the additional stress caused by the detonation gas is less than the tensile strength of the rock).Explosive blasting is often a very important measure to fracture rock in petroleum and mining engineering. The occurrence conditions of rock subjected to explosion loads can be divided into two cases: the rock has one or more free surfaces, and the rock is located with surrounding constraint. Obviously, rock blasting in the former condition is distinctly different from that in the latter condition. For the former condition, the free surface provides a heaving space for the rock fragmentation induced by the shock wave and makes the blasthole connected to the external space through the blasting-induced fracture clusters, so the detonation gas rapidly spreads into the atmosphere. In contrast, when blasting occurs in the rock without a free surface, there is no pathway for the detonation gas to leak from the blasthole to the atmosphere, which is similar to the application of quasi-static loading on the existing cracks with long duration. In deep resource mining, the blasting fracturing technique is one of the most promising options to enhance the permeability of a deep rock reservoir. There may be no free surface for the deep rock during blasting. Thus, it is of great importance to reveal the corresponding fracturing mechanisms and contributions of the explosive stress wave and detonation gas in deep rock blasting ( Numerical modelling provides a useful tool to simulate the explosive blasting in rock. Different efforts have been made to distinguish different effects of the shock wave and detonation gas on rock fracturing. In addition to the numerical simulation methods, a few lab and field tests provide another approach for these studies. Whether the detonation gas widens and lengthens the pre-existing cracks or only separates the broken parts, the effect of the gas pressure on the rock blasting cannot be neglected. In this paper, we focus on different contributions of the explosive stress pulse and detonation gas to the production and growth of cracks in deep rocks without free surfaces. The purpose of this paper is to reveal the fracturing mechanism of the shock wave and explosion gas under the conditions of coupling charge and decoupling charge. To reach this goal, a square model with a circular borehole at its centre is established and modelled as a particle assembly based on the granular discrete element method. Meanwhile, simulations considering two primary scenarios are implemented: the first scenario considers the combined effect of the shock wave and detonation gas in the rock blasting, while the second scenario excludes the gas pressure from the rock blasting. Notice that the gas pressure is considered quasi-static pressure on the fracture clusters connected with the blasthole. The mechanical responses of the rock subjected to blasting loads are simulated using the Particle Flow Code (PFC), and the rock is modelled as a collection of rounded granules using the Parallel-Bond Model (PBM). In Eqs. To update the maximum tensile stress ( In Eqs.  Let us define a variable to measure the relative size of the blasthole and cartridge: In Eq. The simulated rock in this study is sandstone, whose material parameters are as follows: density A key issue to the numerical simulation using PFC is the proper selection of mesoscopic parameters of the particle assembly to match the above macroscopic mechanical parameters of rock. Numerical simulation experiments are commonly used to calibrate the mesoscopic parameters, including the conventional triaxial compressive test and direct tensile test. In general, the macroscopic mechanical parameters of the rock samples are determined by the joint effort of the mesoscopic parameters of the particle assembly and the particle size, i.e., the macroscopic mechanical parameters change with the change in particle size or mesoscopic parameters. The first step of calibrating the mesoscopic parameters is to decide the particle size, which is subjected to the numerical mode size and computational power of a computer. In this paper, the numerical model is a square with a circular borehole at its centre. The size of the entire model is 10 × 10 m, and the minimum diameter of the borehole is 8.0 cm. If the diameter of the particle is too large, it will reduce the computing effort, but the borehole cannot be accurately modelled. In contrast, a too small particle size can precisely simulate the borehole, but the computation is too heavy. Finally, according to the computational capabilities of the author's computer, the particle diameter is set to be maximally 2.0 cm, which can simulate the borehole well.  Linear Group: grain density = 2750 kg/m3; effective modulus = 27.0 GPa; friction coefficient = 0.7; and stiffness ratio = 1.0. Parallel-Bond Group: bond effective modulus = 27.0 GPa; bond stiffness ratio = 1.0; bond tensile strength = 32.8 MPa; bond cohesion = 150.0 MPa; and bond friction angle = 55°. To verify the reasonability of the calibrated particle size and mesoscopic parameters of the particle assembly, a simple virtual wave propagation test was conducted. The test model is a 10.0 m × 0.2 m (L × W) rectangle and consists of 10018 particles. A sinusoidal pulse is applied to the left of the test model, and the right side of the test model is set as an absorbing boundary to eliminate the effect of the reflect wave. Two monitoring points were arranged at the midpoint and right end, respectively; the distance between the two monitoring points is 4.9 m. First, The explosive loads are resolved into shock wave stress and gas pressurization. According to the elastic wave motion theory, the transmission pressure of the explosive shock wave ( In Eq. In Eq. According to these discussions, when In this paper, the explosive charge has the following properties: cartridge diameter In addition to the above explosive stress wave, the gas pressurization cannot be ignored during blasting, which results from the detonation gas squeezing into the initial cracks and expanding its own space. This process, which is defined as isentropic adiabatic expansion, is generally considered a quasi-static state. Thus, the gas pressure can be calculated as ( In Eq. In Eq. Based on the above discussion about the computation theory with two types of explosive loads, let us focus on how to bring them into the numerical model in the simulating process.  In addition, The detonation gas can undoubtedly only flow through the cracks connected to the blasthole, whereas the isolate fractures and fracture clusters that are not connected to the borehole should be ignored in the generating process to calculate the gas pressure and apply the gas force on the cracks at each time-step. Thus, it is necessary to check whether each crack is connected to the blasthole during blasting. In this paper, the Undirected Graph Theory (UGT) is used to analyse the connectivity of the cracks to distinguish whether there are any fracture clusters connected to the blasthole. A graph is a mathematical structure that consists of a set of vertices and a set of edges that connect the vertices, which can be represented by a function construct In addition, the paired vertices for each edge can be provided as shown in Obviously, a crack in the two-dimensional plane can be considered as an edge of the graph, and the connectivity of two or more cracks completely depends on whether they have common vertices. The topological characteristics of a two-dimensional fracture network can be well depicted by the mathematical structure of an undirected graph. Therefore, the procedures to compute the connectivity of cracks in a plane can be provided based on the undirected graph theory: Each crack is considered a line segment and numbered in sequence. Meanwhile, each node is assigned a serial number, and the matching relationships of a crack that links two corresponding nodes are established based on their respective numbers. An adjacency matrix that corresponds to the fracture network is established by judging the intersections of all line segments. In other words, according to the matching relationships built in the previous step, the weight value of the adjacency element is assigned to be zero if there is no line segment that links these two nodes, whereas it is assigned to be equal to 1.0 if two nodes are linked by a line segment. By analysing the weight values in the adjacency matrix, the isolate line segments can be excluded from the fracture network, and the other cracks can be classified into one or more clusters based on their intersections. The marginal nodes of each fracture cluster are determined; if there is any node at the wall of the blasthole, its corresponding fracture cluster is considered connected with the blasthole and enables the detonation gas to penetrate into them. Otherwise, the fracture clusters without any node on the wall of the blasthole are considered useless for gas flow.  The interconnected relations of the fractures in For a complicated fracture network with many line segments and nodes, it is difficult to manually compute its connectivity as the above simple example. However, a built-in programming language of PFC called FISH provides the capacity to develop an auto-calculating program to perform the connectivity analysis. In other words, steps (1)–(4) can be realized using FISH. To distinguish the contributions of the shock wave and gas pressurization on the crack production and propagation, two primary cases are studied. In the first case, the explosive stress wave and detonation gas are simultaneously considered during the blasting simulation, whereas the action of the gas pressure is excluded from the blasting in the second case. In addition, both coupling charge (  From Comparing   The final results induced by rock blasting show that the number of cracks in the final moment is up to 5.3 × 10 To further illustrate the above analysis results, the visualized blasting-induced fractures networks at the final simulating time under the conditions of two different charge structures are shown in As noted, the detonation gas may dramatically change the final distribution pattern of cracks based on its initial peak pressure, which is associated with the charge structure of the explosive. To further illustrate the action mechanism and criterion of the detonation gas, it is necessary to investigate the stress curves of the monitoring points with the mechanical time. Compared with  With the above discussion and analysis, we can conclude that if the gas pressurization is not considered in the rock blasting, the final distribution area and number of cracks induced by blasting at Based on the granular discrete element method, this paper has investigated the different contributions of the shock wave and detonation gas to generating cracks in deep rocks without a free surface. The shock wave plays a major role in crushing the rock around the blasthole and manufacturing a few primary radial cracks further away from the blasthole. The role of the detonation gas in the formation of the fracture network can be resolved into two forms: (a) extending the existing cracks and enlarging the crushing area and (b) separating the already formed rock fragments and increasing the aperture of the cracks. For the detonation gas, the performance of the form completely depends on the additional stress caused by detonation gas. If the incremental radial stress is remarkably greater than the tensile strength of the rock, the first form can occur; otherwise, the second form may occur. The results show that we cannot ignore the role of the detonation gas in creating cracks in deep rocks without free surfaces, and the detonations gas can finally determine the distribution range of the fracture network. A smaller decoupling coefficient indicates that the detonation gas will play a much greater role. The authors gratefully acknowledge the support of The following is the Supplementary data to this article: Supplementary data to this article can be found online at