The digestion reactions of diasporic bauxite with A/S* of 5.96 was studied by adding calcium ferrite. With increasing addition of calcium ferrite, A/S and N/S* in the red mud are reduced. Under the conditions of higher digestion temperature and longer time, A/S in the red mud is also reduced with lower bauxite addition and higher soda in the liquor. Larger-scale experiments have been done with adding calcium ferrite under the conditions of 250°C, 60min which results in A/S in the red mud=0.69 and N/S=0.21. The main silicon mineral of red mud is ferrite hydrogarnet through analysis of XRD and energy-dispersive XRF. The coefficient of SiO2 approaches 1, Al2O3 0.22, and Fe2O3 0.73 in iron hydrogarnet. It is because the structure of the silicon mineral is changed that A/S and N/S in the red mud are greatly reduced.
                  *A/S: mass ratio of %Al2O3 and SiO2 in the solid; N/S: mass ratio of %Na2O and SiO2 in the solid.The characteristics of Chinese bauxite are high alumina, high silica, low ferrite, and middle- and low-grade diasporic bauxite ( The basis of the method for reducing desilication soda losses by the use of lime through the formation of calcium silicates may be traced to the pioneering work of In a new Bayer process with hydrocalcium ferrite ( In this paper, the preparation of the additive is simplified and the step of hydrating calcium ferrite is omitted. Instead, calcium ferrite is preprocessed with bauxite in caustic liquor and then digested. Again the A/S and N/S of the red mud are reduced (  Ironstone: mainly magnetite, Fe Limestone: mainly calcite, CaO 53.2%. Mixed and milled bauxite: chemical and mineralogical composition in Caustic aluminate liquor: adjusted with spent liquor taken from the plant. Its main composition is N To prepare calcium ferrite (C The digestion tests were conducted at 260 It can be seen from Digestion tests were carried out with different molar ratios of caustic Na The relationship between burden C It can be seen from the table that increasing temperature or prolonged time, reduces the A/S of the red mud. But too low digestion temperatures, for example 220 From the conclusions of the above test results, a larger-scale (10 In order to understand and verify the cause of decreasing A/S and N/S, the red mud was analyzed through x-ray fluorescence, x-ray diffraction and SEM. The main chemical composition of the red mud from the larger-scale test is shown on It can be seen from the x-ray diffraction for the red mud that the main mineralogical composition of the red mud is ferrite hydrogarnet, hydrogarnet, hematite, calcium–nepheline and a calcium–titanium mineral. In hydrogarnet 3CaO·Al  When calcium ferrite is added to the digestion of diasporic bauxite with A/S of 5.96 the values of A/S and N/S in the red mud are reduced. The lower A/S is favoured by higher digestion temperatures and longer times. A/S in the red mud is also reduced with lower bauxite addition and higher soda: alumina ratios in the liquor. Under optimum conditions of 250 The main silica mineral of red mud is ferrite hydrogarnet through analysis by x-ray diffraction and SEM. The molar coefficient of SiO The author wishes to acknowledge the financial support received from Zhengzhou Research Institute of CHALCO. The author also wishes to acknowledge the colleagues who have completed the project together.