Within the pediatric age group, orbital fractures are among the most common facial fractures. Although pediatric craniofacial trauma remains relatively uncommon when compared to the adult population, it continues to cause significant morbidity and mortality. Orbital trauma can be caused by a range of mechanisms from low-energy falls to high-energy trauma caused by motor vehicles or sporting injuries. While orbital floor fractures are a common occurrence in both children and adults, orbital roof fractures are found disproportionately more often in children.Within the pediatric age group, orbital fractures are among the most common facial fractures. It is well described in the literature that the relative frequency of orbital floor to roof fractures is dependent on age. The fracture patterns of the orbit are affected by the differing craniofacial shape among children by age. The orbital roof is formed almost completely by the frontal bone, though it extends laterally to the greater wing of the sphenoid and zygoma. The lesser wing of the sphenoid forms the most posteromedial portion of the orbital roof as it extends upwards to the superior orbital fissure and optic canal. Examination of patients with upper third facial fractures begins with a complete craniomaxillofacial trauma history and physical. Younger children may be more difficult to examine and indirect measures must sometimes be resorted to, particularly for extraocular movement evaluation and visual acuity examination. For frontal bone fractures, examination of the skull contour for irregularity should be performed. Any evidence of CSF leak should be noted, through the nose, ear or from lacerations. Overlying lacerations are relatively common and can sometimes be used as access approaches for limited surgical repair. For orbital roof fractures, evidence of vertical dystopia or proptosis should be looked for, as well as visual acuity and full range or limitation extraocular movements. Evidence of an afferent pupillary defect (Marcus Gunn pupil) is also a highly concerning sign. At our institution, in addition to the surgical team survey most patients with orbital fractures receive comprehensive ocular examination by the ophthalmology service. In most centers, plain skull films have largely been supplanted by computed tomography (CT) with multiplanar reconstruction (MPR). Evaluations of axial, sagittal, and coronal views are all valuable given the complex frontal/orbital anatomy and significant symptomatology that can be caused by relatively small bone fragments. Three-dimensional reconstructions can sometimes offer added value, particularly to contextualize the significance of skull fractures to overall cranial contour. Radiation dose from imaging is an important consideration, especially in younger children. Our radiology department, as a tertiary care center performing a significant number of pediatric head/face CTs, has developed special scanning protocols to offer lower dose scans of the head and face in children (e.g., angling cuts away from the brain, taking slightly thicker cuts in less essential areas, etc.) while still maintaining quality. Unnecessary scans should be avoided and, when scans are indicated, dose should be minimized to the extent possible. In patients with developed frontal sinuses, evaluation of the integrity of the anterior and posterior tables should be performed, as well as the status of the nasofrontal duct. Orbital fractures should be carefully examined to identify both the integrity of the orbital contents and the position of any dislodged bony fragments that may lead to ophthalmic symptoms. Indications for surgery in these fractures are undoubtedly the most controversial aspect of their management. Consideration must be given to the overall status of the patient, possibility of future growth, alterations, and risk of long-term complications. Concomitant neurosurgical pathology and need for neurosurgical intervention are often an important adjunctive consideration. In our review of 159 pediatric patients with orbital roof fractures, we found that most can be managed nonoperatively. Seven patients presented with both frontal bone and orbital roof fractures. Three of these patients had the orbital roof directly addressed via craniotomy and wiring or plating and/or onlay alloplastic implant (SynPor). Three patients underwent frontal bone ORIF. One patient underwent frontal sinus obliteration. In our cohort, most orbital roof fractures were noncomminuted and were treated nonoperatively. Management of operative orbital roof fractures will be dictated by the concomitant frontal bone or neurosurgical injuries. If a craniotomy is already necessary, it is a relatively straightforward decision to reduce and repair the roof or place an implant or split cranial bone graft, external to the roof defect. Similarly, in older children who have involvement of the frontal sinus that necessitates intervention, treatment should first address reconstruction of the orbital rim and the frontal sinus, including the possible need for obliteration or cranialization (see below). Our analysis strongly supports the management concept that displacement direction in orbital roof fractures is significant, with inferiorly displaced “blow-in” fractures representing a substantially worse prognostic sign than superior displacement. Direct comparison of “defect size” with roof fractures can be misleading as a concept because a 2 cm In a review of 897 pediatric skull fractures, frontal bone fractures were the most commonly in need of repair, though only about 16% of patients needed surgery. Surgical decision making in these fractures must necessarily be bifurcated into two cohorts: children with developed frontal sinuses and those without. The latter case is more straightforward: the primary indications for surgical repair are depression or displacement of the frontal bone fragment (which will lead to a contour depression) or underlying dural injury, after which the bone can be fixed into place using the surgeon's preferred method of osteosynthesis. Management is more complex in children with pneumatized frontal sinuses, especially those with rudimentary but not fully formed sinuses. Even in adults, indications for cranialization versus obliteration versus observation can be controversial. There is even less evidence to base intervention upon in children. Vu et al. reviewed a series of 39 pediatric patients with frontal sinus fractures. Given the residual potential for skull growth and the many decades of anticipated future life for problems resulting from microscopic mucosal remnants after obliteration to arise, we generally favor cranialization over obliteration. Intervention is recommended in the presence of a persistent CSF leak or imaging evidence that the sinus function is unlikely to be adequate (e.g., comminution of the posterior wall or obstruction of the nasofrontal duct). Isolated anterior wall fractures can generally be managed in a similar fashion to frontal bone fractures as discussed above. The surgical technique used to repair orbital roof fractures is determined by the degree of comminution and the presence of concomitant neurosurgical injuries. Inferiorly displaced fractures with a mild degree of comminution can sometimes be managed through existing lacerations or an orbitotomy with direct reduction of the bone fragment. More comminuted fractures or those requiring a frontal craniotomy for a neurosurgical injury are best managed by intracranial elevation of the bone fragments followed by placement of an autologous onlay bone graft or alloplastic implant. Our preferred method is to reduce any displaced bone fragments and place a thin piece of alloplast (Synpor, 0.85 mm) on the orbital roof. A small pericranial flap is used to cover the cranial side of the implant. We prefer to use alloplast as in our experience autologous bone graft will frequently resorb. Isolated, depressed frontal bone fractures or those associated with a dural tear and CSF leak will sometimes require repair using open reduction and internal fixation ( Extensive fractures involving the anterior and posterior tables and/or nasofrontal duct of the frontal sinus can be treated by frontal sinus cranialization. To accomplish cranialization, the disrupted posterior wall of the frontal sinus is removed, the sinus mucosa in remaining walls is burred away, and the nasofrontal duct is tightly obliterated with bone graft to block communication of the aerodigestive tract and intracranial space. The entire sinus is then covered with a vascularized pericranial flap and the brain and dura are permitted to rest against the repaired anterior wall and sinus floor. It is important to make sure all of the mucosa or the sinus and the proximal portion of the frontal duct is thoroughly surface burred to prevent late mucocele formation. A comparative analysis of autogenous bone graft vs. alloplast does not exist, and the choice of implant ultimately lies with the surgeon. The implants most often employed in children include porous polyethylene and autogenous bone graft, including split cranial bone graft and iliac crest. A well-developed diploic space is required to harvest split cranial bone graft. This method is less feasible in children younger than the age of 5 years although recent reports suggest split cranial bone graft can be harvested in children less than 3 years of age. The optic nerve (CN II) travels through the optic canal, emerging through the optic foramen. Fractures that propagate posteriorly through the orbital roof or sphenoid can in principle go to the optic canal with the potential for nerve injury or bony compression. This is an extremely rare complication, as compared to the comparatively more common situation of traumatic optic neuropathy caused by direct globe injury or traction. Unexpected deterioration in visual acuity or development of an afferent pupillary defect should merit consideration of immediate ophthalmologic consultation, steroids, and potential optic nerve decompression. CSF leaks through the nose are more common with frontal bone fractures than orbital roof fractures and are suggestive of an underlying dural tear. Most will stop with conservative treatment; persistent leaks are typically managed in conjunction with neurosurgery via cranialization as discussed above. Antibiotic coverage during the period of CSF leakage continues to be a topic without a clear consensus. Encephalocele is a rare but feared late complication after orbital roof fractures. Typically limited to case reports, incidence rates are hard to estimate. In our series of 149 patients, we did not see any cases. Menkü reported two cases of late growing skull fractures with underlying encephalocele, Much of the evidence supporting the proposed mechanism and management of these pathologies in the anterior skull base and orbital roof is extrapolated from the substantially more common scenario of growing fractures in the external skull. Much concern around surgical intervention in the pediatric population revolves around the possibility of impairment of further growth, however there is relatively little evidence for these fractures to support whether or not surgery affects long-term growth. These concerns have also often underlain the move to resorbable fixation from surgeons who choose to use these devices. Prevention of late mucocele or pyomucocele is one of the driving forces behind management of frontal sinus injuries. Because the indolent period may be years or decades prior to presentation, the small series in the literature of pediatric frontal sinus fractures rarely include these cases. There have been isolated case reports of pediatric mucocele after both craniofacial surgery (orbital box osteotomies) Pediatric orbital trauma is traditionally considered to involve the lower and medial orbit and zygoma. The large size of the frontal cranium early in life predisposes to trauma to the orbital roof and frontal skull; there is an absence in the literature of good descriptions, treatment and follow-up in the literature of these upper orbital injuries. The difficulty of following children through growth contributes to the lack of data. While many authors describe the “spontaneous correction with growth” of pediatric fractures before age 5, I have usually pursued anatomical correction; there is an orbital roof deformity which follows more subtle but displaced frontal bone fractures and those of the accompanying roof which magnifies with growth, and is challenging to correct. I often, when seeing these unusual cases, think of how straightforward it would have been to pursue correction at the time of the injury. Here, O'Brien-Coon and Redett have produced one of the best categorized descriptions of fractures of this area, and they outline their recommendations for diagnosis and treatment in each specific anatomical area and for each age group. Their outline of “what to do and when” is one based upon much case study, and the extensive experience in a major pediatric trauma center.