As a pretreatment method, microwave irradiation was applied to modify ilmenite surface properties and to improve its flotation behavior in the presence of different gangue minerals including olivine, pyroxene, tremolite, clinochlore and quartz. The flotation experiments were carried out in both micro (Hallimond-tube) and laboratory (flotation cell) scales. The microflotation experiments showed that the ilmenite surface irradiation converts Fe2+–Fe3+ ions, characterized by XPS analysis, improving the floatability. This is due to the increase of oleate adsorption and the formation of more insoluble ferric iron oleate as evidenced by FTIR analysis and zeta potential measurements. In addition, this pretreatment decreases the consumption of flotation reagents. The microwave irradiation does not have a significant effect on surface properties and floatability of quartz. In laboratory scale flotation experiments, when quartz is the main gangue mineral, the TiO2 grade and recovery of flotation concentrate improved from 27.1% to 28.3% and 85.3% to 92.7%, respectively by using microwave irradiation. In the presence of tremolite and clinochlore containing almost 12.4% Fe, the microwave irradiation improved the TiO2 grade and recovery from 21.3% to 22.1% and 71% to 82.5%, respectively. In the case of olivine and pyroxene with 30.1% Fe, the recovery of TiO2 increases from 66.9% to 69.1%. In the flotation of the ore sample containing 24.5% Fe, the microwave irradiation improves the recovery of TiO2 in the ilmenite concentrate from 65.4% to 76.2%. In a general result, in the flotation of ilmenite from different gangue minerals, the separation efficiency and selectivity index have a negative correlation with the iron content of gangue minerals.Nowadays, as natural rutile is becoming scarcer and consequently more costly, it is being replaced by an alternative method that uses ilmenite Liimatainen and Techn studied the flotation of ilmenite at various pulp temperatures Quartz and feldspar are not always the main gangue minerals accompanying ilmenite. In many cases, the iron containing silicate minerals such as olivine and pyroxene are the main gangue minerals of the ilmenite ores Qara-aghaj hard rock deposit located 36 Qara-aghaj ilmenite ore sample and purified samples of ilmenite, olivine–pyroxene (Ol–Px), tremolite–clinochlore (Tr–Cch) and quartz were used in this work. The purified samples were used in microflotation experiments to investigate their flotation behavior before and after microwave irradiation pretreatment. For the preparation of purified phases, the hand-picked samples taken from the Qara-aghaj area were crushed and ground to less than 150 The chemical composition of the samples was determined using X-ray fluorescence (XRF, Philips X Unique II). The phase composition was analyzed with XPERT MPD diffractometer employing Cu Ka radiation. Microwave pre-treatment was carried out in a 2.45 These experiments were carried out in a 300 After grinding and desliming, 300 The zeta potential of the mineral in suspension was measured using a Malvern instrument (Nano ZS, ZEN3600, UK). The samples were ground under 15 The contact angle of distilled water on a polished section of ilmenite was measured using a sessile drop method before and after microwave irradiation. A carefully selected mineral chunk was cut to sizes almost 2.5 XPS spectra were measured with a Specs EA 10 X-ray photoelectron spectroscope to study the distribution density and binding energy of the elements on the mineral surface, before and after treatment by microwave. The XPS analysis was carried out with an Al Kα X-ray source at 1486.6 The FT-IR spectra were obtained with NEXU670 FT-IR (Nicolet Corporation, USA) to characterize the nature of the interaction between the collector and the minerals. The mineral samples were ground to smaller than 0.015 The microwave power and the microwave exposure time are the factors that influence the minerals surface properties. In order to determine the optimum values of these factors, a number of flotation experiments were carried out on the ilmenite samples after irradiation with different powers and exposure times. These flotation experiments were carried out using 3.65 The flotation recovery of untreated and irradiated pure samples as a function of pH values is presented in The flotation behavior of olivine–pyroxene is somewhat similar to that of ilmenite. In strong acidic and alkaline solutions, the flotation recovery of olivine–pyroxene is higher than that of ilmenite while at pHs between 5.5 and 8, olivine–pyroxene is floated less than ilmenite. At acidic pHs (less than 7), tremolite–clinochlore has poor floatability (less than 20%). In alkaline solutions, the flotation recovery of tremolite–clinochlore increases with pH, and reaches its maxima (76.6%) at a pH of 9.5. The higher flotation recovery of olivine–pyroxene and tremolite–clinochlore in alkaline solution can be due to the formation of magnesium and calcium oleate compounds on the surface of minerals  Sodium hexa metaphosphate (SHM) and acidified sodium silicate (SS) with sulfuric acid (SA) at ratios of 1:1 and 1:2 were used as depressant agent for olivine–pyroxene. The results showing the flotation recovery of ilmenite and olivine–pyroxene as a function of depressant dosage at a pH of 6.3 are presented in The flotation recovery of ilmenite in the presence of Pb(NO The effect of a combination of microwave irradiation and activation by Pb(NO To investigate the effect of microwave irradiation on the separation of ilmenite from the ore sample by the froth flotation technique, the flotation experiments were carried out on the mixture of pure ilmenite (20 After microwave irradiation, the recovery of TiO After removing the magnetite from the Qara-aghaj ore sample by the magnetic separation method, the feed material composed mainly by ilmenite, olivine, pyroxene, tremolite and clinochlore minerals (with the chemical composition presented in In order to investigate the oxidation of Fe The FT-IR spectrum of sodium oleate is shown in  The zeta potentials of the raw and irradiated state of ilmenite and different gangue minerals measured as a function of pH in the absence and presence of sodium oleate are shown in The zeta potential measurements in the presence of the collector showed that the collector adsorption results in a significant change in the zeta potential of ilmenite, olivine–pyroxene and tremolite–clinochlore. In the presence of oleate at a pH range of 3–11, the zeta potential of raw and irradiated state of ilmenite, olivine–pyroxene and tremolite–clinochlore is considerably more negative than when KCl is present only. Using sodium oleate of 3.65 The microwave irradiation results in a decrease in the zeta potential of ilmenite, olivine–pyroxene and tremolite–clinochlore, while there are no significant changes in the zeta potential of quartz. This indicates that the conversion of Fe The hydrophobicity of ilmenite and irradiated ilmenite conditioned with sodium oleate was investigated by measuring the contact angle. In microwave irradiation as a pretreatment stage for improving ilmenite floatability, iron ions play an important role. This process converts some ferrous iron ions to ferric ions on the surface of ilmenite. The increase of the relative content of Fe While the microwave pretreatment improves the ilmenite floatability significantly, it simultaneously increases the flotation recovery of gangue minerals such as olivine, pyroxene and clinochlore, making it very difficult to achieve a suitable selective flotation of ilmenite. In the separation of ilmenite by the froth flotation method, the separation efficiency and selectivity index are inversely related to the iron content of gangue minerals. After microwave irradiation, the maximum improvement of separation efficiency and selectivity index are achieved when the gangue minerals are free from iron. As a result, the microwave irradiation is a favorable pretreatment method for improving the metallurgical parameters such as grade, recovery, separation efficiency and selectivity index of the ilmenite flotation process when the gangue minerals contain lower amounts of iron. The authors would like to thank Amirkabir University of Technology for the financial support of this research.