Complex fracture dislocations of the wrist often result in post-traumatic arthrosis. In these cases, patients can experience severe pain and loss of function of the wrist and as a result many of them end up having a total arthrodesis.
                  In trying to avoid the disadvantages of a total arthrodesis, alternative treatment strategies have been investigated, amongst which proximal row carpectomy (PRC). Basic conditions for a good outcome of PRC are an intact cartilage of the lunate fossa of the distal radius and an intact surface of the head of the capitate for the new radiocapitate joint (Fig. 1, schematic drawing post-PRC). Also, an intact (volar) radioscaphocapitate (RSC) ligament is necessary because it plays an essential role in stabilizing the new joint and preventing volar dislocation and ulnar translocation of the distal carpal row.
                  Acute post-traumatic PRC can be indicated, but is rarely reported in literature. In this article, we present four patients whom we have treated with early PRC after severe trauma of the wrist. Three patients had a good outcome. In the patient with the bad outcome, the before-mentioned prerequisites were not met, which is discussed.Complex fracture dislocations of the wrist are a surgical challenge and treatment often fails. This is particularly true for severe injuries with multiple fractures, ligamentous injuries or serious cartilage damage. Frequently, the end result of this high-energy trauma to the carpus is degenerative arthrosis with a limited range of motion, loss of grip strength and severe pain. After a long period of rehabilitation, the ‘wait and see’ policy may fail and the only remaining option for adequate pain management is total wrist arthrodesis. Other early salvage procedures include implant or soft tissue arthroplasty, limited carpal fusion or a resection of the proximal carpal row. Each option has its own drawbacks. Nevertheless, proximal row carpectomy (PRC) offers one major advantage over limited or total wrist fusion; it preserves a certain range of motion that would otherwise be lost. This range of motion is important in the above-mentioned type of injuries, as these injuries are usually the result of motor vehicle accidents or contact sports in young, active patients. Several authors have described PRC as a salvage procedure with favorable long-term results Acute management of complex carpal fracture dislocations using a PRC has been described sparsely in literature. However, PRC is a logical first line procedure when the indication is sound. In addition, the basic requirements for a successful outcome after PRC should be met: the head of the capitate and the lunate fossa of the radius must be relatively free of cartilage damage and the volar radioscaphocapitate (RSC) ligament must be intact. After treatment consists of 1 week of cast immobilisation and after that 6–12 weeks of progressive training including isometric muscle training exercises. In this paper, we present four cases of early PRC after a complex (perilunate) fracture dislocation of the wrist ( We present four patients who underwent PRC after severe radiocarpal injury at the Academic Medical Centre (AMC) and at the VU Medical Center (VUMC) in Amsterdam, The Netherlands. Follow-up ranged from 2 months to 5 years and included assessment of strength, mobility, pain and daily activity. A 17-year-old right-handed young man was involved in a motor vehicle accident in 1998, resulting in a comminuted fracture of the distal radius and ulna on the left side with partial destruction of the radiocarpal joint and a perilunate fracture dislocation. The distal forearm fracture was treated by bridging elsewhere using K-wires and an external fixator. The perilunate fracture dislocation was left untreated. The patient showed signs of median nerve compression. Two days after the injury, a volar exploration of the wrist was performed. Large parts of the scaphoid fossa of the radius showed cartilage damage. However, the lunate fossa was intact. The scaphoid, lunate and triquetrum were all fractured with dislocation and cartilage loss. Further inspection showed that the volar RSC ligament was intact and it was decided to perform a PRC ( A 24-year-old right-handed man was seen acutely after a fall of 10 Besides complex pelvic fractures, examination revealed an open wrist fracture with an unstable distal radio-ulnar joint, a complete comminution of the scaphoid fossa of the distal radius, a comminuted scaphoid fracture and a perilunate dislocation ( An acute PRC was performed, despite the fact that the RSC ligament was shown to be severely damaged. However, the cartilage of the capitate head, as well as the lunate fossa, was completely intact. To stabilise the distal radio-ulnar joint, two stout K-wires were used. In addition, there was a middle third forearm fracture which was treated with open reconstruction and internal fixation ( Because of the severe damage to the capsular ligaments, the patient was treated with prolonged cast immobilisation in contrast with the normal rehabilitation program after PRC (progressive training after 1 week including isometric muscle training exercises). Early follow-up after 3 months showed the capitate to subluxate volarly in addition to an ulnar translocation of the carpus, resulting in a painful, stiff wrist ( A total wrist arthrodesis had to be performed as a salvage procedure ( Final follow-up after 14 months shows, as expected, that there is no movement in the wrist. The VAS for pain was 6. A 32-year-old right-handed man sustained a kite surfing accident and was treated elsewhere for a distal radius fracture of the right arm with cast immobilisation. After 5 weeks, this patient presented to our hospital with continuous pain and symptoms of median nerve compression. Routine X-rays showed a volar lunate dislocation ( An exploration was performed but an attempt to reposition the lunate failed. In addition, there was cartilage damage on the midcarpal joint surface of the lunate and it was decided to perform an early PRC. The RSC ligament was still intact and there was no damage to the cartilage of the head of the capitate and the lunate fossa ( The post-operative rehabilitation was uneventful and after 4 months, patient was free of pain, had normal grip strength, was back to work with a ROM flexion/extension 35–0–35°. VAS for measuring pain indicated 10. A 45-year-old right-handed man was brought to our hospital after a high velocity accident. X-rays showed a volar perilunate dislocation ( Initially, closed reduction was tried. Three days later, an exploration was performed and an almost 180° rotated lunate was encountered with almost all ligaments attached to the lunate destroyed and some cartilage damage to the lunate. Further inspection showed an intact lunate fossa, and intact cartilage of the capitate head. The volar RSC ligament was intact and it was decided to perform an acute PRC.The patient did not follow post-operative mobilisation instructions but regained a ROM flexion/extension of 40–0–40° and pronation/supination of 10–0–20°. VAS for measuring pain indicated 6. Proximal row carpectomy was first described by Stamm. In the last decades, this technique has become popular in the treatment of scaphoid non-union advanced collapse and scapholunate advanced collapse with associated painful arthritis. PRC for these indications is always an elective procedure. However, primary PRC for severely comminuted or irreducible carpal fracture dislocations was already evaluated by Mc Laughlin and Baab in 1951. Crabbe Likewise, in 1969, Jorgensen The outcome in our cases was similar to the outcomes in the literature; all but one patient had acceptable results ( Retrospectively, the patients with the bad outcome did not have a good indication for PRC because of the extensive soft tissue damage which included the volar RSC ligament. PRC is a well-known and proven salvage procedure in cases with severe degenerative arthritis of the carpus. However, there is no widespread consensus for acute PRC as a treatment option in the management of severe carpal trauma prior to the onset of post-traumatic degenerative changes. Essential for a good outcome of any acute PRC is at least intact cartilage of the lunate fossa and the capitate in order to successfully provide pain relief. Moreover, results and complications in early treated cases are directly related to the initial injury and the accuracy and stability of the reduction. Despite early criticism, PRC has proven to be a good alternative for total wrist arthrodesis in elective cases as well as in acute traumatic situations. When performed by a surgeon who is familiar with the procedure, PRC will provide a reliable motion-preserving salvage procedure with a pain free function. We believe that our small series adds to this, and would like to advocate the use of PRC in the acute situation in selected cases. It can shorten the rehabilitation period dramatically and, in certain cases, avoid early progression to a total wrist arthrodesis