Current research has expanded on the existing database by conducting air–water experiments in a 0.125 m regular T-junction and a 0.125/0.076 m reduced T-junction. Inserts, cut to 30° and 45°, protruded from the side arm into the main pipe of the junction at different protrusion depths and their effect on the two-phase flow phase split at the junction measured. Depending on the approaching flow regime, inserts placed at the junction were seen to either enhance the partial phase separation occurring at the T-junction or promote a more equal flow split between the two downstream arms.Junctions are present in many pipeline systems. How the flow is divided between the different outlets of a junction can have serious consequences on downstream equipment. A simple T-junction can be used to exploit this phenomenon with two completely different objectives––either to minimise or enhance the maldistribution of the fluids. Trying to utilise the natural maldistribution of the phases at a T-junction, so that the device acts as a partial separator, is not a new idea but one that has been expanded on in recent years. Fryar The size of the T-junction favors its use as a partial separator for two reasons. The first is that it could be installed where space is at a premium, for example on an offshore platform where the inclusion of a T-junction before a separator would allow a crude separation to take place in which most of the gas could be re-routed, reducing the load on the separator and thus the area it requires on the platform. The second is in the handling of flammable fluids as the geometry of the T-junction means their inventory is naturally low. Care would have to be exercised since the reduction in inventory may be off set against controllability. The division of fluids at junctions depends not only on the geometry of the junction itself but also on the pressures of the pipework in the two downstream legs and the state of the fluid flowing in the pipe. Due to all these controlling factors, predicting what happens at a T-junction is not easy. The eight variables that define the flow split for a typical T-junction are the mass flowrates of the gas and liquid For a given pipeline normally three of these variables will be known leaving five unknown parameters, four of which can be determined by solving mass, and energy balances for the system. The remaining relationship is provided by the phase split at the junction––the locus of the flow split plot. As seen from the literature, models to predict such a relationship, as yet, cannot correctly define the locus for a general case. Phase split strongly depends on the local momentum of the fluid and the geometry of the junction. Azzopardi and Whalley For horizontal annular flow there have been several approaches to predict the phase split at a T-junction. Azzopardi and Whalley There are far fewer models for stratified flow approaching junctions. Shoham et al. However, being able to predict the phase split at a T-junction does not only depend on the flow regime approaching the junction, knowledge of the physical geometry of the T-junction is just as important. Such parameters include the diameters of the inlet, run and branch arms; the inclination angles of the main pipe and side arm; angle of the junction and the radius at the connection between main pipe and branch. Recently Penmatcha et al. Reducing the side arm diameter leads to a reduction in the fraction of liquid taken off, i.e., increased phase separation. This change was seen to have greatest impact for side arm to main arm diameter ratios of nearly 1, Azzopardi et al. Relatively little work on phase split has been published where the internal dimensions of the junction have been altered. Butterworth Only three experiments were performed: annular, wavy and stratified flows. For the annular flow case, see Fouda and Rhodes The apparatus was the same equipment used by Rea and Azzopardi The T-junction is 3.5 m downstream of the air–water mixing unit and lies with all three arms in the horizontal plane. There is a further 3.5 m of 0.125 m diameter tubing, which is followed by a 120° bend. Beyond the bend is a further 0.5 m of piping, containing a butterfly valve, which leads to a cyclone. In the horizontal position, the side arm consists of either 1.5 m of 0.125 m diameter tubing leading to a cyclone which can be replaced with 1.5 m of 0.076 m diameter tubing, depending on the dimensions of the T-junction being studied. Two T-junctions have been used in this apparatus. One with the main bore and side arm both 0.125 m in diameter the other has the main bore of 0.125 m and a side arm of 0.076 m. Both T-junctions are machined from square acrylic resin blocks, (0.2 The air and water leaving the test section are separated in the two cyclones. Calibrated venturi meters on top of the cyclones are used to measure the air flowrate. The water flowrate is determined by diverting the flow from either cyclone to a weigh tank on top of a calibrated load cell and measuring the timed discharge. Both T-junctions had inserts made to fit the side arm. The insert was machined from a transparent plastic and as thin as possible (1.3 mm) so that the inside diameter of the T-junction remained unaltered. The top of the insert was cut to either an angle of 30° or 45°. The insert was made so that it could be fixed at different protrusion depths and rotated. Mass balances were performed on both the air and water flows. Air flowrates were measured by standard orifice plates, where the pressure drops across was read using water manometers, which could be read within ±0.5 mm on the inlet, run and branch arms. Thus, the combined overall error in the fraction of gas diverted down the side arm was 6%. Any results for which the error in the mass balance was above this value were repeated. Inlet water flowrates were measured by rotameters or a turbine meter, which were calibrated by weighing a timed efflux, they could be read within 3%. Exiting water flowrates were calculated by measuring a timed efflux on a calibrated load cell, which could be measured to ±0.1 kg. Thus, the combined overall error in calculating the fraction of water diverted down the branch arm was 5%. Any results for which the error in the mass balance was above this value were repeated. Experiments were carried out to investigate the effects of a baffle, in the form of an insert protruding from the side arm, on flow split. A T-junction can be considered a simple, economic partial phase separator with a small footprint and the baffle was used in an attempt to further exploit the maldistribution of the phases between the two arms of the horizontal junction, to produce a gas rich and liquid rich stream from a multiphase inlet. Flow split data was obtained for annular, stratified-wavy flow conditions in order to assess the performance of such a baffled T-junction with an ordinary junction under similar conditions. Experiments were performed with the regular 0.125 m T-junction and the reduced 0.125/0.076 m T-junction with the insert at various positions. All data has been plotted as fraction of liquid removed versus fraction of gas removed down the side arm and compared where appropriate with the phase split data of Rea A baffle was created at the T-junction by using a cylindrical insert that protruded from the side arm into the junction. How far the insert protruded into the T-junction could be altered. For the following set of experiments two protrusion depths were studied: 1/2 D and 3/4 D. A protrusion depth of 1/2 D indicates that the tip of the insert protruded half way across the main 0.125 m pipeline. Butterworth As can be clearly seen, a forward facing insert promotes flow division at the junction, reducing its partial phase separation qualities, compared to the backwards facing insert at low gas take off (<0.8), similar to the trends observed by Butterworth Reasons why altering the angle of cut at the top of the two inserts do not significantly affect the flow split results could be due to the profile of the insert. When the insert protrudes into the main pipe, from the side arm, the profile seen by the on-coming flow is almost identical in both cases. Reducing the angle of cut from 45° to 30° did little to alter the overall profile. The two inserts were set so that the tip protruded exactly half and three-quarters of the way across the main pipe. For both angles of cut the area where liquid was held up behind the insert and the free area for the flow to pass the insert were very similar. This meant there was the little difference in flow split of the two inserts. Difference in flow split between the two angles of cut was minimal whether the insert was facing forwards or backwards.  At 3/4 D and the insert facing backwards there is greater liquid hold up behind the insert. As the liquid builds up the gas is forced to pass between the insert and the wall of the main pipe resulting in an area of low pressure around the tip of the insert. Once past the insert the gas has a greater area in which to expand into and thus a large proportion is drawn down the side arm. Under these conditions the T-junction and insert acted as a good partial separator. At 3/4 D and the insert facing forwards the insert acts like a large scoop and diverts a large proportion of both the liquid and gas down the side arm. Under these conditions the T-junction and insert acted more like a flow splitter. Such effects were more noticeable with the insert at a protrusion depth of 3/4 D, as opposed to 1/2 D, since the effects were more exaggerated. Sets of experiments were taken in the stratified-wavy flow regime, where Under these conditions the liquid flowing along the bottom of the pipe did not form a very thick layer. This meant with the insert at 1/2 D facing forwards the liquid had to rise slightly to enter the side arm and could not just be scooped in. However, with the insert facing backwards as the gas was forced around and over the insert the liquid also began to rise up and around the back of the insert. This reduced the momentum of the liquid allowing it to be diverted more easily with the gas down the side arm. With the insert 3/4 D across the pipe there was only a narrow channel available for the fluids to flow around the insert. When the insert faced forwards, the build up of liquid in front of the insert was easily forced into the side arm by the faster flowing gas. However, with the insert facing backwards the gas was forced to pass between the insert and the side wall of the main tube. As, by Bernoulli the gas would be flowing much faster through the constriction the liquid being dragged past the insert with it would therefore have a much higher momentum. This resulted in much less liquid therefore being diverted down the side arm for the same fraction of gas. These trends were repeated when a much slower liquid flowrate was used, indicating stratified flow, as can be seen in Insert experiments were also performed on 0.125/0.076 m T-junction which represented a scaled up version of the Butterworth A strict comparison between the two sets of data cannot be performed since the test conditions of Butterworth could not be replicated on the present rig. It can be seen, in As shown by From these experiments, the following conclusions can be drawn for the experimental conditions considered. Altering the angle of cut at the top of the insert from 45° to 30° had little to no effect on the flow split properties of a 0.125/0.125 m T-junction. When the insert was used with annular flow there was a marked effect on the flow split at both protrusion depths and at whether the insert faced forwards or backwards. Placing the insert in the 0.125/0.076 m T-junction produced little beneficial effects on the flow split. To extrapolate these findings to general conditions, further research should be conducted at a larger range of conditions within the annular and stratified flow regimes and for an increased number of pipe diameters beyond those described here and those of Butterworth E. Wren was supported by a CASE studentship in conjunction with BPX(Sunbury) and the EPSRC.