The mineralized extracellular matrix of bone is an organic–inorganic nanocomposite consisting primarily of carbonated hydroxyapatite, fibrous type I collagen, noncollagenous proteins, proteoglycans, and diverse biomolecules such as pyrophosphate and citrate. While much is now known about the mineralization-regulating role of pyrophosphate, less is known about the function of citrate. In order to assess the effect of negatively charged citrate on collagen mineralization, citrate-functionalized, bone osteoid-mimicking dense collagen gels were exposed to simulated body fluid for up to 7 days to examine the multiscale evolution of intra- and interfibrillar collagen mineralization. Here, we show by increases in methylene blue staining that the net negative charge of collagen can be substantially augmented through citrate functionalization. Structural and compositional analyses by transmission and scanning electron microscopy (including X-ray microanalysis and electron diffraction), and atomic force microscopy, all demonstrated that citrate-functionalized collagen fibrils underwent extensive intrafibrillar mineralization within 12 h in simulated body fluid. Time-resolved, high-resolution transmission electron microscopy confirmed the temporal evolution of intrafibrillar mineralization of single collagen fibrils. Longer exposure to simulated body fluid resulted in additional interfibrillar mineralization, all through an amorphous-to-crystalline transformation towards apatite (assessed by X-ray diffraction and attenuated total reflection-Fourier-transform infrared spectroscopy). Calcium deposition assays indicated a citrate concentration-dependent temporal increase in mineralization, and micro-computed tomography confirmed that >80 vol% of the collagen in the gels was mineralized by day 7. In conclusion, citrate effectively induces mesoscale intra- and interfibrillar collagen mineralization, a finding that advances our understanding of the role of citrate in mineralized tissues.Bone is a remarkable organic–inorganic nanocomposite composed of ~70 wt% inorganic carbonate-substituted hydroxyapatite mineral having the form of nano-sized acicular- and platelet-shaped crystals, and ~30 wt% organic matrix mainly consisting of a network of the fibrous protein type I collagen ( In the process of collagen mineralization, the relative partial positive charge of collagen hinders its ability to bind calcium ions, this being a necessary initial step towards final hydroxyapatite (HA) mineralization through the formation of a precursor amorphous calcium-phosphate (ACP) phase ( In an attempt to partially mimic the complex mineralization process that occurs in native skeletal tissue, previous approaches have used anionic additives to achieve HA mineral formation in collagen fibrils ( Along with the diverse array of large macromolecules found in mineralized tissues, including highly negatively charged proteoglycans, also abundant in bone is the negatively charged, small biomolecule citrate (containing three anionic carboxyl groups) – its presence is estimated at about 2 wt% ( More closely related to the work presented here, it has recently been reported that citrate stabilizes HA nanocrystals in bone and regulates calcium-phosphate mineral crystallinity, which can be correlated with the overall tissue strength ( In the present study, in order to exclude the potential inhibiting effect of free citric acid in solution on HA mineral nucleation and growth related to collagen, we have incorporated citrate into our model system at an early stage (prior to mineralization events) – at the pre-fibrillization and gel formation stages of the collagen network assembly. For this, we reasoned that the functionalization of collagen with citrate – through its three carboxyl groups – could effectively modulate the net charge of collagen not only by shielding the cationic groups of collagen through at least one of its anionic carboxyl groups, but also by simultaneously increasing the overall electronegative charge of the collagen through its other carboxyl groups. Therefore, we hypothesized that a functionalized collagen enriched in negative charge through citrate incorporation might facilitate fibril mineralization by providing chemical cues required for HA nucleation and growth. Accordingly, in the present study, citrate-functionalized dense collagen gels with mechanical and microstructural similarities to native extracellular matrix were prepared through a gel aspiration-ejection process ( Citrate-functionalized and neat precursor, highly-hydrated collagen gels were fabricated using a 4:1 ratio of rat tail tendon-derived type I collagen (2.05 mg/mL in 0.6% acetic acid; First Link Ltd, UK) to 10 times concentrated Dulbecco’s Modified Eagle Medium (10 × DMEM; Sigma Aldrich, Canada), with neutralization using 2% of 5 M NaOH (Fisher Scientific, Canada). For citrate-incorporated gels, a concentrated citrate stock solution (100 mM, Sigma Aldrich, Canada) was added to the collagen solution to reach a final concentration of 0.5, 1.0 , 2.0, 5.0 and 10.0 mM, and the pH of the solution was neutralized (pH = 7.4 ± 0.2) by dropwise addition of 5 M NaOH. Gels were prepared by casting 1.5 mL of the neutralized solution in 48-well plates (Fisher, Canada) followed by incubation at 37 °C for 45 min. Subsequently, dense collagen (DC) gels were produced through the standard gel aspiration-ejection (GAE) system ( A volume of 2 μL of the citrate-incorporated neutralized collagen solution, prepared as described above, was placed on a Formvar Mineralization was carried out by immersion of both the dense collagen gels and the Formvar Dense collagen gels were initially fixed with 4% glutaraldehyde (Electron Microscopy Sciences, USA), and then dehydrated through a series of graded ethanol dilutions followed by immersion in 1,1,1,3,3,3-hexamethyldisilazane (Sigma-Aldrich, Canada). In order to increase the conductivity of the samples for observation by SEM, dried gels were coated with a 4-nm, electrically conductive layer of Pt using a Leica Microsystems EM ACE600 sputter coater (Austria), followed by imaging at high vacuum using a FEI Quanta 450 environmental scanning electron microscope (FE-ESEM, FEI Company, USA) operating at a voltage of 5 kV and equipped with an Everhart-Thornley secondary electron detector. Energy-dispersive X-ray spectroscopy (EDS) was performed using SEM equipped with an INCA micro analytical system (Oxford Instruments, UK). Dense collagen gels were initially fixed with 4% glutaraldehyde (Electron Microscopy Sciences, USA), and then dehydrated through a series of graded ethanol dilutions followed by immersion in 1,1,1,3,3,3-hexamethyldisilazane (Sigma-Aldrich, Canada). Gels were then air-dried overnight under a fume hood. Dried DC gels were then embedded in epoxy resin (Electron Microscopy Sciences, USA). Sections (80 nm thick) were cut with a Leica EM UC6 ultramicrotome (Leica, Canada) and placed on Formvar Dense collagen gels were fixed with 4% glutaraldehyde (Electron Microscopy Sciences, USA), and then dehydrated through a series of graded ethanol dilutions followed by immersion in 1,1,1,3,3,3-hexamethyldisilazane (Sigma-Aldrich, Canada). Gels were then air-dried overnight under a fume hood. AFM (Nanoscope IIIa; Veeco, USA) operating in tapping mode with a vertical engage E-scanner and NanoScope version 5.30 software (Veeco/Bruker-AXS Inc., USA) was used to generate height and phase images of dried samples anchored on stainless steel disks. AFM analysis was carried out in air at room temperature. For the analyses, V-shaped, tapping-mode AFM probes (typical tip apex radius of approximately 7 nm) with a silicon cantilever having a spring constant k = 42 N/m (Bruker-AXS Inc., USA) were used. In order to reduce imaging artefacts, the tip force exerted on the sample surface with the amplitude set-point was set as high as possible. Dense collagen gels were rinsed three times with distilled water and then freeze-dried for 24 h at −104 °C and 14 mTorr (BenchTop K freeze-dryer, USA). XRD diffractograms were generated using a D8 Discover diffractometer (Bruker-AXS Inc., USA) equipped with a copper X-ray tube (wavelength, 0.154056 nm), and a HI-STAR general-area detector diffraction system (Bruker-AXS Inc.). Diffractograms were generated by measuring multiple subsequent frames with a frame-width of 23 2θ degrees merged during data post-processing. Dense collagen gels were rinsed three times with distilled water and then freeze-dried for 24 h at −104 °C and 14 mTorr (BenchTop K freeze-dryer, USA). ATR Dense collagen gels were rinsed three times with distilled water and then freeze-dried for 24 h at −104 °C and 14 mTorr (BenchTop K freeze-dryer, USA). Micro-CT analysis was performed with a SkyScan 1172 (SkyScan, Kontich, Belgium) for imaging and for the calculation of the volume % of dried mineralized collagen in gels after 7 days in SBF. Freeze-dried samples were analyzed through a 360° flat field-corrected scan at 37 kV and 228 mA, and then reconstructed (NRecon software, SkyScan, Belgium) with a beam-hardening correction of 10, a ring artefact correction of 15, and an “auto” misalignment correction. Two-dimensional (2D) analysis (software CTAn, SkyScan, Belgium) was carried out using gray scale intensity. To remove background noise, a range of 20–255 (8-bit images) was used. The mineralized volume fraction of the gels was calculated from the ratio of the total volume of the mineralized phase to the total volume of the gel, which were estimated with the “3D measurements” function in CTAn software (SkyScan, Belgium). For image clarity of distinguishing features, collagen and collagen-mineral phases were pseudo-coloured in gray and pink, respectively. The extent of mineralization in dense collagen gels was indirectly calculated by quantifying the calcium concentration from dissolved mineralized gels using a calcium assay kit (Sekisui Diagnostics Inc, Canada). Briefly, calcium was extracted from mineralized gels by dissolution in 0.5 M HCl. Calcium content was spectrophotometrically quantified using the reaction kit reagents and a microplate reader (Infinite F200, Tecan) measuring at 595 nm wavelength absorbance. The capacity of citric acid-incorporated collagen gels to charge-dependently bind 0.1% cationic methylene blue dye (Sigma Aldrich, Canada) was investigated in order to assess the incorporation of the molecule within the dense collagen gels. Gels were immersed in the dye solutions at 37 °C for 1 h, and then rinsed in distilled to remove free unbound dye. Gels were maintained in the dark to prevent dye photobleaching prior to imaging. The mineralization of citrate-functionalized dense collagen gels was investigated across different length scales. SEM imaging combined with EDS of neat, dense collagen gels revealed no calcium-phosphate precipitation at 12 h of immersion in SBF ( At the nanoscale level, calcium-phosphate formation related to collagen fibrils was investigated by TEM ( To investigate how calcium-phosphate mineral deposition was induced by incorporation of citrate within the fibrils, isolated citrate-functionalized collagen fibrils were directly fibrilized onto TEM grids and observed via time-resolved high-resolution TEM after incubation in SBF ( Similar to the intrafibrillar mineralization of single isolated fibrils on TEM grids, TEM images of unstained collagen fibrils in dense collagen gels at day 7 in SBF, microtomed from Epon-embedded samples, also confirmed an increase in mineralization through the observed formation of numerous mineral nanoplatelets ( Along with intrafibrillar mineralization, nanocrystals were also formed on the surface of collagen fibrils and distinctly within the interfibrillar spaces, thus suggesting that interfibrillar mineralization was also induced by citrate incorporation ( In order to investigate the effect of citrate concentration on the extent of collagen mineralization, dense collagen gels were functionalized with different concentrations of citrate and compared to the effect of similar citrate concentrations directly added after gel formation into the SBF ( The direct addition of citrate into SBF at low concentrations also led to an increase in calcium content in the dense collagen gels, which can be correlated with mineral deposition within the gels ( The incorporation of citrate into dense collagen gels not only effectively excluded the inhibiting effect of free citrate on calcium-phosphate growth, but it also promoted its biomimetic mineralization in SBF. This is a distinct approach compared to other Ca/P rich mineralization solutions, as SBF resembles the ionic concentrations of body fluid ( In summary, this study has demonstrated that the small biomolecule citrate – abundantly present in bone – can effectively induce intra- and interfibrillar mineralization of collagen fibrils when incorporated into collagen fibrils at the time of their fibrillogenesis, and after exposure to simulated body fluid. These findings advance our understanding of the effects of citrate on the mineralization of collagen and its role in bone tissue formation, and they also provide insight on the mechanism guiding biomineral nucleation and growth. Furthermore, the use of citrate-functionalized osteoid-mimicking dense collagen gels might offer a promising approach for bone repair and regeneration strategies.  The authors declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this paper. This study was supported by funding from Supplementary data to this article can be found online at The following are the Supplementary data to this article:   