The first part of the project identified an optimum pH range and optimum Mg2+ and Ca2+ concentrations. Following this, a series of the tests was carried out under varying hydrodynamic conditions. The tests also included a polyethylene oxide (PEO) flocculant.
                  The results confirmed that good flocculation response requires not only optimization of the polymer dosage, but also the rate of polymer addition and intensity of conditioning. Good flocculation can be achieved with lower polymer dosages when using more dilute polymer solutions and continuous polymer addition during conditioning.
                  The PEO flocculant was found to be very effective for flocculation of the Syncrude tailings.Since flocculants are either used to enhance solids settling rate in order to maximize thickener capacity, to enhance dewatering by filtration, or to improve water clarification, various tests are utilized to examine their application. These methods include measurements of solids settling rate, supernatant turbidity, sediment density and filtration characteristics. The effect of Percol 727 flocculant, pH and divalent cations' concentration on settling rate and turbidity of the Syncrude desanded tailings, described in Part I In this part, two flocculants, polyacrylamide (Percol 727) and PEO, are tested under more stringent hydrodynamic conditions. The fine tailing samples (de-sanded slurry) from Syncrude, which contain 7% solids (clays, sand and small amount of bitumen), were utilized in the flocculation tests. X-ray diffraction analysis of the Syncrude tailings indicated that the sample contained kaolinite, illite and quartz. It also contained organic matter. The particle size distribution obtained with the use of Elzone 280 Particle Size Analyzer revealed that 90% of the particles were finer than 24 μm and 99.5% particles finer than 50 μm. Two polymers, Percol 727 (Allied Colloids) and PEO (Polyscience), were used in flocculation tests. Percol 727 is a high molecular weight polyacrylamide with a degree of anionicity of approximately 30%. PEO (polyethylenoxide) is a nonionic polymer with a molecular weight of 8×10 Concentrated polymer solutions of 2.5 g/l were prepared by dissolving 0.25 g of dry polymer in 100 ml of tap water. The stock solution was used within three days of preparation. A fresh working polymer solution of 0.5 g/l was prepared everyday by diluting the concentrated stock solution. Slurry pH was adjusted using either 1 M HCl or 1 M NaOH solutions. One mole/liter solutions of MgCl pH was measured with a Fisher Scientific pH-meter (Accumet Model 25). The flocculation experiments were carried out using a standard paddle stirrer with speed control (Phipps and Bird, Richmond, VA) and a standard mixing tank Mg A higher solids content in the flocs and higher density of the flocs lead to a higher initial settling rate. The correlation between solids content in the sediment, initial settling rate and solid content in the supernatant at pH=8.6 is shown in  Changes in hydrodynamic conditions do not affect the flocculation results in the presence of Ca The dependence of polymer dosage (Percol 727) on mixing speed and polymer concentration is shown in According to Different flocculation conditions such as mixing speed, polymer concentration and rate of polymer addition are required for different flocculants (e.g. Percol 727 and PEO). The flocculation performance is strongly affected by mixing conditions. Hydrodynamic conditions are especially important when nonionic polymer is used. The tested PEO was found to be a very efficient flocculant for Syncrude tailings. Contrary to the results with Percol 727 (2% solid content in the supernatant), flocculation with PEO provides very low turbidity of the supernatant (about 0.2% solids content). The financial support of Syncrude Canada is gratefully acknowledged.