Background
                  The incidental finding of squamous cell carcinoma (SCC) in cervical lymph nodes during neck exploration for non-oncologic surgery is not reported in the literature. This study presents the first-ever reported incidentally found SCC in the neck during a penetrating neck trauma repair. The approach, clinical implications, and treatment are discussed.
               
                  Case presentation
                  A 58-year-old otherwise healthy male was taken to an outside emergency department following a near-fatal gunshot wound to his neck with a large pharyngeal defect. During the neck exploration, several firm enlarged upper cervical lymph nodes were sent for frozen section pathology, which came back suspicious for SCC. A comprehensive neck dissection was completed and the remaining lymph nodes were excised. The patient underwent a pharyngoplasty and neck skin reconstruction with a bi-lobed anterolateral thigh (ALT) free flap. Final pathology identified the neck nodes to be positive for moderately differentiated human papillomavirus negative SCC. The patient underwent treatment for cancer of unknown primary with chemoradiation therapy. PET-CT imaging 1-year postoperatively was negative for persistent or recurrent disease. The patient was without signs of recurrence at his 18-month follow-up with a viable ALT flap at the site of reconstruction.
               
                  Discussion
                  Incidental cancer diagnosis during surgery following trauma is rare. These circumstances make a case for routine examination of lymph nodes during surgery.Squamous cell carcinomas (SCCs) account for approximately 5% of cancers of unknown primary site (CUP) [ This study presents the first-ever reported incidentally found SCC in the neck during a penetrating neck trauma repair. The approach, clinical implications, and treatment are discussed. A 58-year-old otherwise healthy male was taken to an outside emergency department (ED) following a near-fatal gunshot wound (GSW) to his neck with a large pharyngeal defect. An emergent cricothyrotomy was performed in the ED, and he was then taken to the operating room (OR) for neck exploration by a trauma team. He was found to have significant tissue loss of the cervical skin, sternocleidomastoid muscle, and internal jugular vein, and comminution of the thyroid cartilage and hyoid bone. There was near complete transection of the supraglottic airway, and a transected cervical esophagus with an intact posterior wall. Both the larynx and esophagus were approximated during this first surgery. He was taken back to the OR for further debridement of declared necrotic tissue. Skin, muscle, pharyngeal mucosa, and the right clavicle were extensively debrided. He was found to have a large pharyngeal defect exposing his supraglottic airway. His neck was then packed with antibiotic-soaked gauze, and he was transferred to our tertiary care academic facility for further management. Upon evaluation in the OR, the patient was found to have a visible fistula between the right lateral pharynx and the left oropharynx at the level of hyoid ( Final pathology identified the neck nodes to be positive for moderately differentiated HPV negative SCC. The patient was to come back for further management, including robotic base of tongue mucosectomy to search for a primary tumor but refused to travel to our institution, as he lived several hours away. The patient re-presented 18 months later to our clinic for evaluation of his tracheostomy. He had not yet been decannulated and capping trials were recommended. He was using a gastrostomy tube and oral diet and reported some swallowing impairment due to the tracheostomy. By then, the patient had received a PET-CT that did not localize a primary cancer site and had been treated for CUP with definitive chemoradiation therapy to the base of tongue and tonsils. PET-CT imaging 1-year postoperatively was negative for persistent or recurrent disease. The patient's right neck appeared healed with a healthy skin paddle from his ALT free flap. While incidental cancer diagnosis during surgery following trauma is extremely rare, incidental diagnosis via imaging in trauma patients is more common. These patients are found to have similar long-term outcomes to non-injured cancer patients [ This patient’s presentation was traumatic and unfortunate but did lead to his cancer diagnosis and prompt treatment. The trained eye of the surgical oncologist was likely better primed to identify lymph nodes suspicious for cancer compared to that of the community trauma surgeons. Additionally, the trauma surgeons were likely more concerned with hemostasis and proper ventilation for this patient. Regardless of the procedure, it is crucial to be able to identify pathologic nodes when operating in the neck. Suspicious lymph nodes may appear enlarged, immobile, firm, or have surrounding fibrosis due to the tissue invasion or inflammatory response. Frozen sectioning should be used in cases in which the pathology report will change the intra-operative management or help render an unanticipated diagnosis. In the case of our patient, the pathology report of the frozen sections led to the neck dissection and prevented unnecessary repeated surgery and associated risks. Since the trauma surgeons did not have the training to perform a neck dissection, fixed specimens would have been appropriate to send to pathology during those initial two surgeries, had cancer been suspected. This would have ensured the surgical oncologist was ready to perform pharyngeal and neck skin reconstruction along with an oncologic neck dissection. Trauma patients are at an increased risk of loss to follow-up [ Our patient's extraordinary circumstances make a case for routine examination of lymph nodes during any surgery, which constitutes a unique opportunity for direct evaluation. This can be done by thoroughly palpating for enlarged lymph nodes after anesthesia induction prior to starting the surgery, followed by visual examination of lymph nodes during surgeries that involve their visualization. Any encountered enlarged or firm lymph nodes should then be submitted for frozen or permanent pathology analysis. The potential for these clinical outcomes, however, stresses the importance of our established informed consent regarding the in-operative treatment of such incidental findings. In the case of our patient, he was not alert prior to surgery so such a discussion was not possible. Furthermore, he did not have any listed emergency contacts, so the surgical oncologist had to decide whether or not to proceed with the neck dissection. The difficulty in obtaining patient or healthcare proxy consent is not an unlikely scenario for trauma patients, so routinely examining lymph nodes in trauma patients does prompt ethical issues surrounding the potential lack of pre-operative consent for risky procedures. This research did not receive any specific grant from funding agencies in the public, commercial, or not-for-profit sectors. The authors declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this paper. None.