Understanding the roles of particle properties in powder compaction is important to many industrial products, such as tablets in pharmaceutics, briquettes in iron ore handling and green compacts in powder metallurgy. However, the role of particle shape in bulk compression and how it is related to the properties of the final compact are not well understood. In this study, we investigated the structural evolution, force distribution and compact strength of tetrahedral particles using discrete element method, with a focus on the effect of particle interlocking due to non-spherical particle shape. Tetrahedral particles were constructed using clumped sphere approach, which allows multiple contacts being set up between two contacted particles. Die compaction followed by unconfined compression were conducted on the assemblies of both spherical and tetrahedral particles. The results showed that the tetrahedral particle shape reduces the degree of particle rearrangement at the early stage of bulk compression but enhances the resistance to bulk deformation at the later stage due to enhanced shear resistance at interparticle contacts. The compact of tetrahedral particles presents a higher compressive strength due to increased number of interparticle bonding. Compared to the spherical particles, the macroscopic failure mode tends to be more ductile for the tetrahedral particles. The tetrahedral particle shape has no effect on the dominant bond failure mode but leads to a wider shear banding, more dispersed bond breakage and a slower bond breakage process. This work highlights the role of particle shape in densification mechanism and mechanical response of the formed powder compact.Die compaction is a unit operation commonly used in many industries, such as pharmaceutical, mineral processing, powder metallurgy and ceramic industries, during which loose powder is consolidated under external pressure, resulting in a dense, size-enlarged compact ( DEM has been applied extensively to investigate the compaction process. However, idealized spherical particles are often used in simulations, although particles in engineering practice are rarely spherical. Experimental studies have shown that particle shape plays an important role in both die compaction behavior and the resulting compact strength ( DEM can provide abundant microscopic information, such as packing structure and interparticle forces. Detailed reviews on DEM modeling of non-spherical particle system have been given by The objective of this work is thus to conduct a micromechanical analysis to investigate the role of particle shape in powder compaction and the mechanical response of formed compact using discrete element method. This work follows our previous effort on linking compact strength to powder behavior in die compaction and but focuses on microscopic analysis. Both structural and force analysis are conducted to understand the role of particle shape in densification mechanism, frictional mobilization, compressive strength and failure pattern during unconfined compression test. DEM model for non-spherical particles using clumped-sphere approach has been well established in the literature ( For a non-spherical particle, the translational and rotational motions are governed by Newton’s second law of motion, given as, In this study, the particles are modeled as elastic-perfectly plastic, where the normal contact force is calculated by Hertzian theory for elastic deformation and the model of Each simulation consists of four stages: die filling, compaction, relaxation and unconfined compression. Particles were first generated randomly inside a cylindrical container to form a packing. Each particle was assigned with a random orientation by initializing different values to its Euler angles. The die filling process was terminated until total kinetic energy of the system is essentially zero. The packed bed was then subjected to die compression by moving the upper punch downward at a constant strain rate until reaching a packing density of 0.7, followed by an upward displacement of the top punch until it was separated from the compact. To conduct unconfined compression, the side walls were directly removed. The sample was given a relaxation period of 0.1 The bulk behavior of granular assemblies depends on the collective interaction between constituent particles. For powder compaction, understanding of the microscopic origin of the bulk behavior can be achieved from two aspects: macroscopic behavior and microscopic statistical analysis.  At later stage (  Comparing with experiments, evolution of structural information during die compaction is readily accessible in DEM simulations. A well-known characteristic of granular material is the inhomogeneous force distribution. It is widely accepted that force chains developed within granular materials ( Apart from the force magnitude, another important microscopic quantity in characterising force structure is the force orientation. For the tetrahedral particles, During die compaction, applied load is largely transmitted through a sparse, heavily loaded contact network ( To examine the role of particle shape on the degree of friction mobilization at the inter-particle contacts, the distribution of mobilized friction coefficient is shown in The stress-strain relationships of the formed compacts during unconfined compression are plotted in One major advantage of discrete modeling is that the failure process can be readily accessed. To this end, three different stages are selected, corresponding to the pre-peak, peak and post-peak stages of the unconfined compression. As illustrated in The failure process can be further illustrated by plotting bond breakage ratio The failure pattern is closely related to the microstructure and distribution of inter-particle bonding prior to compress. It is thus necessary to study the extent of the inter-particle bonding.  In the present study, the previous developed DEM model was extended to investigate the role of particle shape in the densification mechanism and compact strength by means of micromechanical analysis on the compaction of tetrahedral particles. The non-spherical particle shape is represented via a clumped-sphere approach. Iron ore fines was selected as the reference material. Comparative analysis on the structure and forces were made between the compactions of tetrahedral particles and spherical particles, leading to the following conclusions: Compared to spherical particles, a gradual transition stage was observed in the evolution of the coordination number, indicating a reduced degree of particle rearrangement for the tetrahedral particles. The tetrahedral particles present more resistance to bulk deformation at the later stage of die compression due to the combined effects of mechanical interlocking and enhanced frictional resistance at contacts. Force analysis showed that the effect of consolidation pressure is only significant at large forces while the dip at small forces observed in the compression of spherical particles is suppressed. With increasing die loading, normal contact forces tend to align more close to the horizontal direction. The orientation preference of normal contact force is less obvious in the compact of tetrahedral particles after die loading. A significant change were observed in the force structure due to elastic recovery after die unloading. In unconfined compression, tetrahedral particles showed an enhanced compressive strength and loading stiffness compared to that of the spherical particles. The bulk failure is mainly controlled by shear-induced bond failure, which shows no dependence on particle shape. The tetrahedral particle shape gives rise to a wider shear banding, a more dispersed bond breakage and a much slower bond breakage process. Meanwhile, the macroscopic failure mode tends to be more ductile for the tetrahedral particles. The enhanced compressive strength was attributed to the increased number of inter-particle bonding. For the tetrahedral particles, the tension-induced bond breakage cause compact expansion while the angle of shear banding is more related to the most likely angle of the shear-induced broken bonds. The authors gratefully acknowledge the support from the University of New South Wales.