Soybean oil methyl ester (SBME), better known as biodiesel was used as diluent for the rare earth ions (RE (III))(La (III), Pr (III), Nd (III), Eu (III), Gd (III), Er (III), Yb (III), Lu (III) and Y (III)) extraction in the presence of sec-octylphenoxyacetic acid (CA-12) in this paper. The effects of extractant concentration, the equilibrium pH of aqueous phase and temperature etc. were examined in the chloride medium. The slope analysis technique was used to investigate the extraction mechanism, and it was found that the extraction mechanism was a cation-exchange mechanism in CA-12-SBME system. Y (III) extraction in the nitrate medium was also investigated, and the extraction mechanism in the nitrate medium was similar to the chloride medium. The separation factors (β) amongst RE (III) pairs have also been evaluated. It showed that Y (III) was the most difficult RE (III) to be extracted in the CA-12-SBME system, implying CA-12-SBME system could be employed to extract and separate Y (III). To examine the suitability of this extraction system, a fractional extraction (4 stages for extraction and 2 stages for scrubbing) was studied in a real sample, and the percentage of Y (III) in the raffinate was enhanced from 30.5% to 76.9% when the recovery of Y (III) was 36.5%. The results were consistent with the data calculated by Xu model, which were 75.0% and 40.0% respectively. This implied the purity of Y (III) and the percentage of recovery could be improved by increasing the stages for extraction and scrubbing.In recent years, the concept of “green chemistry” has been paid more and more attention, and the use of alternative solvents for volatile organic compounds (VOCs) is an important component of green chemistry ( Environmental hydrometallurgy has also been proposed to encourage investigator to find more appropriate technique for a specific problem, and exploring biological alternatives to solvents and etchants is an important area of environmental hydrometallurgy ( Sec-octylphenoxyacetic acid (92% purity, CA-12) was kindly supplied by Tianjin Xiandai Chemical Plant (China) and used as received. The concentration of CA-12 was titrated by standard NaOH (0.1 The concentration of RE (III) in the mixture was determined with TJA Poems (Franklin, MA, USA) ICP-MS. A model PHS-3C pH meter (Leici, Shanghai, China) was used for measuring pH values. The electric conductivity was measured by DDS-307 Conductivity Meter (Leici, Shanghai, China). Shimadzu (Kyoto, Japan) UVmini-1240 UV–visible spectrophotometer was used to determined the concentrations of RE (III) in aqueous phase after extracted in the single RE (III) extraction by spectrophotometrically method. The organic phase was gained by dissolving CA-12 in the SBME to be 0.05 The SBME was produced by transesterification of soybean oil and methanol following previous report ( Y (III) has been selected as the representation of RE (III) for the equilibrium time experiments. The effect of equilibrium time on the Y (III) extraction in chloride medium was studied from 1 The extraction behaviors of individual RE (III) as function of equilibrium aqueous pH were shown in  The distribution isotherms for the Y (III) extraction in chloride medium were obtained by extracting Y (III) from 0.5 CA-12 is a kind of surfactant itself, which would make the extraction system emulsification easily. However, adding salts in the aqueous phase could eliminate emulsification. Therefore, the salt effect was also needed to be investigated. The concentration of NaCl (or NaNO CA-12 has been studied as extractant for the RE (III) and other metal ions extraction ( The separation factor ( The effect of temperature on the extraction in chloride medium was studied in the range of 298 The relationship between stripping acidity (HCl) and stripping percentage for Y (III), La (III) and Gd (III) have been studied. The loaded organic phase was obtained by extracting RE (III) into the CA-12-SBME organic phase, and the loaded RE (III) concentration were calculated by mass balance. The results were shown in The recycling experiments were performed to estimate the stability of the CA-12-SBME extraction system. The extraction ability changed little after 5 cycles ( The suitability of CA-12-SBME system was examined by applying it to the separation and extraction of Y (III) from RE (III) in a real sample. The number of the theoretical stages was calculated by the Xu model ( In our present work, four stages for extraction and two stages for scrubbing were chosen as a sample of the fractional extraction to evaluate the feasibility of CA-12-SBME system. The process of separating yttrium from other rare earths was shown in In this paper, a systematic investigation was carried out by using SBME as the diluent for the RE (III) extraction in the presence of CA-12. The stoichiometry of the extracted species, mechanism of extraction of RE (III), effect of temperature and separation factors between RE (III) pairs have been evaluated and discussed. The results indicated that the extraction mechanism used SBME as diluent was a cation-exchange mechanism, and a similar extraction equation was proposed both in the chloride and nitrate medium. The Y (III) was the most difficult RE (III) to be extracted, and this implied that the CA-12-SBME extraction system could be employed in the Y (III) extraction and separation. A fractional extraction (4 stages for extraction and 2 stages for scrubbing) was studied in a real sample, and the results were consistent with the Xu model, which indicated that the CA-12-SBME had potential application in industry. Adding the benign properties (such as renewable, biodegradable, nontoxic, eco-friendly, good solubility, etc.), SBME would be promoted an alternative diluent for the Y (III) extraction and separation. This project was supported by