Dose-dependent effects of strontium on osteoblast function and mineralization.
               
                  Background
                  Strontium-ranelate is now being used in the treatment of osteoporosis in elderly patients. As the majority of these patients already have a decreased renal function they are at an increased risk for accumulation of the element. Recent findings from epidemiologic studies in dialysis patients and experimental data obtained in a chronic renal failure (CRF) rat model established a dose-related multiphasic effect of strontium (Sr) on bone formation. To confirm these in vivo findings an in vitro set-up, consisting of primary rat osteoblast cultures, was applied. Sr was added to the culture medium at concentrations of 0, 0.5, 1.0, 2.0, 5.0, 20, and 100μg/mL, respectively.
               
                  Methods
                  Calcium incorporation (index of mineralization) and alkaline phosphatase activity were determined in the medium during the culture period, while at the end of the experiment, nodule formation (mineralized + unmineralized area) was quantified using a digital imaging system. mRNA synthesis of various osteoblast specific genes was assessed by means of reverse transcription polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR).
               
                  Results
                  Compared to the control group (0μg/mL Sr), a significantly reduced nodule formation in the presence of an intact mineralization was found for the lowest 0.5 and 1μg/mL Sr doses, suggesting an impaired in vitro osteoblast differentiation. Both nodule formation and mineralization were normal for the 2 and 5μg/mL doses. For the highest Sr doses (20 and 100μg/mL) a reduced mineralization was observed in the presence of an intact nodule formation indicating an inhibitory effect on the hydroxyapatite formation. The alkaline phosphatase activity reflected the multiphasic pattern of the nodule formation while the calcium incorporation corresponded with the pattern of nodular mineralization. No variations in cell proliferation were found. RT-PCR revealed that Sr interfered with the osteoblast at the level of the mRNA synthesis of several relevant genes.
               
                  Conclusion
                  Using the proposed in vitro model we confirmed the multiphasic effect of Sr on bone formation previously demonstrated in a CRF rat model. The data presented allow us to suggest that at low concentrations Sr interferes with the bone formation at the level of cell differentiation, whereas at high concentrations the disturbed mineralization in the presence of an intact nodule formation is indicative for a physicochemical interference of Sr with the hydroxyapatite formation.Due to its chemical analogy to calcium (Ca), strontium (Sr, molecular weight 87.62) is a bone-seeking element that readily exchanges for Ca in diverse tissues, including the hydroxyapatite lattice in bone Data from previous studies of our group showed that: ( The clinical relevance of the present investigations needs to be emphasized since Sr is now being used as the Sr-ranelate compound for the treatment of osteoporosis in elderly patients in doses up to 2 to 3 Primary osteoblasts were isolated from fetal Wistar rat calvaria. Calvaria were dissected aseptically from 20-day-old fetuses of timed-pregnant Wistar rats. After dissection, loosely adherent soft connective tissue was removed and calvaria were minced into ±1 Sr was added to the medium of the confluent cultures at various amounts as the chloride compound SrCl Mineralized cultures (to which no Sr was added) were fixed in 90% ethanol, air-dried, and analyzed with a JEOL JSM 6300 scanning electron microscope (JEOL Europe, Zawentem, Belgium) for morphologic examinations. Using the same apparatus, the elemental composition of the deposited mineral was determined by means of Electron Probe X-ray Micro Analysis (EPXMA) (JEOL Europe). In addition to this technique, unfixed mineralized cultures were air dried for Fourier Transform Infra Red (FTIR) analysis to further identify and characterize the deposited mineral. After mixing the samples with potassium bromide, FTIR spectra were recorded on a Nicolet 20 DXB FTIR-spectrometer (Nicolet Instrument Corporation, Madison, WI, USA). Three hundred scans were taken in the mid infrared (IR)-range (400 to 4000 Measurement of Sr in the culture medium was done using a Zeeman 3030 atomic absorption spectrometer equipped with an HGA-600 graphite furnace (Perkin Elmer Corporation, Ueberlingen, Germany), as previously described in detail Medium samples were taken before and after each incubation period to measure the Ca concentration. The decline in the Ca concentration in the medium after incubation was used as a measure of Ca incorporation into the mineralized nodules (i.e., hydroxyapatite formation). After integration over the different time points the Ca incorporation was expressed as the absolute amount of incorporated Ca (μg) over time [area under the time-concentration curve (AUC) of 11 time points]. This method was used as an alternative for the previously described radioactive At the end of the experiment, for each of the cultures the total amount of incorporated Ca was compared to the area of the mineralized sections of the nodules measured by quantitative microscopic digital image analysis (KS-400; Kontron Embedded Computer AG, Munchen, Germany). Within the nodules, differentiation between mineralized and unmineralized nodule area was done based on the difference in gray value following a modified protocol from Nefussi Total phosphorous content was measured in the cell culture medium before and after incubation on a Vitros 950 AT Autoanalyzer System (Ortho Clinical Diagnostics, Johnson & Johnson, Raritan, NJ, USA). Alkaline phosphatase activity in the conditioned culture medium was determined spectrophotometrically by measurement of the release of To check whether Sr has a direct effect on the enzymatic activity or electrophoretic mobility, a serum sample with a known bone alkaline phosphatase activity was incubated with various Sr concentrations, after which the isoenzymes were separated by agarose gel electrophoresis according to the method described by Van Hoof Using the Fluoreporter® Blue Fluorometric dsDNA quantitation kit (Molecular Probes, Leiden, The Netherlands), the concentration of double-stranded DNA (dsDNA) was determined in cultures of the various study groups to check for possible Sr-mediated differences in cell number. DNA measurements were performed at one time point before confluence and at three different time points after confluence. The effects of Sr on the proliferation of primary osteoblasts were determined using a cell proliferation enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA) BrdU kit (Roche, Basel, Switzerland). At two different time points preconfluence, as well as at five time points postconfluence, cells cultured in 48-well plates and exposed to different Sr concentrations were incubated with BrdU labeling solution for 24 Total RNA was extracted from primary osteoblasts exposed to the different Sr concentrations 18 Reverse transcription-polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR) was performed for the following genes: alkaline phosphatase (ALP); bone sialoprotein (BSP); osteopontin (OPN); bone morphogenic protein-2 (BMP-2); core binding factor alpha 1 (CBFa-1); and glyceralgdehydephosphate dehydrogenase (GAPDH), which was applied as housekeeping gene. PCR primer sequences and fragment length for the different genes under study are, respectively: ALP F: 5′-GCTACACCACAACACGGGCGA-3′, R: 5′-TCCAAATGCTGATGAGGTCCA-3′, 550 Data are expressed as mean ± SD unless otherwise stated. For each of the various study parameters, comparison of the various study groups (i.e., different Sr concentrations) versus the control group (0 Cells seeded at 6000 cells/cm Determination of the Sr content in the culture medium revealed values accurately reflecting the values noted for the Sr additions of 0, 0.5, 1, 2, 5, 20, and 100 Quantitative microscopic analysis of the nodule formation by measuring the nodule area in the culture showed an Sr-related multiphasic pattern For the levamisole group (alkaline phosphatase inhibitor) both the total nodule area (9.6 ± 3.5 The Ca incorporation showed an Sr-dependent multiphasic pattern similar to the calculated mineralized nodule areas determined by quantitative microscopic imaging Measurement of the total phosphorous concentration before and after incubation revealed no significant differences between the different treatment groups, which was due to the high background phosphorous level resulting from the large excess present in the culture medium. The addition of Sr to the culture medium affected the alkaline phosphatase activity in a multiphasic way, similar to that seen for the quantification of the total nodule formation. Enzymatic activity was significantly ( To examine whether the observed multiphasic effect of Sr on alkaline phosphatase was due to an interference of the element with the cellular secretion/synthesis of the enzyme rather than being the result of a direct interaction with the enzyme activity, the electrophoretic mobility and enzymatic activity of a serum sample incubated with the different Sr-concentrations was also assessed. No difference in the electrophoretic pattern or in signal intensity could be observed between the various groups. The absence of any difference in enzymatic activity was further confirmed using the standard procedure with Multiphasic effects of Sr on both Ca incorporation and alkaline phosphatase were consistent in function of time for all the groups under study and no time-dependent difference or time shift was observed To examine whether the observed Sr-induced effects on the different parameters were due to an interference of the element with the cellular proliferation, total DNA content and BrdU-incorporation of the different groups under study were determined at different time points pre- and postconfluence. No difference in the DNA content or in the BrdU-incorporation Reverse transcription-polymerase chain reaction analysis on cell lysates of the different groups at sacrifice of the culture (i.e., 18 In previous studies, increased bone Sr levels were noted in dialysis patients with osteomalacia Primary rat osteoblast cultures isolated from 20-day-old fetal rat calvaria were used. This model has previously been applied by others studying the in vitro osteogenesis Quantification of nodule formation was primarily done by measuring the nodule area. Following a modified protocol from Nefussi Using this validated model of in vitro bone formation we could confirm the multiphasic effects previously observed in vivo and present evidence for Sr to exert a cell biological effect at low doses, and a physicochemical effect on bone formation/mineralization at high doses. The reduced nodule formation at the lowest Sr concentrations (0.5 to 1 The electrophoretic data of alkaline phosphatase indicate that the observed effect of Sr on the activity of the enzyme in the culture medium was not due to a direct interaction of Sr with the intact metalloenzyme, but rather occurs secondary to a cellular response. This suggestion is further supported by the results obtained by RT-PCR analysis. Here, the mRNA expression of alkaline phosphatase was also affected in a multiphasic way similar to the pattern for its enzymatic activity. This multiphasic pattern, and more particularly, the inhibition of the expression at low Sr concentrations, was also observed on other osteoblast-specific factors, such as bone sialoprotein, BMP-2, and CBFa-1 At the intermediate concentrations (2 to 5 Complex dose-depending effects of Sr on Ca metabolism have recently been published by other investigators In agreement with our previous observations in the CRF rat Our primary cell culture data to a certain extent do not fully agree with the in vitro findings reported by Canalis Using the proposed model we have been able to demonstrate a multiphasic effect of Sr on the in vitro bone formation. Moreover, these data allow us to suggest that, at lower concentrations, the interference of Sr with the bone formation is cell-mediated, most probably at the level of osteoprogenitor cell differentiation. At high Sr concentrations no effect on the osteoblast differentiation could be observed; therefore, the disturbed mineralization is suggested to result from a physicochemical interaction. S.C. Verberckmoes is a recipient of a postgraduate research grant of the Flemish Institute for the promotion of Scientific Technological Research in Industry (IWT). Financial support for the study was provided by a grant from the Foundation of Scientific Research (FWO). The authors would like to acknowledge Dr. Pegie Cool and Dr. Walter Dorriné from the Department of Chemistry of the University of Antwerp for the technical assistance in FTIR and EPXMA analysis, and Hilde Broes from the Department of Clinical Chemistry of the University Hospital of Antwerp for the technical assistance in the determination of the electrophoresis of alkaline phosphatase. Furthermore, we acknowledge the European Synchrotron Radiation Facility for provision of synchrotron radiation facilities, and we would like to thank Andrea Somogyi and Michael Drakopoulos for assistance in using beamline ID18F.