Granular recycled Construction and Demolition (C&D) materials used in pavement structures and embankments experience static and dynamic loading during their service life. As a result, particle crushing causing serious issues such as settlements may occur. Particle breakage depends on different factors such as particle mineralogy, loading condition, particle size, and particle shape. A new insight into the importance and effects of particle shape on the degree of crushing is presented. In this study, breakage of individual C&D particles with different mineralogy and microstructure was studied. The fracture characteristics were found to be highly dependent on the particle shape factor. The particle behaviour at different scales from a single particle to particle assembly is presented and discussed. Discrete Element Method (DEM) was also used to clarify evolution of cracks through the particles. DEM assisted in measuring breakage energy more accurately by partitioning and tracking the energy dissipation especially through the creation of new surfaces during fragmentation. Precise three-dimensional particle shapes were generated by a large number of bonded spherical sub-particles and used to model single particle crushing and particle assembly crushing. The results demonstrated that brittle C&D granular materials with higher degree of sphericity and lower flakiness index would show higher resistance to breakage.Breakage index was introduced with the focus on particle size distribution before and after loading. Breakage probability of different particles with different sizes was investigated. Particle fracture under impact loading was investigated to understand comminution process in mineral processing field. Study was conducted on glass ballotini micro-particles with NaCl binder forming a greater agglomerate; totally different from soil particles. The focus was on issues related to chemical and process engineering. Influence of non-spherical particles during shearing was investigated using DEM. Impact breakage of individual agglomerates Breakage criterion only applied to particles having a coordination number smaller than three Studies on three well-rounded sand particles in a compression column, highly affected by boundary conditions Recycled Construction and Demolition (C&D) materials are granular materials usually collected near curbsides, generated by construction and demolition of buildings and structures, or commercial and industrial activities. Recycling and reusing waste materials can help to decrease the demand for scarce virgin natural resources and simultaneously reduce disposal cost into the landfills. Waste Rock (WR) used in this study originates from surface excavation of basaltic rock, whose placement normally occurs near the surface to the west and north of Melbourne, Australia. Recycled Concrete Aggregate (RCA) and Crushed Brick (CB) are by-products of construction and demolition activities of buildings and structures. RCA, WR, and CB have been recognized as showing geotechnical properties equivalent or similar to typical quarry pavement subbase materials commonly used in Victoria, Australia Granular materials used in pavement structures, embankments, foundations, and even rail track structures experience static and dynamic loading conditions. Consequently, particle breakage in the shape of abrasion or asperity breakage and total fragmentation may occur Among a number of factors affecting degree of crushing, the inherent strength of the particles and effective stress state have been reported as the most important Particle breakage and fracture is a detrimental phenomenon that can only be fully understood at the particle scale. Due to experimental limitations on measuring force chains and monitoring crack propagation at this scale, Discrete Element Method (DEM) has been widely used in the past few years. However, original DEM used circular/spherical balls to simulate particles This study aims to highlight the effect of particle shape on particle breakage at different scales and proposes a new relationship between particle tensile strength and particle shape. To accomplish this, a series of experimental tests were conducted on WR, RCA, and CB particles. In addition, 3D DEM simulations were used to measure breakage energy more accurately for WR samples. While the input energy can be calculated from experimental results (the area under the load-displacement curve), it contains not only breakage energy but also energy dissipation due to friction between particles and loading plates and during rearrangement of particle fragments. DEM was used in this study to partition and track the energy dissipated through the creation of new surfaces during fragmentation. Despite recent interest in studying breakage at the particle-scale, due to the versatile characteristics of granular materials, uncertainties still exist preventing the development of a comprehensive description of the mechanical phenomena happening during particle breakage. Nevertheless, in general terms, the particle breakage has been categorized in two major forms: abrasion and particle fracture/fragmentation Eq. Even though Eqs. In this study different materials with various mineralogy and microstructure comprising Crushed Waste excavation Rock (WR), Recycled Concrete Aggregate (RCA), and Crushed Brick (CB) were tested. To observe and identify different minerals and also microstructure of the particles, Scanning Electron Microscopy (SEM) and Energy-Dispersive X-ray Spectroscopy (EDS) were utilized. As shown in WR, RCA, and CB are coarse-grained granular mixes with a maximum particle size of 20 Cavarretta et al. Here A is area, and d In this study, to categorize particle shapes, several images from 1.3 WR: RCA: CB: A bulky particle is closer in shape to a spheroid than to any other aforementioned shape categories, while particles with elongated shape are close to prolate spheroids, and flaky particles are comparable to oblate spheroids. Following this, to investigate the effect of particle shape on particle crushing across the different scales, Single Particle Crushing (SPC) and Particle Assembly Crushing (PAC) tests were conducted. Single Particle Crushing (SPC) experiments were conducted on 21 single particles of WR, 14 single particles of RCA, and 14 particles of CB. To eliminate the effect of size on particle crushing, particles in the size range of 13.2 to 19 In order to further investigate the effect of particle shape at a larger scale, eight one-dimensional compression experiments were conducted on assemblies of WR particles for each shape category (i.e. bulky, elongated, or flaky). The WR particles with size between 13.2 and 19 DEM simulations of SPC and PAC tests on WR particles were performed using Particle Flow Code (PFC3D 5.0). Firstly, to simulate different particle shapes, WR particles (i.e.: bulky, AR It is necessary to calibrate and adjust micro-parameters, particularly contact model properties, in order to match macro-scale properties of the generated specimen with those measured in the laboratory Results from three representative SPC tests on C&D material particles for each shape category are plotted in It is clear that particles in the same size fraction have a variety of shapes, from bulky to extremely flaky. Hence, using the average particle diameter related to a sieve aperture will lead to incorrect calculation of particle tensile strength (see Eq. Interestingly, To further investigate the effect of particle shape while the cushioning effect of other particles is considered, PAC tests were performed.  Furthermore, since bulky particles showed higher resistance against breakage, it is expected that in an assembly containing a high percentage of bulky shape particles, less breakage would happen than in an assembly with a high Flakiness Index. Therefore, the particle size distribution after loading would not be significantly different from the particle size distribution before loading in an assembly with a high weight percentage of bulky particles, as long as the other controlling factors such as loading rate, level, and condition are the same. However, this research focuses only on the significant effect of particle shape on breakage, and so further research is required on the impact of fine content on particle crushing in a granular assembly. SPC and PAC experiments provided valuable information about particle crushing; however, they do not provide sufficient information about the internal stress distribution within the particles or the mechanism of cracks in terms of whether they were shear or tensile cracks. Therefore, DEM was used to estimate particle stress distribution leading to crack propagation. Fragmentation was monitored by tracking bond breakage in the DEM agglomerates. Research into breakage energy in particulate media has a long history from the earliest work, such as research by Rittinger Overall, these results suggest that the total energy dissipated during particle crushing under quasi-static loading is much higher than the energy required to break inter-particle bonds. Consequently, neglecting frictional dissipation, especially for an assembly of particles, will greatly overestimate breakage energy.  This investigation into a variety of Constructing & Demolition materials demonstrated that particle tensile strength and breakage energy are closely dependent on a particle's shape factor. After studies on several individual C&D particles, a modified particle tensile strength as a function of particle Aspect Ratio is introduced. In addition, it has been found that particle shape plays a more prominent role in particle breakage phenomena than mineralogy and microstructure of the C&D particles. Further studies on particle fracture across the scale also showed that although boundary conditions and particle interactions have considerable effects on particle breakage, the significant influence of particle shape on particle crushing is not diminished even in an assembly of particles. The fracture mechanism of brittle WR particles with different shapes was identified using 3D DEM simulations, indicating that tensile failures on the plane linking the contact points of the particle with adjacent particles are the dominant type of particle failure. Additionally, this study has shown that the energy calculated from the force-displacement curve is far greater than the energy dissipated through particle fragmentation. Breakage energy measured accurately during DEM simulations was less than one third of the total input energy. The results have indicated that a large portion of input energy is dissipated through other mechanisms, particularly through frictional dissipation between particles and fragments, and the input energy cannot be equated to the breakage energy. Taken together, these findings suggest that brittle C&D granular materials with a higher degree of sphericity (an Aspect Ratio closer to 1) and a lower flakiness index would experience less particle breakage under loading.