Introduction
                  Current literature shows divergence of views regarding screws positioning in femoral neck fractures fixation.
                  The goal of this study is to evaluate the efficiency of divergent screw fixation for fracture neck of femur (NOF).
               
                  Methods
                  The study was conducted at an academic Level 1 Trauma Center.
                  This is a retrospective study conducted from October 2013 to October 2016.
                  The study included 41 patients (33 males, 8 females) suffering from fracture NOF who were fixed using BDSF technique (26 within 24h. & 15 after 24h.). The average age was 41.5 y (23–49 y). According to Garden classification; 17 patients (41.5%) were type 4, 24 patients (58.5%) were type 3. According to Pauwel’s classification; 8 cases (19.5%) were type III, 25 cases (61%) were type II & 8 cases (19.5%) were Type I. Thirty-six cases (88%) were trans-cervical, 4 Sub-capital (9.5%) and 1 (2.5%) Basi-cervical. Six patients had comminution at the fracture site.
                  We evaluated radiographic outcomes of union, femoral neck shortening, screws back-out & femoral head avascular necrosis (AVN). We also evaluated functional outcome using the Harris hip score. Follow-up was 24 months on average (ranging from 20 to 29 months).
               
                  Results
                  One patient was lost during the follow up, the remaining 40 cases gave the following results regarding union: 38 united (within 3–4 months), 2 patients were un-united & one of them developed AVN.
                  Twenty-seven patients (71%) had femoral neck shortening <5mm, 8 patients (21%) had shortening 5–10 & 3 patients (8%) had shortening >10mm. Shortening was on average 3mm (0–15). Screws back-out distance was on average 4mm (0 to16).
                  Patients with mild femoral neck shortening had Harris hip score of 96 on average (92–100), those with moderate shortening had a score of 75 on average (72–79), those with severe shortening had a score of 62 on average (56–68).
               
                  Conclusion
                  The Authors believes this method provides better union rate & less incidence of femoral neck shortening than that of the conventional inverted triangle screws configuration reported in literature. However multi-center studies & long term follow-up is needed to fully evaluate this method.Femoral neck fractures are a commonly encountered injury in orthopaedic practice and result in significant morbidity and mortality. Use of the Garden and Pauwel’s classification systems have remained the practical mainstay of femoral neck fracture characterization that help dictate appropriate treatment. Operative options include in situ fixation, closed vs. open reduction with internal fixation, and hip arthroplasty. Recent reports demonstrate diversity among orthopaedic surgeons regarding the optimal treatment of femoral neck fractures and changing trends in management. Pauwel’s classified femoral neck fractures based on the orientation of the horizontal gradient of the line of fracture. In Pauwels Type 3 fractures, a less compressive load, a high sheer stress and varus load are dominant. In the current study authors aimed at evaluating the efficiency& Reproducibility of the biplane double supported screw fixation (BDSF) method described by Filipov. A single-center, retrospective study was conducted at an academic Level 1 Trauma Center. The inclusion and exclusion criteria are enumerated in A total of 41 patients (33 males, 8 females) who met the inclusion criteria & did not have any of the exclusion criteria were included in the study. Fracture fixation of all patient was done using the BDSF technique (26 within 24 All patients underwent surgery to fix NOF fracture using the biplane double supported screw fixation (BDSF) described by Filipov Closed reduction was achieved in all Garden type 3 patients (24 patients), but was not successful in all Garden type 4 patients (17 patients) & open reduction (using antero-lateral Smith-Petersen approach to the hip) had to be done to these patients, where the inter-nervous plane between tensor fasciae latae & the Sartorius is utilized to expose the anterior aspect of the hip capsule which is then incised to directly visualize the femoral neck to achieve anatomic reduction of the fracture; guide pins for the cannulated screws are then inserted through separate stab incisions on the lateral aspect of the thigh to fix the fracture. When reduction is confirmed satisfactory by direct vision of the fracture site & by image intensifier, the screws are advanced over the guide pins for final fracture fixation. All surgeries were performed by the 1st Author. Postoperatively patients are discharged the next day after surgery on anticoagulants for 14 On follow up visits, 2 blinded observers (the 2 authors) assessed patients for the following outcomes: Radiographically: Union, defined as disappearance of fracture line Femoral neck shortening, by measuring the distance between the center of the femoral head & the tip of the greater trochanter (which is a representation of the length of abductors muscles lever arm) & comparing it on post-operative radiographs to that at final follow up. Backing out of screws. Avascular necrosis (AVN), bone scan was done to confirm suspected cases of AVN. Radiographic assessment was done before the functional assessment to prevent bias. Functionally: assessed according to Harris hip score. One patient was lost during the follow up due to lack of compliance, the remaining 40 cases had the following results; union was achieved in 38 cases (95%) within 3–4 months ( Among the united group (38 patients), we used the method adopted by Zlowodski Patients with mild femoral neck shortening had Harris hip score of 96 on average (92–100), those with moderate shortening had a score of 75 on average (72–79), those with severe shortening had a score of 62 on average (56–68). The topic of screws configuration, used in fixing neck of femur (NOF) fractures, is still controversial in orthopaedic literature. Most clinicians believe that the inverted triangle configuration using 3 cannulated screws provides superior biomechanical stability & hence good clinical results. Based on the study conducted by Xia.X.and Liu.Z, non-parallel screws technique allows the screws to share more weight thus reducing postoperative complications (such as femoral neck shortening) and may be more suitable for elderly patients. BDSF technique is designed to insert oblique screw to improve the internal fixation strength of intra-capsular femoral neck fractures, theoretically based on the concept of the establishment of two supporting points for the implants used; those 2 points are the sub-trochanteric point at the lower screw as well as the metaphyseal point of the upper 2 screws. The screws are crossing which provide bi-planar stability. Filipov O. applied the technique on 88 patients, the average age was 76.9 (with the youngest patient aged 38 and the oldest aged 99), and the average follow-up period is 8.06 months. The fractures have been classified by the Garden classification as follows: Garden type I: 3 (3.41%); Garden type II: 1 (1.14%); Garden type III: 9 (10.23%); Garden type IV: 75 (85.02%). Out of the studied 88 patients, union was achieved in 87 patients (98.86%) and non-union in 1 patient (1.13%). A comparison between our results & that of Filipov O. study A Our study using non-parallel screws shows better results as regard union rate & incidence of AVN. Weil, Y. A. Our study shows less incidence of femoral neck shortening. In Conclusion, the Authors believe this method is easily reproducible with similar results & also believe it appears to lower the incidence of femoral neck shortening which is known to have a negative impact on the functional outcomes after NOF fracture fixation. However multi-center studies & long term follow-up is needed to fully evaluate this method No funding was received for this study. The authors have none to declare. All procedures performed in studies involving human participants were in accordance with the ethical standards of the institutional and national research committee and with the 1964 Helsinki declaration and its later amendments or comparable ethical standards. Informed consent was obtained from all individual participants included in the study. Level III, Therapeutic study.