A reference model has been developed to optimize the design of novel flotation sedimentation tanks using numerical simulation methods The computational fluid dynamics software, “Fluent”, is used here to numerically simulate the solid-liquid two-phase flow of the sedimentation process in a novel air flotation-sedimentation tank. The simulation obtained particle trajectories and a series of curves that explore the relationship between particle size, particle density and removal rate. The sedimentation velocity was calculated for instances when the density reached a minimal limit value. In particular, the least amount of change in unfavorable sedimentation velocities was determined for differently sized particles as they reached their minimal density values. Numerical modeling of the novel flotation-sedimentation tank was found to correctly reflect the laws of particle sedimentation and can be used in further research concerning the optimization of new flotation-sedimentation tank designs.In water treatment engineering, the unit structure, the equipment and the container in which the water treatment operates together, can be called a reactor. Traditionally, the development and optimization of reactors has mainly relied on empirical data and physical model tests. Within the discipline of hydromechanics, experimental research methods are used to construct physical models. Such a physical model can be based on a reactor that is designed in accordance with geometric, sport and dynamic similarities. By undertaking an experimental study, the flow patterns and flow characteristics of the reactor can be determined, thereby optimizing the parameters of the reactor design, and eventually the actual reactor construction. The main drawback of such traditional research methods is the long duration of the development cycle and the high cost of development The use of numerical simulation methods can widen the range of experimental research aimed at solving complex flow problems like turbulence and multiphase flow in water treatment research A new type of flotation-sedimentation tank is introduced to add flotation and sedimentation packing devices into the structures and to combine the effects of flotation and sedimentation. Side flow lamella can be observed for sedimentation processes, whereas side flow sloping plate flotation can be observed for flotation processes The “Fluent” software, developed by a company of the same name is typical of computational fluid dynamic software packages The novel air flotation-sedimentation process is dominated by air flotation. The design of such a system needs to first meet the requirements of the air flotation process, and then those of the sedimentation process. The layout of the model is shown in The design considerations required for the novel air flotation-sedimentation are as follows. The water quantity (Q) is 0.0042 Particle settling speed (μ) is 0.32 The length of particle sedimentation need L′ According to the calculation, the design must not only meet the requirements of air flotation process, it must also meet the requirements of the sedimentation process. To reduce unnecessary calculations, the water collection area is removed from the model. Therefore, the motion law of the solid-liquid two-phase in the water collection area is not taken into consideration. The simplified model is shown in The flow rate of the fluid in the tank is low. It can be treated as an incompressible fluid, to satisfy the laws of mass conservation, and conservation of momentum. Its control equations are Continuity equation: Momentum equation When the flow is turbulent, we can adopt a standard k–ε model, which introduces a turbulent dissipation rate equation, ε, defined as In the standard k–ε model, k and ε are two basic unknown values, and the corresponding transport equation is The following properties and conditions are set. The density of water is 998.2 The inlet flow Q The standard k–ε model was chosen as the turbulence model. The SIMPLE algorithm was used to solve the pressure–velocity coupling. A first-order difference scheme is used for the discretization of the momentum, energy, turbulent kinetic energy and turbulence dissipation rate. According to the settings above, iterative calculations are continued until convergence To discuss the effects of solid–liquid separation when operating the sedimentation process in the air flotation-sedimentation tank, consider spherical particles as ‘flocs’. A discrete phase model can then be used to stimulate the movement of flocs in the tank The removal rate of the particles is used to express the solid-liquid separation effect. Because the inlet particles are assumed to be particles of the same size, for the size of particle, its removal rate e is determined by:  In the trajectory charts above, due to the blockage of the contact baffle, particles that enter near the top of the inlet need to bypass the baffle before entering the separation area. The fluid near the bottom of the inlet will form a vortex when touching the sloping plate before rising in the contact area and finally entering the separation area. Because the size of the particles is small, the movement characteristics of the flow carrying the particles is similar to those of the flow. These characteristics are consistent with observations made through an observation window or through the tank surface. By calculating the removal rate of same sized particles with different densities, we can determine the relationship between particle density and the removal rate. From the relationship curves between particle density and removal rate, the removal rate for a given size of particle are observed to increase as the particle density increases. For the same particle density, the removal rate increases with increasing particle size. The trends observed in the curve suggest that for small size particles, once the density increases, the removal rate will have a significant change. For large size particles, the removal rate is affected obviously by density changes. For each curve, rising trends in the removal rate decrease as the density increases. Ideally, the lowest density calculated by Fluent, when the removal rate of certain size particles reaches 100%, is defined as the minimal density value. The minimal density value for each particle size is shown in From the particle size-minimal density value curve, the relationship between minimal density values and particle size is observed to follow a power function. A large number of theoretical and experimental assessments of the flocculation density show that as the flocculation size increases, its density decreases. The relationship can be expressed as: Calculations show that a power function fits each minimal density value, with each point data having a good correlation. The function in an expression of the minimal density value and particle size as follows: When particles reach the minimal density value, their removal rate is 100%. Thus, the sedimentation velocities in the separation area are the lowest in the system. Generally, the flocculation sedimentation velocity used in the design of a sedimentation tank is either that of static water or an empirical value. The dynamic motion of particles can be conveniently studied by numerical simulations. For example, calculations can be made for 1 Based on the work presented here, the following conclusions can be made. Relationships between particle size, density and particle removal rate were found through numerical simulation of sedimentation processes characterized by the new flotation-sedimentation system. The greater the density is for a given sized particle, the higher the removal rate will be. The larger the particle size for the same density, the higher the removal rate will be for those particles. As the particle size increases, the removal rate of particles with the same density gradually decreases. The relationship between particle size and minimal density can be expressed by ρ Numerical simulation shows that the average sedimentation velocity lies between 0.8 and 1.7 mm/s when the particle density reaches the minimal density. The model can be considered as a set of rules for particle sedimentation. It can be used for further optimization research for new flotation-sedimentation tank designs. The authors declare that they have no conflict of interest. The authors would like to acknowledge the financial support for this work provided by the