Proper management and treatment of produced water has emerged as a big challenge for oil and gas industry. Increasingly stringent environmental regulations and economic constraints are compelling the use of more advanced treatment methods. Membrane operations are gaining significant interest for this application due to their broad range of separation capabilities, high efficiency and low operational cost. Commercially less-adopted membrane operations, such as membrane distillation (MD) and membrane crystallization (MCr) are gaining significant interest for produced water treatment due to their almost concentration-independent performance and less fouling potential. The current study analyzes the performance of an integrated microfiltration (MF) and direct contact membrane distillation (DCMD)/membrane crystallization (MCr) system for freshwater and minerals recovery from produced water. Based on the experimental data, thermodynamic/exergetic/quantitative analyses have been performed. Performance of the integrated processes has been compared with the conventional multi-stage flash (MSF) in terms of process intensification metrics.Produced water refers to the waste stream generated in oil and gas industries. It is a complex mixture of several organic and inorganic compounds. The physical and chemical properties of produced water vary considerably depending on the geographic location of the field, the geologic formation, and the type of hydrocarbon product being produced. Produced water properties and volume also vary throughout the lifetime of a reservoir. The composition of produced water from different sources can vary by order of magnitude. The major compounds of produced water include - dissolved and dispersed oil compounds, - dissolved formation minerals, - production chemical compounds, - production solids (including formation solids, corrosion and scale products, bacteria, waxes, and asphaltenes), - dissolved gases. Proper treatment and management of produced water is necessary to avoid possible negative environmental impacts associated with its discharge A large number of biological, physical, chemical and physicochemical treatments have been tried for produced water treatment Membrane technology offers an interesting way to exploit the full potential of produced water. Membrane operations have been applied to achieve various separations in produced water treatment Recently, MD has gained significant attention for desalination of produced water. The main characteristics of the process, which make it interesting for this particular application, include operational performance almost independent of solution concentration, ability to use low grade heat generally available with produced water, ultra-pure product quality and less fouling and scaling potential Potential of MD to concentrate the solutions to their saturation level, without significant decay in performance, has been well exploited as membrane crystallizer. In membrane crystallization (MCr), crystals and freshwater are extracted simultaneously from saturated solution. Membrane crystallizers have several advantages over the state-of-the-art crystallizers including homogeneous saturation throughout the solution at any time, separation of evaporation and crystallization steps, narrow crystal size distribution and easy-to-tune crystal morphology In the present work, the potentiality of an integrated MF plus MCr membrane process for PW treatment was analysed. First of all the membrane-based process was studied from a thermodynamic point of view (for estimating the amount of salts that can be obtained from the utilized PW). The output of the thermodynamic simulation was compared with the results of the experiments. Details about experiments (flux, operating conditions, amount of recovered crystals etc.) on MCr for produced water treatment can be found in The system considered for the analysis has been described in a previous publication In As simulation tool for salt precipitation, the geochemical software PHREEQC (interactive-version 3) using the Pitzer specific-ion-interaction aqueous model If From the experimentally achieved results Mass Intensity (MI) is defined as the ratio between the total mass entering the unit operation with respect to the total mass of the reference product. The lower this value, the better exploited is the raw material fed to the unit. Energy Intensity (EI) is the ratio between the total energy duty involved in the unit operation with respect to the total mass of the reference product. Analogously to MI, the lower this value the better the energy exploitation in the unit. Waste Intensity (WI) draws attention to the quantity of waste that is produced for a given mass of product. It also exposes the relative wastefulness of different parts of the chemical processing industries that includes industries as diverse as petrochemicals, specialities and pharmaceuticals. For Mass, Energy and Waste Intensities, lower values of these indicators are related to an intensified process. Values of these metrics as function of freshwater recovery factor have been shown in Experimental EI calculated by using thermal energy to be provided to the feed solution and removed from the system (calculated by using the heat balance at feed and permeate streams in MCr unit, respectively) has been shown as inset in In the previous paragraph the energetic consumption of the process was estimated. However, the energetic analysis of a system allows to establish only its energetic requirements. The exergy analysis of the system can provide the true measure of the effective energy use and to identify the sites of greatest losses and, consequently, the technical changes for improving their performance The exergy of a flowstream for a system in which the governing parameters are the temperature, the pressure and the composition, can be written as follows the subscript N β c MW The total exergy destroyed and transformed in the (irreversible) production of entropy is equal to The exergy destroyed ( The exergetic efficiency ε Exergy calculations were performed for a 200 produced water inlet stream MCr recovery factor plant recovery factor NaCl recovered MCr feed temperature MCr permeate temperature coolant medium of MCr permeate: cooling well water (available at 15 A summary of the exergy analysis for the process - a low operating pressure (0.12 -a low operative temperature (38 Both these aspects contribute in increasing the exergetic efficiency ε Further loss sites in the analysed process are due to the pressure drops in the membrane modules and to the cooling of the MCr permeate. The latter, however, in the proposed process, is only 0.84% of the total exergy entering in the system E For what concerns the loss of exergy in the membrane module, as already proved in Therefore, for the analysed process, the reasonable and practical way to increase efficiency or reduce the power input is when thermal energy available in the plant. Practically, due to the low operative MCr process, this can be realized coupling MCr with waste and/or alternative energy sources (such as solar or geothermal energy). In The installation of the HR improved the exergy efficiency of the system (until 97.2%) since both the total exergy input and the total irreversible entropy production (RsT It has to be noted that the advantages of exploiting waste and/or alternative energy sources are obvious to anyone has any experience with membrane or thermal desalination technologies. However, one of the aims of the paper is to show how the recourse to the exergy analysis is useful for identifying the sites of losses in the real processes but avoiding the complexity that exists in the classic approach of the Second Law of Thermodynamics. In the previous paragraphs the analysis of a Produced water from Venango County, Pennsylvania The composition in Today and in future, restrictions regarding treatment of produced water and the volume that can be discharged back into the sea might limit oil production from several reservoirs. Therefore, it is interesting to investigate how MD and MCr remove each ion from the produced water. Estimated removal of each ion has been provided in In the current study, only thermodynamic modeling has been carried out, whereas the kinetics of nucleation and growth of each salt as well as salts fractionation have not been evaluated because out of the scope of this study. In order to quantify the advantage of membrane processes over state-of-the-art treatments for produced water, “conventional” and “innovative” PW from Venango County with composition provided in Various PI metrics calculated for the system have been shown in The application of more advanced treatment technologies, such as brine crystallizer, can alter these metrics considerably, however, the design data for these technologies is still not readily available in literature and therefore, the analysis has been performed by using MSF-a well mature and widely applied technology in desalination. Integrated MF and MD/MCr system has been analysed experimentally and theoretically for the treatment of produced water. The experimental results show that integrated system offers the opportunity to convert produced water into salt and freshwater highly efficiently and also minimizes the problem of waste disposal, as evident from very low final values of MI and WI, respectively. Precipitation of NaCl water as function of water recovery factor from real produced was simulated with PHREEQC software which shows good agreement with the experimental results. The simulations, carried out at composition of produced water from Venango County formation, indicate that almost 1  Calculation procedure for P/S and P/W ratios for membrane systems. Membrane area required Membrane area enclosed in one module A No. of MD modules required Weight of one module Total weight of modules Module size S Space density of module elements (%) Size of MD modules units Calculation procedure for P/S and P/W ratios for MSF. The main equations used for these calculations have been provided below. The details can be seen elsewhere Feed flow rate required Where n is number of stages and y can be calculated as following: Area of brine heater Stage width Stage length