Purpose
                  To compare clinical outcomes of arthroscopic therapy for tibial eminence fracture with nonabsorbable suture and absorbable suture anchor.
               
                  Methods
                  Between February 2010 and September 2012, a total of 60 tibial eminence fracture patients were treated with nonabsorbable suture fixation or absorbable suture anchor fixation under arthroscopy. Patients with tibial plateau fractures and other significant injuries, including osteochondral lesions, meniscal tear, and anterior cruciate ligament (ACL) or mutiligament injuries, were excluded from the study. Radiographs, anterior drawer test (ADT), Lachman test, Lysholm score, and International Knee Documentation Committee (IKDC) 2000 subjective score were employed to evaluate clinical outcomes in follow-up.
               
                  Results
                  A total of 41 patients were analyzed. Among these patients, 22 were treated with nonabsorbable suture fixation and 19 with absorbable suture anchor fixation. According to the modified Meyers-McKeever classification, 15 cases were categorized as type II, 21 as type III, and 5 as type IV fractures. The mean time from injury to surgery was 7.1 days (range, 3 to 12 days). All patients were followed up for a median period of 33.7 months (range, 24 to 45 months). Radiographic evaluation showed optimal reduction immediately after operation and bone union within 3 months in all patients. At the final follow-up, there was no limitation of knee motion range in any patient. Grade II laxity was found in 2 cases from suture group and 1 from suture anchor group, showing no significant difference based on ADT (χ2 = 0.538, P = .764) and Lachman test (χ2 = 0.550, P = .760). Lysholm and IKDC 2000 subjective scores were significantly improved (P < .001). However, there were no significant differences in the improvement of Lysholm (t = 0.522, P = .604) and IKDC 2000 subjective scores (t = 0.644, P = .523) between the 2 groups.
               
                  Conclusions
                  Nonabsorbable suture fixation and absorbable suture anchor fixation are equivalent techniques in terms of the clinical efficacy of arthroscopic tibial eminence fracture treatment.
               
                  Level of Evidence
                  Level III, retrospective comparative study.Tibial eminence avulsion fracture is commonly seen in the skeletally immature population Multiple surgical treatment methods for tibial eminence avulsion fractures have been described. Open reduction and internal fixation techniques have a higher incidence of postoperative complications. In this study, 2 fixation techniques were performed to treat tibial eminence fracture under arthroscopy. One group was treated with a modified suture technique using neckwear knot formed by passing the free ends of a folded suture through the loop on the other end. With the base of the anterior cruciate ligament (ACL) trapped in the knot and the suture ends tied over a bone bridge, the fracture fragment can be firmly fixed. The other group was treated with a suture anchor method based on the suture bridge technique commonly used in the shoulder for repair of rotator cuff tears and greater tuberosity fracture. The inclusion criteria were isolated displaced tibial eminence fractures in both skeletally mature and immature patients, whereas patients with tibial plateau fractures and other significant injuries, including osteochondral lesions, meniscal tear, and ACL or mutiligament injuries were excluded from the study. Fractures were confirmed and evaluated by anteroposterior and lateral plain radiographs and computed tomographic scans. Magnetic resonance imaging was performed prior to surgery to better evaluate meniscal injury and ACL tearing. According to the exclusion criteria, 3 patients with osteochondral lesions, 8 patients with meniscal tear, 5 patients with ACL injuries, and 2 patients with mutiligament injuries were excluded. Eventually, 42 patients were recruited in this study, and all of them were categorized as type II fractures or above according to the modified Meyers-McKeever classification ( The patient was placed in the supine position under epidural anesthesia. A tourniquet facilitated visualization. Standard anteromedial and anterolateral portals were applied to perform surgery with the use of an arthroscopic operating system (Smith & Nephew). After penetration into the articular cavity, the first step was to debride blood clots and embedded synovial tissue in the fracture site with a motorized shaver and radiofrequency blade to enhance visualization and facilitate reduction of the fracture fragment. Then the joint was thoroughly inspected to exclude concomitant injuries. After the debridement and inspection, trial reduction was attempted with a probe to figure out the tension of ACL and the optimal position for reduction. The entrapped transverse meniscal ligament between the avulsed fragment and the tibial bony bed should be reduced with a probe to facilitate the reduction of the fragment. For the suture technique, two 2.5-mm-diameter tibial tunnels were created on both sides of the fracture by use of the Acufex ACL tibial guide (Smith & Nephew) with the angle set at 45°. The internal exits of the 2 tunnels in the joint were located at the anteromedial and anterolateral margins of the fracture site, respectively. Simultaneously, the distance between the external exits was approximately 15 mm at the level of the tibial tuberosity. Subsequently, a suture hook loaded with No. 0 prolene was introduced through the anteromedial portal. The prolene was then advanced to the lateral side of the ACL and around its back while the suture hook was removed. A suture grasper was used to retrieve the end of the prolene out of the joint through the anteromedial portal. The prolene was used as a guide suture to deliver a folded No. 5 Ethibond nonabsorbable suture (Ethicon) around the base of the ACL. The 2 free ends of the folded suture were passed through the loop on the opposite terminal by a suture grasper to form a neckwear knot around the ACL adjacent to the fracture fragment. An additional loop ligature was performed around the base of the ACL using another suture in the same protocol as above. The limbs of the 2 sutures were respectively retracted out of the medial and lateral tibial tunnels by the use of a suture retriever introduced through the tunnels. Finally, the fracture fragment was reduced and held in position with a probe, and the sutures were then tightened over the bony bridge with the knee in 30° of flexion. Fixation stability and ACL tension were evaluated with a probe under arthroscopy. Postoperative radiographs were used to verify reduction of the fragment. The arthroscopic photographs and schematic drawings showing the procedures of suture technique are displayed in For the suture anchor technique, disposable cannulas were used to facilitate the operation. For type III and IV fractures, the awl was used to create a pilot hole at the posteromedial edge of the fracture site and a 2.3-mm bioabsorbable anchor (Smith & Nephew) loaded with 1 strand of No. 2 FiberWire (Smith & Nephew) was placed. Then the 2 free ends of the suture were respectively shuttled by a suture retriever to pierce the fibers of the ACL adjacent to the fracture fragment. Another 2.3-mm bioabsorbable anchor was placed at the anteromedial margin of the fracture site, and the free ends of the suture loaded were passed through the ACL slightly anterior to the previous suture in the same fashion. The awl was used again to create a pilot hole in the midlateral edge of the fracture site. The fracture fragment was adjusted and held reduced by the probe. A 4.5-mm Footprint anchor (Smith & Nephew) was loaded with the free ends of the sutures and inserted into the midlateral hole to create the suture bridge. The knee flexion angle for tensioning in suture anchor technique was adjusted according to the location of the fracture fragment to minimize the tension of ACL and sutures. The arthroscopic photographs and schematic drawings showing the procedures of suture anchor technique for type III fractures are displayed in The axial schematic drawings showing suture location of the suture fixation and anchor location of the suture anchor fixation are presented in The involved knee was placed in a hinged knee brace locked in full extension, and weight bearing was avoided for the first 3 weeks postoperatively to prevent potential redisplacement of the fragment resulting from the activation of the muscle around the knee. The brace was then adjusted to allow a motion range from 0° to 90°, and partial weight bearing with crutches was initially allowed for the next 3 weeks to stimulate formation of the bony callus and promote fracture healing. Full range of motion and weight bearing with the brace unlocked were allowed at 6 weeks postoperatively. The brace was continued after allowing full motion and weight bearing to prevent potential reinjury and removed if bony union was radiographically verified at 3 months. Isometric quadriceps exercises were performed throughout the immobilization period as a precaution against disuse atrophy. Return to sports was advised at 6 months postoperatively. Statistical analysis was performed using SPSS version 13.0 for Windows (SPSS, Chicago, IL). Data were expressed as 95% confidence intervals. The paired From February 2010 to September 2012, a total of 60 patients with tibial eminence fractures received arthroscopic surgery in our institution. Based on the inclusion and exclusion criteria, 42 patients of tibial eminence fractures were enrolled in this study. One patient in the suture group had a reinjury in the medial meniscus of the operated knee 17 months after surgery and received arthroscopic partial meniscectomy 3 weeks after that. This patient was excluded from the study. Ultimately, 41 cases were analyzed. Among these cases, 22 were treated with nonabsorbable suture fixation and 19 with absorbable suture anchor fixation. There were 25 men and 16 women, with a median age of 28.4 years (range, 12 to 54 years). Injury mechanisms included 18 traffic accidents, 14 sport injuries, and 9 falls. The right knee was involved in 24 cases and the left 1 in 17. The ADT and Lachman test were positive in the preoperative physical examination under anesthesia. According to the modified Meyers-McKeever classification, 15 cases were categorized as type II, 21 as type III, and 5 as type IV fractures. The mean time from injury to surgery was 7.1 days (range, 3 to 12 days). All the patients were followed up for a mean period of 33.7 months (range, 24 to 45 months). No statistical significance was found in the basic data of 2 groups ( The operative time for suture anchor technique was significantly less than that for suture technique ( The results of the current study reveal that there were no statistically significant differences between the clinical outcomes of these 2 arthroscopic fixations for tibial eminence avulsion fracture. As is well known, this fracture typically occurs in skeletally immature patients and in adults as well. Arthroscopy has become a pervasive and prevalent technique used in the treatment of tibial eminence avulsion fracture. Among the fixation systems applied in the arthroscopic therapy of avulsion fracture, suture fixation is the most popular maneuver chosen by the majority of surgeons because of the advantage of its applicability in all types of fractures, including comminuted fractures. In the current study, all these patients achieved bony union without tibial eminence tilt. Tibial eminence tilt following fixation may result in decreased ACL tension and secondary impingement, which can lead to knee instability, pain, and loss of knee extension. It is supposed that it may be correlated with the clinical outcome scoring. Besides, all the patients restored their preinjury range of knee motion without any arthrofibrosis; only 2 cases in the suture group and 1 in the suture anchor group showed asymptomatic grade II laxity based on the ADT and Lachman test. These results may be related to the rehabilitation regimen we adopted in this study, which was conservative, with the involved knee locked in full extension and no weight bearing for the first 3 weeks postoperatively. In contrast to the radical protocol other authors applied, with passive and active motion immediately after surgery to avoid arthrofibrosis, Both techniques used in this study provide accurate reduction and rigid fixation, avoid the possibility of bone fragments crushing and ACL cutting, can be applied to address all types of fractures, including comminuted fractures, and do not need a second intervention for implant removal. This study has some limitations. First, it is a nonrandomized retrospective series rather than a prospective one, and some bias might arise from unblinded surgeons and patients, especially from nonrandomized assignment of surgical technique with inconsistent indications. Future randomized studies with consistent indications for 2 approaches should be performed to minimize the bias and further improve the comparability of different groups. Second, the fact that the surgeon performed suture fixation earlier than suture anchor fixation may have influenced the results. Third, the follow-up period is not long enough to evaluate the long-term clinical efficacy of these 2 techniques. Fourth, knee instability findings were assessed with subjective tests, and more objective assessment with KT testing was not available in this study. Fifth, an effective and objective way was not available to analyze the correlation between tibial eminence tilt following fixation and outcome scoring. Sixth, the absence of intraobserver reliability study is also a limitation of the present study. Additionally, the relatively small sample size in this study due to the low incidence of tibial eminence fracture may increase the possibility of type II error. This means a likelihood that there actually exist differences in the outcomes of the 2 approaches but that we may fail to detect them because of insufficient numbers. With the constant sample size, the most common way to decrease type II error is to increase the α value; however, this will alternatively increase the possibility of type I error, which is a possibility that there actually exists no significant difference in the clinical outcome between the 2 groups but that we may detect some falsely. In practice, the most effective way to decrease type II error is to increase the sample size, so future larger studies comparing these 2 techniques are necessary to ensure the availability of stronger evidence supporting the findings of this study. Finally, as we were unaware of any previously documented findings with respect to minimum clinically important differences for the primary outcome measures identified in our series, we considered that all these outcome measures would be clinically significant if any statistically significant differences were found in these outcome measures between the 2 groups, for we thought that these most commonly used and reliable assessments could directly reflect the clinical results of the treatment for tibial eminence fracture. In fact, however, some statistical significance may be too small and of questionable clinical significance, so future studies should be conducted to determine minimum clinically important differences for these primary outcome measures. Nonabsorbable suture fixation and absorbable suture anchor fixation are equivalent techniques in terms of the clinical efficacy of arthroscopic tibial eminence fracture treatment. The authors acknowledge Can Huang for assistance in the collection of patients' clinical data. The authors are also very grateful to Yang Liu for assistance in the acquisition of images under arthroscopy and Juanli Zhu for the conduction of Lysholm and IKDC 2000 assessment.