In this investigation, a pilot-scale flotation column was successfully designed, installed and tested in rougher circuit of the Miduk copper concentrator, Iran. The axial dispersion model was employed in the design procedure. Collection zone rate constant (k
                     c) along with the target recovery of over 75% was used to size the column. The rate constant k
                     c was determined based on a number of pilot and industrial experiments. Performance of the pilot column was compared with existing full-scale Microcel columns in a number of parallel experiments.The Miduk copper concentrator, located in south-east of Iran, treats 18,000 tpd crushed ore with an average of 1% copper content and produces a final concentrate of over 30% copper. Miduk is one of the few mineral processing plants that utilize columns in rougher circuit. The rougher circuit consists of five parallel Metso Minerals CISA Microcel flotation columns, each 12 Axial dispersion model has shown to provide a good description of the axial mixing process in flotation columns and can be used for scale-up purposes ( These experiments were performed in a 0.26 Industrial-scale tests were conducted in one of the rougher columns (with in-line static mixers for bubble generation) at the Miduk concentrator. Industrial collection rate constant ( Froth recovery was estimated from the empirical model developed by Collection rate constant employed in the calculations was the average of the values obtained in the pilot and industrial columns, i.e. An internal porous ceramic sparger with orifices around 2 In this section, performance of the pilot and industrial columns operating under similar operating conditions is compared. Grade–recovery curves for a set of experiments conducted in both columns are presented in Collection zone rate constant (   A pilot-scale column with a 10 Under the same operating conditions, performance of the pilot column was better than the industrial column. It was mainly attributed to different bubble generation systems and mixing conditions as well as froth characteristics. The good correlation between Under the same operating conditions, The following general kinetic equation of a continuous flotation process was employed to derive a relationship to calculate collection zone recovery of the industrial columns ( By replacing the RTD model equation Finally, combining Eqs.