HA and bone morphogenetic protein-2 (BMP-2) possess superior osteoinductive and osteoconductive activities in the repair of bone defects. In this study, a BMP-2 mimicking oligopeptide (serine–serine–valine–proline–threonine, SSVPT) was introduced to the surface of nano-sized HA as the reinforcement phase of a poly(methyl methacrylate) (PMMA) cement, and the synergistic action of HA and oligopeptide on the bioactivity of HA/PMMA bone cement was investigated. Incorporated with 3-trimethoxysilyl propyl methacrylate (MPS)-modified HA, the compressive strength, flexural strength, and flexural modulus of HA/PMMA complied with the international standardization organization 5833 standard. Adherence measurement demonstrated that the introduction of HA and SSVPT could promote the adhesion and proliferation of human fetal osteoblast (hFOB) on the surface of HA/PMMA cement. The increased alkaline phosphatase (ALP) activity indicated that HA/PMMA could promote osteogenic differentiation of hFOB. All of the results illuminated that the HA/PMMA cement could be used as a bioactive material for regeneration and reconstruction of load-bearing bone.Poly(methyl methacrylate) (PMMA) bone cement is a self-curing acrylic material without adhesive property and has long been applied in vertebroplasty Bone morphogenetic protein 2 (BMP-2) has been largely reported to enhance the osteoinduction of bone substitutes High loading of HA can improve the bioactivity of PMMA bone cement Methyl methacrylate (MMA) and poly(ethylene glycol) 2000 (PEG, Mn 2000 Human fetal osteoblast (hFOB) was purchased from the cell bank of Chinese Academy of Sciences at Shanghai, China; and the experimental protocols with the hFOBs were approved by the Ethic Committee of Sun Yat-sen Memorial Hospital, Sun Yat-sen University. Dubeco's modified Eagle's medium (DMEM) and fetal bovine serum (FBS) were purchased from Hyclone (USA). Geneticin Selective Antibiotic (G-418 Sulfate) was purchased from Notlas (Beijing, China). N-2-hydroxyethylpiperazine-N-ethanesulphonic acid (HEPES) was purchased from Amresco (USA). 3-(4,5-dimethylthiazol-2-yl)-2,5-diphenyltetrazolium bromide (MTT) was purchased from GBCBIO Technology Inc. and used as received. Alkaline Phosphatase Assay Kit was purchased from Beyotime Biotechnology (Shanghai, China). The BMP-2 mimicking peptide (SSVPT) was synthesized on the 2-chlorotrityl chloride resin employing a standard Fmoc solid-phase peptide synthesis (SPPS) process The surface modification of nano-HA by MPS was prepared according to literature To prepare peptide functionalized nano-HA (p-HA), m-HA (0.5 The morphology of HA and m-HA were characterized by TEM (FEI Tecnai G2 Spirit, Netherlands) at an acceleration voltage of 80 The HA and m-HA nanoparticles (5 The modification degree of MPS on the surface of HA was also measured on a TGA/DSC1 thermogravimetric analysis (TGA, Meteler, USA). In detail, 8 The weight percentage of the organic content on nano-HA surface was determined from the following formula Bone cements were prepared by mixing solid and liquid components at a powder (P) to liquid (L) ratio of 1:3 (w/v). The liquid component contains MMA (monomer, 3 The mechanical properties of the cement samples were tested on a Lloyd universal material testing machine (LLOYD, Britain) according to the ISO5833 standard. The samples for the compressive test were cast into a cylindrical mold (length Specimens of PMMA-based bone cement with size of 2 The Ca/P ratio of the mineral layer was determined by energy dispersive X-ray (EDX) spectrometry (Inca X-act, OXFORD, Britain). MTT assay was carried out to determine the cytotoxicity of PMMA-based bone cements through co-culture of hFOBs with extracts of the cements. The extracts were prepared according to the ISO10993 standard. In preparation, the PMMA-based cylindrical bone cements (diameter The cell response on the surface of the PMMA-based bone cements was also measured. The hFOBs (6.0 hFOBs (6.0 The ALP activity of the cells on the surface of p The nano-HA particles displayed rod-like morphology with average diameter around 20 The thermal stability of the m-HA was also characterized ( Mechanical property of bone cement is one of the most important factors in the repair of vertebral body defects. In this study, due to the Si The formation of apatite on the surface of the bone cement was mainly governed by the composition and the surface characteristics such as surface roughness. The incorporation of HA would presumably improve the surface characteristics of PMMA-based bone cement and affect the mineralization process. In the initial stage of incubation of bone cements in the SBF, it was observed that not much significant difference was observed in the amount of minerals on the surfaces of these cements ( The presence of SSVPT peptide accelerated the growth of apatite on the surface of p The Ca/P ratios of the minerals on the surface of the cements were 1.75, 1.72, 1.70, and 1.64 for pure PMMA, m-HA/PMMA, p The cytotoxicity of the PMMA-based bone cements toward hFOBs was examined through both the incubation of hFOBs with the extract and the direct seeding of cells on surface of the cement ( In the direct contact of hFOBs with the cements ( An ideal bone cement for repairing vertebra can not only provide mechanical stability during bone ingrowth It has been reported that BMP-2 can facilitate cell adhesion and induce bone formation As an early marker of osteogenic differentiation, ALP plays an important role in the early phase bone formation and exhibits high expression levels during the mineralization process. The ALP activities of hFOBs on the surfaces of PMMA-based bone cements were assessed. Previous research has reported that HA can interact with cells, stimulate the expression of the genes to induce bone matrix formation on preosteoblastic cells, and enhance the bioactivity of PMMA-based bone cement From An injectable PMMA-based bone cement incorporated with 40 This work was supported by grants from the