The cross piston press possesses four hydraulic cylinders mounted crosslike. Each of them acts on one piston of the working block in the center. The oppositely orientated pistons are activated simultaneously and the both piston pairs act alternatively. In this way a multiple crosswise stressing of the material in the working chamber of the block is achieved. The cross piston press can comminute a fine material to a microfine powder. Locked-cycle experiments were done with limestone, quartz and smelted corundum, and a product fineness was achieved of x
                     95=3–4 μm. The specific energy consumptions were 60 kW h/t with limestone, 300 kW h/t with quartz, and 480 kW h/t with corundum, these values are remarkable less then those ones of milling in stirred mills. Considerations on the throughput lead to the results that industrial units could have a capacity up to 4000 kg/h (limestone), 1500 kg/h (quartz), and 400 kg/h (corundum). The test device was designed for a dry operation, however it is possible after some modifications to perform a wet comminution with a high concentrated slurry. A cross piston press might also be employable for mechanical activation.One method for comminuting brittle materials is to stress a particle bed as performed in roller-table- and high pressure roller mills. Two conditions have to be satisfied: (1) The material introduction into the gap has to ensure that a particle bed is established and (2) the applied pressure must be high enough to break the particles. If the feed contains a high portion of particles smaller than 100 μm, then a particle bed cannot be built up easily. With decreasing size the particle strength raises strongly, therefore a pressure of several Megapascals or even more than thousand Megapascals have to be applied for fine particles. For these both reasons the above mentioned mills cannot be used easily for producing microfine powders. A further problem arises from the fact, that never all particles are broken in a particle bed. This comminution method, therefore, can only be performed in a closed-circuit procedure. The amount of breakage depends mainly on the specific energy dissipated in the particle bed. Experiments with hard materials like quartz and corundum have shown that the same size-reduction can be achieved by one stressing with a high pressure or by a multiple stressing procedure applying a moderate pressure, if always the same specific energy is introduced The essential parts of the test device, see After any cycle piston 3 moves further back to open the vertical discharge tube and piston 1 moves further forward to push out the material. For refilling the piston 1 moves back behind the vertical feeding tube. Fresh material slides down and is pushed into the press chamber as the piston moves forward again. The motion of the pistons are controlled by hydraulic valves, which are activated by mechanical relays and switches. All hydraulic cylinders are operated with the same oil pressure. The devices is designed for a specific force on the particle bed (stressing pressure) of 250 MPa at the maximum. One piston is instrumented with strain gauges and a motion sensor for measuring the force-displacement curve and by that the work-input. The test device was designed for dry operation, however it is possible after some modifications to perform a wet comminution with a high concentrated slurry. The experiments were done as locked-cycle tests to simulate a closed-circuit, see The particle size distributions were measured with a Sedigraph 5000 D and the BET-surfaces with a Quantasorb (3-point method). The feed materials were limestone ( The results are characterized with the following data of the equilibrium cycles: volume or mass related specific energy absorption fine material production f defined as the quotient of discharged mass circuit factor specific work-input particle size classifier efficiency The influence of the energy absorption on the fine material production and the specific work-input The Finally the specific work-input should be compared with those ones of milling in stirred mills. Comminuting limestone to a product with The production of fine material and the operation time for one press cycle determines the throughput of a closed circuit with a cross piston press. For calculation the following quantities were used: Some of the quantities are defined as: This equations enables to calculate the throughput of a big cross piston press. The results (rounded values) listed in