An automated process for bioproduct recovery using magnetic micro-ion exchangers (MMIX) and the technique of high-gradient magnetic separation (HGMS) was developed with the recovery of lactoferrin from crude whey being chosen as a model system. The first step of the design of the separation process was the optimisation of binding and elution conditions for the target protein on the millilitre scale. Second, the magnetic filter used for particle separation was characterised by breakthrough studies. On the basis of the results of these pre-studies, a separation process for the recovery of lactoferrin was designed, which consisted of: (i) binding of the target protein to MMIX particles in a batch reactor, (ii) recovery of the loaded MMIX particles from whey using high-gradient magnetic separation, (iii) washing of the MMIX particles to remove loosely bound solids, (iv) elution of the target protein. Finally, the complete process was automated and conducted over three full cycles. To allow for multi-cycle processing, it was necessary to include a recovery step (v) in which the MMIX particles were equilibrated and pumped back into the batch reactor, where they were mixed with a new batch of whey to start another process cycle.
                  A model for the estimation of the theoretical productivity (space–time yield) of the process was developed as a tool for comparison with other recovery processes. Furthermore, the influence of the MMIX particle concentration and particle size applied shall be discussed.Separation of biomolecules from solid-containing feedstocks has always been a challenge for conventional separation techniques like membrane filtration or chromatography, due to column blocking or membrane fouling. In most cases, pre-clarification of the feedstock is required, a time-consuming step, which leads to increased separation costs and a higher product loss during the purification process. Apart from the techniques of expanded bed adsorption (EBA) The crude sweet whey used throughout this study was donated by the Lothar Müller Käsemanufaktur (Hockenheim, Germany). The whey had a pH of 5.0, a conductivity of 4.4 The isoelectric point of most whey proteins is below the natural pH of sweet whey (5–6) Adsorption of pure lactoferrin was monitored to determine the protein binding capacity of the MMIX particles. The protein was dissolved in 10 Small-scale lactoferrin batch binding and elution studies were carried out in 1.5 A schematic representation of the HGMF system employed for the work described here is shown in Prior to HGMF recovery of lactoferrin, the particle trapping characteristics of the magnetic filter were examined in breakthrough studies using MMIX particles at a concentration of 10 Equilibrated MMIX particles were re-suspended in whey in tank T1 and then mixed at room temperature for 600 Particle concentration was determined by dry weight measurements. Samples containing magnetic particles were applied to pre-dried and weighed 0.45 The soluble protein content (expressed in BSA equivalents) was determined by means of the bicinchoninic acid (BCA) protein assay (Sigma, St. Louis, MO, USA). The assay was scaled down for use with a Cobas Mira Plus spectrophotometric robot (Roche Diagnostics, Switzerland). The lactoferrin content was determined using the ELISA bovine lactoferrin quantification kit (Bethyl laboratories, Montgomery, TX, USA). The manufactured MMIX particles were characterised by examining their ability to bind lactoferrin in the pure form and from whey having a lactoferrin content of 106 Although practically the same initial slopes ( Optimisation of the MMIX particle concentration applied in the batch adsorption of lactoferrin is of crucial interest to the HGMS process. Due to the limited mass of particles that can be retained in the magnetic filter, particle concentration in the batch reactor directly influences the volume of whey that can be processed in one cycle. The influence of MMIX particle concentrations in the range of 2–8 As can be seen in Having selected an appropriate concentration of magnetic particles to be used during batch binding, the retention capacity of the magnetic filter had to be determined. The volume of whey that can be processed per cycle directly depends on the particle mass that can be retained in the filter. Under ideal conditions, the filter will capture 100% of the incoming magnetic particles, until a certain capacity is reached, after which a sudden breakthrough will occur. In reality, however, some magnetic particles will escape the filter, before its total capacity is attained. The filter should therefore be operated at a point, where a high capacity is reached at the expense of minimal particle loss. The particle retention capacity was determined in the media used during protein isolation, namely, the equilibrium/washing buffer, the elution buffer, and whey. The breakthrough behaviour of the MMIX particles was comparable in the two buffers used, resulting in a filter capacity of 88 The last step of protein purification with HGMF is the elution of the target protein. The aim of this process step is to completely desorb the target molecules from the MMIX particles and to minimise desorption of other bound whey proteins, which would lead to a decreased purification factor. To achieve this goal, the sodium chloride concentration (0.2–1.5 A requirement for industrial use of the HGMF process is the possibility of recycling the MMIX particles over as many process cycles as possible, because frequent replacement of the particles would lead to a strong increase in operation costs. Therefore, the reuse of the MMIX particles was investigated over 50 process cycles of the isolation of lactoferrin from a pure protein solution. A certain particle loss in the course of the process occurred because of incomplete particle recovery. To minimise this particle loss, all process liquids were collected and particles were retrieved and fed back into the process after every 10th cycle. After the 30th cycle, the handling was further optimised by not discharging the pipette tips after each step, but using a different pipette with a fixed tip for each step. By this, the loss of particles attached to the walls of discharged tips could be avoided, resulting in practically no further loss during the cycles 30–50. During the first 10 cycles, the particles reached high working capacities, followed by a decrease of nearly 40% from 160 Under the optimised conditions for the recovery of lactoferrin from crude whey determined above, an HGMF run was performed. It consisted of the loading phase of the filter with MMIX particles after adsorption of the target protein in a batch reactor, a washing step, and three elution steps. The fractions collected in the course of the process were analysed for total protein and lactoferrin concentrations. The results of this analysis are displayed in The lactoferrin concentration curve shows that, it was not possible to bind the total amount of lactoferrin present in the whey, as predicted. Furthermore, the drop of the lactoferrin concentration at the end of ‘whey discharge’, which means that the particle-depleted whey leaves the magnetic separator, indicates a significant backmixing in the system. Due to this backmixing, the sodium chloride concentration in the system does not change sharply between the washing and the elution steps. As a consequence, the second half of the draining wash volume partly contains elution buffer and, hence, increasing lactoferrin concentrations. Backmixing and the resulting elution buffer dilution also are reasons for the decreased protein recovery in the first elution step. In the following elution steps, higher lactoferrin concentrations can be achieved, due to a higher eluting power of the buffer. Decrease in lactoferrin concentration at the end of the third elution could be due to either the dilution of the buffer with washing buffer and the resulting decrease in eluting strength or the completed elution of the target protein. Looking at the mass balance derived from The possibility of deriving an HGMF process from laboratory results was demonstrated in the previous section by scaling up the optimised conditions by a factor of 2000. It may therefore be assumed that further up-scaling to the industrial process scale is possible. Another important requirement for industrial use of the process is its multi-cycle automation. In Section The decrease in protein concentration within the last 200 In the first cycle a yield of 50% was obtained. This is similar to the previous single HGMF run (Section Regarding purification and concentration, satisfying results were obtained in the first run. However, the incomplete recovery of the magnetic particles also deteriorates concentration and even purification factors in runs two and three. This is obvious for the concentration factor which directly depends on the amount of target protein adsorbed in the batch. The reason for decreasing purity is less trivial. If lactoferrin would be the species with the highest affinity for the MMIX particles used, lower amounts of particles applied per volume of feedstock should result in a higher fraction of lactoferrin in the total load and, hence, higher purities after elution. As shown by the small-scale tests for optimisation of the support concentration, however, this does not seem to be the case for lactoferrin in combination with the MMIX particles used. It is evident from the qualitative analysis in In the long run, it may be expected that process performance will approach constant values in terms of yield, purification, and concentration factor, because the amount of particles that is not flushed out of the filter and, hence, particle concentration during the batch sorption step will reach consistent values. Besides the yield and purification factor, also criteria of process time and volume of the system are needed for comparing HGMF with other separation technologies. Consequently, the productivity of an HGMF system While a more general discussion of the relationship between the dimensionless parameters (CR and In practice, In addition to the amount of product produced per cycle, determination of productivity requires an estimation of the cycle time. The period comprises protein adsorption; separation of ‘product-loaded’ MMIX from the bulk liquid phase (i.e. the feedstock); removal of impurities in two washing steps; and two stages of elution to recover the target species. Periods of potential conditioning of the MMIX particles between cycles and CIP are not taken into account at this point. The washing and elution process steps include the following sequential sub-steps: filling of the system recycle loop with the buffer, re-suspension and circulation of the MMIX particles; re-separation of the MMIX from the circulating flow. As the size of the MMIX particles is very small ( The above figure clearly shows that for low particle concentrations when the full working capacity of the magnetic separator is used and the resulting batch volumes are large, the primary particle separation is by far the most time-consuming step. In the case of large particle concentrations by contrast, the duration of a process cycle is dominated by the time fixed for the washing and elution steps. For the operation parameters of the model process, it is obvious that both sub-processes contribute about equally to the total duration at the chosen particle concentration of 5 Combining Eqs. From the plot, it is clear that the productivity of the model process increases up to a particle concentration of approx. 8 Besides the particle concentration used, the size of the MMIX particles would be another parameter suitable for the optimisation of the productivity. On the one hand, larger particles would result in reduced specific surface areas and, hence, lower protein binding capacities, on the other hand, the flow velocities applied in the magnetic separator could be larger and, hence, the time required per processing cycle would be smaller. It is obvious that next to an optimum particle concentration also an optimum particle size exists, which is much harder to predict, however. Although the underlying theoretical equations regarding the variation of the specific area and the separation efficiency of single particles with particle size are known, experimental data show that the correlations do not hold for real systems. The reasons can be found in e.g. particle agglomeration effects. Nevertheless, it can be said as a general rule that in the case of high target concentrations accounting for high particle concentrations and, consequently, small batch volumes per cycle, the separation time is of minor importance compared to the protein binding capacity. Therefore, small particle sizes will be preferable. In an analogous manner, comparatively larger particle sizes will be preferable in the case of low target concentrations. Magnetic particle-based separation technology for bioseparation can be scaled up from laboratory studies in magnetic racks to an integrated magnet technology-based process. It was possible to design an automated HGMF process which supplies a purified and concentrated protein over a multitude of cycles. The observed drawbacks of backmixing and incomplete flushing of the filter require further investigations, but may be solved, as was shown recently for flushing in our laboratories