The physical quality of electrodeposits obtained on mesh cathodes may be characterized by a coverage ratio which reflects the homogeneity of the deposit over the electrode surface. On the basis of experimental results, an expression is proposed to predict this ratio for copper electrodeposits obtained in arsenic-containing electrolytes.constant in Eqs. electrode surface area covered by deposit (m total electrode surface area (m constant in Eqs. constant in Eqs. reactant concentration in the bulk solution (mol/m diffusivity (m Faraday’s constant, current density (A/m cell current density (A/m limiting current density (A/m current density for a cathodic reaction under mixed control, (A/m exchange current density (A/m flowrate (mL/min) gas constant (J/mol temperature (K) charge number cathodic charge transfer coefficient overpotential (V) coverage ratio This work aims to quantify the relationship between the cell current density, cathodic kinetic parameters and the coverage ratio of the electrodeposits obtained in a reactive electrodialysis (RED) cell which uses copper mesh cathodes. The physical quality of a copper electrodeposit is mainly determined by its microstructure, smoothness and continuity (absence of porosity, cracks and voids). The effect of operation parameters on the physical quality of copper electrodeposits obtained on mesh cathodes in a RED cell was recently investigated ( Impurities and additives strongly influence the electrodeposit quality. In the present work the only studied impurity is arsenic and no additives were added to the electrolyte. In normal operation, the RED cell is made up of two compartments, the first one containing the cathode and the catholyte and the second one containing the anode and the anolyte. The compartments are separated by an anion membrane, meant to prevent cation transport between the electrolytes. A current, provided by a rectifier, is passed through the cell in order to obtain chemical species at one or both electrodes. The electrolytes are recirculated to ad hoc tanks. In the present work, in order to approximate conditions in an operating RED cell (cell geometry, electrolyte composition and hydrodynamics), a similar cell was used to carry out a potentiodynamic sweep with the aim of characterizing the cathodic kinetics. A schematic of the RED cell and photographs of the produced copper mesh cathodes can be found elsewhere ( The catholyte composition was 4.8 The kinetic parameters for the copper electrodeposition reaction were obtained from a potentiodynamic sweep and calculated by a method described elsewhere (  Results for the dependence of the coverage ratio on the cell current density and the corresponding cathodic overpotential values are presented in In normal industrial operation, the copper electrodeposition reaction takes place under mixed control. In this case, the overpotential of the cathodic reaction is The same authors demonstrated that, when the electrodeposit is obtained at a cathode potential near the charge transfer control range (i.e. in the mixed control range dominated by charge transfer) its physical quality is low. On the other hand, when the cathode potential is near the mass transfer control range (i.e. in the mixed control range dominated by mass transfer) the physical quality of the electrodeposit is high. This means that the physical quality depends on the overpotential of the cathodic reaction. A graphic representation of the relationship between kinetic parameters, kinetic controls, cell current densities and cathodic overpotentials is shown in A relationship between coverage ratio and cathodic overpotential can be given as Substituting It must be kept in mind that the physical quality of the copper electrodeposit also depends on other variables, such as the concentration of impurities other than arsenic (e.g. antimony) and additives (e.g. glue and thiourea). Further work is required in order to obtain a full quantification of mesh cathode quality as a function of physico-chemical variables. This work was funded by the National Committee for Science and Technology (CONICYT, Chile) via FONDECYT Project No. 101 0138. Thanks are due to Rodrigo Ortiz for his help with the calculation of kinetic parameters. Financial support from Placer Dome is also acknowledged.