The energy efficiency of dry fine grinding process of powders dramatically declines with decreasing particle size, and represents a growing concern in various cutting-edge technical applications for pharmaceutical and cosmetic products, advanced-ceramics, and food industry. In this paper, we report on a detailed experimental analysis of the long-term grinding behavior of silica sand as a model material in an oscillatory ball mill for a broad range of the values of vibration frequency and amount of powder. We show that the re-agglomeration of fine particles unambiguously explains the anomalous increase of grinding power consumption. We also find that the agglomeration phenomena are correlated with the volume fraction of the class of finest particles. A nonlinear comminution model is shown to capture this effect for the prediction of the evolution of the specific surface area.The grinding process is used extensively for the manufacture of cement, pharmaceutical and food products with various purposes such as calibrating the size of a raw product, extracting specific components or increasing the specific surface area and the reactivity of products. It is well known that the industrial grinding operations represent a major part of the total energy consumption at a global level. For example, clinker grinding consumes one third of the total energy needed for cement manufacturing [ The energy consumption is affected by not only the properties and mechanical behavior of the material and the grinder technology but also the loading mode and the rate of energy supply. The grinding device controls the way energy is supplied to the material and the dissipation mechanisms involved in the process such as friction and the viscosity of the carrier fluids. The material can be more or less brittle, dry or dense. It evolves during the grinding process with an increasing cohesive stress, defined as the additional stress induced by cohesive forces between particles, as the average particle diameter is reduced. Hence, for fine-milling, both inter-particle and intra-particle surface energies are to be overcome for grinding the material [ Several comminution laws have been proposed to link the consumed energy to a characteristic particle size of the powder. The popular models are those of Rittinger [ Chen et al. [ To account for this limit size, Kano et al. fitted the variation of In this paper, we present a detailed investigation of the dry grinding of silica sand in an oscillatory ball mill. We are interested in the evolution of specific surface area (SSA), particle size distribution, agglomerated SSA and consumed electrical energy as a function of the input grinding energy power. These measurements allow us to characterize the onset of agglomeration and its signature on the evolution of SSA as a deviation from the linear Rittinger regime and its level-off at larger input power. We also evidence the correlation of particle agglomeration with the production of very fine particles whose volume fraction increases proportionally to the SSA. We introduce a phenomenological model that accounts for the agglomeration by an extra energy dissipation term proportional to the created surface. The predicted asymptotic SSA is in agreement with previous experimental measurements in a ball mill. In this work, we used a commercial silica sand composed of 98.60% of pure silica for filtration applications, marketed by Euromortier. It is a sieved sand between 0.5 mm and 1.4 mm. All the samples used in this study come from the same batch. Silica sand is employed in many industrial applications and its brittle mechanical behavior is well described in the literature. Furthermore, silica particles present the advantage of being relatively homogeneous, inert, safe and easy to handle, making it a good model material. Silica sand is a relatively hard material. It can scratch glass and steel and it has an index of 7 on the qualitative Mohs scale. Using a helium gas pycnometer (Ultrapyc 1200e, Quantachrome Instruments®) the density was measured and found to be very close to that of The commercial silica sand was sieved using a Rotex sieving machine to ensure that it was properly graded and to reduce spreading so as to achieve a nearly monodisperse population. We chose two sieves with close aperture diameters 0.8 mm and 1.0 mm and with a small size allowing us to do measurements using laser diffraction from the very beginning of grinding. After 10 min sieving, we obtained a fraction representing 10% of the total initial mass. The bulk density was measured to be between 1.4 and 1.6 g.cm  The electric power supplied to the device sets in motion the ball and the powder that it contains. The kinetic energy supplied in this way is consumed in the grinding process, but a large amount of power is dissipated by friction between the different mechanical parts of the device and through Joule effect in wires. It is therefore difficult to estimate the grinding energy, i.e. the energy for the comminution of particles. We may consider that grinding energy is directly related to the ball-jar collision energy. Following the work of Karinkanta et al. [ The maximum velocity of the jar, according to Eq. Since the ball is propelled by motion of the jar, its maximum velocity Note that the assumptions underlying this relation hold at weak filling ratio where the motion of the ball is not limited by the amount of material in the jar. We performed a detailed parametric study in which the energy was changed by varying the frequency, the mass of the powder (related to the filling ratio) and the milling time. For the chosen range of frequencies, the ball has a high kinetic energy and the mechanical work is mostly transmitted through impacts of the ball onto the powder. Using a transparent jar, Chen et al. [ All the samples were first dried in an oven at 65 °C during 24 h. A first series of experiments were conducted at 20 Hz for different values of powder mass (6, 13, 17 and 20 g) and a second series were then conducted with a fixed mass (13 g) for two other frequencies (15 and 25 Hz). For each set of parameters, 10 independent grinding experiments were conducted for times ranging from 0.5 to 111 min. For all these experiments, the consumed electric power At the scale of particles, scanning electron microscope (SEM) imaging was performed. At the scale of the bulk, the particle size distribution and specific surface area (SSA) was also determined. Observations of different samples of the ground powder were performed using a Phenom Pro-X SEM (France) equipped with a backscattered electron detector. The particles were directly fixed without coating on the sample holder using carbon adhesive tape and the images were captured at a voltage of 15 kV. The particle size distribution was determined by Laser Diffraction (LD) using a Mastersizer 2000 (Malvern Instruments Ltd., United Kingdom) particle size analyzer coupled with the sample dispersion unit Hydro 2000S with ethanol as liquid carrier. Note that, as a large number of the studies carried out in our laboratory involve water-reactive powders, we preferred to use ethanol rather than water also for these experiments although water could have been equivalently used. The results were quantified in volume based on the Mie theory [ To estimate the level of agglomeration in the bulk, we used ultrasounds with the following protocol: A first measurement is directly done on the powder (denoted 3 min of ultrasonic treatment is applied to the suspension. The sample is stirred at 2000 rpm during 5 min in order to eliminate potential bubbles. A second measurement is performed ( The agglomerated surface of the powder is calculated as The Brunauer-Emmett-Teller (BET) method, based on nitrogen absorption, was used as a reference measurement of the SSA. This measure, denoted below   For low surface values the ratio As In The same data are plotted in The Rittinger model, which assumes a linear increase of the surface as a function of the grinding energy (Eq. The nonlinear evolution of the SSA can be accounted for by assuming an extra energy dissipation that is proportional to the created surface Eq. This equation is similar to that introduced by Tanaka in 1954 [ The experimental data are well fitted (  At low impact energies, the agglomerates can be visually identified at the end of the milling ( In order to clarify the effect of the finest particles, we studied the correlation between agglomeration and volume fraction In this section, we consider the electric energy consumed by the device and heat loss while milling. For milling times below 72 min, Several experiments were also carried out for other values of the powder mass and vibration frequency. Similar trends were observed but with smaller values of energy power drop, as reported in We also measured the effect of powder mass on energy consumption before and after the the transition observed in In this work, we preformed an extensive parametric study of the milling of silica sand using an oscillatory ball mill. We showed that the extra surface created by milling depends on the total energy supplied, and a dimensionless parameter ( For specific surface area above 1500 m The authors declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this paper. We thank Bpifrance for their financial support (