This paper deals with the removal of trace iron from nickel sulfate solution using Monophos resin. Kinetics, thermodynamics and adsorption mechanism of iron adsorption were studied. Kinetic and thermodynamic parameters as well as equilibrium constants were calculated based on various equilibrium models. Liquid film diffusion, particle diffusion and chemical reaction models were used to fit the experimental data. It was shown that the adsorption mechanism was well represented by particle diffusion model. And pseudo-second-order and intra-particle diffusion model were more consistent with the adsorption process and clearly predicted the intra-particle distribution of iron concentration. Langmuir isotherm well described the adsorption data. Thermodynamic parameters indicated that the adsorption process was spontaneous and endothermic. An iron adsorption rate of 89% was reached with iron concentration being reduced from 1.92 mg/L to 0.21 mg/L.High purity nickel has good ductility, high temperature properties, excellent corrosion resistance, and good linearity of resistance temperature characteristics as well as good thermal neutron capture performance. Therefore, it is widely used in high temperature structural materials, aero engines, nuclear reactor protection materials, biomaterials and low expansion alloys. In particular, high purity nickel with a purity of 99.999% (5 N) or higher is applied to large scale integrated circuit as contact layer and wiring materials, magnetic thin film materials, and special packaging materials ( It is known that precipitation method is often used to deal with high concentration of iron. However, the precipitation method is not a good ideal for removing the iron concentration of the milligram level ( A relatively new macroporous chelating resin nemed Monophos has been reported to be quite effective for removing trace iron from copper sulfate ( In order to study the adsorption kinetics, a 150 mL nickel sulfate solution with a nickel concentration of [Ni] = 90 g/L and an iron concentration of [Fe] = 1.92 mg/L was added into a conical bottle, which was placed in a 60 °C hot water. Duo to the acidity of the solutions, Fe in this study is believed to be mainly in the form of Fe(III). Then, 25 g wet resin was added into the solution. Sampling was done every 5 min in the first 10 min, every 10 min in the time range from 10 min to 60 min, and every 30 min afterwards till the total adsorption time reached 240 min. Each time, a 2.5 mL sample was taken. For studying the adsorption thermodynamics, 5 wet resins (12.5 g each) and 5 solutions (150 mL each) with different concentrations ([Ni] = 50 g/L,60 g/L,70 g/L,80 g/L,and 90 g/L) were added into 5 conical bottles, respectively. The bottles were placed in a thermostatic oscillator with a constant temperature and an oscillation frequency of 110 r/min. For 300 min to achieve an adsorption equilibrium state. A 5 mL sample was then taken from each bottle. These tests were done for 3 different temperatures of 20 °C, 35 °C and 70 °C. Iron concentrations of all samples were analyzed using an ICP-OES 8000.  It can be seen from An adsorption process of an ion exchange resin can be divided into three steps ( Here, In order to predict the adsorption mechanism of adsorption reaction, liquid film diffusion model, particle diffusion model, and chemical reaction model were used to fit the experimental data. In order to study the adsorption behavior of Monophos resin, five dynamic models such as pseudo-first-order equation, pseudo-second-order equation, Weber-Morris, Elovich and Bangham are used to fit the data (see Pseudo-first-order equation The Lagergren equation is one of the most widely used rate equation to describe the adsorption of adsorbate from the liquid phase. The line form of pseudo-first-order expression of Lagergren is given as follows (  Pseudo-second-order equation Pseudo-second-order equation is often described by the McKay equation. It is based on the sorption capacity of the solid phase ( The correlation coefficient value (R Intra-particle diffusion model The most commonly used technique for identifying the diffusion mechanism involved in the adsorption process is by using Weber-Morris equation ( where, According to this model, if adsorption is controlled by the intra-particle diffusion, a plot of Though, correlation coefficient of Weber-Morris equation is more than 0.97 for adsorption. The intercept of straight line fails to pass through the origin. This implies that Weber-Morris equation in not only rate controlling step and other adsorption mechanisms are accompanied by particle diffusion. The data were further used to learn about the step occurring using pore diffusion model. Elovich The Elovich equation is a description of the heterogeneous diffusion process controlled by the reaction rate and the diffusion factor. It is another kinetic equation based on the adsorption capacity (  Bangham's equation The Bangham's equation is used to describe the adsorption process of resin and it can predict whether the adsorption process is controlled by diffusion ( where, The correlation coefficient of Bangham's equation is 0.95562. This indicates that the adsorption of iron onto Monophos resin is acceptable for this model and shows that the diffusion of adsorbate into the pores of adsorbent was the adsorption mechanism which is consistent with the above result of particle diffusion model. It is important to evaluate the most appropriate correlations for equilibrium curve to optimize the use of adsorbents. And mathematical models can be used to describe and characterize the adsorption process. Therefore, five most common isotherms such as the Langmuir, the Freundlich, Temkin, the Dubinin-Raduskevich and Redlich- Peterson isothermn models were used to investigate the adsorption capacity of Monophos resin.  In order to determine which model applies in this study, we calculated and plotted the data in Langmuir isothermal adsorption model The Langmuir isothermal adsorption model is commonly used model of isothermal adsorption. Its equation is as follows ( Langmuir equation has the best consistency with the experimental data in this study, with a correlation coefficient R Freundlich adsorption isotherm model The Freundlich adsorption isotherm model is an empirical formula based on the adsorption of adsorbents on the multiphase surface. This isotherm is derived from the assumption that the adsorption sites are distributed exponentially with respect to the heat of adsorption. The expression is as follows ( It can be seen from Temkin Temkin equation describes the energy relation which the adsorption heat is linearly decreased with the coverage duo to adsorbent-adsorbate interaction. The Temkin equation has usually been applied in the following linear form (  Dubinin-Raduskevich Dubinin-Radushkevich (D-R) isotherm is another isotherm equation that proposed by Dubinin. He assumes that the characterristics of the sorption curves are related to the porosity of the adsorbent. The linear form of Dubinin-Radushkevich isotherm can be expressed as follows (  Redlich-Peterson isotherm Redlich-Peterson isotherm is incorporated three parameters into an empirical isotherm. The Redlich-Peterson isotherm model combines elements from both the Langmuir, Freundlich equations and the mechanism of adsorption does not follows ideal monolayer adsorption. The Redlich-Peterson isotherm is widely used as a compromise between Langmuir and Freundlich isotherms ( It can be seen from fitting results ( The feasibility and orientation of the physicochemical adsorption process can be evaluated from thermodynamics studies. The thermodynamic parameter helps to determine the favourable adsorption temperature, nature of adsorption process (exothermic or endothermic) ( The Gibbs free energy of adsorption process is given as: The Langmuir constant Combining Eq. Here, K The temperature range studied in this paper is so small (298-343 K), which one can assume both Δ Resin adsorption is a process of entropy increase. When the resin adsorbed one iron ion, it will release two H ions and the hydration ability of H ion is stronger than that of iron ion, which increases the confusion of the solution. This paper deals with the removal of trace iron from nickel sulfate solution using Monophos resin. Kinetic parameters, thermodynamic parameters and equilibrium constants were calculated based on various equilibrium models. These models explain the adsorption behavior of resin from different aspects. Meanwhile, the kinetic data and thermodynamic data follows the models and their correlation coefficients (R Adsorption mechanism: Liquid film diffusion, particle diffusion and chemical reaction models were used to fit the experimental data. The results showed the adsorption mechanism could be better described by particle diffusion model indicating the diffusion into particle rate limiting for the adsorption. Kinetics: Pseudo-first-order, pseudo-second-order, intra-particle diffusion model, Elovich equation and Bangham's equation were applied to simulate the experimental kinetic data. The results revealed that the adsorption of iron onto Monophos resin is not acceptable for pseudo-first-order model for the inconsistency between results calculated of Thermodynamic: The adsorption data were well described by the Langmuir isotherm. The thermodynamic parameters such as △G, which were all negative, indicated that adsorption process of Monophos was spontaneous and positive value of △H (+13.223 kJ/mol) showed that the adsorption was an endothermic reaction. This work was financially supported by the