The recycling of three different fly ashes obtained from the coal fired thermal power plants has been studied. Coal fly ashes were vitrified by melting them at 1773K for 5h without any additives. After the glass production, glass samples were subjected to a heat treatment process to be able to see whether or not the glasses could be transformed into a microcrystalline structured materials. Produced glass samples were heated to 1423K and held at this temperature for 2h to determine the effect of heat treatment process on the properties of glasses. The properties of glass and the heat treated glass samples produced from coal fly ash were investigated by means of differential thermal analysis (DTA), X-ray diffraction (XRD) and scanning electron microscopy (SEM) techniques. DTA study indicated that there were only inflection points of the endothermic peaks in the DTA curves of the glass samples. XRD analysis showed the amorphous state of the glass samples and also the presence of only the diopside phase in the heat-treated glass samples. SEM investigations revealed that small amount of crystallites occurred in the microstructure of the heat treated glass samples in contrast to the amorphous structure of the glass samples. The mechanical, physical and chemical properties of the heat-treated glass samples are found better than those of the glass samples. Toxicity characteristic leaching procedure (TCLP) results showed that the heavy metals of fly ashes were successfully immobilized into both glass and heat treated glass samples. It can be said that glass and heat treated glass samples obtained by the recycling of coal fly ash can be taken as a non-hazardous material. Overall, results indicated that the vitrification technique is an effective way for the stabilization and recycling of coal fly ash.Increasing demands to the generation of more electric power has resulted in construction of coal fired thermal power plants. Today, thermal power plants exhaust large quantities of combusted waste in the form of bottom ash, fly ash or slag. The growing production of fly ash has long caused on environmental problem with technological and economic effects in the world. Fly ash’s potentially hazardous nature is primarily due to the volatile toxic metals that it contains. Metals that have low boiling points (Cadmium, Zinc, Lead, Mercury, etc.) tend to concentrate and accumulate in the fly ash, and the fly ash will frequently fail the EPA test for toxicity. Currently, large quantities of fly ash are used for landfilling which cause negative environmental impacts such as leaching of potentially toxic substances into soils and groundwater, the change in the elemental composition of the vegetation growing in the vicinity of the ash and the accumulation of toxic elements throughout the food chain The chemical composition of fly ash is typical of the most common glassy ternary system (SiO In this study, the possibility of using waste coal fly ashes in glass production as a raw material source has been investigated. It was also aimed in this study to determine whether or not the glasses could be transformed to a crystalline structured material. For this purpose, microstructural characterization, TCLP test, density, porosity, water adsorption, microhardness and chemical resistance measurements were performed on both glass and heat-treated glasses to investigate the effect of heat treatment on the properties of glass samples. The fly ash samples used in this study were obtained from Çayırhan, Seyitömer and Afşin-Elbistan thermal power plants in Turkey. Chemical compositions of fly ash samples were given in It is clear that the major chemical components in fly ash samples are SiO Glass samples were prepared from the fly ashes without any additives. In each batch 20 Annealed glass samples were subjected to a heat treatment process. As it is known, some glasses are very stable without clear exothermic effects at the crystallization stage. These glasses could not be transformed to the fully crystallized glass-ceramic materials DTA scans of annealed glass specimens were carried out using Rigaku (Model Thermoflex) thermal analyzer to detect the glass transition (T X-ray diffraction was utilized to determine the crystalline phases occurred in the produced materials and also the amount of amorphous glass present in the samples. The initial glass compositions were analyzed to check for any crystalline phases that may have formed during annealing process. The crystallized samples were analyzed to determine which crystalline phases were present and also to determine if the sample had fully crystallized. In all cases, samples which were analyzed by X-ray diffraction were ground to fine powder form. A Siemens diffractometer Model D 5000 operated at 40 SEM investigations were conducted in an Amray Model 1830 operated at 20 Vickers microhardness measurements were done on the produced glass and the heat-treated glass samples. The microhardness tester used in this study was a Leco Model M-400-G. Samples were ground and polished with diamond paste. A load of 0.5 Density and the porosity of the produced glass and the heat-treated glass samples were measured by using a Quantachrome Autoscan-33 mercury porosimeter. Mercury intrusion porosimetry measurements of the samples were carried out pressurizing the system up to 227 It is known that there are several applicable leaching test methods. In this study, toxicity characteristic leaching procedure (TCLP) was selected as the most appropriate method to investigate the leachability of the samples, since it is relatively simple and has acceptable limits. TCLP analysis were limited to certain metals of Cr, Pb, Zn and Mn. The experimental procedure is summarized as follows A leaching solution (extraction fluid) was used in the TCLP experiments. Extraction fluid consists of 5.7 The chemical resistances of the glass and the heat-treated glass samples were tested in 10% HNO The water adsorption (%) of the produced materials was determined using the procedure outlined in the ASTM standards The produced glass samples from Afşin-Elbistan, Çayırhan and Seyitömer fly ashes were brown to deep black in color. The color of the glasses produced from Çayırhan and Seyitömer fly ashes were deep black because of their high Fe If a glass is heated, its heat capacity changes within a narrow temperature range called the glass transition temperature ( XRD patterns of the glass samples shown in The XRD analyses of heat-treated glass samples were given in The homogeneity of the produced glass was obviously related to the performance of the production process used. SEM investigations confirmed the homogeneous nature of all glass samples.  Density, porosity, water adsorption and Vickers microhardness values of the produced glasses were given in Density, porosity, water adsorption and Vickers microhardness values of the heat-treated glass samples were also given in TCLP results of the glasses produced from fly ashes were given in TCLP tests were performed to all heat-treated glass samples and the experimental results are also presented in Chemical resistance of glasses was listed in Results for chemical resistance of the heat-treated glass samples were also given in This study has clearly shown that coal fly ash samples were successfully vitrified without any additives. On the basis of the results reported in this study, the following conclusions can be drawn: DTA results showed that the produced glass samples had no crystallization tendency. Microstructural studies indicated the amorphous state of the glass samples. When the heat treatment process was applied to the glass samples, the amorphous phase had practically disappeared and diopside crystalline phase occurred in the samples. Physical and mechanical properties of the heat-treated glass samples are better than those of the glass samples. TCLP results demonstrated that the heavy metals were successfully solidified into both glass and the heat-treated glass samples structure. It can be said that the glass and the heat-treated glass samples produced from coal fly ash could be considered as a non-hazardous material. Chemical resistance of the produced glass and the heat-treated glass samples show high resistance to alkali solutions. It is clearly seen that heat treatment process improved the properties of the glass samples. Overall results have indicated that the glass and the heat-treated glass samples produced from coal fly ash have several desirable properties that would make them attractive to industrial use in the construction sector.