Entrainment can make an important contribution to recovery in the flotation of fine particles. This paper presents an experimental study into the recovery by true flotation and by entrainment, of colloidal silica and alumina particles with a size range from 40 to 160 nm in diameter. The flotation experiments were carried out in a small laboratory column-type cell with fine bubbles with typical average diameter of about 150 μm. No wash water was used. Cetyltrimethylammonium bromide and Dowfroth 250 were used as the collector and frother, respectively. The particle concentration in the pulp was about 1% by weight. In these experiments the total recovery of particles was low, typically 54% after 50 min. Four techniques, including three previously described in the literature and one newly developed in this study, were used to assess the true flotation due to the bubble-particle collection mechanism, and the entrainment. All employed techniques show that the proportion of the colloidal particles recovered by true flotation was quite high, varying from about 79–86% of the total recovery. The paper also discusses the mechanisms of minimising the entrainment of the colloidal particles in the laminar flow flotation regime with fine bubbles.The advances currently being made in grinding technology are allowing large, complex low-grade mineral deposits to be exploited economically. The continual reduction in grade is forcing miners to produce ultrafine particles in order to liberate mineral particles from the ore, e.g. the McArthur River and Century Zinc precious metal deposits ( The horizontal Isamill (MIM Process Technologies, Brisbane, Queensland, Australia) is capable of grinding to P Techniques such as carrier flotation, agglomerate flotation, emulsion flotation and oil-in-water flotation have been suggested as ways of increasing the flotation rates of ultrafines. All of these methods have their short-falls and none have been very widely applicable. These processes have been discussed and reviewed elsewhere ( The recovery of fine particles is a function of true flotation, entrainment and entrapment. The entrapment of particles occurs in a poly-disperse system with fine particles becoming trapped amongst agglomerates of coarser particles or trapped amongst agglomerates of coarser particles and bubbles. The recovery of fine particles is thus a function of true flotation and entrainment only, when no coarse particles are added to the system. The process of true flotation occurs when a particle collides with a rising bubble and is attached to its surface. The selected particle is then removed from the cell as part of the froth. On the other hand, particle entrainment occurs when particles are dragged from the pulp into the froth in the interstitial liquid. While true flotation is a selective process, capture of particles in the interstitial liquid is non-selective. For a system, of mixed species, a high level of particle entrainment will result in a low-grade product. It has been a long held view that the predominant capture mechanism for ultrafine particles is entrainment ( A number of techniques have been developed to evaluate the level of true flotation and entrainment. A brief summary of these methods is given below. The first technique was proposed by This first method assumes that entrainment occurs only when a frother is present. It was argued by Despite this recommendation, it must be pointed out that a bubble in distilled, deionised water has a residual negative zeta potential ( A second technique, proposed by A third method, attributed to A fourth method is now described, which involves two separate flotation tests using different colloidal species of equal size. The two species chosen were silica and alumina. The silica, which is naturally negatively-charged, is rendered hydrophobic in the flotation suspension by the attachment of a cationic surfactant. In contrast, the alumina particles carry a positive charge, and does not adsorb the cationic collector. Thus in separate flotation experiments involving a single species, if the solids are conditioned identically with a cationic collector and a frother, the silica will float by true flotation and entrainment, while alumina will be recovered only by entrainment in the froth. Thus the difference in recovery between the two experiments gives a measure of the true flotation of the hydrophobic species, in this case, the silica. This procedure has a number of advantages over the previously discussed methods, principally related to the effect of the reagents on the bubble size distribution and the froth properties. The technique of Batch-wise flotation tests were carried out in a 1 l column-type cell of internal diameter 70 mm and of height variable in the range 305–405 mm. Bubbles are produced by introducing gas through a fine frit sparger in the bottom of the column. Nitrogen gas was sparged through 68 mm pyrex glass sintered disc of porosity three (Corning Ltd, Artington, Surrey, UK), to produce an average bubble diameter, determined photographically, of 150 μm. The volumetric gas flow rate was 80 cm The particles used in the flotation tests were silica and alumina. The silica suspension was composed of 1.5% Snowtex ZL and 0.5% Snowtex 20 L (Nyacol Chemical America Corporation, Houston, Texas, USA). The particle size distribution of this suspension, determined using transmission electron microscopy, was found to range from 40 to 160 nm. The transmission electron micrographs were taken using a JEM-1200EX11 transmission electron microscope (Jeol USA, Peabody, Massachusetts, USA). The alumina suspension was composed of 0.6% AKP-50 particles (Sumitomo Chemicals, Tokyo, Japan). The AKP-50 particles have a mean particle diameter of 150 nm, determined using an Accoustosizer IIs (Colloidal Dynamics, Warwick, Rhode Island, USA). Prior to conditioning, the alumina and silica particles were dispersed at 100 W power for 5 min using a Sonicator 3000 (Misonix incorporated, Farmingdale, New York, USA). Since the rate of flotation is a function of particle size, the zeta potentials of the particles were checked to ensure that the charge they carried was sufficient to ensure a stable suspension. For a quiescent colloidal pulp a zeta-potential at the mineral interface greater than 25 mV absolute is generally indicative of dispersion ( The frother used in the experiments was Dowfroth 250 (Dow Chemical Corporation, Ludington, Michigan, USA) at a concentration of 30 ppm. The collector used during the experimental tests was cetyltrimethyl ammonium bromide (CTAB) (Ajax Chemicals, Sydney, Australia) at a concentration of 5 The solids recovered versus water recovered, for a system with and without collector, obtained for silica particles with the method of One benefit of Trahar's method over that of The rates of true flotation and entrainment were assessed using the technique of The procedure of Warren assumes that entrainment occurs when particles are transported in the interstitial liquid. When the line of best fit is extrapolated to zero water recovery, for a 60 mm froth height, the intercept suggests that over 79% This labor-intensive method requires many flotation tests to be carried out to obtain an accurate estimate of the true flotation and entrainment rates. Tests must be conducted with a wide range of froth heights, to obtain a range of water recoveries. As the froth height is increased the character of the froth changes. The upper layers of the froth in the column tend to be drier than those at the bottom. For a three-phase system, the bubble size increases significantly as coalescence takes place in the froth. This coalescence improves froth grade by dislodging entrapped particles and detaching weakly held true flotation particles. Hence the problem of the A flotation test was performed for a froth height of 60 mm and a mass balance was completed around the cell. The technique of In this technique, it is assumed that the concentration of entrained particles in the interstitial liquid is the same as the concentration of particles in the pulp. Flotation tests were performed with froth heights ranging from 20 to 120 mm. The level of true flotation was determined using Eq. The linear behaviour of the recovery curve is due to the low overall recovery of solids, to be expected in the flotation of particles of the size used here. Total recovery could have been increased by increasing the flotation time, or the gas flowrate. The recovery can also be enhanced by using another frother capable of forming finer bubble sizes in the pulp. A preliminary test revealed that reagent-grade ethanol at 0.5% concentration, in conjunction with CTAB, was capable of achieving an overall recovery greater than 85% after 20 min of flotation. However, ethanol is unable to form a stable froth when no collector is added. Hence Dowfroth 250 was chosen as the preferred frothing agent as it was able to produce stable froth with and without collector and could be used to examine all four models. This technique involved comparing the flotation of hydrophilic alumina particles, against a system of hydrophobised silica particles, conditioned with the same reagents. The addition of the cationic collector, 30 ppm CTAB, rendered the silica hydrophobic while leaving the alumina particles hydrophilic in the slurry. Hence, all particles captured during the flotation of alumina with a cationic surfactant were entrained. The flotation tests were carried out at a 60 mm froth height. The overall solids recovered versus water recovered, for a system with hydrophobic silica and a system with hydrophilic alumina is given in This technique indicates that true flotation accounts for 82% The recovery of colloidal silica by true flotation was found to be very high ranging between 79% and 86%, depending on the technique used to measure this value. This is a very significant portion considering the froth height was only 60 mm and no wash-water was added to flush the mechanically entrained particles back into the pulp. It is known that the entrained particles can enter the pulp-froth interface by the pulp agitation (mechanical entrainment), and/or by the bubble wake and the bubble swarm (crowding) effects (hydraulic entrainment). Since no mechanical agitation was used in our experiments, the contribution of mechanical entrainment was insignificant. The formation of a wake behind a rising bubble is limited by the hydrodynamic conditions. The wake volume is a function of the velocity, Therefore the reduction in the bubble diameter significantly reduces the size of the associated wake, by reducing the Reynolds number and terminal velocity. The reduction in the size of the wake in-turn reduces the number of fine particles captured behind the bubble which are later transferred hydraulically to the froth. For fine bubbles with a mean diameter of 150 μm, produced in this study by sparging nitrogen gas through a fine glass frit, the rise velocity determined by the available predictions ( The small degree of entrainment in the flotation tests can be due to the bubble swarm crowding effect, which is a function of the bubble concentration. In flotation cells, bubbles rise through the pulp, slow down as they approach the pulp-froth interface and then crowd together at the interface. The liquid cannot be rapidly squeezed out between the rising swarm of bubbles, due to the restricted paths for drainage through the bubble swarm. As each layer crosses the interface, another layer of bubbles will form and push more liquid upwards in a continuous process and entrain particles into the froth phase. Further work needs to be conducted relating entrainment rates to the bubble size and gas holdup in order to verify this mechanism. Batch flotation tests were conducted in a small laboratory column-type cell using fine bubbles to assess the rate of true flotation and entrainment using four different techniques. The four techniques employed were those of The level of true flotation and entrainment was found to vary linearly with froth height. The true flotation was found to account for 76% The four techniques were compared and were found to reveal highly consistent results. For a constant 60 mm froth height, the level of true flotation was found to be 82% The high efficiency of true flotation obtained with colloidal silica is due to the fine bubble size, 150 um, used in the experiments. As the bubble collides with the froth it rapidly decelerates causing the particles entrained in its wake to wash over its surface and entrain hydraulically into the froth. A smaller bubble size has a smaller associated wake and hence fewer particles are entrained into the froth. The authors gratefully acknowledge the financial support of the Australian Research Council.