Bacteria have been studied in bioflotation and bioflocculation processes for impurity removal. Electrostatic forces are important for adsorption of bacteria onto mineral surfaces. In the present study, three strains of bacteria: Bacillus subtilis, Paenibacillus polymyxa and Mycobacterium phlei, are used to emphasize the importance of bacteria–coal electrostatic interaction on coal cleaning. They differ in their point of zero-charge (PZC). Flotation experiments were conducted using each bacterium individually to reduce coal impurities. Although promising results were observed for all studied bacteria, B. subtilis was the best. By correlating the PZC of coal particles as well as the bacteria, it was found that the superiority of B. subtilis is related to wider PZC difference between the coal and B. subtilis.Bioflotation and bioflocculation have been evaluated for mineral beneficiation ( The adsorption and adhesion of bacteria onto mineral and coal surfaces are controlled by several factors. Previous studies have indicated that the ionic strength, bacterial species and mineralogy are among those factors ( In the current study, the importance of electrostatic forces in the bacteria–coal interaction was studied by using three strains of bacteria. The main difference between these bacteria is the difference in their point of zero charge (PZC). In addition the application of each strain of bacteria to reduce the impurity level (either sulfur content or mineral matter (ash)) was tested. The effect of PZC difference on adsorption of bacteria on raw coal (as a mixture of coal, sulfur and ash) was characterized using adsorption kinetics, adsorption isotherm and flotation tests. A 10 Bacteria were isolated from El-Maghara mine water. They were spread on nutrient agar plates and incubated at 30 Zeta-potential was measured after agitation of 0.1 For bacteria, the harvested bacterial sample was re-suspended in KCl solution of proper strength (1 Adhesion studies were conducted by mixing coal and bacteria (3% pulp density coal suspension in a bacterial suspension of predetermined cell count) in either distilled water or electrolyte solution. The effect of time, cell concentration and pH on the adsorption was studied. The bacteria cells were counted as an average of five readings to determine the residual concentration of bacteria. The adsorbed amount was calculated as the difference between initial and residual concentrations. The flotation experiments were conducted with each strain of bacteria as a flotation reagent, i.e., depressant for sulfur and ash minerals in a Denver flotation cell (D-12) of 1.0 El-Maghara coal sample was characterized by XRD and chemical analyses.   Adsorption kinetics of studied bacteria onto coal is used to determine the equilibrium time of adsorption at pH The higher and faster Bacteria adsorption isotherms onto coal were conducted at pH  On the other hand, the dissolution of iron-bearing minerals such as hematite and pyrite, at pH  The coal cleaning and the grade obtained follow the same order as bacteria adsorption on the coal surface. The higher the adsorption is the higher the grade of the cleaned coal. It is expected that the affinity of some functional groups of bacteria to certain metal ions leads to metal binding ( The importance of electrostatic interaction on bacteria adsorption on coal surface was investigated. Three types of bacteria were used. The main difference between them is the difference in their zero-point of charge (PZC). To identify such importance adsorption kinetics, adsorption isotherm, effect of pH on adsorption and zeta potential were used. It was noticed that the bacteria followed the surface charge of coal after their interaction. The coal–bacteria interaction was strongly pH-dependent where the maximum adsorption for all bacteria was observed at pH In addition, the bioflotation tests, based on the natural floatability of coal and hydrophilicity of bacteria, for removal of sulfur and ash impurities indicated that