The large amount of Cu present in printed circuit boards (PCBs) residues, usually about ten times more than the Cu amount present in rich-content minerals, makes these residues an attractive secondary source of Cu. Thus, the main aim of this work was to develop a simple and nearly-closed two-step process to recover Cu from PCBs residues with high purity.
                  Firstly, a multi-element leaching solution, containing 78% of the total amount of Cu present in the residue together with other metals, was obtained using acidic (HNO3 2mol/L for 210′ at 50°C) conditions. In a second step, a bispicolylamine resin was used to recover Cu with high selectivity from the multi-element (59.0% Cu) leaching solution and a final Cu solution with high purity (99.0%) was obtained after eluting, with H2SO4 4mol/L, the Cu retained in the column.
                  Additionally, the amount of Al (85%) leached from the residue, present in the raffinate, was totally recovered as a solid of Al(OH)3.Printed circuit boards (PCBs) are widely used in most electric and electronic equipments. Improvements in the processing power of computers have shortened their average lifetime. Therefore, each year, the amount of waste electric and electronic equipment (WEEE) is rising three times faster than other forms of municipal waste It is estimated that between 20 and 50 million ton of WEEE are generated internationally each year and this will increase at a rate of 3–5% per annum PCBs contain approximately 30% metallic material, 40% organic resin materials, and about 30% glass materials used as resin reinforcing fibers Although PCBs correspond to only about 6% of the total weight of the WEEE PCBs contain around 20% of Cu, which is 10 times more than the Cu amount present in rich-content minerals Recovery of metals from PCBs is usually performed by pyrometallurgical and hydrometallurgical methods, both combined with mechanical pretreatments. Incineration of WEEE during pyrometallurgical processing releases some hazardous gases that cause severe environmental problems; in addition, this kind of process requires high investments So, it is of great interest to develop new and green technologies, with low consumption of energy and reagents, for recycling metals. Hydrometallurgical processes are interesting due to the simplicity and less consume of energy, less capital and operating costs than pyrometallurgical ones The hydrometallurgical processes consist in a first step where the metals are extracted into solution by chemical leaching in acid or alkaline medium, and then a second step that consists on the solution purification. Precipitation, cementation, absorption, ion exchange, electrowinning and solvent extraction are purification methods usually used Chelating ion exchangers with bispicolylamine functional groups are unique in the commercial array of ion exchange products. These resins have three nitrogen donor atoms and two of them are in the aromatic pyridyl groups (tertiary amine) ( Several hydrometallurgical attempts were tried to extract Cu from the composition of PCBs, the major metallic element in the composition of these residues. Chehade et al. Since a high amount of Cu is present in PCB, its recovery is economically important (about 1400 $ per ton of PCB) Chemicals used in the experiments were of analytical reagent grade. The synthetic solutions were prepared by dissolving the proper chemicals in deionized water to the required concentration. Metals (Ag, Al, Au, Cu, Fe, Pb, Ni, Sn and Zn) concentration was measured, by atomic absorption spectroscopy with flame atomization (AAS-FA) in a Perkin Elmer AAnalyst 400 spectrometer (Norwalk, CT, USA). A nitrous oxide flame was used for the determinations of Al and Sn and an acetylene flame for the remaining metals. PCBs scrap used in this work was collected from more than sixty obsolete computers from different models or brands. Only motherboards were used and the batteries and the main plastic parts were removed. All the PCBs were coarsely milled in a single shaft shredding system (M 400/1–200, Erdwich). After a preliminary study, a grain size of 0.250 The metal composition of the PCBs roasted residue was determined by aqua regia digestion, at a shaking bath with temperature control (OLS200, Grant), for 24 The leaching tests were performed with HNO The metal leaching yield was calculated by quantification of each metal in the leaching solution, after filtration, by AAS-FA. All experiments were done at least in triplicate. The recovery of Cu was performed using the DOWEX™ M4195 resin, purchased from Sigma Aldrich. Synthetic solutions containing Cu, Ni, Fe, Pb, Al, Zn, Ag and Sn, were prepared from CuSO The adsorption capacity for Cu to DOWEX™ M4195 resin was studied in batch assays using a synthetic solution of Cu, at pH 1.3. For this purpose, samples of 0.1 Adsorption isotherms assays were performed in order to know the maximum affinity of DOWEX™ M4195 resin to Cu. Cu concentration was varied between 2 and 22 Kinetic studies were performed with a 17 A chromatographic glass column with adjusting top screw ( In an initial phase, synthetic solutions, with a metal composition similar to the real leached solution got from the PCBs, were used. At a second phase, a real leached solution was studied. Flow rates of 1 and 2 Between adsorption and elution, the resin was washed with 120 All the experiments were performed at room temperature. To describe the experimental data obtained with the column assays performed with the real leaching solution, the equation, based on the Thomas model (Eq. This model is empirical and one of the most used models to describe column processes. It assumes Langmuir kinetics of exchange/elution process, no axial dispersion and that the rate driving force obeys second-order reaction kinetics The pH of the raffinate solution was increased up to 8.5 using NaOH 10 After 3 According to these results PCB residue is composed by 28% of metals. Besides metals, PCB residue is also constituted by organic resin materials (40%), and glass materials used as resin reinforcing fibers (30%) The amount of Cu determined in the fraction <0.250 The main goal of this task was to leach the higher amount of Cu and Ag, but avoiding Au leaching, in a single step from the PCBs residue without using extreme conditions of temperature and acid concentration in order to avoid a high spend of energy and reagents. HNO For HNO The results obtained in this work are in good agreement with the results found in the literature. Birloaga et al. The amount of the other metals present in the leaching solution, corresponding to the conditions where the highest amount of Cu and Ag was leached (2 The study of this equilibrium is important because it allows developing an equation that represents the interaction between the metal ion and the resin surface. The parameters of this equation, determined by adjusting the theoretical models to the experimental data, allow predicting the extent of adsorption/exchange in the system. Cu sorption effectiveness was tested between pH 0.5 and 3; our results evidenced that the resin adsorption efficiency was not affected in this pH range (data not shown) and confirmed the information available in the literature, where it is pointed out that Cu sorption effectiveness does not change in the pH range 1–5 The variation of According to the Langmuir model, the maximum capacity of the resin to Cu was 0.85 Two different solutions with a Cu concentration of 17 The experimental data shows that after 2 Several works reported in the literature pointed out that DOWEX™ M4195 resin, which is a low price commercial product, evidences strong affinity for Cu over many heavy metals even in very acidic solutions due to the presence of the bispicolylamine functional group ( For starting, a synthetic solution containing all the metals found in the leaching solution was prepared and column assays were performed in order to predict the series of affinity for metal ions from this multi-component solution for the resin. Synthetic solution was prepared to match the metal concentrations predicted after acid leaching of the PCBs residue and the pH was adjusted to 1.3. A flow rate of 1.0 To promote the recovery of Cu adsorbed to the resin, elution with H  The metal adsorption profile to the resin from a real solution, which composition is shown in Two flow rates of 1.0 and 2.0 Previous results showed that both flow rates allowed retaining a high amount of Cu but the flow rate of 2 For Cu, the data of the column assay were fitted to the Thomas model ( Previous experiments performed with synthetic solution ( A suitable destination of the raffinate solution should be assessed. Taking into account the composition of the raffinate, which contains Al, as major element, plus other metals (Cu, Ni, Fe, Zn, Sn and Pb) at less amounts, the possibility of recovering Al by precipitation was evaluated. For this purpose, a pH of 8.5 was defined after previous computational simulation of Al speciation in aqueous solution in the presence of all metals (data not shown). The high pH value was chosen in order to precipitate also other metals, like Zn. The precipitation of Al was efficient (100%). Under these conditions, the metal composition of the resultant filtrate fulfills the limits of discharge for all metals The overall process developed in this work, since the collection of the PCBs until achieving the final purified Cu solution ( Column assays were performed according to the following sequence: (i) metal loading on the resin; (ii) washing of the column with water; (iii) elution of the Cu and Ni with sulfuric acid; (iv) washing of the column with water. The resin, present in the column, was not changed throughout all the work performed. A total of thirteen full loading-elution cycles were conducted with the same material and no modification of the retention efficiency of the resin occurred, suggesting a high stability of the performance of this resin. Furthermore, Al, the second major constituent of the leaching solution ( In this paper, end life PCBs, after a mechanical pre-processing, were chemically treated using an efficient and nearly closed two step process for recycling Cu. For this purpose, from the roasted PCBs residue (fraction <0.250 Additionally, the Al present in the raffinate, at high concentration was recovered by precipitation, giving a solid of aluminum hydroxide. Moreover, the metals concentration present in the resulting solution, after Al precipitation, fulfills the legal discharge stipulated limits and thus, this solution can be discharged to the public sewerage system. In conclusion, the process developed in this work represents a clear advance on the recovery of Cu with high purity from end life printed circuit boards since it is: (i) simple to operate; (ii) based on a low cost process (inexpensive reagents and a resin of low commercial price are used); (iii) fast (the global process has a short duration time) and (iv) based on a nearly closed-loop process for Cu separation. The authors declare that this article content has no conflicts of interest. This work has been supported under the financing with the reference