Response surface methodology was used to determine optimum conditions for extraction of protein from red pepper seed meal. A central composite design including independent variables such as temperature (30, 35, 40, 45 and 50°C), pH (7.0, 7.5, 8.0, 8.5 and 9.0), extraction time (20, 30, 40, 50 and 60min) and solvent/meal ratio (10:1, 15:1, 20:1, 25:1 and 30:1 v/w) was used. Selected response (dependent variable) which evaluates the extraction process was protein yield and the second-order model obtained for protein yield revealed coefficient of determination of 96.7%. Protein yield was primarily affected by pH and solvent/meal ratio. Maximum yield was obtained when temperature, pH, mixing time and solvent/meal ratio were 31°C, 8.8, 20min, 21:1 (v/w), respectively. These conditions resulted in protein yield of 12.24g of soluble protein from extract/100g defatted red pepper seed flour. The adequacy of the model was confirmed by extracting the protein under optimum values given by the model. These results help in designing the process of optimal protein extraction from red pepper seeds.Utilization of wastes of fruit and vegetable processing has been the subject of many studies in an attempt to find new, alternative cheap sources of proteins ( Peppers belong to the genus  Various parameters such as pH, temperature, ionic strength, solvent type, extraction time, solvent/meal ratio, presence of components causing linking, affect protein extractability ( When many factors and interactions affect desired responses, response surface methodology (RSM) is an effective tool for optimizing the process ( In the present study, RSM was employed to optimize the protein extraction process from red pepper seeds for maximum yield. The parameters investigated were temperature, pH, extraction time and solvent/meal ratio. Dried red pepper seeds ( Red pepper seeds were ground to pass through a 1 Red pepper seed meal was extracted with selected 29 combinations of independent variables such as temperature (30–50 Moisture, crude fat, crude protein and ash content were determined according to the methods of Response surface methodology was used to determine the influence of four independent variables and the optimum conditions of protein isolation. The process variables and the responses were defined from published data ( The variables were coded according to the following equation: The response function investigated was The model proposed for response (Y) was: The objective in the optimization process was to find a common value for the dependent variables; thus we used the desirability method. Predicted values ( Surface plots were generated by assigning constant (zero) values to two of the four variables and solving the fitted equations as a quadratic equation in the remaining two variables. The proximate analysis of defatted red pepper seed flour is presented in Red pepper seed flour was extracted for its protein following 29 combinations of four independent variables (temperature, pH, extraction time, solvent/meal ratio) ( The application of RSM yields the following regression equation, which is an empirical relationship between protein yield and the test variable in coded units, as given in the following equation. The predicted values of protein yields were calculated using the regression model and compared with experimental values in The significance of each coefficient was determined using the Student t test and Analysis of variance (ANOVA) of independent variables was performed. The statistical analysis data revealed that linear, quadratic and interaction terms were significant ( The 3D surface plots were drawn to illustrate the main and interactive effects of the independent variables on the dependent one. These graphs were obtained by fixing two variables at coded zero level (  Optimum extraction conditions were estimated by the desirability method using a Minitab Software. A solvent/meal ratio of 21:1 (v/w), extraction time of 20 The suitability of the model equation for predicting the optimum response value was tested using the recommended optimum conditions. When optimum values of independent variables (temperature 31 In conclusion, response surface methodology technique proved to be a useful tool in establishing optimum conditions for extracting red pepper seed protein. Protein was extracted from defatted red pepper seed flour with 29 selected combinations of temperature, pH, solvent/meal ratio and extraction time. The experimental value of protein yield varied from 8.32 to 12.72