The Sr-isotope ratios were determined for 17 samples of siderite from the polymetallic deposit of Jebel Awam, formed because of a granitic intrusion through metasedimentary Palaeozoic rocks about 286 Ma in the eastern part of the Moroccan Meseta. The isotopic ratios range from 0.712829 to 0.713960. As siderite contains negligible Rb, the measured isotopic ratios are the same as its parent fluids. In this view, the isotopic ratios of the carbonate rule out that the mineralizing solutions were composed of either magmatic fluids, as the local granites show a range of initial ratios between 0.706 and 0.709, or seawater, whose isotopic ratio about 286 Ma was 0.7075. On the contrary, the mineralizing fluids were composed of meteoric water circulating mainly through the schists of the Palaeozoic basement, whose isotopic range was between 0.712 and 0.718 at the time of the ore deposit formation. Moreover, the Sr-isotope ratios of siderite rule out any possible recrystallization of the carbonate during the Alpine orogenesis. As a whole, this study shows the possibility of using siderite for determining the type of fluids involved in ore deposits, provided that the age and the Sr-isotope ratios of the rocks of the mineralized area are known. This may be useful to assess also the provenance of the metals carried by the fluids.Siderite is sometimes a major gangue mineral of hydrothermal ore deposits. Determination of its chemical composition as well as of its carbon and oxygen isotope compositions is routinely carried out in the study of ore deposits, as this may provide information on the composition of mineralizing fluids and the nature of CO In this paper we have measured the Sr-isotope ratios of several samples of siderite, aimed at providing additional information useful to ore genesis studies. In this regard, it is noted that though the Sr-isotope method has been applied to the genetic study of carbonates since the early 70s, it has rarely been applied to siderite and, furthermore, the method was mainly used to establish the age of formation of this carbonate (e.g. The studied siderites come from the polymetallic deposit of Jebel Awam (hereinafter JA), located in central Morocco The results obtained from this study show that the Sr-isotope composition of siderite can successfully be used in the ore genesis investigation. The studied siderites were collected from the polymetallic (Pb–Zn–Ag, W and Mo) deposit of JA, located in central Morocco More information on siderite, geometry of the ore bodies and history of the ore production is reported by Rb and Sr contents of siderite were determined by ICP-MS analyses. Sr isotopic measurements were carried out on the carbonate fraction of siderite, obtained by submitting about 50 mg of powdered carbonate to the following treatments: ultrasonic washing in ultrapure water, rinsing in double-distilled water, dissolution in 2.5 N ultrapure HCl, centrifugation and loading onto a standard Bio-Rad AG50-X8 cation exchange resin, collection of Sr in 2.5 N HCl and evaporation to dryness. Sr isotope analyses were performed using a Finnigan MAT 262 RPQ multicollector mass-spectrometer. All samples were loaded on a Re zone refined double filament as nitrate and analyzed in static mode. Sr analyses have been normalized to Internal precision (“within-run” precision) of a single analytical result is given as two standard errors of the mean (2 se) and is obtained as a mean of more than 200 ratios collected on each sample with a stable beam >2.5 V. In the period during which the mass spectrometric analyses were performed, SRM 987 Sr-standard gave a mean of 0.71022 with error (external error) expressed as two standard deviations (2  Because siderite hosts negligible Rb (<1 ppm), there has been no produced growth of radiogenic The narrow isotopic range indicates that the mineralizing fluids had a rather homogeneous Sr-isotope composition, suggesting a common provenance for the radiogenic Sr. In this view, as the isotopic range is quite higher than the range of the initial Sr-isotopic ratios shown by the local granites (0.706–0.709, Moreover, from the average Sr content of siderite it is possible to determine the Sr content of the parent fluid. In fact, though the Sr distribution coefficient between siderite and fluid is not yet known, however, it must be lower than the distribution coefficient of calcite (0.1–0.02 quoted by After formation, the JA siderites may have undergone recrystallization to some extent during Alpine orogenesis, especially considering that the JA area is situated at the foot of the Middle Atlas. Therefore, the isotopic ratios of both the granites and schists have been considered at 110 Ma, an age that may be representative of the most important tectonic Alpine phase in the area (e.g. The Sr-isotope ratios of 17 samples of siderite from the two most important Pb–Zn–Ag veins of the polymetallic deposit of Jebel Awam, located in the Moroccan Meseta at the foot of the Middle Atlas, range narrowly from 0.712829 to 0.713960, irrespective of sample locations. According to As siderite contains negligible Rb, the measured Sr-isotope ratios (0.712829–0.713960) are independent of the age and represent the Sr-isotopic ratios of the parental fluids of the carbonates. In this view, the Sr-isotope ratios indicate that the fluids were neither magmatic, as the initial Sr-isotope ratios of the granites ranged from 0.706 to 0.709 The homogeneous Sr-isotope compositions of siderite rule out possible recrystallization of this carbonate during Alpine orogenesis. As a whole, this study proves that the Sr-isotope ratio of siderite allows determination of the Sr-isotope composition of the parental fluid of this carbonate; this can be particularly useful if siderite is a major component of a mineral paragenetic assemblage. In fact, the type of fluids involved in the formation of a mineralization can be determined, once both the age and Sr-isotopic ratios of the main lithotypes present in the mineralized area are known. This in turn, along with information obtained by means of other techniques, ascertains the ore genesis. In this respect, for instance, because of the strict association of sulfides, quartz and siderite in the same veins at JA, it may be probable that the source of Pb and Zn is the same as that of radiogenic Sr and, thus, Pb and Zn derived essentially from leaching of the schists of the Paleozoic basement. Finally, it is noted that the determination of the Sr-isotope ratios of siderite may help for evaluating, at least on first approximation, the age of a mineralization. The authors thank the CNR, Centro di Studio per il Quaternario e l'Evoluzione Ambientale, for the use of the mass spectrometer facilities. We also thank Dr. S. Simmons and Dr. E. Marcoux for improving the manuscript.