Long-term excessive intake of fluoride (F) could lead to chronic fluorosis. To explore the underlying molecular mechanisms, present study is designed to elucidate the effect of fluoride on proteome expression of bone in sodium fluoride (NaF)-treated SD rats. Hematoxylin and eosin (H&E) staining was used to determine the severity of osteofluorosis, and bone samples were submitted for iTRAQ analysis. The results showed that the cortical thickness and trabecular area of femur bone in medium- and high-dose groups were higher than in control group. Contrary to this, trabecular area was reduced in the low-dose group, indicating that the bone mass was increased in medium- and high-dose groups, and decreased in the low-dose group. Thirteen (13), 35, and 34 differentially expressed proteins were identified in low-, medium-, and high-dose group, respectively. The medium- and high-dose groups shared a more similar protein expression pattern. These proteins were mainly associated with collagen metabolism, proteoglycans (PGs), matrix metalloproteinases (MMPs), etc. The results suggested that the effect of NaF on SD rats is in a dose-dependent manner. Some key proteins found here may be involved in affecting the bone tissues and bone marrow or muscle, and account for the complex pathology and clinical symptoms of fluorosis.Fluorine is a common and highly reactive element in the earth crust, that can combine with other elements to form fluoride (F) ( After ingestion of fluoride, approximately 99% of the fluoride is assimilated in hard tissues and get accumulated in bones and teeth ( Proteomics is a powerful tool for clarifying toxicological mechanisms associated with diseases. The proteomics analysis associated with F-toxicity has already been studied in different tissues ( Weanling SD rats (two-weeks old, weighing between 110 and 140 g) were obtained from Experimental Animal Center of Guizhou Medical University and kept in ventilated cages at 25–28 °C and 12/12 h light-dark cycles with free access to food and water. Rats were divided randomly into four groups i.e., 12 animals each group with an equal sex ratio. The groups were exposed to different NaF concentrations via drinking water for 24 weeks. The concentration of NaF (Sigma Chemical Co., St. Louis, MO, USA) was 50 mg/L, 150 mg/L and 250 mg/L for the NaF-treated groups, respectively. The control group rats were supplemented with pure water. These three treated groups were named as low-dose (50 mg/L), medium-dose (150 mg/L), and high-dose group (250 mg/L). The dose design was based on LD50 of NaF ( Bone morphology was examined with hematoxylin and eosin (H&E) staining. After 24 weeks of treatments, the rats were anesthetized by ether inhalation and were then killed, and the femur bones were removed for histological examination. Ten tissue samples were fixed in 10% formaldehyde solution. After decalcification, the femur bones were embedded in paraffin, serially sectioned into 3 μm sections, and stained by H&E. The sections were examined under a light microscope (LONYPAS HB51, Japan) and analyzed. Similar to a previous study ( Protein digestion and iTRAQ labeling were carried out as previously described ( The dried samples were reconstituted in 100 μL deionized water and injected into the Agilent high-performance liquid chromatography (HPLC) system (Agilent Technologies, Santa Clara, CA, USA) with a high pH RP column (Durashell, C18, 250mm × 4.6 mm, 5 μm). A total of 48 fractions were collected, merged into ten pooled fractions and lyophilized. Prior to LC–MS/MS analysis, the ten pooled fractions were reconstituted in 30 μL of LC–MS buffer, and 8 μL of each fraction used per NanoLC–MS/MS analysis ( An Ultra 2D Plus nanoflow HPLC (Eksigent Inc., Dublin, CA, USA) coupled with Triple TOF 5600 system (AB Sciex) was used for the analytical separation of peptides. Microfluidic traps and nanofluidic columns packed with ChromXP C18 (3 μm, 2.1 × 100 mm Eksigent) were used for online trapping and desalting, while nanofluidic columns packed with ChromXP C18 (3 μm × 150 cm, Eksigent) were employed in analytical separation. Data were acquired with a 2.4-kV ion spray voltage, 30-psi curtain gas, 5-psi nebulizer gas, and an interface heater temperature of 150 °C. The scan scope for TOF-MS is 350–1500 and for MS/MS is from 400 to 1250. Smart information-dependent acquisition (IDA) was activated with automatic collision energy and automatic MS/MS accumulation. Protein identification and quantification were performed using ProteinPilot v4.5 (AB Sciex) with the Paragon Algorithm against the rat Swiss-Prot database. Based on a 95% confidence level, at least one unique peptide per protein was required for identifying proteins, and two quantified peptides were required for quantifying proteins. The cut-off values of 1.2-fold for upregulated and 0.8-fold for downregulated proteins, and The differentially expressed proteins were loaded to STRING database (Search Tool for the Retrieval of Interacting Genes/Proteins, version 9.1, To confirm the iTRAQ proteomics results, the expression levels of calreticulin (CRT, or gene name Calr) and matrix metallopeptidase 8 (MMP-8 or gene name Mmp8) were determined using immunohistochemical analysis. Formalin-fixed paraffin-embedded bone tissues were fixed in neutral formalin, dehydrated in paraffin and then cut into 3 μm sections. The sections were deparaffinized through xylene and rehydrated with step wise low percent of alcohol. Endogenous peroxidase activity was blocked with 3% hydrogen peroxide at 37° C for 10 min, mixed with citrate buffer in a microwave oven for retrieving antigens, and treated with primary antibody of CTR (dilution 1:250; Abcam, Cambridge, MA, USA) and MMP-8 (dilution 1:50; Abcam) for overnight at 4° C, respectively. The samples were incubated with secondary antibody (PV-9001, Zhongshan Goldenbridge Biotechnology Co., Ltd., Beijing, China) at 37° C for 20 min. Subsequently, they were first treated with DAB (diaminobenzidine) for ∼2 min and then counterstained with hematoxylin for another 10s. PBS (phosphate-buffered saline; 137 mM NaCl, 10 mM phosphate buffer, and 2.7 mM KCl, pH 7.4) was used as a negative control for the primary antibody. Using a microscope with × 400 magnifications, five fields were randomly selected on each section to measure the integrated optical density (IOD). Numerical results are expressed as the mean ± standard deviation (SD). One-way ANOVA followed by the Student-Newman Keuls (SNK) was used to test the difference. Statistical analysis was performed with SPSS software (SPSS Inc., Chicago, USA). Statistically significant level was considered as α = 0.05. The same dose of NaF was given to SD rats in our previous studies ( By iTRAQ analysis, a total of 1371 proteins were successfully identified with 63 significantly differentially expressed proteins in NaF-treated groups. Out of these, 13 proteins (3 upregulated and 10 downregulated) were identified as differentially expressed proteins in low-dose group; 35 proteins (10 upregulated and 25 downregulated) in medium-dose group, and 34 (20 upregulated and 14 downregulated) proteins in high-dose group. The total proteins are listed in Supplementary Table 2 and differentially expressed proteins are presented in The hierarchical cluster analysis showed that the expression pattern of differentially expressed proteins in NaF treated-groups was almost similar; however, the medium- and high-dose groups shared a more similar pattern as compared to low-dose group ( All 63 differentially expressed proteins were analyzed for bioinformatics analysis. STRING database was used for GO annotation, pathway identification, and PPI networks analysis. The top 20 rankings of BP and CC are showed in We further analyzed these differentially expressed proteins by using Cytoscape. The results of GO annotation were well agreed with STRING analysis, the BP, CC, and MF associated with these proteins and are presented in Remarkably, most of these biological processes, CC and pathways were associated with the differentially expressed proteins found in the medium- and high-dose groups, suggesting that they may play a crucial role in these two groups. The expression levels of CRT and MMP8 were detected by IHC, as shown in ( After administring the SD rats with different concentrations of NaF, we successfully established the rat model of chronic fluorosis. We further performed iTRAQ analysis to identify the differential expression of bone proteins between NaF-treated groups and the control group, and 63 differentially expressed proteins were identified. These proteins and their related processes and signaling pathways may be linked to the pathogenesis of fluorosis. As described in the methods section, the whole bone of the rat was used with intact bone marrow tissues. Therefore, the total proteins may include the proteins derived from bone tissue and bone marrow. Due to limited data on the rat proteins, we compared our data with the data of human bone tissue reported in a previous study ( In low-dose group, the levels of 40S ribosomal protein S15a (Rps15a) and 40S ribosomal protein S3a (Rps3a) were significantly decreased, whereas MMP-8 and MMP-9 were significantly increased. Ribosome biogenesis plays a key role in skeletal development ( In medium- and high-dose groups, several biological processes, CC and pathways were affected by NaF. These include collagen fibril organization, collagen metabolic process, collagen trimer, ECM-receptor interaction, endochondral ossification, proteoglycan metabolic process and protein digestion and absorption. The previous studies have shown that F can affect the collagen metabolism of cartilage and bone ( Other important group of proteins was proteoglycans (PGs). Chondrocytes form the macromolecular framework of the tissue matrix from three classes of molecules: collagens, PGs, and non-collagenous proteins ( In addition, several important signaling pathways are affected due to F, these include calcium signaling pathway (Atp2a1, Calr, Slc25a4, Vdac1, Vdac2), serpin superfamily (Serpinf1, Serpinh1, Serpinb1a), arginine and proline metabolism (Ckb, Ckm, Got2), and cysteine and methionine metabolism (Got2, Ldha, Mdh2), glycolysis/gluconeogenesis (Eno3, Got2, Ldha, Mdh2, Pgk1). Among the signal pathways related proteins, CRT is the major Ca Serpins are a broadly distributed family of protease inhibitors that control many important proteolytic cascades. Serpinf1 and Serpinh1 have been reported as causative genes in osteogenesis imperfect, which comprised of a heterogeneous group of disorders characterized by bone fragility, frequent fractures, and low bone mass ( Another protein, PRELP, was upregulated in medium- and high-dose groups and it might be responsible for the increase in bone mass in both groups. It has been known to inhibit osteoclastogenesis entering pre-fusion osteoclasts through a chondroitin sulfate- and annexin 2-dependent mechanism, hence, reducing the nuclear factor-κB transcription factor activity. It is a novel osteoclast antagonist that counteracts bone loss ( Moreover, 7 myosin proteins include Myh2, Myh4, Myh7, Myl1, Myl3, Myom1, and Mybpc1 were significantly decreased in the NaF-treated groups, particularly in medium- and high- dose groups. This agrees with a recent study which demonstrated that fluoride disturbed the contractile pattern of skeletal muscle proteins ( The homeostasis of bone remodeling is regulated by a balance between bone formation and resorption ( In conclusion, by iTRAQ analysis, we identified 63 differentially expressed proteins between the rats treated with NaF and the normal controls. Most of these proteins belong to collagen proteins, MPPs, PGs, proteolytic protein, osteoclast related protein, and myosin proteins. These were involved in different signaling pathways and associated with bone mass change, mineralization process, dysfunction of the motor cell, and affected on osteoblasts and/or osteoclasts, and finally, contributing to the pathophysiology of skeletal and chronic fluorosis. These results provided new insights into the molecular mechanisms of fluoride toxicity. However, this is a preliminary study, in addition to CRT and MMP-8, other differentially expressed proteins need to be further verified. The signal transduction pathways associated with these differentially expressed proteins need further study. The authors declare no conflict of interest. This study was financially supported by Supplementary data associated with this article can be found, in the online version, at The following are Supplementary data to this article: