Species of macrofungi (mushrooms) were collected from clean areas and analyzed for their antimony content. These were compared to species collected from extremely polluted areas in the vicinity of a lead smelter and on mine and slag dumps. Antimony content was determined using long-term instrumental neutron activation analysis (INAA). Ectomycorrhizal and terrestrial saprobic macrofungi were examined. Antimony content of macrofungi from the clean areas was mostly less than 100μgkg−1 (dry mass). The highest concentrations (units of mgkg−1) were found in various species of the ectomycorrhizal genera Chalciporus and Suillus. Antimony contents of macrofungi growing in the polluted areas were considerably higher. The highest content was found in a single collection of Chalciporus piperatus (1423mgkg−1).Not a great deal is known about the biogeochemistry, environmental speciation and toxicity of antimony. Despite numerous papers on the content of trace elements in macrofungi (mushrooms), only a few authors have reported data on antimony. Macrofungi are well-known accumulators of many trace elements, among others arsenic ( All macrofungal samples were collected and identified by J.B. (B-samples) and Z.Ř. (M-samples) from many sites in the Czech and Slovak Republics. The first group of samples came from unpolluted rural areas away from any known mineral deposit (or mineral processing) that had an elevated level of antimony in the soil. A second group of macrofungi was sampled in extremely polluted areas (the Příbram district and the Kutná Hora district) characterized by high Sb content in soils. In the vicinity of Příbram, the sources of pollution are recently finished mining activities (Pb–Zn–Ag–Cu–U mineralization with significant occurrence of Sb-bearing minerals such as allemontite, tetrahedrite and stibnite) and lead smelting. The lead, cadmium, mercury and copper contents of macrofungi have already been investigated in this area ( In the case of certain samples of ectomycorrhizal fungi, the underlying soil was collected to the depth of about 10 The fruit bodies were isolated from substrate debris using a stainless steel or plastic knife, rinsed with distilled water, cut into thin slices and dried. Drying was initially performed at room temperature and later in an oven at 65 Pelletized samples with a mass of about 500 At the first counting after one week of decaying, Macrofungi were divided into two groups – ectomycorrhizal fungi (E) and terrestrial saprobes (S). They were collected in clean (EC, SC) or polluted (EP, SP) areas. Antimony contents of the macrofungal samples, belonging to the four groups mentioned above, are presented in In order to quantify the element accumulation in macrofungi, concentration factor The distribution of Sb among the ectomycorrhizal fungi and terrestrial saprobes from clean and polluted areas is presented in In general, antimony contents of both groups of macrofungi from clean areas (EC, SC) were mostly under 100 The highest ability to concentrate Sb was found in the ectomycorrhizal genera According to Antimony content of soils is much higher than that of macrofungal fruit bodies; values of the concentration factor are usually in the range of 10 Little information is available about antimony to estimate the impact on human health; some antimony compounds are known to have a genotoxic potential ( Antimony content of ectomycorrhizal and terrestrial saprobic macrofungi from clean areas is generally under 100 We are very grateful to Jan Kučera, Tjakko Stijve and anonymous referees for their help and valuable comments during the development of this manuscript. Financial support was obtained from the IAEA Research Contract 11922, project GAUK 261/2005/B-GEO/Prf and project IRP AV0Z10480505.