Introduction
                  Bicondylar tibial plateau fractures can be treated with locked plating applied from the lateral side with or without additional application of a medial plate (dual plating). Recent studies demonstrate that these injuries can be sub-grouped based upon their morphology by computed tomography (CT). The purpose of this study is to evaluate the relationship between fracture pattern, method of fixation and loss of reduction in bicondylar tibial plateau fractures.
               
                  Patients and methods
                  Preoperative CT scans and postoperative plain films were evaluated on a consecutive series of bicondylar tibial plateau fractures. Fracture patterns were classified by CT. Angular alignment was measured immediately postoperatively and again at clinical and radiographic union to assess loss of reduction.
               
                  Results
                  A total of 140 patients were studied. Sixty-six (47%) had a single large medial fragment with the articular surface intact, 19 (14%) had a medial articular fracture line with a mainly sagittal component and 55 (39%) had a coronal fracture through the medial articular surface. A total of 129 patients had been treated with lateral locked plating alone whilst 11 patients (all with a coronal fracture of the medial condyle) underwent dual plating.
                  There was little loss of reduction (median subsidence 0.5°) when lateral locked plating was employed alone in patients with a single medial fracture fragment or with a sagittal medial fracture line. When lateral locked plating was used in the presence of a medial coronal fracture line, there was a significantly higher rate of subsidence (median 2.0°) compared to those with no medial fracture line (p
                     =0.002). Patients with coronal fracture lines treated with dual plating had significantly less loss of reduction that those treated with lateral locked plating (p
                     =0.01).
               
                  Conclusions
                  Most patients with bicondylar tibial plateau fractures do well when treated with lateral locked plating. However, those with a medial coronal fracture line tend to have a higher rate of subsidence and loss of reduction when lateral locked plating is employed alone. These fractures may be better treated with dual plating if the soft tissues allow.
               
                  Level of evidence
                  Level III (retrospective comparative study).Several strategies have been advocated for the management of bicondylar tibial plateau fractures. Recent series of proximal tibia fractures have highlighted the existence of specific fracture patterns that involve a coronal fracture line through the medial condylar articular surface. Barei et al. described a series of 146 bicondylar tibial plateau fractures and identified a 29% incidence of a medial coronal/postero-medial shear injuries. The trauma surgeons at our two level-one trauma centres have primarily used lateral locked plating in the treatment of bicondylar tibial plateau fractures. However, in cases with extensive medial comminution or when a postero-medial fracture fragment is present, dual plating is occasionally used. The primary goal of this study is to evaluate the effect of fracture morphology and method of fixation of bicondylar tibial plateau fractures on radiographic alignment at healing. Secondary outcome measures include the initial postoperative reduction (alignment) and the rates of infection and nonunion. We performed a review of all patients with bicondylar tibial plateau fractures treated at our two trauma centres between 1 January 2002 and 31 December 2007. Institutional Review Board approval was obtained prior to the initiation of the study. Patients were identified through query of our prospectively gathered electronic trauma database. Inclusion criteria consisted of the diagnosis of a bicondylar tibial plateau fracture, of 18 years or older at the time of injury, presence of a preoperative computed tomography (CT) scan of the injury, treatment with either lateral locked plating or dual plating and follow-up to clinical and radiographic union. As many as 161 adult patients were identified with bicondylar tibial plateau fractures. Seven were excluded due to lack of a preoperative CT scan, three because they were treated with an external fixator or isolated medial or posterior plating and 12 for insufficient follow-up. The remaining 140 patients made up our final study cohort. Preoperative radiographs were reviewed to confirm the diagnosis of a complete articular proximal tibial fracture. All fractures were classified by a single observer according to the Arbeitsgemeinschaft für Osteosynthesefragen (AO) and Schatzker classification systems. Fractures where the medial tibial condyle is separated from the diaphysis but remains in one piece, without any fracture line crossing the medial articular surface. Fractures where the medial articular fragment is split in the coronal plane. Fractures where the medial articular fragment is fractured or comminuted in some other way. The definition of a coronal fracture was based upon the findings of Barei et al. and included all fracture patterns with the major medial articular fracture line lying within −45 to 30 of the posterior femoral condylar axis. For the purposes of statistical analysis, patients were divided into four groups combining fracture morphology and the method of fracture fixation: No medial articular fracture line, treated with a lateral locking plate (no medial fracture LL). Medial articular fracture without a coronal component, treated with a lateral locked plate (non-coronal medial fracture LL). Medial articular fracture with a coronal component, treated with a lateral locked plate (coronal medial fracture LL). Medial articular fracture with a coronal component, treated with dual plating (coronal medial fracture dual plate (DP)). Fractures fixed through unilateral locked plating were approached through a single antero-lateral incision. In cases where dual plating was employed, separate medial and lateral incisions were used. It is our general practice to use temporary external fixation to maintain an adequate reduction if the quality of the soft-tissue envelope precludes early definitive fixation. If a fracture had been treated with a temporary external fixator, this was left in place during the surgery to assist with maintenance of alignment. If no external fixator was used, the AO ASIF universal distractor was employed to help reduce significantly displaced fractures and to maintain alignment during fixation. The standard antero-posterior (AP) radiographs of the proximal half of tibia obtained immediately postoperatively and at follow-up appointments were used to gauge reduction. The quality of the initial reduction and its maintenance were assessed by the articular alignment measured immediately postoperatively and again at the time of fracture healing by two independent observers ( Data were compiled on Microsoft Excel (Microsoft Inc., Redmond, WA, USA). Statistical analysis was completed with Statistical Package for the Social Services (SPSS) version 16.0 (SPSS Inc., Chicago, IL, USA). Articular alignment values used were the averaged findings of the two observers. There was a high degree of inter-observer reliability ( As many as 140 patients met the entrance criteria and were included in the study. Mean follow-up was 28 months (range 4–90). The median age was 48 (18–87). Patient demographics, fracture characteristics and mechanism of injury are presented in Preoperative CT revealed that 47% of patients had a single large medial condylar fragment with the articular surface intact, 14% had a medial articular fracture line without a coronal component and 39% had a coronal fracture through the medial articular surface. Of those treated with lateral locked plating, 31 were fixed using a stainless steel periarticular tibial locking plate and 98 with the Less Invasive Stabilisation System (LISS, Synthes, Paoli, PA, USA). For the purposes of analysis, all patients with unilateral locking plates were considered together. Dual plating constructs typically included a lateral locked plate and a medial buttress plate. There was a higher proportion of patients with AO class 41C3 fractures in the dual plating group when compared to other treatment groups ( Complication data are presented in Postoperative alignment ranged from 7.0° of valgus to 7.5° of varus. The incidence of postoperative malreduction (varus/valgus alignment of 5.0° or more) was 15% for the no medial fracture LL (lateral locking plate) group, 5% for the non-coronal medial fracture LL group, 18% for the coronal medial fracture LL group and 18% with the coronal medial fracture DP group ( Fifty-four percent of the fractures showed a change in alignment of ≥1° during the follow-up period to final healing. Forty-four percent developed increased varus malalignment (up to 13°) and 11% developed increased valgus malalignment (up to 4.5°). The incidence of loss of reduction of 5.0° or more was 5% for the no medial fracture LL group, 5% for the non-coronal medial fracture LL group, 14% for the coronal medial fracture LL group and 0% with the coronal medial fracture DP group ( Patients with a medial coronal fracture treated with lateral locking plates had a median change of alignment of 2.0° of varus alignment at healing compared to 0.5° of varus for patients without a medial fracture line ( The median loss of reduction for patients with medial coronal fractures treated with dual plating was 0.5°. Patients with coronal fracture lines treated with dual plating had significantly less loss of reduction than those treated with lateral locked plating ( Our series highlights the difficulty in treating complete articular tibial plateau fractures. Immediate postoperative alignment ranged from 7° of valgus to 7.5° of varus. Fifteen percent of patients had malreductions ≥5°. There were no statistically significant differences in the incidence of initial postoperative alignment regardless of fracture pattern or type of fixation. This suggests that we were able to achieve an acceptable reduction in 85% of the patients regardless of the technique chosen or method of fixation used. The 15% identified as malreduced had a maximum of 7° valgus or 7.5° varus. This range of malreduction is similar to those reported by others examining lateral locked plating and dual plating for bicondylar fractures. Grosling et al. similarly reported a 23% rate of immediate postoperative malreduction using the LISS plating system. A number of authors have hypothesised that lateral locked plating may not be as effective as dual plating in managing tibial plateau fractures associated with a postero-medial fragment. We have shown that lateral locked plating performs well in fracture patterns with no medial fracture line or a non-coronal fracture line. Only 5% lost of reduction of 5.0° or more in both groups. Similarly, in each group the median medial degree of reduction lost was only 0.5°. Lateral locked plating appears to be least effective for bicondylar fractures when a medial coronal fracture line is present. Fourteen percent of patients with a coronal medial fracture line treated with lateral locked plating alone lost 5.0° or more of reduction, compared to 5% in the other two lateral locking plate groups. Although no statistically significant differences were present between these groups ( The presence of a medial coronal fracture line significantly increased the median reduction lost compared to those without a medial fracture (median 2.0° vs. 0.5°, Several factors could explain why lateral locked plating is less effective for fractures with coronal medial fracture lines. The direction of locked screws is fixed and is, for the most part, parallel rather than perpendicular to a coronal fracture line. This may explain why the fixation failure was not seen with medial articular fracture lines in the sagittal plane. Further, although the posterior medial fracture fragments may be small, it may serve a critical role in preventing posterior subluxation of the medial femoral condyle. Even when locking screws engage the fragment, the quality of the fixation may be inadequate to resist the forces of displacement. Finally, with small medial fragments, the best fixation is achieved when screws engage the far cortex. This means that screws must pass all the way through the bone. Surgeons generally avoid prominent medial screws, particularly with the self-drilling tips of the LISS screws, thereby leaving the screws shorter than would be best for ideal fixation. The inclusion of a medial plate in the fixation construct avoids these problems and provides a medial buttress to prevent subsidence. Our study has a number of limitations. It is a retrospective review and the choice of fixation was not randomised. Dual plating was used disproportionately in fractures that involved a coronal component. Further, the clinical significance of the increased subsidence seen is unknown. However, the results obtained in the dual plating group were equal to or better than those obtained with lateral locking plates despite a higher proportion of more complex fractures. Our approach to treating bicondylar tibial plateau fractures has evolved based upon our experience. It is our current practice to use unilateral locked plating in cases where the medial tibial condyle is intact and is one large piece. If fracture fragments are large, and the joint surface itself is relatively preserved, we use the LISS system. For more complicated articular injuries we favour large fragment locking plates as we feel the screw spread more effectively captures the medial tibial condyle. Additional fixation with independent small or mini fragment plates and/or screws is often required if the lateral articular surface is comminuted. We have found that we are treating a much larger proportion of fractures with dual plating. We use this technique in cases where the medial fragment is either small (limiting fixation from the lateral side) or fractured in the coronal plane. Implant choice should be fracture specific; however, we typically use small fragment pre-contoured plates for both the medial and lateral sides. The medial side is addressed first. Direct medial plate placement is useful if the medial side is intact but small. When a coronal fracture line is present, postero-medial placement allows the shear component of the injury to be buttressed into place. The lateral side is then addressed through a separate approach, building to the provisionally fixed medial tibial condyle. Our experience suggests that lateral locked plating provides adequate fixation of the majority of bicondylar tibial plateau fractures. However, fractures with a medial coronal fracture line tend to have a higher rate of loss of reduction when lateral locked plating is employed alone and may be better treated with dual plating if the soft tissues allow. Most importantly, not all bicondylar tibial plateau fractures are similar, and surgical treatment should be tailored to the specific fracture pattern to optimise results. The authors report no financial or personal relationships that relate to the material presented in this manuscript. No outside funding sources were used; only internal departmental funds were used.