This paper discusses the combined state and parameter estimation of SAG mill inventories and model parameters. Recognised simulation models are utilised for the rock and water charge state equations. New models of the ball charge and mill shell lining states are presented. The 36 state system is detectable although not completely observable. Five ore grindability and mill discharge grate parameters augment the state system. One mill weight and two discharge measurement models are presented and utilised in two state estimation formulations. Results indicate that a size by size SAG mill discharge measurement model provides superior state estimates and improved discharge grate parameter estimation compared to a bulk SAG mill discharge measurement model.The SAG milling process presents measurement and control problems typical of an industrial process in that “the total state vector can seldom be measured and the number of outputs is much less than the number of states.” State estimation techniques may be utilised to “provide acceptable estimates of all the state variables (even those not directly measured) in the face of measurement error and process disturbances” ( This paper discusses combined state and parameter estimation (CSPE) for SAG mill charge levels and is a continuation of earlier work ( The discussion centres on the primary grinding circuit shown in Significant research has been conducted in the use of Kalman filters for comminution process state estimation. Much of the research has been conducted by J.A. Herbst and colleagues whom, over time, have had association with Utah Comminution Centre, Control International (Inc.), GS Industries, JA Herbst and Associates, Svedala (Optimization Services and CISA) and Metso Minerals.  Kalman filters were applied to autogenous/semiautogenous (AG/SAG) mills by A Kalman filter has been used on an iron ore pebble mill ( The Svedala Cisa OCS The review shows that the technology of Kalman filters in SAG mill state estimation is well progressed. However, the industrial uptake of state estimation has been slow and isolated to larger mining houses and new installations. The lag between development and uptake is a reflection of the level of uptake of model based decision making control technologies.  The Herbst and Pate application of a Kalman filter for the estimation of mill rock and ball hold-up is recognised in a review of automation in the minerals processing industry. Research into state estimation for SAG mills is also currently being progressed at the Julius Kruttschnitt Mineral Research Centre where a Kalman filter is utilised to predict ore hardness, mill total charge and mill discharge factors ( The contribution of the work reported here is to present further examples of state estimation for SAG mills and novel models of the SAG mill discharge, SAG mill ball charge and shell protective lining. State estimation of mill rock charge, ball charge ( CSPE for SAG mills is now discussed further with the presentation of the state equations and parameters. Two formulations are presented which include process measurement equations for mill weight and mill discharge. Both are based on a University of Sydney thesis dissertation ( Continuous-time nonlinear systems can be described as follows ( In discrete-time, where measurements are available at equally spaced intervals (sampling periods) Δ One method of on-line state and parameter estimation is achieved through the utilisation of an the extended Kalman filter on the system described by Eqs. This research models the SAG milling process by the following 36 state equations and five parameter equations:      The dynamic ball charge model proposed by this research is as follows: The ball feed to the SAG mill, bi The overall ball wear rate may be determined from operating data. If the ball charge level is being maintained at a constant level, the ball wear rate is equal to the ball feed rate The total surface area of grinding balls in The fractional surface area of the ball charge in Assuming hardness of 450 and 250 Brinnell for the outside and inner layer of the balls, respectively, (estimated from data in The model can be adjusted to suit a given set of operating conditions by the introduction of a ball wear coefficient, BWk The model of ejection of balls from the SAG mill proposes that the SAG mill discharge grate behaves as a vibrating screen which can be modelled by an efficiency to oversize model ( The efficiency model utilised here is taken from The model is validated against operating data by fitting the ball wear model parameters (BWk The dynamic model of the SAG mill shell protective lining proposed by The mill shell remains intact throughout the operational life of the mill. Therefore, the mill shell weight (shell) is a constant. The lining is the internal shell protective lining and is subject to wear through direct contact with the mill contents. The SAG mill discharge grate is internal to the mill also and is subject to wear. Periodic change out of the mill protective lining and discharge grate occurs to accommodate the wear of these internal components. From plant experience, the shell lining wear occurs predominantly at discharge end. Therefore, the lining term can be broken up into a feed end and a discharge end term: Combining the feed end lining terms and a constant (to accommodate mill weight instrument offset) into a SAG mill weight constant, SMWconst (t), allows the model to we rewritten as follows: Integrating Eq. The mill liner wear rate, wearate, can determined from the change-out frequency and the relative change in weight of the discharge grate and discharge end shell lining at change-out time. Based on typical plant experience, the change-out frequency is approximately 6 weeks, or 1008 h (6×7×24), and the change-out liner weight is approximately half the liner installation weight, i.e., The shell lining is a series of alternating low lifter and high lifter bars separated by shell lining segments. The installation weight of the discharge end shell lining, lining In Eq. The installation weight of the discharge grate, In Eq. The second term in Eq. The assumption that all mill lining wear occurs in the discharge end of the mill allows the mill liner model to be simplified. Subtracting the mill weight constant (SMWconst) from both sides of Eq. Take all terms in Eq. Express ( Solve Eq. Determine the current lining thickness, (slt−wt) (mm). The state equations required for the combined state and parameter estimation formulation have now been presented, i.e., dynamic mass balance models of the rock (Eqs. The measurement (process output) models typically utilised in CSPE are based on mill powerdraw and mill weight (by way of bearing pressure or load cell measurement) ( The SAG mill weight is measured by load cell. This measurement, mass of ore particles, grinding balls and water in the mill charge kidney (the charge material that is not in free-fall from the charge shoulder to the charge toe), mass of the mill shell discharge end lining and the discharge grate, ( a calibration term, tare, that allows for the difference between the actual total mill weight and the load cell measurement (includes the mill shell weight and the feed end shell lining weight), Model 1 is a bulk flow model which estimates the total volumetric discharge rate of the SAG mill. The SAG mill discharge stream volumetric flowrate can be reconstructed from four available plant measurements and then utilised in the CSPE formulation as the second process output, The plant measurement, Eq. The liquid mass flowrate, SMDC On account of the SAG mill discharge grate characteristics, i.e., high fractional open area (foag), high relative radial position of the open area ( The parameter functionality of the SAG discharge measurement model, The relative fraction pebble port open area ( The ore breakage parameters A, b and The mill weight measurement Initial difficulties in generating results utilising this formulation ( Linearising the CSPE at steady-state conditions to generate a state-space model of the form Generating the “observability matrix,” Determining the rank of the observability matrix, If the rank of The rank of the observability matrix, The issue of primary concern in utilising the bulk flow model was the low number of plant measurements and measurement models (2) relative to the number of states in the system (36). Therefore, the number of plant measurements was increased through the extension of the SAG mill discharge bulk flow model to a size by size model. Twenty eight new plant measurements, Eq. The system matrix A for the size by size model ( The rank of the observability matrix, The system of states was shown to be detectable for both CSPE formulations ( The results of the CSPE models are given in  The poor observability of this model can be inferred from the two poor state estimate results that stand out in  Relative error is present in the estimates of the mill discharge parameters ( The state estimates of The volumetric ball charge ( Although both CSPE formulations are capable of good estimates, the The results arising from a suite of inferential models––models that infer unmeasured conditions from other measurements––to be presented in a future paper, indicate the error in the charge estimates from a mill weight-based inferential model is 1.3% and 1.8% for the estimates of the total volumetric charge ( Two formulations of combined state and parameter estimation (CSPE) for SAG mills have been presented. They incorporated novel dynamic models of SAG mill ball charge and protective shell lining. Two novel measurement models of the SAG mill discharge, a bulk flow model and a size by size throughput model, and a novel mill weight measurement model were also presented. Assessment of system observability and detectability showed that observability was poor for formulation utilising the mill discharge bulk flow model. The subsequent development of the size by size throughput SAG mill discharge measurement model yielded better observability properties and improved state estimates. Both of the CSPE formulations, whilst not completely observable, are detectable. Both formulations would require further validation prior to implementation. The size by size SAG mill discharge measurement model ( Acknowledgements go to Northparkes Mines for their assistance with and permission to publish circuit information, the Centre for Process Systems Engineering for part hosting and the University of Sydney for providing Australian Postgraduate Award funding for this research.