We propose a population balance model coupled with a mass transfer model to simulate the simultaneous shrinkage and breakage of particles during the reactive dissolution of particle agglomerates in stirred tank. The high-order moment-conserving method of classes is adopted to solve the population balance model. In the mass transfer model, the driving force is estimated by considering the physical constraints including electroneutrality, water dissociation and dissolution equilibrium. The simulation results, including the concentration and the particle size distribution of the final products, were validated by experiments carried out in a laboratory scale stirred tank. The unknown physical parameters in the particle breakage model were fitted against the experimental data. The results underline the importance of particle breakage in the reactive dissolution modeling under the investigated operating conditions. Several daughter size distributions functions found in literature were tested. Among them, the beta distribution provides the most flexible way to describe breakage of the particle agglomerates.Dimensionless shape factor of beta distribution, [−] Total mass transfer area, m Breakage table Concentration of component, mol/m Diffusion coefficient of component p, m Breakage frequency, 1/s Growth rate, m/s Mass transfer coefficient, m/s Solubility product, mol Volume shape factor, [−] Water auto-ionization constant, mol Particle size, m Amount of component, mol Number density, #/m Mass transfer flux, mol/(m Reynolds number, [−] Schmidt number, [−] Sherwood number, [−] Volume, m Molar volume, m Paricle number density, #/m Charge of the cationic and anionic, [−] Daughter size distribution function, [−] Exponent of the particle size in power-law breakage kernel, [−] Density, Kolmogorov length scale, m Kolmogorov time scale, s  Dynamic viscosity of the liquid, P Breakage rate constant, [−] Overall energy dissipation, m Kinematic viscosity of liquid, m Breakage Dispersion Index of the particle size classes Liquid phase Index of the components Solid phase Several efforts have been devoted to the experimental and numerical studies on solid-liquid reactive dissolution in various industrial applications such as reduction of metallic oxides, hydrometallurgy, kraft pulping, chemical leaching and aqueous mineral carbonation ( Shrinking particle model is usually employed to describe the solid-liquid mass transfer during the dissolution of non-porous powder particles. It is commonly based on the assumption that particles are monodispersed, i.e., all the particles have the same diameter ( The solid-liquid mass transfer of uncharged molecules can be described by the typical Noyes-Whitney equation ( Another important but often neglected phenomenon, is the breakage of the particles due to high shear rates occurring in the reactors (most commonly stirred tanks) where the dissolution process takes place. The raw materials are not always perfect spheres or cubes, but rather agglomerates with various morphology, and the breakage of such large agglomerates may alter the total solid-liquid contact area, influencing the dissolution rate in both mass transfer and surface reaction regimes. For this reason, a detailed population balance equation (PBE), accounting for both particle shrinking due to chemical dissolution and particle breakage due to intensive turbulence, is needed to properly describe the behavior of the dissolution process ( As the most important character of the dispersed phase in the multiphase processes, the variation of PSD caused by physical mechanisms including nucleation, growth, agglomeration and breakage can be described by solving population balance equation (PBE) ( In this work, we propose a population balance model coupled with a mass transfer model to simulate the reactive dissolution of Mg(OH) The reactive dissolution of Mg(OH) The shrinking particle model can be adopted to calculate the solid-liquid mass transfer during the reactive dissolution as shown in The dissolving particles are spherical. The particle shrinks uniformly and maintains the same shape during the dissolution and breakage. The liquid volume, The agglomeration of the particles is neglected during the reactive dissolution. Perfect mixing is assumed in the laboratory scale stirred tank reactor. It is important to mention that assumption of particle shape should be confirmed by experimental evidences, since the shape of raw materials could vary case by case. In this study, it is reasonable to assume agglomerates of Mg(OH) As a rate-limiting step, the mass transfer rates of the components (Mg The solid-liquid mass transfer flux can be calculated as ( To calculate the concentration difference between the solid-liquid interface and the bulk solution, the interface concentrations are needed. As previously mentioned, the solid-liquid interface concentration is usually assumed constant determined by solubility product. Then, the interface concentration of components, including Mg The bulk concentration of chloride remains constant during the dissolution as it is not added to the system. Therefore, the mass transfer flux of chloride ( The solid-liquid mass transfer coefficient, As previously mentioned, the only particle size related physical phenomena considered here are the particle shrinkage and the particle breakage. The population balance equation (PBE) can be written for particle diameter ( The PBE can be solved with the method of classes (MC), where the internal coordinate space is discretized into a finite number of size classes ( The growth term (third RHS term of Eq. The birth term by particle breakage can also be factored into two part: Together with the breakage frequency, also the daughter size distribution (DSD) function is needed to model the outcome of a breakage event. A variety of functional forms for the DSD functions has been proposed and validated through comparison with the experimental data. Most of the DSD functions are proposed based on the breakage of single particle, droplet and bubbles( Note that the breakage rate constant and the parameter of beta distribution are tank average values which are obtained by parameter fitting based on the assumption of spatial homogeneity of the laboratory scale reactor. In the stirred tank reactor, the breakage rate of particle agglomerates near the impeller could be larger than the tank average value due to the non-uniform distribution of the turbulent intensity, as well as the PSD can be different from point to point in the domain. Indeed, a fitting process that involves the influence of hydrodynamics, mainly taking the local energy dissipation rate into account, could result in a more applicable and realistic set of physical parameters ( The mathematical model consisting mass balance equations and population balance equations was implemented in Matlab R2016b. For the mass transfer model, the solid-liquid interface concentration is calculated numerically with the Levenberg-Marquardt algorithm at every time step ( The experimental system consisted of a 3L jacketed glass stirred tank equipped with a Rushton turbine impeller, a thermostat (Lauda T2200) and an on-line pH meter (Metrohm 744). In order to improve mixing and prevent vortex formation, four baffles were located symmetrically at the inner wall of the reactor. In each batch operation, 2.5L HCl solution (pH In order to validate the proposed model, different initial conditions (particle sizes) and operation conditions (impeller speeds) applied for the experiments were listed in As the proper description of the initial condition is essential in the solution of the ODEs constituting the PBM, the accurate discretization of the initial PSD is crucial to model the reactive dissolution. The SEM pictures of the raw materials of Mg(OH) The initial PSD of particles is usually obtained by using a predetermined probability density function (PDF) such as lognormal or Weibull distribution in which parameters are fitted against measured PSD ( The concentration of magnesium ion and the PSD of the final products were calculated and compared with the experimental results under different initial and operating conditions. The only unknown physical parameters including the particle breakage constant ( The dissolution rate can be calculated from the time evolution of the magnesium ion concentration in In addition, the present model can give a better understanding of reactive dissolution by analyzing the influence of operating conditions on both particle diameter and mass transfer area. The Sauter Mean Diameter ( The experimental and modeling results of The influence of the impeller speeds on particle diameter and mass transfer area shows that particle breakage could play an important role in the reactive dissolution of particle agglomerate. The evolution of PSD simulated by the reactive dissolution model (Case 2) with and without breakage were compared in As it is possible to see from The interface concentration and mass transfer rate of components in Case 2 are presented in This work proposed a mathematical model for reactive dissolution of solid agglomerates under ideal mixing assumption. The simultaneous particle shrinkage and breakage were described by using the population balance model coupled with a mass transfer model. In the mass transfer model, the Nernst-Planck equation is adopted to guarantee the electroneutrality of the mass transfer fluxes and the interface concentrations. To describe the breakage of agglomerates, beta distribution is adopted as a daughter size distribution function, while the breakage frequency is modeled with an empirical correlation that accounts for the interaction between particle and turbulent eddy. The resulting population balance model is eventually solved by means of the high-order moment-conserving method of classes. The comparison between the modeling results and the data measured during reactive dissolution experimental campaign carried out in a laboratory scale stirred tank reactor pointed out several interesting aspects. Firstly, the model is capable of predicting the influence of different initial particle size and impeller speed on the reactive dissolution rate. Then, the influence of particle breakage on the Sauter Mean Diameter and the mass transfer area were identified: the inclusion of the particle breakage in the model is crucial to the accurate simulation of the dissolution rate and the evolution of particle size distribution. Compared to several daughter size distributions in the literature, the beta distribution provided the most flexible way to predict the breakage of solid agglomerates with complex internal structures. Finally, the interface concentration estimated by considering the physical constraints including electroneutrality, water dissociation and dissolution equilibrium, was found to be different from the values calculated by the solubility equilibrium during the reactive dissolution. Financial support from the