High energy costs required to smelt low grade concentrates could be alleviated by the production of high grade concentrates. Obtaining maximum PGM recovery by the use of high dosages of polysaccharide depressants may be problematic in that a significant decrease in the stability of the froth, particularly with CMC, results. These highly unstable froths may result in restricted mass pulls and decreased valuable mineral recovery. There are a number of ways of counteracting unstable froths, such as increasing airflow rate, reducing froth height or increasing frother dosage. Although necessary to maximise PGM recovery, all of these are likely to lead to increased water recovery and dilution of the concentrate by entrained material. This work examines the effect of increasing frother dosage on the recovery of sulphide minerals and floatable gangue from a Merensky ore at varying dosages of guar gum and CMC, as well as on the recovery of entrained gangue and its dependence on the physical nature of the flotation pulp.The presence of naturally floating gangue (NFG) in both the Merensky and UG2 ore types of the Bushveld Complex, South Africa, presents two processing problems. In the flotation of the sulphides and discrete Platinum Group Elements (PGE) after suitable comminution, the NFG interferes with the successful flotation of the slower-floating species such as pyrrhotite and ultrafine pentlandite because it enters the flotation hierarchy ahead of these species. In so doing it stabilises the froth and is recovered into the final concentrate partially at the expense of the aforementioned slow-floating species. Small amounts of NFG, including talc, in the order of 0.5–5% by mass in the ore, are sufficient to cause these undesirable effects.It has been shown that these naturally floatable minerals are due to the presence of talc along pyroxene grain boundaries ( Although the two polysaccharide depressants appear to be almost interchangeable in their efficiency as depressants, their structures are significantly different. The CMC molecule has a high negative charge density in that, at high concentrations the adsorption of CMC results in a strong negative charge on the particles causing significant dispersion, while the guar gum molecule has a very low charge density which, even at high concentrations would not result in dispersed pulps in the presence of the high ionic strength waters found in the concentrators. Comparative adsorption studies of CMC, guar gum and starch depressants on talc were reported by Recent testwork in the Reagent Research Facility at UCT has shown ( For this work a Merensky ore containing a significant amount of NFG ( An ore from the southern section of the Merensky Reef in the Bushveld Igneous Complex, South Africa was prepared at UCT ( Batch flotation tests were conducted using a method developed at UCT ( The frother used for all the batch flotation tests was DOW 200 at dosages varying from 40 to 70 The frother, DOW 200, was supplied by Betachem and the chemical salts used in making up the synthetic plant water, were obtained from Merck. The air supply to the flotation cell was maintained at a flow rate of 7 For all previous testwork using this ore, DOW 200, at a fixed dosage of 40 As in previous work the measure of froth stability has been taken as the mass of water reporting to the concentrate at a fixed froth height. Total mass and water recovered for the various conditions evaluated are shown in For all depressant dosages it is shown that an increase in frother dosage resulted in an increase in water recovery and a corresponding increase in the mass reporting to the concentrate. This indicates that, whatever the nature of the froth stability (stabilised or destabilised) an increase in frother dosage resulted in an increase in froth stability and a greater mass recovery. The addition of depressant, either guar gum or CMC, significantly reduced froth stability and the mass of water recovered. The presence of a significant amount of NFG in the froth in tests conducted in the absence of depressant resulted in a much greater increase in the water recovered than that observed when either 250 or 500 The amount of entrained gangue (or entrainability) in the concentrate as a function of the water recovered is shown in  The effect of increasing frother dosage on the recovery of NFG to the concentrate for the selected depressant dosages is shown in The cumulative mass of water recovered as a function of time is shown in Upon examination of the data displayed in The grade versus recovery curves for copper and nickel at 500 Very different behaviour was, however, observed at 500 The final grades and recoveries of copper and nickel for all conditions are shown in By increasing the depressant dosage to 500 Increased frother dosage, from 40 to 70 Highly destabilised froths, due to the dispersing action of high dosages of CMC depressant, were rendered more stable by the use of increased frother dosage. An increase in frother dosage improved the recovery of copper and nickel, but at the expense of grade. At high depressant dosages (>300 High dosages of depressant resulted in an increase in copper and nickel grades but always at the expense of recovery, presumably by the depression of partially liberated sulphide/gangue particles. However, it must always be borne in mind that increased frother dosages may lead to downstream problems in a concentrator. This testwork was carried out using one frother. Further work should involve the use of different frothers to determine whether the same effects are noted. Lonmin Platinum for supplying the Merensky ore used in this study Members of the Reagent Research Facility for providing the financial support to enable this work to take place.