Object
                  Guidelines for the management of pediatric epidural hematoma (PEDH) remain poorly defined. Here we seek to characterize the disease course of PEDH in patients with presenting Glasgow Coma Scale (GCS) of 14+, and suggest high-risk characteristics for progression to surgery.
               
                  Methods
                  A prospectively maintained, single-institution, level-1 trauma hospital admission database was queried to identify patients ages 6 months to 18 years presenting with PEDH between 2006 and 2016. Selected charts were reviewed for clinical information and treatment. Head imaging was reviewed for hematoma size, location, fractures, and midline shift.
               
                  Results
                  Of 210 cases reviewed, 117 presented with a GCS of 14+. Of these, 24 required surgery while 93 were managed conservatively. Factors leading to surgery included decline in GCS (40%), size alone (21%), localizing neurological deficit (20%), progression on repeat imaging (12%), and other (7%). Hematomas involving the temporal lobe plus an adjacent lobe were more likely to proceed to surgery than those involving the temporal lobe alone (OR: 24.8, 95% CI (4.74, 129.26)). Hematomas in proximity to the superior sagittal and transverse sinuses proceeded to surgery in 33.3% and 37.5% of cases, respectively. Of the 93 patients with a thickness:biparietal skull diameter ratio of ≤0.15, 89 (95.7%) were managed conservatively.
               
                  Conclusion
                  In this single-institution experience, 21% of pediatric patients presenting with a GCS of 14+ proceeded to surgery. High-risk features include large hematoma thickness, proximity to the transverse sinus, and multilobar location. A thickness:biparietal skull diameter ratio less than 0.15 was highly unlikely to proceed to surgery.Epidural hematomas are a serious condition found to be present in 2–4% of all pediatric traumatic brain injury (TBI) The average age of pediatric patients with epidural hematomas (PEDH) is between 6 and 10 years old, with greater mortality rates seen in younger children Although EDH has been found to comprise 2–4% of all TBI in both adult and pediatric reviews, the two entities are unique to each other, and therefore require special considerations A prospectively maintained, single institution, level-1 trauma hospital admission database was queried to identify pediatric patients presenting with epidural hematomas between January 2006 and July 2017. Patients between 6 months and 18 years of age were included in analysis; those under six months of age were reviewed and analyzed separately. Patient charts were reviewed for age, ethnicity, method of injury, presenting GCS, neurological exam findings, fontanelle status (when appropriate), time to surgery, and type of surgery (craniotomy vs. craniectomy). Possible methods of injury included assault, domestic fall (less than 10 feet), fall from height (greater than 10 feet), motor vehicle accident, non-vehicle road accident (e.g. motor vehicle vs. pedestrian, cycling accident), sports-related injury, and other. Neurological findings recorded included the presence of a lucid interval, anisocoria, focal neurological deficits, and a decline in GCS. All initial computed tomography (CT) scans were reviewed for location of hematoma, lobes involved, involvement of superior sagittal sinus or transverse sinus, fracture pattern (open or closed fracture, comminution status), and concurrent intracranial injury (e.g. contusion, SAH, SDH, ICH). Measured variables included hematoma thickness (in the axial, sagittal, and coronal planes), amount of midline shift (MLS), and biparietal skull diameter ( In total, 210 cases of PEDH were identified and reviewed. Of these, 117 presented with an age-adjusted GCS of 14 or better. There was a male-to-female predominance of 1.4, and the average age at the time of injury was 6.4 years old. The most common method of injury was domestic falls, followed by non-vehicle road accidents. Only five of the 117 patients presented with evidence of a lucid interval. Nineteen patients had hematomas located completely or partially infratentorially, nine contacted the superior sagittal sinus, and 24 contacted the transverse sinus. The remainder of the presenting characteristics are listed in Regarding the 117 GCS 14 or better patients, 93 were managed conservatively, five were immediately taken to surgery, and 19 progressed to surgery over the course of their hospitalization. Only one of the 24 surgically treated patients underwent a craniectomy. The indications for surgical evacuation included decline in GCS +/- progression on imaging or focal neurological deficit (40%), size alone (21%), localizing neurological deficit alone (20%), progression on repeat imaging alone (12%), or other reasons such as clot location and hydrocephalus (7%). Presenting size (in axial, coronal, and sagittal thickness), volume, MLS, and thickness to biparietal skull diameter (BSD) ratio were all significantly greater in the surgically managed group ( Management of epidural hematomas in the pediatric population remains highly variable, in part due to a lack of guidelines comparable to what may be found in the adult literature. The average patient age in this cohort was 6.4 years old, comparable to the average age of 6–10 years old reported in other studies We found that the most common indication for operative treatment was a decline in neurological exam, which at times prompted a repeat CT scan before electing to conduct surgical evacuation of the hematoma. The next most common indication was size alone on initial CT scan, followed by localizing neurological deficit, progression on CT scan alone, and other. Follow-up CT scans were obtained either for routine purposes or due to a change in clinical exam. Routine follow-up imaging, or imaging that was not obtained due to a change in clinical exam, is not strictly regulated and therefore was done at the discretion of the attending physician. Generally, it occurred within 24 h following initial scan. It is important to note that the use of magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) for follow-up imaging could not be assessed in this study because it is not commonly conducted at the authors’ home institution. That being said, there is mounting evidence that the use of fast MRI is comparable or superior to CT for the assessment of PEDH, and it may play a significant role in the management of children with EDH and other traumatic intracranial pathology Our findings suggest that there are reliable factors that can prognosticate the clinical course and treatment of children with EDH presenting with a GCS of 14+. It is not surprising that objective measurements of hematoma size and mass effect had a direct relationship with frequency of surgical treatment, though it is notable that this maintained to be true within a cohort that were homogenously well-appearing on arrival The last factor we found to be predictive of surgical evacuation was a thickness to BSD ratio greater than 0.15, a cutoff value determined by examination of the general trends of this metric in both the operative and non-operative groups. It is very reasonable that a thicker lesion for a smaller diameter space is less likely to be tolerated, but with this cutoff value of 0.15, an objective, quantitative value is available as a point-of-reference. Additionally, a simple visual survey of hematoma thickness compared to biparietal skull diameter can be deceiving ( The main limitation of this study consists of the lack of measurable outcomes data. Although the mortality rate in this cohort was 0% and all patients returned to baseline by the end of their hospital stay, a specific evaluation tool such as the Glasgow Outcome Scale was not utilized. Additionally, long term follow-up was often not conducted past a reassuring clinic visit, which is common practice for PEDH. The acquisition of objective outcomes data would provide us with an effective means of comparing treatment success. Additionally, this was a single-center study, and although our sample size was not insignificant, a multi-center study would aid in increasing the power of these findings. Finally, surgical decisions were at the discretion of the on-call surgeon. While decisions were often made in conjunction with a pediatric neurosurgeon, practice patterns cannot be presumed to be homogenous. A high index of suspicion for deterioration of PEDH patients presenting with GCS 14+ should be maintained throughout the course of their hospitalization. Although these children do very well overall, the need for surgical evacuation is not uncommon, and was most often heralded by a decline in mental status. Follow-up scans were also at times indicative of the need for surgical evacuation, however the utilization of additional imaging is a complex topic that is beyond the scope of this paper. Our findings suggest that initial subjective clinical assessment of PEDH presenting with GCS 14+ is not highly predictive of the need for surgical evacuation. There are, however, factors such as size and mass effect, location, transverse sinus involvement, and thickness to BSD ratio that have shown significant association with surgical management of these patients. Follow-up studies including outcomes data would help rectify the issue of assessing treatment success, and prospective management trials are necessary to further demonstrate the proper handling of children with GCS 14+. This research did not receive any specific grant from funding agencies in the public, commercial, or not-for-profit sectors. On behalf of all authors, the corresponding author states that there is no conflict of interest and have no competing interests to disclose. None.