4-Methylcyclohexane methanol (MCHM) is a saturated alicyclic primary alcohol. It has a molecular formula of CH Crude MCHM has a mixture of these two isomers plus other components. It was first synthesized by reduction of a methylcyclohexane carboxylate ester. It has had various intended uses, including as an air freshener, About 10,000 gallons of a mixture of crude MCHM and stripped PPH (mixture of polypropylene glycol phenyl ether and dipropylene glycol phenyl ether) A study showed that alicyclic primary alcohols are metabolized primarily to corresponding carboxylic acids, which is 4-methylcyclohexane carboxylic acid, a naphthenic acid, in the case of MCHM. For a worker exposed to HCHM vapor, the airborne concentration of HCHM, the respiratory rate of the individual, and the time of exposure to the contaminated air will determine the amount of toxicant absorbed into the respiratory system. The area of the skin exposed, concentration of the HCHM, and the length of time of skin contact will determine the amount absorbed through the skin. A 28-day study following oral administration of pure MCHM in rats of 400 Direct contact with HCHM liquid can cause skin and eye irritation. Vapor can cause eye and respiratory tract irritation, especially if HCHM is heated. Bacterial and mammalian mutagenicity and chromosomal aberration studies with HCHM were negative. There are no clear evidences of teratogenic or developmental toxicity effects from exposure to MCHM. Following inhalation, move victim to fresh air. If breathing has stopped, perform artificial respiration. Administer oxygen if breathing is labored. Ensure medical personnel are aware of exposure to MCHM and take precautions to protect themselves. Following skin contact, immediately flush skin with running water for at least 20 If a leak has occurred, warn unnecessary personnel to move away. Stop leak, if possible without risk of exposure. Do not touch damaged containers or spilled material unless wearing appropriate protective clothing. Ensure adequate ventilation in the area. Isolate the spill area and deny entry to unprotected personnel. Since it can form a flammable/explosive vapor–air mixture, use spark-proof tools and explosion-proof equipment and remove all sources of ignition. Prevent liquid from entering sewers, basements or confined areas, building a secondary containment structure if necessary. Absorb MCHM with vermiculite or other inert material and put spilled material in an appropriate waste disposal container. Store MCHM only in original containers in an upright position in a cool well-ventilated area. Keep away from all sources of ignition, heat and light, sparks, or open flame. Store away from oxidizing agents. Avoid prolonged storage periods. Keep away from food, drink, and animal feed storage. Oxidizing agents are incompatible materials. EPA Method 525, which is used for the determination of organic compounds in drinking water, has served as a guide for the analysis of HCHM in water. It involves the use of gas chromatography/mass spectroscopy (GC/MS). There are no occupational exposure limits or drinking water standards for MCHM. When handling MCHM, wear splash goggles, lab coat, protective nitrile gloves and boots.