The aim of this study was to investigate the effect of finishing hot rolling temperature in promoting interpass recrystallization on a Nb-stabilized AISI 430 ferritic stainless steel. Torsion tests were performed in order to simulate the Steckel mill rolling process by varying the temperature ranges of the finishing passes. Interrupted torsion test were also performed and interpass recrystallization was evaluated via optical microscopy and electron backscatter diffraction (EBSD). As a result of this work, it has been established, within the restrictions of a Steckel mill rolling schedule, which thermomechanical conditions mostly favor SRX.Ferritic stainless steels are an interesting alternative to austenitic stainless steels, owing to their excellent properties even with only small contents, or absence, of nickel. As such, there is increasing interest in developing and improving ferritic stainless steels by industry. These types of steels, like the AISI 430, are widely used in applications that require deep drawing, such as kitchen tools, sinks, and appliances; therefore, surface finishing is very important After solidification, this type of steels present mostly {0 Industry hot rolling of ferritic stainless steels is performed in two stages: roughing and finishing. During roughing, a slab is reduced in 7 passes from 200 Hinton and Beynon In the current work, hot finishing rolling on a Steckel mill of Nb-stabilized AISI 430 ferritic steel was simulated via hot torsion test. This steel does not also transform on cooling, hence changes in texture can only be promoted from recrystallization. In this respect, it is expected that the experimental steel will behave much like the reported for Ti–Nb steel. However, by using hot torsion, it was possible to simulate conditions much more similar to those found in industry, namely, by applying a larger number of passes than that used by the authors just mentioned. The temperatures used in the experiments were also very close to those found in actual Steckel rolling practices. The aim of the present work is then: to simulate this process via hot torsion testing and investigate, within the restrictions of a Steckel hot rolling schedule, which thermomechanical conditions, largely related to pass temperature, would mostly favor SRX. The steel used in the present work was a Nb-stabilized AISI 430 ferritic stainless steel, hereafter denominated 430Nb steel, with chemical composition as shown in Rolling at a Steckel type mill at Aperam South America steelworks was taken as reference for the hot torsion simulations. Detailed description of the mill is given elsewhere For rolling simulations, 15 During the tests, the specimens were heated at 2 The true strain is converted to the torsion angle by Measured values at torque were converted to true stress using Metallographic analyses were performed on the longitudinal sections of the samples in a plane located 0.1  For EBSD measurements, the sample was prepared in the same manner as that used for optical microscopy, including polishing with diamond paste. Afterwards, the samples were polished with colloidal silica for 40  The level of the stress–strain curves increases as temperature decreases, as expected. The shape of the curves are however very similar in all experiments, that is, all curves indicate the occurrence of recovery as the sole dynamic softening mechanism. When passes were given at higher strains, case of passes 1–3 in which strains were respectively 0.43, 0.62 and 0.56, even then, no dynamic recrystallization happened. In these passes the flow curves reach a plateau, in special in the case of curves seen at higher temperatures (the simulation run at 1050–990 Other important information that can be obtained from the stress–strain curves shown in For instance, softening between passes 1 and 2 seems to be high, close to 100% in all simulations, since the shape of the curves are very much alike. Then the level of the stress does not change in the second pass, that is, it stays almost constant suggesting dynamic recovery being very effective in counter balancing strain hardening. Parameter   As mentioned earlier, torsion simulation allows interruption of test at any stage of the process giving more flexibility to investigate microstructure evolution than industry hot rolling trials. On the other hand, it is impossible for any mechanical test, in particular hot torsion, to replicate an industry process fully. So torsion results must be seen as an approximation to reality and, in this way, the results will probably indicate trends. With this in mind, it is interesting to note that microstructure before pass 3 seems more recrystallized than after pass 5. Recrystallization is essential to change texture in this steel, as already mentioned. These observations also seem to agree with previous analysis of the shape of flow curves and estimation of fractional softening. That is, fractional softening is larger than 50% for passes 1, 2 and 3 and less 50% for passes 4 and 5. Also the shape of flow curves for passes 4 and 5 were distinctively different from those of passes 1, 2 and 3 indicating some work hardening, remaining after deformation. As for grain sizes, after pass 5 in the simulation 960–900 As evidenced by the shape of the flow curves ( Similar results were observed by Mehtonen et al. Results of the present work indicate that full recrystallization occurred at deformations given in passes 1–3 as seen in With the results obtained from this work, it is possible to speculate on which temperature range would be more suitable in order to favor recrystallization and latter work hardening. So it seems that finishing rolling in Steckel mill should be carried out at high temperatures for first passes, allowing the occurrence of recrystallization between passes. Then, final passes should be given at lower temperatures allowing for some work hardening to occur during the last passes. The main results can be summarized as follows: Flow curves obtained via torsion test simulation of the finishing hot rolling on a Steckel mill confirmed that interpass recrystallization occurred in the Nb-stabilized AISI 430 ferritic stainless steel at high temperatures deformation. When the simulation temperatures decrease, results indicated partial recrystallization and full work hardening in the last two passes. The flow curves and microstructures analysis showed that recovery is the main dynamic softening mechanism during the first three passes for all simulations, while elongated grains showed that work hardening took place in the last two passes performed in the temperature ranges of 960–900 Results reported here may suggest that finishing rolling 430Nb stabilized steels in a Steckel should be carried out in such a way that first passes were given at higher temperature so as to allow static recrystallization to occur between passes. Also, final passes should be applied at lower temperatures so that no static recrystallization would occur between passes and work hardening would occur during deformation so that softening by dynamic recovery would not be so effective as to decrease work hardening significantly. The authors declare no conflicts of interest. The authors would like to thank