The dissolution of liberated chrysocolla particles in dilute (0.033 to 0.15 mol L−1) sulfuric acid solutions has been shown to be relatively rapid and the kinetics of dissolution are consistent with rate-determining diffusion of acid through the silica layer that is formed around the particles from which the copper has been dissolved. The rate is inversely proportional to the square of the particle size and increases linearly with increasing acidity. The effect of the addition of chloride ions on the rate is negligible at concentrations below 70 g/L chloride. Addition of sulphate ions results in reduced rates of dissolution due to complexation of the proton by sulphate ions. The effect of temperature is relatively small as expected for a process for which the rate is controlled by diffusion.
                  The rate of dissolution in dilute acid is slower than malachite but faster than tenorite under the same conditions. These results suggest that heap leaching of chrysocolla in dilute acid may be slow relative to malachite but should present no chemical problems and that there is no advantage to be gained from the addition of chloride ions. High sulphate concentrations (100 g/L) in the raffinate solution to the heap could reduce the rate by up to one-half.Chrysocolla is a copper silicate mineral with the nominal formula CuSiO It is known to be easily soluble in dilute acids but very few studies ( Dissolution in acid occurs by the following reaction The following is a summary of a study of the kinetics of the dissolution of relatively pure chrysocolla particles under conditions similar to those encountered during heap leaching of oxide or mixed oxide/sulfide ores. The species distribution for the dissolution of chrysocolla in acidic sulfate solutions is shown in It can be seen that chrysocolla is completely soluble at pH values below about 3 and completely insoluble at pH values above about 6. Thus, there are no thermodynamic restrictions on the dissolution of chrysocolla under acidic conditions. Natural chrysocolla inevitably occurs as intergrowths with quartz and it is difficult to obtain sufficient material of high grade. Small lumps of chrysocolla from Arizona were sourced locally and XRD analysis provided little confirmatory evidence as expected from the literature ( Examination of the particles shows that the chrysocolla (pale blue/green) is generally liberated from the quartz (colourless) and other minor dark gangue minerals. The composition in terms of chrysocolla content increased with decreasing particle size due to preferential crushing of the softer copper mineral. The copper content decreased from 17.8% to 11.7% from the finest to coarsest fraction. After leaching, the converted chrysocolla appears as amorphous cloudy, white particles easily distinguished visually from the original crystalline quartz. There does not appear to be a noticeable size change during dissolution. The leach tests were conducted in a stirred, temperature-controlled baffled reactor as described previously ( The solution samples were added to 5 mL of 2 M ammonium chloride.ammonium hydroxide at pH 10 and the volume made up to 10 mL. The absorbance of the solution at 615 nm was measure in a 20 mm quartz cell using a Shimadzu spectrophotometer. A standard solution of copper was used for calibration. This method is more rapid and accurate than AA or ICP analysis at these concentrations. As will be demonstrated below, the rate of the dissolution of chrysocolla particles can be very well described in terms of rate-determining diffusion of protons through the amorphous silica product layer. This well known “ash layer” model (  It is obvious that the initial dissolution rate is rapid but it slows noticeably after about 60% dissolution and that the rate decreases as the particle size increases. Also shown (as square points and right axis) are the corresponding plots according to Eq. As a further test of the rate equation, the values of 3 x slope (=1/τ) of these lines are plotted in Again, the adequate linearity (except for the point for the smallest size) confirms the applicability of the leaching model. From the slope of the line in The results (in terms of the time for complete dissolution) as obtained from plots similar to those shown in It can be seen that the rate increases linearly with increasing acidity as would be required for diffusion (a first-order process) as the rate controlling step. The effect of the addition of chloride (as sodium chloride) on the rate was studied using the +355–500 μm size fraction in a solution of 0.1 mol L It is apparent that the rate is independent of the chloride concentration in the range studied as could be expected if the rate is controlled by the diffusion of acid within the silica product layer. Addition of excess sulfate ions (as magnesium sulfate) could be expected to reduce the rate due to the formation of hydrogen sulfate ions thereby reducing the proton concentration. The results of such experiments with the +250–355 μm size fraction in 0.1 mol L These results confirm the above expectation and also shown in The effect of temperature was studied using the +355–500 μm size fraction in 0.1 mol L The activation energy calculated from the slope of the plot is 23.4 kJ mol It is interesting to compare the rate of dissolution of chrysocolla with that of malachite (Cu Note that, in the case of chrysocolla, the initial rate using Eq. As a result of the difference in the form of the rate equations, the rate of chrysocolla dissolution decreases more rapidly at high extents of reaction than does that for malachite or tenorite. Thus, the time for 80% dissolution under these conditions is 3.5 times longer for chrysocolla than malachite although it is only 2.1 times longer for 50% dissolution. These results confirm unpublished reports that the rate of chrysocolla leaching in heaps is slower than that of malachite. The absence of significant quantities of tenorite in most copper ores is fortunate in that the rate of leaching could be expected to be an order of magnitude slower than the other copper “oxide” minerals. The dissolution of screened samples of liberated chrysocolla particles in dilute (0.033 to 0.15 mol L The rate of dissolution in dilute acid is slower than malachite but faster than tenorite under the same conditions. These results suggest that heap leaching of chrysocolla in dilute acid may be slow relative to malachite but should present no chemical problems and that there is no advantage to be gained from the addition of chloride ions. High sulphate concentrations (100 g/L) in the raffinate solution to the heap will reduce the rate by up to one-half. A published (