Herein we describe a method to fabricate submicron bioactive glass tubes using sol–gel and coaxial electrospinning techniques for applications in bone tissue engineering. Heavy mineral oil and gel solution were delivered by two independent syringe pumps during the coaxial electrospinning process. Subsequently, submicron bioactive glass tubes were obtained by removal of poly(vinyl pyrrolidone) and heavy mineral oil via calcination at 600°C for 5h. Tubular structure was confirmed by scanning electron microscopy and transmission electron microscopy imaging. We examined the bioactivity of submicron bioactive glass tubes and fibers and evaluated their biocompatibility, using electrospun poly(ε-caprolactone) fibers – a bioinactive material – for comparison. The bioactivity of the glass tubes was examined in a simulated body fluid and they demonstrated the formation of hydroxyapatite-like minerals on both the outer and inner surfaces. In contrast, mineralization only occurred on their surface for bioactive glass solid fibers. Energy-dispersive X-ray data suggested that the bioactive glass tubes had a faster induction of mineral formation than the solid fibers. We demonstrate that the proliferation rate of mouse preosteoblastic MC3T3-E1 cells on bioactive glass tubes was comparable to that on solid fibers. We also show that bioactive glass tubes can be loaded with a model protein drug, bovine serum albumin, and that these structures exhibit delayed release properties. The bioactivity of released lysozyme can be as high as 90.9%. Taken together, these data suggest that submicron bioactive glass tubes could hold great potential for use in bone tissue engineering as well as topical drug or gene delivery.Bioactive glasses hold significant promise for hard tissue engineering as they are resorbable and readily form a bioactive hydroxycarbonate apatite (HCA) layer Bioactive glasses are generally formulated in the forms of bulk, crushed powders, foams and micron-scale fibers. Owing to its high porosity and large surface area, a nonwoven mat of electrospun nanofibers can serve as an ideal scaffold to mimic the hierarchical architecture of extracellular matrix for cell attachment and nutrient transportation The objective of this study is to fabricate submicron hollow bioactive glass tubes and to examine the use of these structures in bone tissue engineering. Given the potential difficulties in accurately directing the formation of these types of structures using phase separation methods, we chose to employ a sol–gel approach with the electrospinning process via the application of two syringe pumps to independently and precisely control the flow rates for the core and shell A solution containing 1.34 Scanning electron microscopy (SEM) images and energy-dispersive X-ray (EDX) spectra were obtained from samples supported on an Si substrate using a FEI Sirion microscope at an accelerating voltage of 15 The in vitro mineralization of submicron bioactive glass tubes and fibers was performed in SBF for different time intervals. The SBF consisted of 142 Mouse calvaria-derived preosteoblastic cells (MC3T3-E1; ATCC CRL-2593) were cultured in alpha minimum essential medium (Invitrogen Corp., Grand Island, NY), supplemented with 10% fetal bovine serum (Invitrogen) and 1% antibiotics (comprising penicillin and streptomycin; Invitrogen). The medium was changed every other day, and the cultures were incubated at 37 The cell morphology at day 3 was characterized by fluorescent microscopy. The cells on the samples were washed twice with phosphate-buffered saline (PBS), fixed in 3.7% formaldehyde solution (Sigma–Aldrich) in PBS for 30 The cell viability was measured using the 3-(4,5-dimethylthiazol-2,5-diphenyl tetrazolium bromide (MTT) assay (Sigma–Aldrich), which is based on the mitochondrial conversion of tetrazolium salt. After 1, 3, 5 and 7 Submicron bioactive glass tube (10 Lysozyme was similarly loaded into the glass tubes. The bioactivity of the lysozyme released from tubes after incubation for 165 All experiments were performed in triplicate, and data are presented as means A schematic illustrating the preparation of submicron bioactive glass tubes is depicted in  We also performed selective area electron diffraction (SAED) on the submicron bioactive glass tubes and demonstrated an amorphous structure ( In order to test bioactivity, we immersed the glass tube samples in SBF at room temperature for different time intervals. For comparison, we also immersed the glass fiber samples in SBF under the same conditions. SEM images demonstrated that immersion in SBF for 1 Elemental analysis of the bioactive glass tube and fiber samples after immersion in SBF over different periods of time was used to determine the atomic percentage of each element ( We also used ICP-AES to quantify the ion concentrations in SBF after incubation with submicron glass tubes and fibers at different times ( The mechanism of mineralization for bioactive glass has been investigated by Hench (i) Rapid exchange of Ca (ii) Loss of soluble silica in the form of Si(OH) (iii) Condensation and repolymerization of an SiO (iv) Migration of Ca (v) Crystallization of the amorphous CaO–P It is likely that immersion of the bioactive glass tubes into water can lead to the formation of minerals ( In order to test the potential of tubes for use as a bone scaffold, we cultured preosteoblastic MC3T3-E1 cells on the submicron bioactive glass tubes. We chose electrospun PCL fibers for comparison because PCL is a biocompatible and biodegradable but bioinactive material, and has been used for bone tissue engineering previously Using the MTT assay, we attempted to quantify the MC3T3-E1 cell proliferation ( For bone tissue engineering, the incorporation of growth factors (e.g. bone morphogenic proteins) onto bone scaffolds and the sustained release of these proteins from scaffolds are highly desirable for the effective regeneration of bone Drug loading and release were quantified by micro BCA protein assay kit. The amount of BSA that could be loaded into the submicron bioactive glass tubes and fibers was 82.98 and 66.63 Fluorescence microscopy after incubation with fluorescein isothiocyanate (FITC)–BSA appeared to demonstrate a uniform distribution of FITC–BSA in the bioactive glass tubes ( In order to test the bioactivity of biomacromolecules after release, we prepared submicron lysozyme-loaded bioactive glass tubes. The concentration of released lysozyme from the glass tubes after 165 We have demonstrated the fabrication of submicron bioactive glass tubes by injecting heavy mineral oil and gel solution to the core and shell independently during coaxial electrospinning, followed by sintering to remove the heavy mineral oil and polymer. This approach is simple, versatile and robust. An in vitro bioactivity test indicates that the bioactive glass tubes had a faster induction of HCA-like mineral formation compared to solid fibers. Preosteoblastic cells showed a higher proliferation rate on submicron bioactive glass tubes than on PCL fibers. In addition, the model protein drug BSA was released from bioactive glass tubes for a longer period than was observed with the solid fibers. The bioactivity of released lysozyme from glass tubes can be as high as 90.9%. This novel class of bioactive glass could be promising for applications in bone tissue engineering and drug delivery. This study was supported by start-up funds from the Supplementary data associated with this article can be found, in the online version, at  Certain figure in this article, particularly Figures 1, 6 and 8, is difficult to interpret in black and white. The full colour images can be found in the on-line version, at