Bone formation is enhanced by mechanical loading, but human exercise intervention studies have shown that the response to mechanical loading is variable, with some individuals exhibiting robust osteogenic responses while others respond modestly. Thus, mechanosensitivity — the ability of bone tissue to detect mechanical loads — could be under genetic control. We applied controlled mechanical loading to the ulnae of 20-week-old (adult) female mice derived from three different inbred strains (C3H/He, C57BL/6, and DBA/2), and measured the bone formation response with fluorochrome labels. Mechanical properties, including mechanical strain, second moments of area, and cortical bone material properties, were measured in a group of calibration animals not subjected to in vivo loading. The C3H/He mice were significantly less responsive to mechanical loading than the other two biological strains. Material properties (flexural elastic modulus, ultimate stress) were greatest in the C3H/He cortical tissue. Geometric and areal properties at the midshaft ulna were also greatest in the C3H/He mice. Based on the presumed role of osteocytes in strain detection, we measured osteocyte lacuna population densities in decalcified midshaft ulna sections. Osteocyte lacuna density was not related to mechanosensitivity. Our data suggest that bone mechanosensitivity has a significant genetic component. Identification of the genes that exert their influence on mechanosensitivity could ultimately lead to therapies that enhance bone mass and reduce fracture susceptibility.Low bone mass is a major risk factor for osteoporotic fracture. The accumulation of bone mass and the retardation of bone loss can be enhanced by environmental factors, such as mechanical loading (exercise) or calcium intake, but genetic studies have revealed that a large portion (60%–70%) of the variance in bone mineral density (BMD)—the best single predictor of bone fragility—is explained by heredity. Rodent models are particularly useful for studying the genetics of bone mass and other skeletal traits for a number of reasons, including: (i) there exists a wide range of skeletal phenotypic variation (e.g., BMD, strength) among different strains; (ii) the mammalian gestation/maturation period is short in rodents, allowing relatively quick creation of recombinant inbred and congenic strains; and (iii) gene mapping in mice and humans has revealed considerable homology in gene order between the two species, and many markers in the mouse genome have been mapped to the specific chromosomal positions in the human genome. Of the available inbred mouse strains, three in particular have been studied extensively in skeletal genetics, C57BL/6, DBA/2, and C3H/He. The C57BL/6 strain is characterized by low BMD and large total cross-sectional area (CSA) in the midshaft femur; the C3H/He strain exhibits very high femoral BMD and a smaller femoral CSA than the C57BL/6 mice; and DBA/2 mice have moderately high femoral BMD and a very small midshaft femur CSA. Mechanical loading of the skeleton during growth can substantially enhance periosteal bone apposition, and ultimately produce a diaphyseal cross section with enlarged area. We undertook an investigation of in vivo skeletal mechanosensitivity in three biological strains of mice, by applying well-controlled dynamic loads to the ulnae and measuring the resulting osteogenic response. We hypothesized that the biological strain exhibiting the greatest CSA would exhibit the greatest osteogenic response to loading, and the biological strain exhibiting the least CSA would exhibit the least response to loading. We further sought to investigate the role of osteocyte lacuna population density in the observed differences in mechanosensitivity. The osteocyte network is commonly thought to be the primary mechanosensory apparatus in bone. Virgin female mice from each of the biological strains, C57BL/6 (n = 35), C3H/He (n = 30), and DBA/2 (n = 30), were purchased from Harlan, Inc. (Indianapolis, IN) at 13 weeks of age. The animals were housed at Indiana University’s animal care facility for 7 weeks (acclimation period) before the experiment began. Standard mouse chow and water were provided ad libitum during the acclimation and loading periods. All procedures performed were in accordance with the Indiana University Animal Care and Use Committee guidelines. When the animals reached 20 weeks of age, five mice per biological strain were chosen at random, anesthetized, and killed by cervical dislocation. Immediately after killing, each animal was weighed and the left forearm was fixed between the cup-shaped platens of a miniature materials-testing machine (Vitrodyne V1000; Liveco, Inc., Burlington, VT), which has a force resolution of 0.05 N. The forearm was fixed in place using a small preload (∽0.1 N) that applied compression to the forearm through the olecranon and dorsal surface of the flexed wrist ( Immediately after the left forearm of each calibration animal was broken, the right arm was minimally dissected to expose the medial surface of the midshaft ulna. A single element strain gauge (Model EA-06-015DJ-120; Measurements Group, Inc., Raleigh, NC) was fixed to the exposed medial ulnar surface with cyanoacrylate (M-Bond 200; Measurements Group) at a point 3.35 mm distal to the brachialis insertion. Preliminary studies in our lab showed that this was the most reliable method for placing the gauge at the midshaft in the fleshed forearm, where the total length cannot be measured without significant dissection/disruption of the surrounding tissues. Once fitted with a strain gauge, the voltage was zeroed and the forearm was loaded in cyclic axial compression using an electromagnetic actuator with feedback control ( We chose to use the radius for deriving material properties because of its long, straight, and cylindrical morphology, and because of its high aspect ratio. The right radii removed from the five calibration animals per biological strain were scanned in the transverse plane through the midshaft on a desktop μCT (μCT-20 Scanco Medical AG, Auenring, Switzerland) using 7 μm voxel size. Each midshaft radius slice was imported into S The strain-gauged ulnae removed from the five calibration animals per biological strain were scanned in the transverse plane through the center of the strain gauge (still attached at the midshaft) on a desktop μCT (μCT-20, Scanco Medical) using a 7 μm voxel size. The midshaft slices were imported into S The remaining animals in each of the three biological strains were divided randomly into three groups for in vivo loading: low magnitude (36% of mean forearm Right and left ulnae were removed, cleaned of soft tissue, measured for total length, fixed in 10% neutral-buffered formalin for 48 h, dehydrated in graded alcohols, cleared in xylene, and embedded in methylmethacrylate (Aldrich Chemical Co., Inc., Milwaukee, WI). Using a diamond-embedded wire saw (Histo-saw; Delaware Diamond Knives, Wilmington, DE), transverse thick sections (∽70 μm) were removed from the ulnar midshaft. The wafers were ground to a final thickness of ∽20 μm, and then mounted unstained on standard microscope slides. One section per limb was read on a Nikon Optiphot fluorescence microscope (Nikon, Inc., Garden City, NJ) using the Bioquant digitizing system (R&M Biometrics, Nashville, TN). The following primary data were collected from the periosteal surface at ×425 magnification: total perimeter (B.Pm); single label perimeter (sL.Pm); double label perimeter (dL.Pm), measured along the first label; and double label area (dL.Ar). From these primary data, the following derived quantities were calculated: mineralizing surface (MS/BS = [1/2 sL.Pm + dL.Pm]/B.Pm × 100; %); mineral apposition rate (MAR = dL.Ar/dL.Pm/4 days; μm/day); and bone formation rate (BFR/BS = MAR × MS/BS × 3.65; μm Each ulnar cross section used for fluorochrome histomorphometry was digitally captured through the microscope at ×250 magnification and imported into S The (right) strain-gauged ulnae from the calibration animals were decalcified in Decal I solution (Surgipath Medical Industries, Richmond, IL) after the strain gauges were removed. Each bone was embedded in paraffin and sectioned through the midshaft at 5 μm thickness using a Jung Histocut 820 microtome (Reichert-Jung, Inc., Germany). The sections were mounted on charged microscope slides, deparaffinized in xylene, dehydrated in graded alcohols, stained with hematoxylin-eosin, and coverslipped. On each section, the number of osteocyte lacunae (Ot.Lc.N) was counted and the cortical area (Ct.Ar) was measured on a Nikon Optiphot research microscope under white light. Bioquant morphometry software was used to collect measurements from each section at ×250 magnification. From the two parameters, we calculated the population density of osteocyte lacunae (Ot.Lc.Dn) within the cortical bone (Ot.Lc.Dn = Ot.Lc.N/Ct.Ar). Differences between bone formation parameters in the loaded (right) and nonloaded (left) ulnae were tested using Student’s Fluorochrome-labeled sections revealed that most of the load-induced formation (bone between labels) was localized to the medial and lateral quadrants of the periosteal surface ( Relative (right minus left) bone formation rates (rBFR/BS) were closely associated with peak load magnitude ( The osteocyte lacuna population density (Ot.Lc.Dn) was significantly ( Ulnar midshaft areal and geometric properties were greatest in the C3H/He mice, which exhibited 35% greater cortical area and 70% greater I Strain-gauge measurements from the medial surface of the right ulna revealed differences in ulnar compliance among the three biological strains of mice ( Mechanical testing of the left forearm (ulna and radius) in situ revealed large differences in mechanical properties among the three biological strains ( The radius three-point bending tests showed significant differences in cortical bone material properties among biological strains ( At the start of the experiment (first loading day) and at time of killing, the C3H/He mice were heaviest, the DBA/2 mice were lightest, and the C57BL/6 mice were intermediate ( Our main objective in this study was to determine whether different biological strains of mice exhibit different degrees of sensitivity to the same mechanical stimulus. We hypothesized that mice exhibiting small ulnar cross-sectional areas would be less responsive to ulnar loading than mice with large ulnar cross-sectional areas. Our results indicate that C3H/He mice were clearly the least responsive to mechanical loading, yet they exhibited the largest ulnar cross section. Conversely, DBA/2 mice exhibited the smallest ulnar cross sections, but these mice were among the most sensitive to mechanical strain. The C57BL/6 mice exhibited a significantly larger ulnar cross section than the DBA/2 mice, yet these two biological strains exhibited almost exactly the same osteogenic response to loading (in terms of mechanical strain). Thus, it appears that bone size is not related to mechanosensitivity, at least among the inbred strains we examined. The C3H/He mice appear to be least mechanosensitive in two key, independent parameters. First, the osteogenic threshold in the C3H/He mice (2392 μϵ) was significantly greater than that in the C57BL/6 (1769 μϵ) and DBA/2 (1860 μϵ) mice. Mechanically induced bone formation is threshold driven, and bone formation signals will not be generated in the tissue unless a strain “setpoint” is surpassed. Our second objective was to determine the relation between osteocyte lacuna population density and mechanosensitivity. We hypothesized that the DBA/2 and C57BL/6 mice, in light of their greater mechanosensitivity, would have a greater population density of osteocyte lacunae than the C3H/He mice. However, the lacuna counts from the ulna midshaft sections were inconsistent with our hypothesis. The C3H/He and C57BL/6 mice exhibited statistically indistinguishable osteocyte lacuna densities, but the C3H/He mice were significantly less mechanosensitive than the C57BL/6 mice. In addition, the DBA/2 mice had significantly more lacunae per unit area than the C57BL/6 mice, but these two biological strains exhibited nearly identical mechanosensitivity. Thus, it appears that osteocyte lacuna population density is not related to mechanosensitivity in the three biological strains of mice tested. Genetic effects on mechanosensitivity have been observed in species other than mice. Pitsillides et al. Historically, the attainment of adult bone size, shape, and robusticity has been considered an epigenetic process, Among all three inbred strains, the bone formation response to loading comprised lamellar bone exclusively. Previous investigations of periosteal mechanoresponsiveness to extrinsic loading in C57BL/6 and C3H/He mice were based on woven bone responses, precluding a direct comparison to our results. It is also of interest to note that, in addition to being less sensitive to enhanced loading conditions, the C3H/He mice are also less sensitive to reduced loading conditions. Kodama et al. The cross-sectional properties of the midshaft ulna (Tt.Ar, Ct.Ar, I The material properties derived from the radius tests were 1.6–5-fold greater than those reported in the literature from the femur, although the trends by biological strain were similar. Akhter et al. The differences among biological strains in flexural elastic modulus (stiffness of the cortical material) corresponded well with volumetric BMD differences reported by Beamer et al., The main effect of loading on periosteal cell populations in all three biological strains appears to have been on both the rate of new bone apposition (MAR), and the number of active cells on the periosteal surface (MS/BS). A loading effect on MAR was not detected in the DBA/2 low-load group or in the C3H/He mid-load group. In conclusion, significant differences in mechanosensitivity were found among the ulnae from three different biological strains of mice. In terms of peak mechanical strain, C3H/He mice appear to be less sensitive to mechanical loading than DBA/2 and C57BL/6 mice. The C3H/He mice exhibited a significantly greater osteogenic threshold, and significantly lower gain in bone per unit mechanical strain once the osteogenic threshold was exceeded, than DBA/2 and C57BL/6 mice. Differences in mechanosensitivity were not associated with differences in osteocyte lacuna population densities. Significant differences in cortical bone material properties and structural properties at the ulnar midshaft were also detected among strains. The data suggest that bone’s propensity to respond to mechanical loading is at least partially influenced by genes. Identifying the set of genes that exert their influence on mechanosensitivity has the potential to reveal target molecules and signaling pathways for pharmacological intervention, and ultimately to enhance bone mass and reduce fracture susceptibility. The authors thank Mary Hooser and Diana Jacob for assistance with tissue processing. This work was supported by NIH Grants AR43730 and T32, AR07581.