Copper converting is mainly conducted in Peirce–Smith converters. Extensive work has been conducted to understand fluid flow phenomena as air is injected into molten mattes. High momentum must be transferred from the gas to the melt in order to refine the metal. In this work, we present a CFD analysis of gas injection with one and three tuyeres. Results show that by increasing the number of injection points, the flow pattern within the converter change considerably. Such changes result in the development of large recirculation zones and localised eddy formation. Additionally, it was found that the gas plumes in the melt are asymmetrical thus flow paths constantly interfere between themselves. Bubbling–jetting transition is found to be better represented by the Kutateladze number.Copper conversion is the selective oxidation of iron and sulphur with oxygen enriched air (up to 35 vol.% O Clogging of tuyeres as a result of accretions growing on the tip of them. Erosion on the refractory lining around the tuyeres due to localised thermal gradients. Inefficient SO This type of furnace has not experienced significant technological improvements over a century of operation, which opens the door for upgrading it ( On the other hand, gas injection is vastly used in process metallurgy; a significant amount of analytical and experimental work has been published on this subject. Extensive reviews were made by In this paper we present some CFD results of the fluid flow within a converter, after injecting gas with one and three tuyeres. Most of the reports existing in literature refer to a single injection point; however, given the nature of the converter, more information on flow patterns and velocity fields is needed when more than a single injection point is used. Fluid flow is described by Navier–Stokes (NS) equations, which are expressed in vector form as follows: In current copper converting practice, turbulence is needed to increase copper matte mixing, thus mass, momentum and heat transfer are also increased. In order to model turbulence properly, the Large Eddy Simulation (LES) model was employed. It is well recognised that LES simulates turbulence in a better way than two-equation models such as the  This new calculation approach is based upon increasing the accuracy of the numerical method by modifying the curvature of the gas–liquid interphase as it moves. The soundness of the resulting simulations is improved as the gas–liquid curvature is smoothed. Also important is the discretization of the bi-phasic curvature, which can lead to considerable errors or increased computational time. In addition to the curvature refinement conditions, the use of more stable filters has also allowed for improving the exactitude of the simulations conducted with the LES model. For our calculation procedure, we added a surface tension term to the NS set of equations, similarly to Marín and Utigard. This particular approach differs from that of Liovic and Lakehal’s, in the sense that we have accounted for the surface tension effect directly from NS equations and then using a filter similar to the one described (Liovic and Lakehal), rather than modifying the curvature at the gas–liquid interface, With the aid of such filter, we have been able to obtain reasonable numerical results. In this work, a force term due to surface tension was added to the right side of Eq. The indicator function is then represented by: Due to the incompressibility nature of the flow, this indicator function satisfies Eq. Additionally, another model is needed to tackle the multiphase flow in the copper converter. The Volume of Fluid (VOF) formulation relies on the assumption that two or more phases are not interpenetrating. For each additional phase ( Eq. To better define the liquid–gas interface, the CFD software used in this research uses an interpolation scheme called “Geometric Reconstruction Scheme” ( Another possible source of error in numerical simulations is that of numerical diffusion. Numerical diffusion arises from truncation errors that are a consequence of representing the fluid flow equations in discrete form ( Earlier simulations (  As seen in In addition to increase the size of the slice for calculation of the three injection points, the use of symmetry planes around the central tuyere to reduce the number elements was neglected, because this approach could result in inaccurate flow patterns.  In terms of fluid flow, it can be noticed in After the initial second of blowing, the free surface of the melt becomes disturbed by the continuous gas input. Waving phenomena takes place. As the gas enters the matte, the liquid is pushed away by the former so when the latter reaches the opposite wall of the converter it returns towards the injection point. Such motion results in continuous crashing with the “new” liquid pushed by the gas. As time proceeds, more momentum is transferred from the jet to the bath and recirculation of the liquid within the vessel begins. This recirculation flow increases and eventually two loops are created at the left and right sides of the ascending bubbles stream. As a consequence of the melt collisions, splashing and the development of a circular flow pattern within the melt occur. Both of these effects are undesirable. In terms of the gas, it is shown that due to the motion of the liquid an initial bubbling regime establishes. From time to time, and depending upon the bubbling frequency, an open jet appears.  As with the injection with one tuyere, an initial bubbling regime establishes. Bubble frequency is similar among the different tuyeres. The interference of the different gas streams change the local residence time of the gas plume in adjacent tuyeres; thus, the bubbling frequency is altered; consequently, some open jet regime establishes because of the stream interference.  The gas–liquid interfaces shown in It is also expected that as the number of tuyeres increases, the flow pattern within the liquid should change as well. In the case of gas blowing with one tuyere, a well-defined recirculation zone at the centre of the vessel develops. Such recirculation zone nearly occupies one half of the total volume available for matte conversion. This zone is undesirable since it prevents the full use of the converter to conduct the refining reactions. However, as the number of tuyeres for gas injection increases to three, the flow patterns in the vessel become more chaotic.   This effect proves that even though the different tuyeres are located symmetrically alongside the converter axis, and the air injected into the matte is supplied under controlled velocity and pressure, the flow within the converter does not follow a constant path. Flow paths are greatly affected by several phenomena occurring simultaneously in the reactor as copper is refined. Among them: melt density increases, surface tension changes, gradients in viscosity develop, localised turbulent effects, gas emission as the sulphur is removed from the matte, among others. Unfortunately, it is very difficult to single out any of these effects as the one having the stronger influence on the fluid flow. All of these effects and the confinement of the metal in the converter account for the complexity of the flow behaviour. Further numerical modelling on the same converter (Teniente) by This dimensionless group relates inertial forces to gravitational ones. The inertia of the gas tend to make its motion linear after leaving the tuyere, but the effect of the liquid density as well as that of the gravity deviates the trajectory of the gas; as the density difference between the surrounding melt and the gas increases so does the deflection that the gas experiences. The greater the value of this number, the less gravitational influence; thus Valencia’s observations that by increasing the modified Froude number more splashing occurs are correct. In every test they made, they found that an unsteady jet developed.   This observation is important, since we could observe in both models (one and three tuyeres) that the gas jet does not considerably penetrate the melt. Furthermore, as the blowing time increases, the jet seems to move towards the wall behind the injection point. Such effect is related to the force balance that establishes between the gas and the melt. The density difference between the gas and the melt increases as iron and sulphur are selectively removed from the matte. Typically the matte density is about 4800   If we consider that gas is injected into the PS converter with velocities ranging from 80 to 120 To corroborate these observations from the numerical simulations, independent tests were conducted in a scaled copper converter water model with just one injection point. Experimental details have been already published ( It is evident from the images in On the other hand, in another set of tests with gas velocity of 25 Experimental measurements ( It is clear from the observations in Numerical simulations of air blowing into a copper matte have been conducted. The effect of the number of tuyeres used to inject the gas was studied. As more tuyeres are used to blow the gas, the more chaotic the fluid flow within the vessel it becomes. Turbulent effects are magnified due to different flow paths, resulting in localised eddy formation; as the number of eddies increases, the less efficiently the volume of the converter is occupied, as flow recirculation takes place, limiting the formation of new reaction sites. Consequently, mass transfer rates are greatly affected. Additionally, the Kutateladze number is used to predict the transition from bubbling to jetting regimes. This is very important since either regime established during blowing affects the dynamics of the converter. Financial support from IPN Grants is greatly appreciated.