The characteristics of the bioleaching of realgar by Acidithiobacillus ferrooxidans BY-3 (A. ferrooxidans) were investigated in this work. We examined the effects of using ferrous iron and elemental sulfur as the sole and mixed energy sources on the bioleaching of realgar. Under all experimental conditions, A. ferrooxidans BY-3 significantly enhanced the dissolution of realgar. Moreover, arsenic was more efficiently leached using A. ferrooxidans BY-3 in the presence of ferrous iron than in other culture conditions. A high concentration of arsenic was observed in the absence of alternative energy sources. This concentration was higher than that in cultures with sulfur only and lower than that in cultures with ferrous iron and sulfur. Linear or nonlinear models best fit the experimental data; the nonlinear model exhibited the dual effects of dissolution and removal on the bioleaching of realgar, whereas the linear model only applied to situations of slow bioleaching rather than removal.Realgar is a naturally occurring arsenic sulfide that is also called red arsenic (or Bioleaching, a long-standing technology in hydrometallurgy, has recently been applied to the field of pharmaceuticals. In a previous study, we recovered arsenic from realgar using indigenous acidophilic microorganisms ( Ferrous iron and elemental sulfur exert important effects on metal extraction during the bioleaching of sulfide ores, but there have been no thorough studies on their effects on the bioleaching of realgar. Previous investigations have revealed that ferrous iron and elemental sulfur are simultaneously used by  This work focused on the efficiency of sole and mixed energy sources (ferrous iron and elemental sulfur) in the bioleaching of realgar. The behavior of Realgar was obtained from Shimen County of Hunan Province, China and purified by traditional methods according to the Chinese Pharmacopoeia ( A pure culture of All experiments were performed in 250 Each control experiment was performed under similar conditions by replacing the inoculum with an equal volume of the medium. Various parameters such as pH, bacterial population size, and the concentrations of arsenic and sulfur were studied. The extracted liquid was compensated by the addition of 5 In all experiments, soluble arsenic and sulfur concentrations were measured by ICP-AES after pretreatment by a microwave digestion system (WX-8000; Shanghai Yi-Yao Instruments, Shanghai, China). The pH values were measured in duplicate (at a minimum) using an FJA-3 electrochemistry ion analyzer (Nanjing Chuan-Di Instruments, Nanjing, China). Free bacteria in solution were quantified by direct counting using the Petroff-Hausser counting chamber coupled with an optical microscope (OPTON, Germany). The microscopic features of the samples were observed with a JEOL scanning electron microscope (SEM; JSM-5600LV, Tokyo, Japan) operated at 20 The XRD analyses were conducted with a Multipurpose X-ray Diffraction System (X’Pert Pro MPD, Philips, Netherlands) using Cu The bioleaching experimental data from the four groups (G1, G2, G3 and G4) were analyzed using the linear and nonlinear mathematical models embedded in the Origin Pro 8.0 software package (OriginLab, USA). The changes in bacterial population and arsenic concentration over time are shown in SEM observations were performed to elucidate the surface morphology of powder realgar and its interactions with After 15 The variations in arsenic dissolution and bacterial population over time in the presence of ferrous iron are shown in Jarosite and magnetite were visually observed, and their presence was confirmed by the SEM and XRD patterns of their solid residues (see The above results suggest that the decrease in the extraction of arsenic was due to the uptake of arsenic by iron-based adsorbents (e.g., jarosite or goethite) and biosorbents (e.g., The changes in sulfur concentration and pH during the bioleaching of realgar in the G2 group are shown in The following stages help explain the bioleaching process in the system with iron (II) only. In the first stage, the bacterial cells were attached to the realgar surface and grew rapidly; then, the realgar surface was corroded via a direct action. The accumulation of free bacteria in solution led to more bacterial attachment to the realgar surface. In the second stage, In the final stage, with an increase in the concentrations of iron (III) and sulfur, the production of FeAsO  As After 30 The changes in arsenic concentrations and bacterial population size in the G4 group varied with time in the presence of iron and sulfur, as shown in The evolution of the change in pH values is notable. In the beginning, the pH of the system with iron (II) and sulfur was higher than that of the culture without The bacteria grew preferentially by iron (II) oxidation. Sulfur oxidation did not commence until all available iron (II) was exhausted. Upon sulfur oxidation, sulfate formation was accompanied by a decrease in pH, and the concentration of iron (III) decreased because of its simultaneous reduction to iron (II) in a medium with sulfur. Sulfur oxidation stopped at pH The conversion of realgar depended primarily on its total arsenic content. Conversion algorithms were applied to test the experimental data from the bioleaching of realgar, as described previously ( According to different conversion systems, the conversion of realgar is represented by four different symbols in The changes in arsenic dissolution and removal with time can be fitted by the Voigt function. The equation of the nonlinear model is given in Eq. The fit status codes of the nonlinear model were succeeded (101), succeeded (100), reduced chi-square (1) and succeeded (100) for the G1, G2, G3 and G4 groups, respectively. These results show that the fit status of the G2 and G4 groups was succeeded fit, and the chi-square value was reduced until the tolerance was reached. The fit status of the G1 group was succeeded fit, and fit converged and chi-square did not change, whereas the chi-square may largely be due to an improper model. Hence, the nonlinear model for the G1 group did not represent the best result. The fit status of the G3 group shows that the chi-square was reduced, but the tolerance was not reached. The nonlinear model for the G3 group did not express the fitted model. As shown in the fit status, the nonlinear fitting of the G2 and G4 groups were better than those of the G1 and G3 groups. The conversion of realgar is represented by four different symbols in The effects of ferrous iron and elemental sulfur on the bioleaching of realgar were explored in this work. We found that This work was supported by the Supplementary data associated with this article can be found, in the online version, at 