Recovery of indium from LCD screen wastes, which contain indium in the form of indium tin oxide (ITO) as the electrode material, is becoming economically and environmentally justified. Indium is a valuable metal and the present work was aimed to recover indium from ITO as the starting material to study the recovery of indium from waste LCD screens by solvent extraction.
                  The apparent rate of dissolution in acidic media is slow requiring six hours for complete dissolution of the ITO sample in 1M of either H2SO4 or HCl. Complete dissolution in HNO3 took significantly longer. The acid concentration was found to have a major effect on both the amount and rate of leaching allowing some leaching selectivity.
                  Three solvent systems were chosen to study their selectivity for the separation of indium from tin: TBP, D2EHPA and a mixture of both. With either 1M of TBP or 0.2M of D2EHPA+0.8M of TBP, tin could be selectively extracted from a 1.5M HCl solution of this metal. D2EHPA extracts both indium and tin from H2SO4 media but indium could be selectively stripped with HCl from the loaded D2EHPA. Based on these results, a scheme for separating and concentrating indium from ITO by solvent extraction is proposed. The scheme includes dissolving ITO into 1M of H2SO4, then extracting indium and tin to D2EHPA followed by selective stripping of indium into 1.5M of HCl. With this process, HCl solution containing 12.2g/L of indium could be achieved.Indium is a rare and valuable metal, which is used mainly as indium tin oxide-films (84% in 2007) in liquid crystal displays (LCDs) ( Indium is evenly distributed in the earth's crust. It has no minerals of its own so it has to be recovered as a byproduct from other metallurgical processes or from secondary raw materials. Most commonly indium is associated with zinc, lead, copper, and tin ores ( The largest indium producer is China with other big suppliers being South Korea, Japan, Canada, Belgium, Russia, France and Peru. China also has by far the world's biggest indium reserves. The global refinery production of indium was 568 Today the amount of waste LCD screens from computer and TV sets is fast accumulating owing to the popularity of their usage particularly in consumer goods and thus, development of recovery methods for indium from these wastes is growing in importance. Since 2007 more indium has been produced from secondary than from primary raw materials. The most important secondary raw material has been the waste coming from the sputtering process in the deposition of ITO onto the LCDs, in which only 30% of ITO is deposited onto the glass surface ( Solvent extraction is a commonly used method for the purification of indium in process metallurgy particularly in zinc refineries, where indium is usually recovered from sulfate solutions ( Bis(2-ethylhexyl) phosphate (CAS-number 298-07-7), usually known as di-2-ethylhexylphosphoric acid (D2EHPA), is by far the most popular extractant and it is almost always used in practical applications since it has a high loading capacity for indium and good selectivity for indium over many other metal ions such as, for example, Zn(II), Fe(II), Cd(II), As(III) and Cu(II) ( In chloride media the corresponding reaction is In high hydrochloric acid concentrations (> D2EHPA may also be mixed with other known extractants, typically alkylphosphates or alkylphosphine oxides, in order to improve the selectivity of extraction and stripping ( Although there are several articles on the solvent extraction of indium using D2EHPA, very few of them considered the effect of tin when present in solution with indium. One such study was that of The purpose of the present study was to explore the most appropriate experimental conditions for the acidic leaching of ITO and then use solvent extraction with D2EHPA, TBP and their mixtures as extractants to separate and concentrate indium from its acidic solutions. The following reagents were used in this study: indium tin oxide (ITO) nano powder (Inframat Advanced Materials, 99.99%, particle size 30–70 All metal analyses of aqueous samples were carried out using ICP-AES. For the study of the leaching of ITO, the dissolution experiments were carried out in a glass reactor by agitating 1 The D2EHPA was washed with 6 Three different extractant compositions were used in the solvent extraction experiments: 1 The effect of the initial acid concentration to the extraction equilibrium was determined for every acid (H For D2EHPA, the loading isotherm for indium from ITO solution was constructed. Test solutions of ITO in 1 The fractions of extraction and stripping,     The apparent rates of the leaching kinetics of the oxide mixture in all the three acids were slow (  The separation of indium and tin by solvent extraction was studied using sample solutions of these metal ions in H With D2EHPA, the selectivity for indium over tin was much higher particularly at the higher end of the range of acid concentration that was investigated although a minimum of 20% tin was still extracted. In HCl media, the tin extraction was higher than indium, but no satisfactory separation could be achieved ( With TBP, tin could be extracted when the HCl concentration is above 0.3 A good separation of indium and tin from their HCl solutions (1–2 Another way of achieving separation between indium and tin was by selective stripping of the loaded D2EHPA with HCl. As shown in D2EHPA is known to have very good loading capacity for indium from 1 Based on extraction and stripping stages described below ( The present work showed that, in terms of leaching, the apparent rates of dissolution of indium tin oxide (ITO) in acidic media were slow but best achieved with either H In terms of separation and purification of the dissolved indium and tin, three different solvent extraction systems were studied for separation of these metals. Tin could be selectively extracted from its HCl solutions with either 1 The authors want to thank Mr. Miikka Tulonen and Mr. Kari Valkama for their cooperation within this work. Thanks also to the Finnish