Objective
                  Odontogenic Ameloblast-Associated Protein (ODAM) is encoded by a secretory calcium-binding phosphoprotein cluster gene, which generally plays an important role for mineralization. Dental follicle (DF) is essential in regulating bone formation for tooth eruption. This study aims to reveal ODAM expression in the DFs of developing and erupting molars, and to determine the possible role of ODAM.
               
                  Design
                  DFs were collected from human third molars and rat mandibular molars for gene expression assessment and for establishment of cell cultures. RT-PCR and western blot were conducted to determine ODAM expression. Over- or silencing expression of ODAM in the dental follicle stem cells (DFSCs) was done by transfecting the cells with ODAM plasmid or siRNA to evaluate ODAM effects on osteogenesis.
               
                  Results
                  Rat DFs weakly expressed ODAM at early-postnatal days, but a chronological increment of ODAM expression from days 1 to 11 was observed. Differences in expression of ODAM were seen in the human DFs of different individuals. In vitro, ODAM was expressed in DFSCs, but almost no expression in DF-derived fibroblast-like cells. Forcing the DFSCs to overexpress ODAM accelerated osteogenesis, whereas continuously silencing the ODAM in the DFSCs reduced osteogenesis only at 2 weeks of osteogenic induction.
               
                  Conclusions
                  ODAM is differentially expressed in the DFs of different age molars. Its expression is coincident with the increased bone formation of tooth crypt during tooth eruption in rat DFs. Increase of ODAM expression may accelerate osteogenic differentiation of DFSCs. Thus, ODAM expression in the DF may regulate bone formation for timely tooth eruption.Tooth development involves a series of complicated mineralization processes. Teeth and other hard tissues can be viewed as the results of mineralization in the extracellular matrix. Secretory calcium-binding phosphoproteins (SCPPs) are macromolecules involved in mineralization in bone development. Odontogenic Ameloblast-Associated Protein (ODAM, also known as Apin) is encoded by a gene in the SCPP cluster ( The dental follicle (DF) is a loose connective tissue sac surrounding the unerupted tooth. A major function of DF is to regulate tooth eruption via timely and spatially controlling osteogenesis and osteoclastogenesis ( Human DFs were collected from the impacted wisdom teeth removed at the Pacific Oral and Facial Surgery Center (Livermore, CA, USA). Human tissue collection has been approved by Institutional Review Board (IRB) of Louisiana State University. DFs of Sprague Dawley rats were surgically collected from the first mandibular molars of rat pups at postnatal days 1, 3, 5, 7, 9 and 11 in 3 independent litters for RNA extraction to determine chronological gene expression. The protocol for using rats has been approved by Institutional Animal Care and Use Committee (IACUC) of Louisiana State University. For establishment of cell cultures, the DFs collected from rat pups or from the human patients were minced into small pieces and then digested with trypsin to obtain cell suspension. The cell suspension was centrifuged at 3000 RPM to collect cell pellets. For DFSC cultures, cells were cultured in the medium consisting of α-Minimum Essential Medium plus 20% fetal bovine serum (Atlanta Biologicals, Inc., Flowery Branch, GA, USA) and proper antibiotics. Our previous studies showed that cell populations derived from dental tissue under this culture condition contain stem cells ( DFs collected from first mandibular molars of rat pups of different postnatal days and from different human impacted molars were used for RNA isolation to determine ODAM expression. Total RNA was also extracted from the established human and rat dental follicle cell cultures. Total RNA were isolated using RNeasy kit (Promega, Madison, WI. USA) or Direct-zol™ RNA Kit (Zymo Research, Irvine, CA, USA) according to the manufacturers’ instructions. The total RNA was further treated with Ambion Turbo DNase I kit (Thermo Fisher Scientific Inc. USA) to remove possible contamination of DNA. Next, the RNA was quantitated and analyzed with a Nanodrop spectrophotometer. RNA samples with OD260/OD280 greater than 1.8 were processed for RT-PCR to acquire gene expression data. Briefly, equal amounts of the RNA were reverse-transcribed into cDNA with MLV reverse transcriptase. Conventional PCR or real-time PCR was conducted using the cDNA and ODAM specific primers, and actin was used as the internal control in all RT-PCR analyses. For conventional PCR, the PCR products were electrophoresed in an agarose gel to determine the gene expression. For real-time PCR, threshold cycle (C To determine if ODAM protein was indeed exist in the DF, rat pups of postnatal day 8 was sacrificed and DFs of 1st and 2nd molars were isolated and lysed in CytoBuster™ Protein Extraction Reagent (EMD Millipore Corporation) containing protease inhibitors. 20 Cells (DFSCs or DFC) were seeded in the flasks or plates at a cell density around 8.0k-10.0k cells/cm ALP activity was measured with the QuantiFluo™ Alkaline Phosphatase Assay Kit (BioAssay Systems, Hayward, CA, USA). Specifically, 150 To study the effect of ODAM on osteogenesis, ODAM overexpression experiments were conducted by transfecting plasmid vector, namely, pCMVrODAM containing rat ODAM (rODAM) coding sequence driven by a CMV promoter into human and rat DFSCs. The plasmid, pCMV3tag3 (Agilent Technologies, Santa Clara, CA, USA) without insertion of the ODAM coding sequence, was also transfected into the cells to serve as the control. Briefly, cells were seeded in 12-well plates or T25 flasks. When they reached about 80–90% confluency, the plasmids (ODAM or control plasmids) were mixed with PolyJet ™ transfection reagent (SignaGen Laboratories, Gaithersburg, MD, USA) and then added to the cultures according to the manufacturer’s instruction. After overnight incubation, the medium along with the transfection reagent was removed, and cells were collected at designated time points for RNA isolation to determine the overexpression of the transgene rODAM by RT-PCR. For induction of differentiation, osteogenic differentiation medium was added to the transfected cells, and incubated for 5, 7 and 14 days, followed by Alizarin red staining as described earlier and by ALP analysis. For ALP analysis, 150 To study if knockdown ODAM affects osteogenesis, DFSCs were transfected with ODAM-siRNA to knock down ODAM expression. Specifically, cells were seeded in 12-well plates, and ODAM-target siRNA [5′-GAAUGGUAUCUGUUCCUCGUAUAGCUG-3′, which was synthesized by Integrated DNA Technologies, Inc. (ITD, Coralville, Iowa, USA) or a scrambled siRNA (control) were mixed with RNAiMax (Invitrogen, Waltham, MA. USA) according to the manufacturer’s protocol. The siRNA mixture was added to the cultures at a final siRNA concentration of 20 Conventional RT-PCR results showed no detectable transcript of ODAM in neonatal rat DF at day 1 and only a weak expression of ODAM at postnatal day 3. A notable increase of expression was seen at day 5 and a huge increase seen at day 7. The incremental trend continued until postnatal day 11 ( Two populations of cells, dental follicle cells (DFC) and dental follicle stem cells (DFSCs) were established from the human and rat DF, respectively. The DFC are fibroblast-like cells that have no capability of differentiation, whereas the DFSCs can be induced for multiple lineage differentiations ( Because rapid increase of ODAM expression in the rat DFs was coincident with the bone growth in the tooth crypt during the tooth eruption, we conducted ODAM overexpression experiments by transfection of rODAM expression plasmids into human or rat DFSCs to mimic the in vivo rapid increase of ODAM expression seen in the DFs. High levels of rODAM transgenic expression appeared to last at least 9 The transfected DFSCs were incubated in osteo-induction medium for assessment of their osteogenesis. Alizarin red staining showed that more calcium deposition was seen in the rODAM transfection treatment than the control transfected with 3T3 plasmid at days 5 and 7 of induction, but no notable differences were observed at 14 ODAM expression in the DFSCs was knocked down by transfecting the cells with ODAM-siRNA using RNAiMax (Thermo Scientific). Maximal knockdown efficiency was seen at 72 Tooth eruption is a localized event which requires bone resorption and bone formation in the given tooth crypt. Bone resorption and bone formation are mainly regulated by the DF of the given erupting tooth. The DF exerts this regulatory role by timely and spatially expression of cytokines and growth factors to regulate osteoclastogenesis and osteogenesis ( The dental follicle is a connective tissue sac consisting of majority of fibroblast-like cells. Various studies have reported the existence of stem cells in this tissue (i.e., DFSCs) in human, rat and other species ( DFSCs have been shown to possess capability of osteogenic differentiation in vitro when induced with a proper osteogenic medium ( In a recent publication, In conclusion, ODAM expression in the DF increases chronologically from postnatal days 1 to 11. This expression pattern correlates well with the increase of bone formation seen in the tooth crypt during tooth eruption. This study demonstrated that increased ODAM expression in vitro could function to accelerate the osteogenesis of the DFSCs. Thus, increased ODAM expression in the DF may promote osteogenic differentiation of DFSCs to contribute to alveolar bone formation seen in the tooth crypt for timely tooth eruption. The authors declare no conflict of interests. The authors thank Dr. Gary E Wise for editing the manuscript and his constructive suggestions and comments. This research was supported by a R01 grant (DE008911-21) from the