Waelz oxide is a zinc and lead concentrate pyrometallurgically derived from electric arc furnace dust. There are clear incentives to leaching and purify this oxide to produce liquors that can be electrowinned to obtain recycled metallic zinc. This study is focused on this electrolytic zinc production from previously obtained sulphuric liquor. This liquor was obtained from double leached Waelz oxide (DLWO) throughout a hydrometallurgical process. The electrolytic liquor, after the corresponding leaching and purification stages, contains around 49kg/m3. This liquor was fed to an electrowinning process where platinum or lead anodes and aluminium cathodes were used. After optimizing the different electrowinning critical parameters, and working at these optimal conditions, almost 88 secondary zinc kg were precipitated per each initial DLWO tonne in one-through process. The zinc purity was higher than 99.5%. After some mass balance calculations, it can be concluded that, optimizing the process configuration through internal recycling, around 210Znkg/DLWOt with purity near to 100% could be achieved.The metallic zinc consumption in 2007 was around 11.5 One of these pyrometallurgical processes is the Waelz process. In this process, the Waelz oxide, a mixture of zinc and other metallic species, is produced. In order to reduce the Waelz oxide (WO) chlorine–chloride and fluorine–fluoride concentrations, a double-leaching step using NaHCO In this paper, the electrowinning stage for liquors obtained from DLWO is studied. The main advantage of using this kind of liquor is that metallic zinc is produced from existing HTWs that, in other case, must be deposited in landfills after the corresponding inertization treatment. Other advantage of the zinc recovery from wastes is that no primary mineral sources are required as in the case of roasting blend. Other residual zinc concentrate treatments have been already developed, but using pyrometallurgical processes. The most common one is the Imperial Smelting process. In a previous work the possibility of carrying out a hydrometallurgical pre-treatment of zinc concentrates was studied. The greatest advantage that presents hydrometallurgical processes is the energy consumption saving respect to pyrometallurgical ones. The studies presented in this paper represent a novelty because until now, there were no published data of electrowinning processes in which Waelz oxide derived liquids were used as electrolytes. The liquors must fulfil a series of requirements to be fed to electrowinning processes. Most of them are related to metallic species concentrations, see Not only zinc concentration must be controlled in an electrolysis feed, some impurities concentrations must be also considered. The most important impurities are fluoride and chloride, because they corrode the electrodes during the electrolysis stage. Their maximum allowed concentration is around 12–15 The electrowinning studies were carried out in an electrolytic cell (IKA electrolyse EN 500 E) controlling the electrowinning voltage. In this stage, lead or platinum anodes and aluminium cathodes were used. All the samples obtained during the different process stages were analysed in a Perkin Elmer ICP-OES model 2000-DV. Liquid samples had to be diluted in order to ensure that their concentrations lie between the detection limits of the technique. Solid samples were previously digested using aqua regia and HF solutions because the ICP technique can only analyse liquid samples. The anion concentration determination was carried out using a ICS 3000 (DIONEX) ionic chromatograph. The structural studies of the Waelz oxide and the double leached Waelz oxide were carried out by XRD, the equipment used was a Bruker D8 Advance. The Waelz oxide and double leached Waelz oxide images shown in the characterization section were obtained by scanning electron microscopy (SEM), the equipment used was a Carl Zeiss EVO-40. The composition of the zinc oxide derived from primary sources, the raw material commonly used to produce electrolytes, is less complex than the Waelz oxide and the double leached Waelz oxide ones. These heterogeneous compositions are the main reason for carrying out a detailed characterization of the Waelz oxide and the double leached Waelz oxide. Characteristic samples of Waelz oxide and double leached Waelz oxide were provided by BEFESA ZINC ASER S.A. After the metallic species concentration determination by ICP, see Analysing the Waelz oxide and the double leached Waelz oxide by XRD, see  The sulphuric liquor used in the electrowinning must be previously prepared. This preparation process, described in detail in a previous work, consists of three stages. The first one was a double-leaching step, keeping the pH constant at 3.5 by a sulphuric acid solution addition (the sulphuric acid concentration in the final liquor was around 120 The zinc concentration in the liquor obtained was around 49 Comparing the final liquor composition with the usual electrowinning requirements, it is observed that the chloride and fluoride concentrations in the liquor are very close to the required ones, 400 Once the electrolyte was obtained, the different critical parameters of the electrowinning could be optimized. The metallic zinc production in the electrowinning process takes place through the reaction (1). The zinc sulphate present in the liquor is decomposed because of the application of an electrical current. Due to this decomposition, metallic zinc is precipitated in the cathode while the sulphate ions react with the hydrogen dislodged in the water decomposition forming a sulphuric acid solution. At the same time, oxygen is produced in the anode. The electrowinning was experimentally studied as a batch process. In this step, a platinum cathode was used. The total electrowinning time was 60 In order to optimize the voltage, two parameters were considered: the plated zinc purity and the plated solid amount. It was observed that, for voltages lower than 4.5 In these conditions, around 11.1 The considered as optimum voltage, 4.5 Once the optimum precipitation voltage was determined from experimental data, the influence of the electrowinning time was studied. The electrowinning kinetics when platinum cathodes were used was faster than using lead cathodes. It might be related to the platinum higher electrical conductivity, the surface area differences between both types of anodes (the platinum anode surfaces are less porous than the lead ones) and the lower electrode potential of the lead cathodes. The optimum time was 120 The electrowinning time could be reduced increasing the operation temperature as in industrial electrolytic processes, in which the operation temperature is between 35 and 45 The most common used anodes are made of Ag–Pt. However, in this case, as this study is an approach to the electrolysis stage, lead and platinum anodes and aluminium cathodes were used. These anodes present the problem that they are easily corroded. In industrial applications other kind of electrodes can be considered. For example, in a process using liquors obtained leaching EAFD in which Ti/IrO The anode selection was carried out comparing the results obtained using platinum and lead anodes working at their corresponding optimum conditions: 4.5 When platinum anodes were used, the plated zinc amount was higher than using lead anodes. The zinc purity obtained in both cases, using platinum or lead anodes, was very similar, see Analysing these results, it can be concluded that better electrowinning results were obtained using platinum. The advantages that present the use of platinum anodes were important but, in the case of an industrial application of this process, the economical differences existing between platinum and lead anodes must be also considered. As this study was focused on the experimental study of the process and not on its direct industrial application, the platinum anodes were considered as the optimum ones to carry out the electrowinning stage. Operating with these cathodes, almost 108 In this section a detailed characterization of the liquors and solid products obtained in the process is shown. As it can be observed in In the electrowinning process the main part of the metallic impurities remained in the liquor. The facility for the zinc deposition allowed the production of high grade metallic zinc, with purities higher than 99.5%. The liquor remained after the precipitation was mainly formed by the non-plated zinc and the metallic impurities already present in the preelectrolytic liquor. After obtaining the previously shown experimental results, it was observed that only around the 15% of the zinc content in the feedstock liquor was deposited during the electrolysis. To improve this yield, recycling must be considered. In this section three different configurations and their corresponding mass balances will be discussed. In order to make the recycle feasible, a purge current was compulsory to avoid the impurities accumulation in the process. In all the studied configurations it was considered that the minimum zinc concentration that must be fed to the electrolysis was 40 The first configuration with a recycling current, see The second configuration with a recycle current was similar to the previously described one, but the semi-exhausted liquor was mixed with the flow obtained in the purifying stages, see The last configuration studied was designed combining both previous cases. Part of the semi-exhausted liquor was mixed with the purified liquor before the electrowinning step, and the other part was fed to the leaching step with the fresh liquor, see The metallic zinc production by electrowinning required a previous process to obtain sulphuric liquors from which zinc can be electrowin. A possible process to produce this liquor from double leached Waelz oxide was developed. This process consisted of an acid leaching stage followed by two purifying steps: an oxidation and a cementation. After this previous process, a liquor with almost 49 Once the liquor was prepared, the different critical parameters of the electrowinning stage were studied. The experimental studies were carried out using platinum or lead anodes and aluminium cathodes. The voltage found as the optimum one was 4.5 Carrying out the electrowinning using these liquors, the plated zinc purity was very similar when platinum or lead anodes were used, both higher than 99.5%. The main advantage of the platinum anodes was that the amount of solid plated was higher, around 108 Using lead anodes and recycling the exhausted liquor obtained in the electrolysis, the zinc amount produced can be increased. After mass balance calculations applied to different process configurations, the best results were obtained when two recycling currents were considered, one to the leaching step and another one directly to the electrowinning stage. Through this process, 210.1