Reverse flotation of hematite from a local silica sand ore has been investigated using a batch, bench-scale mechanical flotation cell. The effects of various operating parameters such as type and concentration of collectors, type of acid, pH, conditioning time, solid-in-pulp concentration, particle size and temperature have been studied on the hematite removal efficiency by reverse flotation. The results showed that the separation of hematite from silica sand by reverse flotation is possible and good selectivity can be achieved. Experimental data indicate that a larger amount of hematite can be removed from quartz in the presence of hydrochloric acid at elevated temperatures. Also, there exists an optimum collector concentration (Aero 800-series) at which the hematite removal is maximum. A first-order kinetic rate was obtained for the hematite removal from the silica sand.concentration (wt.%) flotation rate constant (s flotation rate order time (s) temperature (°C) removal efficiency final hematite initial Industrial minerals, such as silica sand, china clays and feldspar are often associated with iron oxides which impair transmission in optical fibers, affect the transparency of glasses, discolor ceramic products and lower the melting point of refractory materials. The iron content can be reduced by a number of physical, physicochemical or chemical methods, the most appropriate method depending on the mineralogical forms and distribution of iron in the ore Batch flotation is an efficient separation method, which is used frequently to remove hematite from the silica sand ore. Batch flotation cells have been used extensively to investigate the effects of various operating parameters on flotation performance. By far the majority of flotation research, particularly with respect to reagent selection, is carried out using such cells. This is mainly because batch flotation tests can be carried out rapidly and are an inexpensive way of assessing mineral flotation response at various operating conditions. In addition, evaluation of the effects of altering flotation variables is easily accomplished by fitting batch data to kinetic rate equations. The kinetic modeling of flotation processes is important from both a design and operation perspective, providing a basis for the simulation of industrial flotation circuits and different rate equations were obtained The purpose of this study is to investigate the various aspects of the reverse flotation for separation of hematite from silica sand using a batch, bench-scale, mechanical flotation apparatus commonly used in industry for separation research and development. The Kowli-Kosh silica sand mine (located in the Fars province in south-west of Iran) was chosen to conduct a feasibility study for possible use in the glass industries. The effects of different operating parameters, including type and concentration of collectors, type of acid, pH, conditioning time, solid-in-pulp concentration, particle size and temperature are studied on the efficiency of reverse flotation separation. Data analysis will be used to determine the variation of the rate of hematite removal with different experimental parameters, as well as determination of the kinetics of the separation process. A bulk of silica sand was taken from Kowli-Kosh silica sand mine to reduce its hematite content by reverse flotation. The raw sample consisted of 97.38% SiO The schematic diagram and a picture of a Denver flotation cell employed in this study are shown in Considerable care was taken in choosing a suitable collector for the hematite, which would not interfere with the hydrophobicity of the quartz particles. In the present work, a mixture of 1:1 ratio of AERO-801 and AERO- 825 was found to be appropriate for floating hematite gangue at pH 2.5. Flotation performance is also enhanced in the presence of well-sized, well-distributed air bubbles, which carry hematite particles to the upper section of the cell. In the present study frorther-65 was used to promote the separation. Experimental data indicated that the optimum concentration of this frother was 15 In this study, the flotation process is evaluated by defining a removal efficiency for the hematite,  The experimental results have shown that the acid type used as well as the cell operating temperature have considerable effects on the efficiency of the hematite removal.  The effect of the amount of the collector-to-quartz weight ratio on the removal efficiency is shown in  Finally the iron content of the obtained quartz product under optimum conditions for sulfuric acid and hydrochloric acid are 0.022% and 0.0185%, respectively at ambient conditions, which are appropriate for manufacturing of any kind of glass except the optical ones. The kinetic modeling of the flotation process is important from both the design and operation view points since it provides a basis for the simulation of industrial flotation circuits. The hematite removal from the pulp phase is the result of the selective transfer of hematite from the pulp to the froth by particle–bubble attachment. The effect of the froth phase behavior on overall flotation kinetics can be determined by a simple approach, which does not distinguish the behavior of the pulp and froth phases. This is the traditional approach used in most batch flotation studies.  In batch flotation systems it is usually assumed that the overall flotation response of different minerals is described as a first-order process with respect to the concentration of floatable minerals. In this work, however, the flotation kinetics was studied based on an Reverse flotation of hematite from a local silica sand ore has been investigated using a batch, bench-scale mechanical flotation cell. Samples of silica sand with known measured size distributions were mixed with tap water and the required amount of Aero-800 collector and acid added to the mixture. Flotation was conducted at the specified airflow rates and levels of agitation. The effect of various operating parameters including type and concentration of collectors, type of acid, pH, conditioning time, solid-in-pulp concentration, particle size distributions and temperature on the reverse flotation have been studied. The following conclusions can be made from the experimental results. (a) The optimum collector concentration was found to be 1.5 The authors would like to acknowledge the technical support received from “Extraction and Processing of Glass Raw Materials Company”, Ghazvin, Iran.