Modelling desiccation cracking in soils is a challenging process that requires a robust computational approach capable of describing soils undergoing thermo-hydro-mechanical coupling processes induced complex cracking patterns. To facilitate this process, this paper presents a computational approach that combines the mesh-free smoothed particle hydrodynamics (SPH) method and a size-dependent constitutive model with an embedded cohesive fracture process zone to simulate shrinkage induced soil cracking. The proposed method describes the fracture geometry through a set of SPH particles that carries their own cohesive fracture process zone and freely moves without being confined to a grid system. As it is a particle-based approach, there are no preferred orientations for cracks to develop, and hence the direction of crack propagation is controlled by local stress conditions and material properties only. This unique feature of SPH in conjunction with the size-dependent constitutive model enables the proposed method to naturally capture the crack propagation in soils while eliminating issues associated with spatial-dependent solutions. The proposed computational framework is verified against analytical solutions followed by the validation against experiment data of direct shear tests, flexural tests and shrinkage-induced soil cracking tests. Very satisfactory agreements with experimental data demonstrate that the proposed computational method is a promising approach for further incorporating multi-physical processes that can provide insights into the crack development processes in clayey soils.Desiccation cracks in clayey soils are formed in response to changes in the stress field during water evaporation. Drying cracks penetrate below the ground surface and induce significant changes in key mechanical, hydrological and thermal soil properties Over the past decades, a large number of experimental investigations have been performed to study soil cracking mechanisms. These experimental studies often examined the influence of layer thickness, boundary conditions, water evaporation rates, fracture length and cracking patterns. It has been observed that soil layer thickness strongly influences soil fracture morphologies A plethora of numerical approaches, which can be broadly categorised into continuum and dis-continuum methods, have been proposed to simulate desiccation cracking in soils Dis-continuum methods, such as the distinct lattice spring model (DLSM) and the discrete element method (DEM), have gained momentum for the simulation of soil desiccation cracking This paper aims at developing a continuum-based particle/meshfree method to capture the development of drying cracks in clayey soils and overcome the aforementioned limitations associated with existing numerical methods. The continuum-based particle/meshfree method inherits all advantages of continuum mesh-based methods such as FEM Several attempts have been made in the literature to model fractures using SPH, most of which have been based on simple continuum damage models. However, this approach cannot properly describes fracture development involving mixed-mode behaviour. Wang et al. An advanced constitutive model for simulating soil cracks is a keystone to successfully capture the development of discontinuities in clayey soils during drying. A large number of existing constitutive models are based on either plasticity or damage theories This study adopts a size-dependent constitutive model that has been already proposed and used to tackle successfully different applications in geo-engineering The paper is organised as follows. A summary of the governing equations together with their discretisation are presented first. This is followed by details of the size-dependent continuum constitutive model to handle fracture in geo-materials at the SPH particle level. Then, different numerical experiments with simple cracking patterns are analysed to illustrate the main features of the proposed SPH-based framework. Finally, the main conclusions of this research are presented. The dynamic behaviour of a soil medium can be described by the following mass and momentum balance equations: A constitutive model that relates the stress to the strain through a set of mathematical equations is then required to complete the above system of governing equations. The generic form of such a model can be written in the incremental form as follows: The SPH method is adopted in this study to convert the above set of partial differential equations (PDEs), Eqs. The integral approximation of the gradient of the field variable where Since the smoothing function Eqs. Using Eqs On the other hand, the tensile stress term Finally, if a constitutive model is known, the above governing equations can be solved using the Leap-frog time integration scheme Boundary conditions are needed in any numerical methods to impose specific constraints on the computational domain. In the mesh-based numerical methods, such as FEM, boundary conditions are directly imposed on the computational mesh. In contrast, the boundary conditions in the mesh-free SPH method are modelled by a set of boundary particles with appropriate physical properties For the no-slip boundary condition, the stress and velocity of boundary particles are also extrapolated from real particles as follows: In this work, the double-scale constitutive model Consider an RVE crossed by a localisation zone of finite thickness The averaged macro-strain rate tensor of the RVE can be described as a linear combination of both the strain rate tensors outside and inside of the localisation band as: Given a very thin localisation band, the strain rate tensor inside the localisation band can be approximated as By substituting Eq. The averaged macro-stress needs to be defined over the RVE and this requires an internal equilibrium condition that can be obtained by applying the Hill-Mandel condition for the balance of virtual work on the macroscale and subscale: By substituting Eqs. To ensure Eq. Accordingly, by combining equations The macro stress can be characterised if the displacement jump rate Substituting Eqs. The above constitutive framework can be applied to model both localised and fracturing materials. In the latter case, the thickness of the localisation band approaches zero (i.e. The above generic formulation is written in the global coordinate system, and a coordinate transformation is needed, given a cohesive law is usually formulated in the local coordinate system across the fracture plane: In the next section, a specific cohesive fracture law on the local coordinate system suitable for modelling soil cracking is explored in details. This is followed by the stress update algorithm to complete the description of the proposed double-scale constitutive model with embedded cohesive fracture zone. As discussed in the preceding section, any existing cohesive fracture laws can be incorporated into the current constitutive framework. Once an appropriate cohesive fracture law is selected, a stress return mapping algorithm is then required to ensure the stresses are correctly updated during the post-yielding process and to return the corresponding tangent stiffness matrix The development of plastic displacements is activated when the tractions across the crack plane satisfy the following yielding function, which initially has a hyperbolic form as shown in The softening functions The incremental plastic displacements can be then calculated using the plasticity theory, assuming associated flow rule, as follows: The plastic multiplier can be calculated by applying the first-order Taylor series expansion of the yield function around a trial stress state: By using this plastic multiplier, the internal variables such as plastic displacement, softening function and damage variable can be calculated. Accordingly, the traction increment across the fracture plane is updated as: The above computational procedure ensures the tractions across the fracture plane always satisfies its yielding criterion. This yield surface gradually shrinks ( Next, the tangent stiffness Accordingly, the plastic multiplier can be expressed as: By substituting the above plastic multiplier into Eq. As a result, the global tangent stiffness matrix can be calculated: Finally, the traction continuity condition across the fracture plane is required to ensure the stress continuity across the inside and outside materials. This can be achieved by further applying a stress return mapping algorithm for the macro model. This section presents the return mapping procedure for the macro size-dependent constitutive model with an embedded crack process zone. The key idea of this procedure is to ensure the residual traction due to stress in-equilibrium between the inside and outside materials are minimised. The residual traction across the fracture plane can be defined as follows: The displacement jump rate is then calculated from the above equation as: To this end, the displacement jump in Eq. The predictive capability of the proposed approach to simulate soil cracking induced by tensile loads is validated in this section. First, the SPH performance is verified against an analytical solution. Then, it is utilised to predict the experimental results of soil samples with different gravimetric water contents (GWCs), before being applied to the simulation of different soil cracking problems to be presented in  An elastic compression path following the Brazilian test (BT) protocol is first selected to verify the proposed SPH approach by comparing the model to closed-form solution results  The compression load induced by the loading strips results in the highest stress concentration at the disk centre ( To further verify the predictive capability of the proposed SPH approach, the vertical stress distribution across the SPH sample is compared to the photo-elastic (i.e.  The proposed SPH framework is adopted to simulate soil cracking in the Brazilian tests as reported by Shannon   The above analyses shows that the proposed SPH framework can correctly predict the behaviour of clays subjected to both, tensile and compressive loads. The progressive developments of the macro fracture can be captured thanks to the embedded crack process-zone considered at SPH particle level. In the following sections, the predictive capability of the proposed SPH model is further demonstrated analysing different soil cracking problems. The proposed SPH framework is further applied in this section to simulate various soil cracking problems involving the Werribee clay. The numerical results are compared with their experimental counterparts. The mechanical properties of Werribee clay for mode-I fracture analysis at three different water contents are directly taken from Amarasiri, et al. The variation of the elastic modulus ( The functions are plotted in The three-point bending tests on Werribee clayey samples conducted at different GWCs reported in Amarasiri, et al.    The direct shear test conducted on a Werribee clay sample with GWC = 27.5% carried out by Nahlawi The shear box is modelled by three layers of boundary particles with a fully fixed boundary condition. To further examine the mesh-independence of the proposed model, three different discretisation sizes were considered for the numerical specimens. These initial distances between particles are 0.9 mm, 1.0 mm and 1.2 mm, respectively, resulting in 181,186 particles (123,816 soil particles and 57,370 boundary particles), 121,968 particles (85,680 soil particles and 36,288 boundary particles), and 78,650 participles (48,020 soil particles and 30,630 boundary particles). The characteristic length scale  The ability of the proposed SPH framework to predict soil cracking is further investigated in this section by simulating a restrained shrinkage induced soil cracking experiment. Werribee clay samples were prepared from dry the dry soil power mixed with deionised water at a GWC ~80% and compacted in a long rectangular mould (250 mm long, 30 mm width and 8 mm height) as shown in The above specimens (i.e. with 8 mm, 12 mm and 16 mm height) are first modelled with an initial inter-particle distance of 0.8 mm. Additionally, to investigate the dependency of cracking patterns on the spatial discretisation size, the 16 mm-thick sample is also created using the inter-particle distances of 0.9 mm, 1.0 mm and 1.4 mm. A fully restrained boundary condition is assigned at the bottom, while fully-free displacements are assumed at the other boundaries. The number of SPH particles corresponding to the different specimen thickness and domain discretisation is summarised in  The above experimental observation of fracture development in clayey soils can be qualitatively described by the proposed SPH framework, as shown in To further examine the predictive performance of the proposed SPH model, simulations involving the three specimen thicknesses discussed above are performed using the particle size of 0.8 mm, and maintaining the same boundary and loading conditions. The numerical results are then qualitatively compared with the experimental counterparts.  This paper presents a size-dependent SPH framework to investigation of soil cracking problems that combines the mesh-free SPH method with a size-dependent constitutive model governed by an embedded cohesive fracture process zone. The proposed approach is first verified with analytical solutions and then applied to simulate various tensile induced soil cracking tests with numerical results validated against the experimental counterparts. The validation demonstrates that the developed SPH model can capture the fracture development and propagation in clayed soils without requiring any ad-hoc treatments and/or regularisations on the constitutive model and numerical method. Through the numerical validations and applications, the following key features of the proposed SPH framework are highlighted: The proposed model features an intrinsic length scale that automatically acts as a localisation limiter to remove the dependence of the numerical results on the spatial discretisation. Fracture development and detachment in soils can be straightforwardly modelled by the proposed framework, thanks to the Lagrangian nature of SPH. The embedded cracks at particle level allow the proposed framework to automatically account for the propagation of macro-cracks, formed by an ensemble of cracked particles with orientations governed by the particle stresses, material properties and loading conditions. Thanks to the above intrinsic features, the proposed SPH framework provides a good basis for further developments to model complex soil desiccation cracking problems which involve fully coupled thermo-hydro-mechanical processes. These works are underway and results will be reported in the future. Funding support from the