Operation of a commercial-scale biooxidation heap for pretreatment of refractory gold ores demonstrates the propensity of heaps to heat concurrent with pyrite oxidation. Heap temperatures can reach 75 °C. The high temperature is lethal for mesophilic iron-oxidizing bacteria. Column testing was conducted to compare effects on biooxidation pretreatment of a sulfidic refractory gold ore and the microbes' response to temperature when bacteria and archaea were grown at different temperatures. Five columns were operated at a different temperature regime: 20–23 °C; 35 °C; 50 °C; 60 °C; and one column varied from 20–23 to 60 °C. For the variable temperature column, the temperature was increased stepwise from 20–23 °C, to 35 °C, to 50 °C, to 60 °C in 2-week increments; after 2 weeks at 60 °C, the temperature was decreased every 2 weeks in the same stepwise manner. The following inocula were used: (1) columns at 20–23 and 35 °C, mixed culture of Acidithiobacillus ferrooxidans and Leptospirillum ferrooxidans; (2) column at 50 °C, moderate-thermophilic iron-oxidizing Sulfobacillus-type bacteria; (3) column at 60 °C, hyper-thermophilic archaea, Acidianus and Metallospheara species; and (4) an equal mix of all of the above for the variable temperature column. The hyper-thermophiles did not increase in numbers until the temperature was increased to 50 °C and above. Lowering the temperature resulted in a decrease in population density of this group of microbes. The moderately thermophilic bacteria increased in number until the temperature was raised to 60 °C; at that point, numbers decreased and remained stable as further decrease in temperature occurred. Decimation of the mesophilic iron-oxidizing bacteria occurred when the temperature was increased to 50 and 60 °C. A low-level population concentration was detectable at increased temperatures attributable to their presence in the ambient temperature solution reservoir. However, this population increased as the temperature was lowered. There was little difference in the amount of sulfide oxidation at either ambient room temperature or 35 °C. Increasing the biooxidation temperature from 35 to 50 °C increased apparent sulfide oxidation from about 38% to 48%. At 60 °C, sulfide oxidation was highest at about 51%. The variable temperature column also had higher sulfide oxidation, 41%, attributable to periods of high temperature biooxidation. The data suggest that there is little difference among the groups of microbes used in this study in terms of sulfide oxidation and improved gold recovery, with some apparent slight advantage in using the hyper-thermophilic microbes.Newmont Mining operates a commercial-scale biooxidation heap for pretreatment of refractory sulfidic gold ore at its Carlin, Nevada operation. The process entails use of three aerated heaps, each containing about 787,400 tonnes of ore for biooxidation over a period of 150 days. Following biooxidation, the ore is removed from the heaps and processed through a conventional mill at a rate of about 10,200 tonnes/day for gold recovery. The plant is designated as a “Bio-mill” process as it is a combination of a biooxidation-heap pretreatment and a conventional metallurgical milling (cyanide leach and carbon recovery of gold) technologies. The commercial process was developed over 10 years of research and developmental testing of pilot-scale The Newmont Mining commercial biooxidation pretreatment heap is the first of its kind. As such, specific information related to heap biooxidation of refractory sulfidic gold ores is not available. Experience now gained with biooxidation heap pretreatment has demonstrated generation of internal high temperatures of the heaps at relatively low sulfide-sulfur concentrations. This report summarizes results of the comparative study. The results have potential for indicating how heaps could be better designed, controlled and inoculated and extend the knowledge base for use of the bacterial catalysts in the biooxidation-heap pretreatment process. Column testing was performed to compare biooxidation at different temperatures and effect on subsequent gold leaching. Water-jacketed columns and circulating water baths were set up for temperature control. Five columns were operated at a different temperature regime: 20–23 °C; 35 °C; 50 °C; 60 °C; and one column varied from 20–23 to 60 °C. For the variable temperature column, the temperature was increased stepwise from 20–23 °C, to 35 °C, to 50 °C, to 60 °C in 2-week increments; after 2 weeks at 60 °C, the temperature was decreased every 2 weeks in the same stepwise manner. A thermistor was buried in the ore of each column for monitoring internal temperature. Each column contained 10 kg of sulfidic ore, crushed to 100% passing 12.7 mm, from Newmont's Carlin, Nevada Gold Quarry Mine operation. The Newmont patented pre-inoculation process was performed for each column The circulating biooxidation liquor for each column was monitored on a weekly basis for pH, Eh(SCE) and soluble iron concentrations. Column temperatures were recorded daily, five times per week. Every 2 weeks, the biooxidation solution was aseptically sampled at each column's discharge point to estimate the density of microbial populations. Serial dilutions were prepared from each sample for incubation at 30, 50 and 60 °C. A basal salts solution containing per liter, 0.4 g (NH  Bottle roll leach procedures were used to determine the potential gold extraction following biooxidation pretreatment at each temperature condition. “Heap leaching” was simulated using a 96-h bottle roll leach with the whole ore at minus 12.7 mm. The initial cyanide concentration was 0.33 g NaCN/L without carbon. The “Bio-mill” process was simulated with biooxidized ore crushed to about Weekly column monitoring data are presented in   An aspect of the comparative temperature study was to monitor the response of microbial populations to temperature. The viable counts were estimates of population density of the microbes capable of growth at either 30, 50 or 60 °C in the circulating biooxidation liquor. Mesophilic bacteria predominated in the column incubated at ambient room temperature. A substantial mesophilic population between 10 Similar results occurred for the microbial population response in the column maintained at 35 °C. The mesophilic bacterial population density was lower in this column compared with the ambient temperature column. The mesophiles varied between 10 The moderately thermophilic bacteria were detected at population densities of up to 10 The hyper-thermophiles were detected in the column operated at 60 °C. A population density up to 10  Hyper-thermophiles were only detected in the columns (60 °C and variable temperature) inoculated with this group. In contrast, the mesophilic and moderately thermophilic iron-oxidizing bacteria coexist. A large biooxidation pretreatment facility will likely require a unit to produce the hyper-thermophilic archaea for inoculation of the ore to facilitate biooxidation under extremely thermophilic conditions. Sulfide oxidation data for the respective columns are presented in The resultant gold extractions following biooxidation pretreatment are presented in The “Bio-mill” process results in higher recovery of gold following biooxidation pretreatment compared to gold recovery by a leach process. Another advantage of “Bio-milling” is more rapid recovery of gold and capital return. However, a simple heap leach following biooxidation pretreatment can be used for lower grade ores. A study of possible impact of temperature on formation of residual iron compounds resulting from biooxidation was conducted The author thanks Newmont Mining, Malozemoff Technical Facility, 10101 East Dry Creek Road, Englewood, CO 80112, USA, for permission to publish this manuscript based on research conducted while the author was Chief Research Scientist, Biohydrometallurgy for Newmont Mining.