The paper is concerned with a simple hydrometallurgical method for the selective recovery of cadmium and nickel from spent Ni–Cd batteries. The following consecutive stages are proposed: dismantling, leaching in sulphuric acid, cadmium electrowinning, Fe3+ removal and nickel electrowinning. The influence of H2O2 addition to the leaching solution on the efficiency of the dissolution process was investigated. The electrowinning of cadmium was carried out at various pH and current densities (100 and 400 A/m2). Fe3+ ions were removed from the bath by hydroxide precipitation. Nickel electrolyses were conducted at pH of 9 and two current densities (100 and 400 A/m2). Concentrations of Ni2+, Cd2+ and Fe3+ ions as well as cathode potentials and electrolysis voltages were monitored during the electrowinning. Efficiencies of leaching and electrolysis were calculated. Final products were metals of high purity (98–100% Cd, 98–99% Ni). Maximum total recoveries of cadmium and nickel from spent Ni–Cd batteries were 92% and 67%, respectively. A preliminary assessment of an economic viability of the proposed treatment was undertaken.At the present time economical and environmental requirements impose the development of effective and inexpensive methods for the recovery of valuable metals from secondary sources. In this respect, an unusual place among non-ferrous metals belongs to cadmium. Over the past 40 years the main cadmium application has changed from coatings to portable Ni–Cd batteries ( The declining production of cadmium from primary sources in a number of developed countries (mainly in Europe) is offset by the increased production in some Asian states. Moreover, the statistics have indicated an increase in the consumption since 1992, especially due to the continuing strength of the Chinese market for Ni–Cd batteries ( This situation has resulted in increasing emphasis on the production of cadmium from secondary sources and the recycling of spent batteries is a young and growing industry. Recycling Ni–Cd batteries is essential not only for environmental reasons ( Various authors investigated in details the individual stages of the hydrometallurgical treatment. Studies of acidic leaching ( Electrolysis is one of the simplest methods for the production of high purity metals. However, purity often decreases when the electrolyte contains several metallic cations and codeposition occurs. Some tests on the selective electrodeposition of cadmium and nickel were carried out by Two brands of spent Ni–Cd batteries (AA-size- Sony, Saft) with a mean weight of 32 g were used in the experiments. The batteries were dismantled into the separate components of the cell. The steel case was opened manually and the rolled electrodes with the polymeric separators and the active cell material were extracted carefully. The electrodes (anodes and cathodes) were perforated steel plaques. Each electrode was covered by proper active electrode material: the anode (negative electrode) by cadmium hydroxide, while the cathode (positive electrode) by nickel hydroxide. The synthetic separators impregnated with potassium hydroxide solution (30%) were insulators between the two electrodes ( The components of the random specimen were disaggregated and weighed. The active electrode materials were physically removed from the electrode plaques, but they were not cleaned chemically from the material strongly adhered to the surface of the electrode. Each component of the cell was dissolved with hot HNO The recovery of cadmium and nickel was carried out using the scheme presented in Electrowinning was conducted directly from the sulphate solution at room temperature. The details of the process are presented in The electrolyses were carried out with a stainless steel plate as the cathode substrate (20 cm Two specimens of spent Ni–Cd batteries (B-1, B-2) were divided into the individual components. On average, the AA Ni–Cd battery consisted of (in wt.%): 55.4  The major components leached with the acid solution were metals (the electrodes) and hydroxides (the electrode active materials). Good solubility of the hydroxide phase was expected. The metallic phases were more resistant to 20% H Hydrogen peroxide improved the dissolution of nickel, but also increased the dissolution of iron necessitating further treatment of the solution. The dissolution of the material from the spent batteries was incomplete and some of solids remained after the process. The solid residues were washed, the scraps of the electrodes (i.e. the metallic pieces visible to the naked eye) were separated from the “powder”, dissolved in HNO It was found that 80–100% of cadmium and over 73% of nickel were able to dissolve from the Ni–Cd battery. Among the three metals, cadmium was the element which could dissolve most readily. These results are consistent with the data reported by It was found that after 5 h of the leaching, the liquor solution contained usually 9–11 g/dm The detailed compositions of the Ni–Cd batteries were determined according the leaching data ( Electrowinning was undertaken using the leach solution. The variable parameters were pH and cathodic current density. Samples of the electrolyte were taken during the electrolysis and analyzed for Cd During the process, the concentration of Cd The initial concentration of Cd After cadmium recovery, the remaining electrolyte had its pH raised to 3–4 and ferric ions hydrolysed and Fe(OH) Nickel electrowinning was carried out from ammoniacal solutions at current densities of 100 and 400 A/m At each electrolysis stage the mass of the cathodic deposit was determined. It was found that at longer times the mass increments became lower. The highest metal recovery during cadmium electrowinning at 100 A/m  Chemical analysis of the cathodic deposits confirmed that only cadmium deposited from the acidic solution. At 100 A/m Cadmium deposited in the form of grey, matt, rather spongy metal, while the nickel deposits were grey and bright, but they peeled off already during the electrolysis indicating highly stressed metal. Current efficiencies based on the mass increments of the cathodes from the electrolyser and the copper coulometer were calculated. The potential of the cathode was monitored during the electrolysis. These measurements seem to be very useful for determining the end of the cadmium electrowinning stage. The voltage of the electrolysis was controlled ( The consumption of the energy The results are presented in Total balance for cadmium and nickel recovered in the electrolysis stages was determined. The amounts of Cd The losses of metals were caused mainly by withdrawing solution samples during the electrolysis. At cadmium electrowinning stage, the sampling led to the losses of both cadmium and nickel ions, whereas 2.5–5.5% of nickel ions were coprecipitated with iron. The results presented in The total recovery of cadmium and nickel from the Ni–Cd batteries was also estimated. The efficiencies of both leaching and electrolysis stages were taken into considerations. The amounts of the metals taken out of the bath during sampling were assumed as recovered. The results of the calculations are listed in An economic viability of the proposed process was assessed. This evaluation is rather qualitative, since solely main costs of the reagents and the energy consumed during electrolysis were taken under consideration. It was estimated that 1.5 t of spent Ni–Cd batteries corresponds to 1 t leachable material (the batteries without the external cases). At contents of metals 34% Cd and 25% Ni in the spent battery and maximum total recoveries of 92% Cd and 67% Ni, about 315 kg Cd and 165 kg Ni are recoverable. The costs of the leaching with sulphuric acid (s:l The studies presented in this paper showed that high degree of recovery of cadmium and nickel is achievable by the hydrometallurgical treatment of spent Ni–Cd batteries. The process consisted of the following stages: leaching in hot H