The adsorption of Cu2+ ion on the various S atoms at sphalerite (110) surface was simulated using the density functional theory (DFT). The results of DFT indicate that Cu2+ ion can be readily adsorbed on the S atom of sphalerite (110) surface, i.e., Cu adsorption on the top site of S atom (top adsorption) and on the bridge site between two S atoms (bridge adsorption). The calculated adsorption energies for the top and bridge adsorptions of Cu2+ ion are −657.24kJ/mol and −670.11kJ/mol, respectively. The density of states (DOSs) analysis shows that a peak of Cu 3d orbital near to the Fermi level is formed after Cu2+ ion adsorption. The formed Cu 3d orbital peak and the S 3p orbital peak are overlapped between −2.00eV and 0eV, implying a steady chemical adsorption. Mulliken population analysis shows that the Cu atom was reduced with the resulting oxidation of the S and Zn atoms during the Cu adsorption process. A comparison of DOS between the Cu2+ ion adsorption and the Cu substitution for the top site Zn atom shows that the DOS of Cu2+ ion adsorption is very similar to that of Cu substitution. Thus, it was concluded that the adsorption of Cu2+ ion on the S atom of sphalerite surface can also result in the activation of sphalerite.Sphalerite (ZnS) is the most abundant Zn-bearing mineral, but its chemical composition varies considerably with the location of deposits, due to the substitution of other elements within the mineral lattice. The most commonly occurring element within the mineral is iron (Fe), usually with a content ranging from 0% to 32%; in such a case, it forms a Fe-sphalerite (Zn The mechanism of copper activation of sphalerite has been extensively studied. It was commonly accepted that copper activation of sphalerite follows an ion exchange mechanism ( Cu As well known, the surface properties of sphalerite have an important effect on the natural floatability of the mineral and also on the chemical reactions occurring on its surface. Numerous experimental investigations on surface properties of sphalerite indicate that the sphalerite surface undergoes a considerable relaxation of surface atoms ( Recent years, quantum mechanical computation has been widely used for studying the microcosmic properties of mineral surface. It was early calculated using this computation by This S-rich surface of sphalerite maybe has adsorption ability for Cu The computations were based on the sphalerite structure (β-ZnS) whose space group is F-43 The perfect ZnS (1 The adsorption energy of Cu According to the conventional ion exchange mechanism, the Zn atom on the sphalerite surface is substituted by Cu atom, which results in the activation of sphalerite. Thus, the calculation of Cu The substitution energy of Cu The above adsorption and substitution energies calculated from DFT cannot represent the real energies and have little physical meaning, due to the fact the calculations are performed in vacuum and the energies are different for different calculation systems. The calculated energies only provide a qualitative criterion for the adsorption and substitution of Cu The calculated geometric parameters for sphalerite (1 As shown in Using a perfect sphalerite (1 As shown in As can be seen in Although tiny difference exists between the formed Cu–S bonds, the bond lengths of Cu–S ( The DOS of electrons of the first surface layer of the ZnS (1 As shown in  To further illustrate the activation of the Cu As shown in A Mulliken population analysis, while not giving realistic charges at individual lattice atom sites, is a valuable tool for comparing changes in charge between one lattice atom and another ( It can be seen from  Two types of Cu Both the top and bridge adsorptions of Cu The DOS of Cu The use of DFT computation provides an insight into the copper activation mechanism and process of sphalerite. Financial support from the key program of the