A systematic study of the electronic structures of natural galena containing ten typical kinds of impurities is performed by the density-functional theory (DFT). Mn, As, Bi, In and Sb impurities make the Fermi level shift to the higher energy level, while Ag, Cu and Tl impurities make the Fermi level shift to the lower energy level. Mn, In, Sb, Zn and Tl impurities result in a decrease in the Mulliken charge of the Pb atom and might decrease the ionicity of galena, whereas Ag, Cu, Bi, As and Cd impurities lead to an increase in that of the Pb atom. The frontier orbital calculations show that Sb and Mn impurities might lead to the over-oxidation of galena, and thus are unfavorable for the flotation of galena.Galena is the most important ore mineral of lead and is a narrow band gap semiconductor. Galena contains 86.5% Pb, 13.4% S and is usually mixed with silver, copper, zinc, arsenic, stibium, bismuth, cadmium, thallium, indium and other elements. It is found that natural galena from different deposits usually has different flotation behaviors. Lattice impurities have a great influence on the flotation behavior of galena ( To ascertain the influence of various impurities on the electronic structure of galena, this paper stimulated supercell models of galena containing ten kinds of impurities including Zn, In, Sb, Tl, Mn, Cu, Ag, Cd, As and Bi, and studied the effect of these impurities on the electronic and semiconducting properties of galena. The results may provide the guidance for the floatability of natural galena containing impurities. The calculations were carried out using the Cambridge Serial Total Energy Package (CASTEP) of Material Studio, which is a first-principle pseudopotential method based on the density-functional theory (DFT) ( Galena (PbS) crystallizes in the rocksalt structure ( The substitution energy of an impurity atom X (Mn, Ag or Zn, et al.) for one Pb atom in galena is defined as: The lattice parameter of the perfect and impurity-bearing PbS is shown in The substitution energy of the impurity atom substituting for the Pb atom is shown in The band structure and density of states (DOS) of the perfect galena are shown in Band structures of galena bearing Mn, As, Bi, In, Sb, Ag, Cu, Zn, Tl and Cd impurities are shown in The DOS of galena bearing Mn, As, Bi, Sb, In, Ag, Cu, Zn, Tl and Cd are shown in The Mulliken populations of the adjacent atoms near the impurity atom are shown in The extent of the interaction of minerals with reagents can be described by the frontier molecular orbital theory, and the highest occupied molecular orbital (HOMO) and the lowest unoccupied molecular orbital (LUMO) are the most reactive ( In the oxidization of galena, the HOMO orbital of galena has most easily donated electrons, and the interaction of the xanthate involves the HOMO of the xanthate and the LUMO of galena. It could be found from The interaction of the oxygen with galena mainly involves the LUMO orbital of the oxygen (acceptor) and the HOMO orbital of galena (donor). According to the frontier orbital theory, the extent of their interaction could be defined by Eq. where Similarly, the interaction of the xanthate with galena mainly involves the HOMO orbital of xanthate (donor) and the LUMO orbital of galena (acceptor), and the extent of their interaction could be defined by the Eq. where Based on the frontier orbital theory, the smaller the The electronic structures of bulk galena bearing Mn, As, Bi, Sb, Ag, In, Cu, Zn, Tl and Cd impurities have been calculated using the density-functional theory, and their influences on the electronic properties and the subsequent flotation behavior of galena have been discussed. Our calculated results show that the impurities change the electronic properties of galena including the lattice parameter, semiconductor type, the Fermi level, the density of states and the width of the forbidden band. Mn, As, Bi, In and Sb impurities make the Fermi level shift to the higher energy level, while Ag, Cu and Tl impurities make the Fermi level shift to the lower energy level. Mn, In, Sb, Zn and Tl impurities result in the Mulliken charge of the Pb atom reduced and consequently might decrease the ionicity of galena; while Ag, Cu, Bi, As and Cd impurities lead to the increase in the Mulliken charge of the Pb atom. The frontier orbital calculations show that Sb and Mn impurities might lead to the over-oxidization of galena, which may cause the further oxidation of lead xanthate, and thus are unfavorable for the flotation of galena. The research may be helpful for the further understanding of the flotation difference of natural galena in practice and provide directive significance to the practice. This research was funded by the