Anodic behaviors of Pd−Zn alloys in hydrochloric acid have been observed by channel flow double electrode to examine dissolution of Pd enhanced by alloying. The measurements on Pd−40%Zn, Pd−60%Zn and Pd−78%Zn show that the enhancement of Pd dissolution depends strongly on the alloy compositions. A linear sweep voltammogram with a Pd−78%Zn electrode indicates that Pd dissolved from the alloy at unusually low potentials, and this might be explained by a dissolution of unstable Pd clusters transiently formed through preferential dissolution of Zn. On the other hand, potentiostatic measurements show that Pd dissolves from Pd−60%Zn at a higher rate than from the two other alloys. Dissolution characteristics of the alloys are discussed by considering their potential dependency and the morphological changes of the dissolving surface.Precious metals have a high corrosion resistance, and their dissolution in aqueous solution requires oxidizing and complexing agents. In precious metals refining, however, it is necessary to dissolve the metals with the burden of a large environmental load In refining processes, some precious metals are alloyed with reactive metals (Cu, Pb, Ni, Zn, Al or Ag) to stimulate their dissolution The authors have applied a channel flow double electrode (CFDE) to examine electrochemical dissolution of precious metal Palladium-zinc alloys were synthesized by an isopiestic vapor pressure method  The dissolutions of the Pd Potentials of the electrodes were controlled by a bipotentiostat (HZ-5000, Hokuto Denko) against the Ag/AgCl reference electrode electrically-connected by a salt bridge. In the following paragraphs, the potentials are represented with reference to SHE. The counter electrode was a Pt wire placed at the end of the channel. Currents at the working and collecting electrodes were recorded every 0.2 s, and represented by When a working electrode made of pure Pd was polarized anodically in hydrochloric acid, In this study, the (PdCl When a working electrode is made of a Pd Because As preliminary examination, dissolution of pure Pd observed by CFDE was compared with a result obtained by an electrochemical quartz crystal microbalance (EQCM). Then voltammograms of Pd The broken line in In the figure,  This section is focused on the potentials at which Pd begins dissolution. Its dissolution from alloys at low potentials might be partly explained by underpotential dissolution The Here, As shown in On the other hand, Pd dissolved from Pd Time variations of  From the observations, the dissolution of Pd  At 0.7 One possible reason is an effect of Zn Contrary to the electrochemical measurements shown above, in chemical dissolutions where oxidizing agents are used, a potential of Pd Considering the OCP and voltammograms in Potentials of pure Pd and Pd Anodic dissolutions of Pd This work was supported by the Ministry of the Environment in Japan through a Grant-in-Aid for Scientific Research about Establishing a Sound Material-Cycle Society (Grant K2120, K22089, K2346). Supplementary data associated with this article can be found, in the online version, at Figure A1 Linear sweep voltammograms of pure Pd electrode in 1