Acid drainage waters generated in the uranium deposit in Curilo, Bulgaria, were treated by means of different passive systems such as natural and constructed wetlands, alkalizing limestone drains, permeable reactive multibarriers and a rock filter, used separately or in different combinations. The waters had a pH in the range of about 2–4 and contained radionuclides (uranium, radium), heavy metals (copper, zinc, cadmium, lead, nickel, cobalt, iron, manganese), arsenic and sulphates in concentrations usually much higher than the relevant permissible levels for waters intended for use in agriculture and/or industry. The water flow rate through the individual systems was different and not stable, and varied in the range approximately from 0.02 to 1.5 L/s. Efficient removal of pollutants was achieved by means of these systems during the different climatic seasons, even during the cold winter months at water and ambient temperatures close to 0 °C. The removal was due to different mechanisms but microbial sulphate reduction, biosorption by living and dead plant biomass and chemical neutralization played the main roles.The uranium deposit Curilo, located in Western Bulgaria, about 35 km north from Sofia, was for a long period of time a site of intensive mining activities including both open-pit and underground mining techniques as well as in situ leaching of uranium. The main uranium-bearing minerals in the ore were nasturane, torbernite, metatorbernite, pich-blende, metaotunite and basetite. The ore was rich in pyrite and, apart from uranium, contained some non-ferrous metals such as copper, zinc and lead, present mainly in the form of sulphide minerals. Quartz and feldspars were the main minerals in the host rock. Clay minerals and some iron hydroxides were also present. The mining operations in the deposit were ended in 1990 but since that time the deposit is a permanent source of acid mine drainage waters. These waters have low pH (usually in the range of about 2–4) and contain radionuclides (mainly uranium and radium), heavy metals (copper, zinc, cadmium, lead, nickel, cobalt, iron, manganese), arsenic and sulphates in concentrations usually much higher than he relevant permissible levels for waters intended for use in agriculture and/or industry. A portion of these polluted waters consists of permanent groundwater arising after the closure of the underground mine and coming from the underground mining works. The other portion consists of drainage waters arising after rainfall from the fractured ore body as well as from dumps consisting of rich-in-pyrite mining wastes and low-grade ores. The generation of these waters is connected mainly with the oxidation of pyrite and other sulphide minerals present in the ore body by the indigenous acidophilic chemolithotrophic bacteria ( The present paper summarizes the data obtained during the about 10-year period of such operations and contains the main conclusions based on these data. Several natural wetlands were used to treat the polluted waters in the deposit. These wetlands differed considerably in size (with surface from less than 100 to about 600 m Four wetlands were constructed and used for water treatment in the deposit for different periods of time. The largest of these wetlands was an acid-resistant concrete pond with an almost rectangular shape (25 m long and 4–6 m wide) dug into the ground and covering an area of about 140 m The wetland was characterized by an abundant water and emergent vegetation and a diverse microflora. The water flow rate during the period of study varied in the range of about 0.2–1.0 L/s and the water depth in the wetland was in the range of about 15–60 cm. Three multibarriers based on the processes of microbial dissimilatory sulphate reduction, biosorption and chemical neutralization were constructed and used for water treatment in the deposit. The largest of these mutibarriers was a pond dug into the ground and its bottom and walls were isolated by an impermeable plastic sheet. The multibarrier consisted of two sections: an alkalizing limestone drain and an anoxic section for microbial dissimilatory sulphate reduction, biosorption and additional chemical neutralization. The alkalizing drain had a volume of about 2.5 m The quality of the waters being treated was monitored at different sampling points located at the inlet and the outlet of the systems for water treatment as well as at different points located at different depths within these systems. The parameters measured in situ included: pH, Eh, dissolved oxygen, total dissolved solids and temperature. Elemental analysis was done by atomic adsorption spectrometry and inductively coupled plasma spectrometry in the laboratory. The radioactivity of the samples was measured, using the solid residues remaining after their evaporation, by means of a low background gamma-spectrophotometer ORTEC (HpGe-detector with a high distinguishing ability). The specific activity of Elemental analysis of solid samples from the sediments and the plant biomass was performed by digestion and measurement of the ion concentration in solution by atomic adsorption spectrophotometry and induced coupled plasma spectrophotometry. Mineralogical analysis was carried out by X-ray diffraction techniques. The mobility of the pollutants was determined by the sequential extraction procedure ( The isolation, identification and enumeration of microorganisms were carried out by methods described elsewhere ( The water treatment by the natural wetlands was studied during a period of about 10 years, covering all climatic seasons. It was found that an efficient removal of pollutants was achieved and their residual concentrations in the wetland effluents in the most cases were decreased below the relevant permissible levels ( The removal of pollutants was due to different processes but the microbial dissimilatory sulphate reduction and the sorption of pollutants by the organic matter (living and dead plant and microbial biomass) and clay minerals played the main role. The heavy metals and arsenic were precipitated mainly as the relevant insoluble sulphides. The dissolved heaxavalent uranium was reduced to the tetravalent state and was precipitated, mainly as uraninite (UO The dead plant biomass was a more efficient sorbent than the living plants. Larger contents of pollutants were also found inside the dead plant cells. Relatively small portions of the pollutants were accumulated inside the living plant and microbial cells. The content of uranium adsorbed on and accumulated in some specimens of algae was as high as 420 mg/kg dry biomass, and that of radium exceeded 50 Bq/kg. At the same time the content of uranium in some clay specimens exceeded 1000 mg/kg dry clay, and that of radium exceeded 1000 Bq/kg. The role of the sorption mechanisms was particularly essential during the cold months when the growth and activity of the plant and microbial communities in the wetlands were negligible or completely inhibited. The removal of portions of manganese and iron was connected with their prior, mainly bacterial, oxidation to Mn Data about the content of some essential physiological groups of microorganisms in the waters and sediments of the wetland during the 10-year operation period are shown in The chemical and mineralogical analysis of the sediments precipitated on the bottom of the wetland as well as on the submerged parts of the water plants revealed that the products from the microbial dissimilatory sulphate reduction (mainly the uraninite and sulphides of different heavy metals and arsenic) were present as the prevalent components in most of the sediments samples. Different hydroxides (mainly of the iron and manganese) and carbonates were also largely present in the sediments. The alkalinity produced during the microbial sulphate reduction in the form of hydrocarbonate ions as well as the alkalinity produced by the solubilization of some acid-consuming minerals (mainly carbonates) present in the wetland gradually increased the pH and stabilized it around the neutral point. The sulphate-reducing bacteria were a quite numerous and diverse population in the bottom zone of the wetland, mainly in the sediments. These bacteria were well adapted to the environmental conditions existing in the wetland and were not inhibited by the concentrations of pollutants present in the waters. Portions of the uranium and of the heavy metals and arsenic as well as most of the radium were removed by their sorption on the plant and microbial biomass and on the clay minerals in the wetland. The contents of pollutants in the main plant species present in the wetland were much higher than those in the relevant species grown in biotopes non-polluted with the above-mentioned pollutants ( Portions of manganese and iron were precipitated as a result of the prior bacterial oxidation of Mn Some arsenic was removed as a result of its adsorption on the iron hydroxides formed in the wetland. Apart from the above-mentioned acidophilic chemolithotrophs, which are able to oxidize the trivalent arsenic to the pentavalent state, heterotrophic bacteria (related to the genus Fine solid particles suspended in the waters were precipitated by some microorganisms as a result of typical agglomeration processes carried out by means of secreted metabolites (mainly polysaccharides). The efficiency of the water clean up markedly depended on the temperature. However, very efficient removal of the pollutants was achieved even in the cold winter months (December–February) at air and water temperatures lower than 5 °C. Since the environmental conditions during the winter are not favourable for microbial growth and activity, the role played by some sorbents, mainly by dead plant biomass and clays, was essential for this removal. In all climatic seasons the concentrations of pollutants in the wetland effluents were decreased below the relevant permissible levels for waters intended for use in agriculture and/or industry. An efficient removal of pollutants from the acid drainage waters was achieved by means of the multibarrier. The water flow rate through the multibarrier was changed considerably during the operation period (within the range of about 1–17 m The activity of the multibarrier was based on three main mechanisms participating in the removal of pollutants: chemical neutralization, biosorption and microbial dissimilatory sulphate reduction. The chemical neutralization was performed by the crushed limestone mainly in the alkalizing drain but also in the second, organic-rich section. In the alkalizing drain the pH of the polluted waters was increased to values near the neutral point and as a result of this most of the dissolved iron (present as Fe The biosorption of pollutants by the dead plant biomass present in the second section of the multibarrier was also an essential mechanism in the water clean up during the warmer but mainly during the cold months of the year ( The microbial dissimilatory sulphate reduction played an essential role in the water clean up during the warmer months of the year. The anaerobic sulphate-reducing bacteria were a quite numerous and diverse population in the multibarrier ( Data about the content of some essential physiological groups of microorganisms in the multibarrier effluents during the 36-month operation period are shown in A relatively long period of time (of about 3–4 months) was needed for the sulphate-reducing bacteria to establish a numerous and very active population in the multibarrier. The microbial sulphate reduction was the prevalent mechanisms in the deeply located layers and in the back zones in the multibarrier (at distances longer than 4–5 m from its inlet). The microbial sulphate reduction was a function of the concentration of organic monomers dissolved in the waters. These monomers were generated as a result of the biodegradation of the solid biopolymers by the different heterotrophs possessing hydrolythic enzymatic activity. The concentration of dissolved organic carbon in the anoxic section of multibarrier during the warmer months of 2005, i.e. in the period between the 9th and 16th months since the start of this operation, was usually higher than 100 mg/l and sometimes even exceeded 200 mg/l. This process resulted in a steady decrease in the concentration of the easily degradable solid biopolymers (cellulose and hemicellulose) present in the mutibarrier ( The microbial activity in the multibarrier markedly depended on the temperature and was negligible during the cold winter days. However, at air temperatures about 0 °C and water temperatures close to the freezing point, the temperatures inside the mutbarrier, within the deeply located layers, usually were in the range of about 2–5 °C. Under such conditions the microbial sulphate reduction still proceeded, although at much lower rates. In any case, the water clean up efficiency of the multibarrier was much higher during the warmer months of the year ( The effluents from the multibarrier were enriched in dissolved organic compounds and in some cases still contained manganese in concentrations higher than the relevant permissible levels. These effluents were treated in a natural wetland where the Mn The treatment of acid waters polluted with radionuclides, heavy metals and arsenic can be efficiently carried out by means of natural and constructed wetlands with a proper size and plant species and microbial cenoses and located in areas with suitable geological, hydrogeological and climatic conditions. Such wetlands are one of the best examples for sustainable development in the field of environmental protection. Larger wetlands characterized by an abundant water and emergent vegetation can be efficient for long periods of time (more than 10 years) if the water influents are maintained at the proper rates depending on the type and concentrations of pollutants. The accumulation of sediments on the bottom of wetlands is the main problem connected with these remediation systems. Efficient treatment of polluted acid waters can be carried out also by means of permeable reactive multibarriers intended for chemical neutralization, microbial dissimilatory sulphate reduction and biosorption of pollutants. After a certain period of time, it is necessary to replace the substrates by fresh batches of these materials. A very efficient treatment of acid mine drainage is carried out by means of a permeable multibarrier of the above-mentioned type and a constructed (or a natural) wetland connected in series. The comparison of the data present in this paper with the data obtained by other studies on this subject ( Parts of this work were financially supported by the European Commission under the INCO/COPERNICUS project No ICA2-CT-2000-10010 “Environmental Management of Hazardous Mining Waste and Effluents” and the project No QLRT-2001-02916 “Multifunctional Permeable Reactive Barriers Carrying Well-Performing Microbial Biofilms for Treatment of Mixed Polluted Plumes”, by the Flemish Government under the project CO-9004-1755.01 “Improvement of Groundwater Protection in Bulgaria Using Advanced Environmental Impact Assessment (EIA) Tolls”, and by the Bulgarian National Fund “Scientific research” under the project “Center of Biotechnologies for the Environment and Related Health Problems (CENBIOHEALTH)”.