Calcium zirconate refractories exhibit a promisingly high corrosion resistance in contact with titanium alloy melts. In the present article, we improved the thermomechanical properties of calcium zirconate based refractories by altering their microstructure and chemical composition. In a full factorial experimental design we investigated the effects of an insitu phase formation, of the addition of coarse grained MgO aggregates as well as the addition of SrCO3. Based on these factors, the chemical, physical, mechanical and thermomechanical properties as well as the resulting microstructure were thoroughly characterized. Strikingly, the addition of SrCO3 resulted in significantly improved mechanical properties before and after thermal shock. The improved thermal shock resistance can be attributed to a lower determined thermal expansion coefficient, a homogeneous pore size distribution with a reduced pore size and a better bonding between the matrix and the coarse grained aggregates.Titanium alloys play a vital role for corrosive and lightweight applications in aerospace, biomedical and offshore industries A main reason is the high cost of titanium which again results from the complicated and energy-intensive processing along the whole process chain of titanium production The inefficient process metallurgy of titanium alloys results primarily from the high melting point and the severe reactivity of titanium alloys with almost all refractory materials including oxide and non-oxide ceramics Generally the reaction of titanium alloys with refractory crucibles and casting molds is similar, whereas a temperature above 1500 K is considered as most critical In the last decades, research on refractories for titanium metallurgy has been much focused on yttria, zirconia and calcia since these materials have an exceedingly low Gibbs energy of formation. This low Gibbs energy of formation was by many studies described as the most important factor for a high stability in contact with titanium alloys However, corrosion resistance is only one of several crucial aspects for large scale refractory applications, whereas other material properties including creep and thermal shock resistance are similarly important Nonetheless, there are several possibilities to improve the thermal shock damage resistance of oxide ceramic refractories. A first option is to design the microstructure by increasing the number of pores relative to the total porosity. The higher number of pores then increases the number of points of crack initiation, crack arrest and crack deflection which then limits crack propagation In this study we therefore test the hypothesis that changing the composition and microstructure of calcium zirconate refractories can yield improved thermomechanical properties including thermal shock resistance using a full factorial experimental design. As a first factor the insitu phase and pore formation in CaZrO The present contribution focused on the improvement of thermomechanical properties of calcium zirconate based refractories for titanium metallurgy. For that purpose m-ZrO The batch compositions were designed by applying a 2 The effect of a modified phase composition and microstructure of the refractories was investigated by varying three factors. First, based on our recent study The compositions were produced using the technique of ordered mixing in a conventional mortar mixer (ToniMIX, Toni Technik Baustoffprüfsysteme GmbH, Germany), as previously described The linear sintering shrinkage (LSS) was calculated by measuring the diameter of the cylinders before and after firing, considering at least four samples of each batch. The apparent porosity and the apparent density were determined according to the standard DIN EN 993-1 applying Archimedes’ principle, using toluene as the immersion medium to avoid hydration. The pore size distribution was analyzed by mercury porosimetry (Autopore V 9600, Micrometrics GmbH, Germany) according to DIN 66133. For that purpose a fired bar of each batch was crushed and sufficiently large parts were randomly selected. Another part of the crushed samples was milled in a planetary mill with tungsten grinding tools (RS 200, RETSCH GmbH, Germany) to avoid contamination. The milled powder was then analyzed by X-ray diffraction (XRD, PW 1820, Cu-K- To investigate the microstructure, slices from the middle of the bar samples were cut. Subsequently, these slices were polished and then investigated using scanning electron microscopy (SEM, XL30 FEG, FEI Company, The Netherlands). Three bars of each batch were investigated on their Young's modulus before and after a single thermal shock. The Young's modulus was measured by the impulse excitation technique (HTVP1600, IMCE, Belgium) based on the standard DIN EN 843-2. Similarly, the thermal shock resistance was additionally evaluated by comparing the cold modulus of rupture (CMOR) of three samples of each batch before and after a single thermal shock. The CMOR was measured with a servo-hydraulic testing machine (TIRAtest 28100, TIRA GmbH, Germany) according to the standard DIN EN 993-6. The thermal shock testing was carried out essentially identical to the standard DIN EN 993-11, i.e. the samples were put into an electrically heated furnace with a temperature of 950 °C for 30 min before they were shocked by compressed air with an overpressure of 1 bar for 5 min. Since the first thermal shock causes the largest absolute drop in Young's modulus, the samples were only shocked a single time due to the large number of samples. Generally, a single thermal shock is sufficient to evaluate the thermal shock resistance of refractories, if appropriate statistical analysis is provided Finally, the refractoriness under load (RUL) and linear thermal expansion (LTE) were determined according to the standards DIN EN ISO 1893 and DIN EN 993-19, respectively, using a hood type furnace (RUL/CIC 421, Netzsch-Gerätebau GmbH, Germany). To investigate the properties of the modified calcium zirconate refractories, a full factorial experimental design was applied. The factorial experimental design was analyzed by analysis of variance (ANOVA) As mentioned in the introduction, although corrosion resistance is a fundamental problem for refractories in titanium metallurgy, thermomechanical properties including thermal shock and creep resistance are equally important for large scale metallurgical applications. However, whereas recent research demonstrated a very promising corrosion resistance of calcium zirconate (CaZrO According to After firing all samples had a white to yellowish color and no brown spots were observed. This is a strong indicator that appropriate care was taken to avoid the formation of free lime in the samples, which is usually indicated by brown spots The microstructure of the investigated samples can be examined in On the other hand, Moreover, comparing Similar to the microstructure, the apparent density (AD) and apparent porosity (AP) were also significantly affected by all three investigated factors, as can be seen from The lower apparent porosity due to the factors X To analyze the pore size distribution, the cumulative mercury intrusion is plotted in The thermal expansion coefficient from 25 °C to 1000 °C was significantly affected by all three investigated factors, as can be seen from The Young's modulus before and after thermal shock as well as the corresponding relative remaining values are summarized in the boxplots in On the other hand, the insitu phase formation (X The results regarding the Young's modulus were in line with the ones regarding the cold modulus of rupture (CMOR). As evident from The thermal shock resistance has to be evaluated in terms of several aspects. During the application of refractories crack initiation can be usually not avoided, thus the resistance to damage by thermal shock has to be considered. Generally the thermal shock damage resistance should be optimized by maximizing the mechanical properties after thermal shock. Secondly, a sharp drop of the mechanical properties due to thermal shock has to be also avoided because it can cause catastrophic failure in service As was shown above, of all three investigated factors, the replacement of CaCO One of the most important properties related to thermal shock resistance is the thermal expansion coefficient By contrary to the addition of SrCO Finally, for all investigated batches the refractoriness under load (RUL) tests indicated a very slow softening after reaching the temperature of maximum expansion (T Calcium zirconate (CaZrO Especially the addition of SrCO These improvements of the physical properties and the microstructure then resulted in a substantially improved thermal shock resistance. Strikingly, not only the Young's modulus and cold modulus of rupture before and after thermal shock increased to a large extent, but also the relative remaining Young's modulus and cold modulus of rupture, respectively, increased. On the other hand, the other two investigated factors improved only some of the investigated mechanical properties, but a coherent improvement of the thermal shock resistance was not achieved. The present study therefore provides compelling evidence of the positive effect of SrCO The authors would like to thank the