Alkaline earth aluminosilicate systems are of widespread technological importance, and it is therefore essential to have accurate phase equilibrium diagrams available. While the phase equilibria for the single alkaline earth CaO–Al2O3–SiO2 and MgO–Al2O3–SiO2 systems are fairly well established, the mixed MgO–CaO–Al2O3–SiO2 systems have received little attention despite their important role in the high-tech glass industry. Here, the liquidus surface (liquidus temperature T
                     liq and primary devitrification phase) is determined by x-ray diffraction phase analyses of isothermally reacted samples from powder mixtures. The phase equilibrium diagrams are presented based on measurements on a total of 120 compositions. In the composition range of interest for industrial glasses, T
                     liq tends to increase with increasing silica content and decreasing alkaline earth-to-alumina ratio. Cristobalite, mullite, anorthite, and cordierite are found to be the dominant devitrification phases for the compositions with high SiO2, Al2O3, CaO, and MgO contents, respectively. Anorthite extends further into the cristobalite and mullite fields for the [CaO]/[MgO]=3 system compared to the cordierite behavior in systems with [MgO]/[CaO]=3. For systems with [MgO]=[CaO], the liquidus temperatures are shifted to lower values since the formation of anorthite and cordierite requires some critical concentration of CaO and MgO, respectively.Fundamental questions in relation to understanding the structure, dynamics, and properties of oxide glasses have been studied for nearly 100 Fortunately, the GFA is strongly correlated with the liquidus viscosity ( Alkaline earth aluminosilicate glasses constitute a particularly important class of compositions due to their use as active matrix liquid crystal display (AMLCD) substrates In this paper, the phase equilibria (liquidus temperature and primary devitrification phase) are therefore determined for a total of 120 compositions within the MgO–CaO–Al Powders of MgO (Penoles Metals and Chemicals, 0.993 purity), CaO (Avantor, 0.9995 purity), Al Small (~ The samples were then analyzed using x-ray diffraction (XRD) to determine the crystallinity of the samples and identify any crystalline phases present. The samples were prepared for XRD analysis by grinding to a fine powder using a Rocklabs ring mill. The powder was then pressed into a standard top loaded sample holder. Using a Bruker D4 Endeavor equipped with a LynxEye™ silicon strip detector, scan data was collected from 5° to 80° (2 The liquidus temperature of each composition is determined as the temperature at which the final crystals melt upon heating. Isothermal holds are performed at 25 In the following sections, the experimental results for the three investigated systems (CaO–Al The investigated compositions and determined liquidus temperatures and devitrification phases for the CaO–Al Based on the data in The experimental results for the MgO–Al The mixed CaO–MgO–Al When the concentration of CaO is three times higher than that of MgO ( For [MgO] The phase relationships in the single alkaline earth and mixed CaO/MgO–Al The authors appreciate valuable support from