The nature of froth flotation is to selectively hydrophobize valuable minerals by collector adsorption so that the hydrophobized mineral particles can attach air bubbles. In recent years, the increasing commercial production of refractory complex ores has been urgent to develop special collectors for enhancing flotation separation efficiency of valuable minerals from these ores. Molecular design methods offer an effective way for understanding the structure-property relationship of flotation collectors and developing new ones. The conditional stability constant (CSC), molecular mechanics (MM), quantitative structure-activity relationship (QSAR), and first-principle theory, especially density functional theory (DFT), have been adopted to build the criteria for designing flotation collectors. Azole-thiones, guanidines, acyl thioureas and thionocarbamates, amide-hydroxamates, and double minerophilic-group surfactants such as Gemini, dithiourea and dithionocarbamate molecules have been recently developed as high-performance collectors. To design hydrophobic groups, the hydrophilic-hydrophobic balance parameters have been extensively used as criteria. The replacement of aryl group with aliphatic group or CC single bond(s) with CC double bond(s), reduction of carbon numbers, introduction of oxygen atom(s) and addition of trisiloxane to the tail terminal have been proved to be useful approaches for adjusting the surface activity of collectors. The role of molecular design of collectors in practical flotation applications was also summarized. Based on the critical review, some comments and prospects for further research on molecular design of flotation collectors were also presented in the paper.Froth flotation is one of the most widely used methods for the separation, enrichment and purification of metal ores, industrial minerals and coals. In froth flotation, special surfactants (known as so-called collectors) selectively cling to specific minerals in mineral/water slurry to increase their surface hydrophobicity so that the hydrophobized mineral particles can attach selectively to air bubbles and transfer to water/air interface Commonly, a flotation collector consists of polar and non-polar groups As the high grade and easy-to-process ores are being depleted at an increasing rate, the mineral industry is facing serious challenges because the processing of low grade, complex and highly disseminated type of ore deposits is becoming an important topic in mineral processing industry. Additionally, most existing collectors exhibit low flotation efficiency for recovery of these refractory ores. Therefore, the development of highly specific flotation collectors is imperative to maintain the sustainable development of metal resources. Traditional flotation collectors have been often developed and selected primarily by a trial and error approach based on rules of thumb, which is prohibitively time-consuming and extremely costly. For efficient recovery of valuable minerals from the refractory complex ores, the design and development of novel collectors have been regarded as an indispensable issue in mineral processing field. Thanks to the rapid development of computer science and quantum chemistry, theoretical and computational chemistry has been widely utilized to understand the chemical reactivity, structure-property relationship and interface chemistry reaction of flotation systems In this account, based on the molecular design approaches, we tried to present the recent progress on the development and practical utility of novel flotation collectors, placing emphasis on the application of density functional theory (DFT) in molecular design of new collectors and their structure-property relationship. Moreover, the directions and prospects for future investigation of molecular design of flotation collectors were discussed, as well as the challenges ahead. Van der Waals or electrostatic interactions of flotation collectors are active to all kinds of minerals rather than to a specific mineral In order to clarify the nature of the CSC, the chemical reaction The criteria for the design/selection of collectors are based on the premise that the chemical reaction of flotation surfactants with metal ions in aqueous solutions is closely related to that occurring on the mineral/water interface Marabini and Barbaro The criteria based on the CSC characterize both the absolute and relative affinity power of a collector toward metal minerals and offer a scientific approach to evaluate the collecting power and selectivity of collectors. Also, the validity of CSC for predicting the flotation efficiency and selectivity has been confirmed unambiguously Molecular mechanics (MM) uses classical mechanics to model molecular systems. The structures and many properties of molecules can be calculated using the force field of MM The accuracy of molecular mechanics calculation depends predominantly on the “force field”. Force field refers to a series of energy functions and parameter sets used to compute the potential energy of chemical system. The basic function form of force filed includes bonded terms ( The typical functional form of each energy terms are given in detail in the literature One of the most commonly used MM methods is molecular dynamics (MD) The criteria for the molecular design of flotation collectors are based on the interaction energy (Δ Pioneering work by Pradip and Rai has led to the application of MM in design/selection of flotation collectors, for which two basic steps have been proposed. Firstly, a large number of molecules are conceived, evaluated and screened for a given mineral surface based on the theoretically computed interaction energies using Universal Force Field (UFF) According to the computed interaction energy, the most promising molecular structures for the practical flotation separation systems have been investigated During the MM simulation, the structure of the surface-collector interaction product derived from static energy minimization is usually local energy minimum structure. In order to locate global energy minimum structure, MD simulations (both in vacuum and solvent) have been used. MD simulation is useful in exploring the physicochemical properties of surfactants in solutions and the structure of collectors on mineral surfaces, thus providing detailed insights on issues regarding surface potential, interfacial reaction as well as the dynamic and thermodynamic characteristics of a adsorption process Extensive research has been carried out regarding the interaction of flotation collectors with mineral surfaces by means of MD simulation Taken together, the above interaction energy-based MM has attracted intensive attention in design/selection of flotation collectors in recent years. Compared with other methods, this novel design paradigm takes into the structural characteristics of both collectors and mineral surfaces, rendering it more scientifically rational. Furthermore, this design framework, regardless of the availability of any experimental data, could assess and predict the collecting ability of a particular collector to different minerals or the relative affinity of various collectors toward a given mineral. However, despite its remarkable scientific merits, there is still much room for improvement in this approach, such as incorporating the effects of solvation, pH and temperature into the calculation of interaction energies. In a word, given the scientific merits of molecular mechanics applied in flotation system, it holds great promise for rational selection of flotation collectors. It is well established that the activity of molecules is determined by their structures. Therefore, structurally similar molecules possess similar properties or activities. Quantitative structure-activity relationship (QSAR) is a method for building statistically computational models which correlates chemical structure with activity quantitatively using chemometric techniques Three components are essential for the establishment of a QSAR model: A data set that provides experimentally measured activity for a group of structurally related chemicals (i.e., the dependent variable). Property data set for the same group of chemicals (i.e., the independent variable or molecular descriptors). Statistical analysis methods relating these two data arrays QSAR approaches have served as a useful tool for various applications such as predicting the activities and properties of untested or unsynthesized organic chemicals Molecular descriptors translate the properties of a molecule into various quantitative parameters Using valence connectivity indices as molecular descriptors, Natarajan and Nirdosh investigated the QSAR of substituted-cupferrons as flotation collectors for a Canadian uranium ore, and found that the fifth order connectivity index, Compared with topological indices, quantum chemical descriptors including frontier molecular orbital energies have definite physical and chemical implications. Yang et al. Though QSAR methods have found their way into various research fields, they still remain in the nascent stage in molecular design of flotation collectors. There are few of reported literature concerning the application of QSAR in ab initio molecular design of flotation collectors. One representative study was that ten novel compounds were developed via molecular similarity-based selection of At present, most of the QSAR studies were limited to the ligand-based approach, which didn't encompass the molecular descriptors for characterizing the specific structure of mineral surfaces and the reactivity of flotation collectors. Additionally, QSAR methods mainly focused on the effect of hydrophobic groups of collectors on their properties and hardly involved their minerophilic groups. Moreover, QSAR models needed lots of experimental samples and provided limited mechanistic value to the collector-mineral interaction, which entails the introduction of more sophisticated methods into molecular design of flotation collectors such as first-principle theory calculations. Nevertheless, given the unique advantages of QSAR, e.g., predictive ability and high-throughput virtual screening, it stands to reason that QSAR could serve as a stepping stone to facilitate the design/selection of high-performance flotation collectors after introduction of novel descriptors such as quantum chemical parameters. Density functional theory (DFT), with its simple conceptual framework, has become the most popular quantum mechanical modeling method to investigate the electronic structure of many-body systems, including atoms, molecules and condensed phases. This success stems from the computational elegance of DFT and its explicit consideration of the electron exchange-correlation effects, which are neglected by traditional methods, such as Hartree-Fock (HF) method and wave-function method. The basic premise of DFT is that the properties of a many-electron system can be uniquely determined by the total electron density. Here, it is not our aim to provide an exhaustive account of DFT, which has been elaborated in detail in literature Traditional ab initio methods involve solving the Schrödinger equation using the Born-Oppenheimer adiabatic approximation: The term ab initio denotes that Eq. Nowadays, DFT has been a powerful tool for incorporating the electron correlation effects without having to know the wavefunction of the multi-particle system. The two theorems proposed by Hohenberg and Kohn constitute the basic principles of DFT, which can be described as follows. All the properties of a system are uniquely determined by the electron density ρ( The electron density that minimizes the total energy functional Despite the fact that the Hohenberg-Kohn theorems lay a theoretical foundation for DFT, they fail to provide the mathematical formulation of the total energy functional Now the only problem in the Kohn-Sham-based DFT is that the exchange-correlation functional remains unknown, for which many accurate approximations have been proposed, including local density approximation (LDA), generalized gradient approximation (GGA) and hybrid functional The application of DFT in the field of chemistry allows for the calculation of molecular systems, clusters and materials where the electron density differs widely and that non-covalent interactions, e.g., dispersion force or hydrogen bond, are present. With its high computational efficiency and accuracy, DFT has been the most versatile method available in chemistry, physics and material science. In the last decades, first-principle theories have been widely recognized as valuable tools to understand the reactive chemical systems and predict their physiochemical properties. Among them, DFT, with acceptable reliability and affordable computing power, has been commonly used to study the energies, structure and properties of various chemical species The interaction energy between flotation collectors and mineral surfaces mainly involves Van der Waals, electrostatic forces, hydrogen bonds, normal covalent bonds and back donation covalent bonds, which is formulated in Eq. The composition and energy of the frontier molecular orbitals (FMO) This quantitative activity energy equation constitutes the essential basis for the collector-mineral interaction. The interaction energy predominantly consists of electrostatic effect, normal covalent bond and back donation covalent bond. The energy of electrostatic effect is directly proportional to the net charge of the reactive center of collectors or mineral surfaces. The energy of normal covalent bond hinges on the electron-donating power of collectors and electron-accepting power of mineral surfaces. The energy of back donation covalent bond lies in the electron-back-donating ability of mineral surfaces and electron-accepting power of collectors According to Eq. Without doubt, the interaction energy represented by Eq. The computed interaction energy offers an excellent approach for understanding the structure-property relationship of collectors, however, it merely provides a total energy of collector-mineral interaction while the contribution of molecular fragments (functional groups) to the energy terms such as electrostatic effect, normal covalent bond and back donation covalent bond are still unknown. The quantitative activity energy equation could quantify the contribution of molecular fragments to energy terms, providing an all-round understanding of collector-mineral interaction and a direction to build molecular fragments, which lays a solid foundation for the development of novel collectors with better collecting power and flotation selectivity. Using DFT method, Liu et al. The DFT calculation results of the ionized thiols of 2-mercaptobenzothiazole (MBT), 2-mercaptobenzoxazole (MBO) and 2-mercaptobenzimidazole (MBI) in the aqueous phase were summarized in The structure-reactivity relationship of diisobutyl dithiophosphate (DIBDTPA), diisobutyl dithiophosphinate (DIBDTPI), diisobutyl monothiophosphate (DIBMTPA) and diisobutyl monothiophosphinate (DIBMTPI) as sulfide mineral flotation collectors inferred that the affinity of the four compounds to mineral surfaces of Cu, Au, Ag and Pb sulfides was predicted to be DIBDTPI At present, xanthates are the main collectors for flotation of sulfide minerals, while dithiophosphates and thionocarbamates serve as auxiliary collectors Liu et al. Liu et al. Yuan et al. Commonly, surfactants for flotation of oxide minerals are categorized into anionic and cationic collectors. In order to increase the affinity and selectivity of collectors to mineral surfaces, novel oxide mineral collectors with strong hydrogen-bonding, electrostatic or chelating abilities have been recently developed, including hydroxamates Guanidine is a kind of organic strong base, which exists as its cationic species in alkaline solution. Moreover, guanidine contains three N Gemini surfactants are amphiphilic compounds with two hydrophobic chains and two hydrophilic head groups per molecule, connected through a spacer chain, which possesses excellent reactivity and surfactivity Fatty acids surfactants are commonly used anionic collectors for flotation of oxide minerals. However, fatty acids lack selectivity against calcium bearing minerals. To improve the flotation efficiency of oxide minerals, oxime and phosphonate surfactants have been introduced as collectors. Based on the results of DFT calculation and flotation tests, Zhao et al.  Recently, α-hydroxy octyl phosphinic acid (HPA) has been exploited as a flotation collector for ilmenite, cassiterite and malachite Apart from the minerophilic groups, the hydrophobic groups of flotation collectors play an important role in adjusting their surfactivity for attaching to air bubbles. The criteria for evaluating the surfactivity of a collector include CMC (critical micelle concentration), HLB (hydrophile-lipophile balance) and Log P Alkyl alkoxycarbonyl thioureas are more effective collectors than xanthates and alkoxycarbonyl thionocarbamates for flotation recovery of copper sulfide ores. They also exhibited a better selectivity toward copper sulfide minerals against pyrite and sphalerite Liu et al.  Organosilicon surfactants are more powerful to reduce the surface tension of water than conventional alky surfactants Yu et al.  In the paper, molecular design approaches for flotation collectors have been reviewed systematically and comprehensively, including conditional stability constant (CSC), molecular mechanics (MM), molecular dynamics (MD), quantitative structure-activity relationship (QSAR), density functional theory (DFT) and Log P. The fundamental principles of these methods have been also incorporated into the paper. The power and the utility of these approaches are illustrated with examples taken mainly from the work on mineral flotation over the past twenty years. The practical utility of various theoretical methodologies in designing new flotation collectors and understanding the structure-property relationship of flotation collectors were selectively summarized in The CSC criteria for design/selection of collectors are based on the premise that the chemical reaction of flotation surfactants with metal ions in aqueous solutions is closely related to that occurring on the mineral/water interface MM uses classical mechanics to model molecular systems. The potential energy of molecular systems is calculated using force fields which parameters can be developed from experimental data or ab initio calculations. MM can be used to study molecule systems whose size and complexity range from small to large biological systems with many thousands to millions of atoms. Therefore, it is a less costly but comparatively accurate molecular modeling tool to simulate the collector-mineral interaction. Universal Force Field (UFF) has been extensively used in simulation and calculation on collector-mineral interaction Molecular dynamics (MD) is closely linked to MM. But, instead of implementing “static” energy minimization methods as in MM simulations, the main purpose of MD simulation is to model molecular motions. In MD simulation, atoms and molecules are allowed to interact for a period of time by approximation of known physics in order to explore the physicochemical properties of interfacial phenomena such as collector-mineral interaction, thus providing detailed information and fundamental understanding on the relationship between molecular structure, movement and function. Generally, surface chemistry problems in flotation systems are very complicated with multiple interactions involved, it is time-consuming and costly to treat these systems using first-principle calculations such as DFT. MM and MD simulations are much less computationally demanding than quantum simulation, while the saving of computational resource comes at a cost due to the numerous approximations introduced, leading to certain limitations. One of the most important problems is that MM/MD simulation is not suitable to model chemical reactions involving electron transfer or atomic orbital overlap for formation of covalent or coordinated bonds. This problem might be solved by incorporating quantum effects into MM/MD simulation, resulting in ab initio MD QSAR is a method for building statistically computational models which correlate quantitative activity/performance with chemical structure by using chemometric techniques. The amenability of flotation separation efficiency of collectors to QSAR modeling might lead to the screen/selection of collector candidates from a virtual database prior to synthesis and flotation test. Neither any prior knowledge of the compounds nor preliminary testing is needed for constructing the virtual database and selecting initial compounds. Therefore, it would be found to be an effective scientific tool in searching for new flotation collectors First principle studies of surface and interfacial phenomena in flotation system provide further insights regarding the relationships among structure, function and dynamics at the electronic level. Among the various quantum simulation methods, DFT, with its high computational efficiency and accuracy, has become the most popular quantum mechanical modeling method to investigate the electronic structure and properties of crystal surfaces and interfacial reaction in the mineral systems The molecular design of flotation collectors for targeted mineral still remains a challenging task. This review provided a brief account of recent developments in collector design, which has been a hot research topic in the field of mineral processing. Based on this critical review, the main conclusions and prospects are as follows: The structure, composition and property of mineral surfaces and their change according to aquatic chemistry should be more considered in future studies. Current theoretical research on molecular design of flotation collectors, such as CSC and QSAR, disproportionally focused on the structure-function relationship of collectors, in which the role of mineral surfaces was underestimated or even neglected. In order to design mineral-specified collectors, more attention should be paid to the physicochemical properties of mineral surfaces. MM can model molecular systems consisting of thousands of atoms, and has proven to be very useful tools for the design and selection of new flotation collectors because of taking into consideration the structural characteristics of both collectors and mineral surfaces. Additionally, molecular modeling of flotation systems involving in crystal plane interactions was made possible by molecular dynamics. However, MM is subjected to some inherent defects for mainly emphasizing on Van der Waals and electrostatic forces of a collector with mineral surfaces, which cannot cope with chemical interaction that involves electron transfer to form covalent/coordination bonds. Consequently, more advanced molecular modeling techniques such as combined methods of MM with quantum mechanics should be introduced to establish a more scientific framework for molecular design of flotation collectors. Quantitative activity energy equation involves modeling the structure and composition of both collectors and mineral surfaces, as well as the interaction of collectors with active surface sites. And most of all, it can quantify the contribution of different molecular fragments to the interaction energies, making us understand the structure-property relationship of flotation collectors more comprehensively. In terms of quantitative activity energy equation, it is not difficult to estimate the collecting ability and flotation selectivity of any surfactants toward specific minerals, which holds huge potential for the design/selection of mineral-specific flotation collectors. However, the energy relationship between the single point energy calculation of collector and the cluster/periodic computation of mineral surfaces, and some quantum chemical parameters such as β (extent of bonding in transition state) need to be built and well defined in the coming investigations. Principles of green chemistry should become an essential part of the design and development of new flotation collectors in future. The rapid advances in green synthetic methodologies and computational toxicology could further facilitate the molecular design of eco-friendly, low toxic and biodegradable flotation collectors with enhanced efficiency and improved selectivity. The authors would like to thank the