The systematic nitrogen transformations were investigated in a tropical freshwater system using a three-dimensional Hydro-Eutrophication model, which simulated hydrodynamics, phytoplankton processes and nutrients cycling in Delft3D. The nitrification and denitrification processes were explicitly considered as the functions of water temperature and oxygen conditions in the model. The validated model was able to capture the thermal differences in vertical direction, reproduce the characteristics of nutrients cycles and primary productions across years with the forcing functions from the area-specific meteorological conditions, discharges and input loads. The modelled nitrification and denitrification process rates were verified by the lab process-oriented measurements.
                  The validated model preformed as a monitor, supplying the knowledge that sediment played an important role in nitrogen cycling, producing twice of the total external nitrogen load to water column. The water column bioactive nitrogen was controlled dominantly by phytoplankton assimilation, which had a nitrogen uptake rate of fifteen fold the external nitrogen loads. The bioactive nitrogen turnover rate by algal growth in this tropical water system was lower than the conditions in the other eutrophic lakes. Fifty-eight percent of the total external nitrogen load was retained via denitrification and burial processes in the Upper Peirce Reservoir.
                  The discovery of the systematic nitrogen transformations in tropical freshwater systems is proposed to be incorporated into future conceptual models of global nitrogen cycles.Excess nitrogen (N) from anthropogenic or internal sources has led to large changes in lake ecosystems, including water quality deterioration, shifts in biological species compositions and reduced biodiversity ( Ecological modelling provides as an alternative research approach which has played a central role in biology and ecology for integration, prediction and understanding. It is clear that significant progress has been made over the last decades in the development of numerical process models ( The purpose of the current study was to understand N transformation rates in a tropical freshwater system using a three-dimensional Hydro-Eutrophication modelling approach. The 3D Hydro-Eutrophication model was developed using Delft3D and validated by comparing the simulated physical and biochemical variables with the field observations. The quantifications of nitrification and denitrification rates obtained from small-scaled incubation experiments on the same system ( Upper Peirce Reservoir is a tropical drinking water reservoir located in the center area in Singapore. Its surface area is 3.2 During the period studied here, the reservoir received a single point source inflow from the Tebrau River from Johor in Malaysia by way of a water transfer pipe ( The 3D Hydro-Eutrophication model was developed using the generic Delft3D model framework. This framework represents an integrated system containing several modules for simulation of wave transformation, near shore currents, sediment transport, morphology and water quality and ecology ( The Hydro-submodel calculated the transport of dissolved substances in the water column as a function of advective and dispersive fluxes ( The hydrodynamic grid was developed using the orthogonal curvilinear grid generator Delft3D-Refgrid, consisting of a total of 1479 computational grid cells in the horizontal plane with a typical resolution of 50 The flow fields in the Hydro-submodel were driven by meteorology, discharges and artificial aeration. The meteorological data comprised of air temperature, cloud cover and solar radiation, wind speed and wind direction, which were provided as measurement data from Changi Meteorological Station at an hourly interval ( The hydrologic budget was estimated as the inflow from Tebrau River, runoff from the catchment and precipitation into the reservoir, minus the withdrawal for CAWW, MacRitchie Reservoir, SICC and Lower Peirce Reservoir (LP), and evaporation from the reservoir. The daily discharges were obtained from the measurements. Evaporation was calculated by the ocean heat flux module in Delft3D-FLOW. The averaged discharge rates are shown in In the Upper Peirce Reservoir, the artificial aeration system is put into operation when the dissolved oxygen level drops below 4.5 The eutrophication-submodel was applied to simulate phytoplankton processes and nutrients cycling on a computational grid that was aggregated 3 Weekly solar radiation and hourly winds were included as the external meteorological forcing functions. Daily external load inputs from the Tebrau River were derived from the product of measured daily flow rates and an estimate of daily concentrations of substances, calculated from the linear interpolation of monthly field measurements. Nutrient loads associated with precipitation were applied as uniformly distributed inputs over all horizontal segments of the top layer, while the loads from runoff were input at five representative segments. The averaged external loads are shown in The phytoplankton processes (BLOOM) in Delft3D-ECO module was applied to simulate phytoplankton primary production, respiration, mortality and sedimentation. The conceptual model showing the phytoplankton processes and the equations used calculating phytoplankton processes were described in Six phytoplankton groups were defined in BLOOM based on measured phytoplankton community composition in the reservoir: fresh water diatoms, green algae, Nutrient cycles include the transitions among algae, inorganic components, suspended detritus and detritus in sediments. The state variables included in the processes were carbon, nitrogen, phosphorus and silicate in algae, NH The phosphorus cycling included algae uptake of SRP, algal mortality flux to SRP (autolysis), and sedimentation of suspended detritus, and mineralization of detritus in water column and in sediment layer. The equations and parameters of the nutrients cycling between nutrients “pools” were shown in Nitrification and denitrification processes are explicitly considered in the Eutrophication-submodel. The independent measurements based on the lab incubation results showed that these two microbial N processes significantly affected total N transformations in the reservoir ( Nitrification was included as a first-order process dependent on ammonium and dissolved oxygen concentration and water temperature. Similar to the denitrification process, the temperature function dropped to zero when the water temperature was below the critical value, meaning the nitrification process was terminated with a critical low temperature. Contrary to the anaerobic denitrification process, the aerobic nitrification process was inhibited by hypoxia conditions. Therefore the oxygen function for nitrification becomes equal to 1.0 when the oxygen concentration was above an optimal value, having a value of zero for below a critical oxygen concentration. Linear interpolation of the oxygen functions was the default option for intermediate oxygen concentrations. The equations for nitrification process were not shown here since they were analogous to those for denitrification. The modules of Delft3D-FLOW and Delft3D-ECO have been widely applied and calibrated to many different water ecosystems including the North Sea ( The model was run for the period from 1 January 2004 to 31 December 2006 with a time step of 1.5 The field data which were obtained from the location in the center of the reservoir ( To strengthen the representative of the monthly observed data, the field measurements were averaged for a given month over 2004–2006 to get an annual series of monthly values with error bars and monthly median values. Meanwhile, the model calculations were also averaged to be the annual time series of daily values over 2004–2006 and compared with the observations graphically. The model simulations were further processed to be the annual series of monthly values to qualify the differences with the observations. Considering the observations were available at the depths of 0.5 In addition to a graphical comparison between modelled and observed substances, it is also important to qualify the performance criteria to assess the model’s “goodness-of-fit”. The “cost function”, a mathematical function which provides a means of comparing data from two different sources ( The cost function results were rated according to the quantitative criteria that have been presented by In this study, the lab measurements on the nitrification and denitrification process rates were available ( The validated Hydro-Eutrophication model was consequently used for the estimation of N transformations, stocks, and turnover and retention conditions in the system. N mass stock in each compartment was estimated by averaging the particular concentrations over 2004–2006 to be the annual series results. The N compartments included dissolved inorganic N pool (NH The systematic N cycling transformations among each N pool were estimated from the mass results, which had been calculated during model simulation and output the values in a mass file. The output values in the mass file are the sum of the process transformation rates over the model simulation period. Thus each process rate would be divided by 3 to get an annual mean value as the model was run for 3 years (2004–2006) in this study. N retention was calculated both from the definition as the difference between N inputs and N outputs, also calculated as the sum of the transport rates of denitrification and burial processes. The results from the above two definitions of N retention were supposed to check the model mass balance. The N turnover rate by algal growth was defined associated with the particular process transport rate and mass stock as follows ( The comparison between model simulations and observations for water level and water temperature which were produced from the Hydro-submodel were presented in Results for the DO concentrations ( As the oxygen concentration in the upper layers was over predicted, the oxygen distribution was presented in The simulated NH The surface TN was predicted slightly higher than the observations in September and October with a mean difference of 0.07 The Chlorophyll The parameters associated with nitrification and denitrification processes in the model were shown in In the Upper Peirce Reservoir, the organic N in detritus (DetN) was the predominant contributor to the N standing stock, having an averaged mass of 0.33 The main processes of nitrogen cycling between the algae, sediments and water as well as total inflows and outflows are outlined in The mineralization of organic matter in sediment and water column contributed the bioactive N (NH This study illustrated the simulation skill and flexibility of applying Delft3D to reproduce a tropical freshwater ecosystem. We have also demonstrated the ways that the model complemented field measurements to validate the processes and simulated the variations in biochemical processes. The 3D Hydro-Eutrophication model was validated with respect to water level, water temperature and concentrations of dissolved oxygen, NH Applying the extended formulations for the nitrification and denitrification processes with the temperature function and oxygen function, the 3D Hydro-Eutrophication model reproduced the vertical distributions of NH In the laboratory experiment, it was observed that considerable amounts of NO With the cost function statistics, the goodness of fit between model simulations and field measurements was “good” or “very good” for water level, multi-layer’s water temperature, dissolved inorganic nitrogen (NH The oxygen mass distributions in the Eutrophication-submodel ( The oxygen production in BLOOM model is stoichiometrically associated with carbon (C) uptake. One molecule O It was also tested to enhance oxygen consumption in detritus mineralization process by increasing the first order mineralization rate or decreasing the sedimentation rate of detritus (to sustain sufficient detritus in the upper layers for mineralization) to test whether these simulations would result in higher oxygen consumption in the upper layers. However, the simulation results showed that the detritus vertical distribution was not sensitive to the sedimentation rate as the vertical mass gradients were controlled dominantly by the bubble screen. As a result, the oxygen concentrations in the upper layers did not change much with a decreased sedimentation rate. Even though the oxygen consumption increased by increasing the first order mineralization rate, the oxygen production by algal photosynthesis still occupied a relative larger proportion in oxygen balance, and the total oxygen concentration was not decreased significantly. Besides biochemical factors, oxygen performance was highly dependent on the accuracy of the underlying hydrodynamic model, particularly the extra mixing in the Upper Peirce Reservoir which was produced by the artificial aeration system. It was found that the oxygen in the Upper Peirce Reservoir was controlled more strongly by the artificial aeration system than the other sources (e.g. surface aeration, primary production) ( The accuracy of water movements with the implementation of the artificial aeration will be further investigated in future. The ecological model was applied to estimate the N stocks and transformations in the water column and the sediments. The NH During the passage of mineralization and resuspension, the inlake NH However, it must be pointed out that nitrification and denitrification processes were of minor importance in N turnover in comparison to algal assimilation, which was the predominant process in N circulation within the reservoir. The DIN uptake rate by algal growth was 32.42 The turnover rate of DIN by algal growth was 0.03-0.06Hour For a given N load, burial and denitrification are the available pathways for N removal from the lake. N retention is the permanent removal of N from aquatic system ( The 3D Hydro-Eutrophication model successfully reproduced the thermal differences and the water quality characteristics with the forcing functions from the area-specific meteorological conditions, discharges and input loads. According to the quantitative criteria statistics, the variables including water level, water temperature and the concentrations of DO, NH The model simulations gave the knowledge that the organic matter was the predominant contributor to the nitrogen standing stock. The sediment nitrogen fluxes generated approximately two-fold the amount of the external nitrogen load to water column. Around 58% of total external nitrogen was removed from the system via denitrification and burial. The authors gratefully acknowledge the support and contributions of