AA 7075 based surface composites reinforced with three different filler materials viz. Multiwall carbon nano tubes (MWCNT), Copper (Cu) and Silicon carbide (SiC) were successfully manufactured via Friction Stir Processing route with homogeneous dispersion of all the filler particles. The comparative effect of different filler materials and subsequent age hardening on the microstructural evolution of friction stir processed Aluminium matrix surface composites were characterized using optical and scanning electron microscopy (OM and SEM), electron backscattered diffraction (EBSD) and X-Ray diffraction (XRD). Hardness, impact toughness and wear behaviour was studied using microhardness test, Charpy impact test and pin on disc wear test respectively. Noteworthy enhancement in the microhardness (143 HV0.1 for as received AA 7075 T6 to 253 HV0.1 for FSPed with SiC filler followed by age hardening), impact toughness (15.8 kJ to 27.5 kJ) and wear resistance (wear loss dropped from 8.57 mg to 5.49 mg) were obtained through the addition filler particles during friction stir processing followed by age hardening. The enhancement in the mechanical and wear properties was primarily ascribed to grain refinement, Zener pinning effect (attributable to incorporation of filler material) and precipitate evolution during subsequent age hardening. SiC filler was found to be the best among the three fillers for the set of FSP and age hardening parameters used in the experiment. Nearly twofold increase in microhardness, impact toughness and wear resistance was achieved in age hardened SiC filler surface composite.Light metal alloys/composites having high strength are very much in demand for aerospace, defence and automotive applications [ Friction stir processing is basically a local thermo-mechanical metal working method, wherein, a rotating tool having a pin and shoulder is plunged and into workpiece that alters the localized microstructure. It leads to modification of local properties without affecting bulk material properties. Severe plastic deformation at high strain rates in the stir zone normally generates fine recrystallized grains by means of dynamic recrystallization. Rotational (rpm) and traverse (mm/min) speed of tool, tool tilt angle (°), plunge depth (mm) and tool geometry are the key process parameters of the FSP technique [ FSP can generate ultrafine grained microstructure having immense grain boundary misorientation which leads to superplasticity [ Owing to their unique blend of properties viz. high strength-weight ratio, exceptional fatigue resistance and perceptible resistance to stress corrosion cracking, the 7xxx-series precipitation hardenable aluminium alloys are being utilized widely in structural components of aircrafts, armed vehicles, bridges, bulky earth moving equipments and many other high end applications [ Clustering of solute atoms leads to development of type I or II Guinier–Preston (GP) zones having an approximately spherical shape. With increase in ageing time, size and zinc-magnesium ratio of GP zones increases and it leads into the transition precipitate known as η’, which, by further increase in time or temperature, converts to η (MgZn Various manufacturing methods of AMMCs like Al-Transition metals (TM) [ In this investigation, Multi-walled carbon nanotubes (MWCNTs), Copper (Cu) and Silicon Carbide (SiC) were selected as a filler material, deliberately. Cu was selected from the Al- Transition metals systems, since during FSP, formation of Al Present work entails the comparative study of above mentioned three different types of filler material and post process age hardening on Microstructure, Mechanical properties and Wear resistance of FSPed Al7075 surface composites. OM and SEM, XRD and EBSD were used to observe microstructure evolution. Microhardness and impact toughness measurement analysis was done to evaluate modification in mechanical properties and wear test was carried out to understand wear behaviour. Rolled AA7075-T6 condition sheet with elemental composition ( A fixture was employed to clamp the specimens tightly to eliminate misalignment. FSP was performed on specially designed CNC FSW machine having capacity of producing maximum download force of 10 kN and 3000 rpm. Non consumable, conical probe, rotating tool made of W-1% La Samples for metallography were taken out from the FSPed zone using abrasive cut off machine. The specimens were rough and fine polished to obtain mirror finish. Rinsing and cleaning of mirror polished specimens was carried out using water and acetone respectively. Keller reagent (2 ml HF + 3mlHCl + 5 ml HNO3 + 190 ml H2O) was used for etching specimens. This sample preparation was carried to facilitate the inspection of microstructural features such as filler distribution in Al matrix, grain size and grain morphology using OM and SEM coupled with Electron Dispersive Spectroscopy (EDS) detector. Lieca DMC 4500 was used for optical microscopy and Carl ZEISS FESEM with backscattered imaging mode was used for electron microscopy. Preparation of EBSD analysis samples was carried out by electro polishing with methanol-perchloric acid ((80:20) v/v composition) solution at 26 V at sub-zero temperature. EBSD measurements were carried out using Fei Quanta-200 HV SEM and TSL-OIM EBSD package. Minimum area of 500 μm × 500 μm was scanned by EBSD beam keeping 0.1 μm step size. Analysis of grain diameter, Grain Orientation Spread (GOS) and Grain Average Misorientation (GAM) was analyzed using TSL-OIM package. GOS is average deviation among the measurement points within the grain. GAM, in contrast, is average misorientation among adjacent measurement points within a grain. Electro polished samples, Friction stir processed surface, were used for XRD measurements. Calculation of lattice strains was done from the slopes of sinθ vs Bcosθ using W To examine degree of hardening, microhardness readings (minimum eight readings per specimen) were taken by applying load of 100 g for 10 s. Impact toughness of the selected specimens was evaluated at room temperature by determining energy absorbed by the material up to fracture using Charpy impact test (ASTM E23). The samples with the dimensions of 55 mm × 10 mm × 5 mm having 45° V-notch (2 mm depth and 0.25 mm radius) was machined from the FSPed plate using Vertical Machining Center (VMC). Standard (ASTM G99-05) pin-on-disc wear tests were performed using DUCOM TR-20LE rotary tribometer. Prismatic specimen pins of size 5 × 5 mm Fundamentally, the microstructure of FSP shows three distinct regions such as stir zone (SZ), thermo-mechanically affected zone (TMAZ), and heat affected zone (HAZ). The rotating and traversing motion of tool, during FSP, stirs and mixes the base material as well as filler particles collectively. By increasing overlap ratio and no. of passes filler particles disperse more uniformly [ The microstructural features of FSPed stir zone examined under SEM at two magnifications are presented in Inverse pole figure (IPF) maps of the base metal, FSP-treated with three different filler and post age hardened AA7075 are shown in  The XRD pattern of the base, FSPed with MWCNT, SiC and Cu fillers and post process age hardened at 120 °C are shown in Noteworthy variations in peak widths and peak position(s) were observed in the samples processed with different conditions, as presented in Interaction between aluminium matrix and filler particles along with size and distribution of precipitates formed during subsequent age hardening are some of the features that play a vital role in influencing the mechanical properties of composite layer formed using FSP. The average hardness results of base metal AA7075 T6 and surface composites formed via FSP using different fillers is illustrated in Structural applications demand the materials having high capability of absorbing rapidly applied forces. Performance failures occur in structural components due to internal damage caused by impact loading. A component designer should always behold impact toughness as one of the most vital properties, so impact toughness of surface composites processed with various conditions was evaluated and presented in Wear resistance in terms of wear loss of the base metal and surface composites fabricated by FSP using different fillers is shown in Furthermore, it was found that, by increasing the sliding distance the weight loss also increases and accordingly, calculated wear rate was increased by increasing the sliding distance ( Significant improvement in mechanical (hardness and impact toughness) and wear properties was observed in all the three surface composites FSPed with MWCNT, Cu and SiC fillers and post FSP T6 age hardened condition. This can be attributed to grain refinement achieved during FSP, dispersion strengthening (Orowan mechanism) by filler particles and precipitation hardening occurred during post FSP ageing heat treatment. Hardness of the processed zone is decided by grain size, presence of filler material particles and their distribution in the Al matrix and size and distribution of strengthening precipitates. Finer grain structure was observed in the specimen FSPed with filler materials compared to that of FSPed without filler ( AA 7075 based surface composites reinforced with MWCNT, Cu and SiC fillers have been successfully manufactured via FSP. The comparative effect of different filler materials and subsequent age hardening on the microstructural modification, mechanical property variation and wear behaviour of aluminium matrix surface composites fabricated via FSP were identified and are summarized below. Severe grain refinement was found in FSPed surface composites fabricated with or without incorporation of filler material. The existence of filler particles brought about more prominent grain refinement owing to their grain boundary pinning action, which have impeded the grain growth during dynamic recrystallization process. Minimum grain size was observed in SiC surface composite. Post process age hardening resulted in generation of MgZn The microhardness, impact toughness and wear resistance were increased significantly by the addition of filler materials. These properties were further increased by post process age hardening. SiC filler was found to be the best among the three fillers for set of FSP and age hardening parameters used in this investigation. Nearly twofold increase in microhardness, impact toughness and wear resistance was achieved in age hardened SiC filler surface composite. This manuscript highlighted the comparison among three different types of filler material (MWCNT, copper and SiC) used to manufacture surface composite using friction stir processing in terms of microstructural evolution, mechanical property (hardness and impact toughness) improvement and wear behaviour. The paper also discussed about the effect of post FSP age hardening treatment. Impact toughness, an extremely significant property, required in many applications of surface composite is discussed in detail. The authors would like to acknowledge the use of national facility (Texture and OIM) lab, Metallurgical Engineering and Materials Science Dept., IIT Bombay for EBSD and XRD measurements.