Background
                  Prospective follow-up data after nonoperative treatment for fractures of the proximal humerus are scarce. We studied functional outcomes and rates of complication and failure after conservative management of these common injuries.
               
                  Materials and methods
                  Consecutive patients aged older than 18 years presenting to the emergency department of a large district hospital with an isolated, closed proximal humeral fracture considered suitable for functional treatment by the surgeon on charge were enrolled in a prospective, externally monitored observational study. Surgeons were free to reduce the fracture and to prescribe any type of sling or brace. Active follow-up after 12 weeks, 6, and 12 months included plain radiographs, Constant score, and Disabilities of Arm, Shoulder and Hand (DASH) score.
               
                  Results
                  We enrolled 160 patients (118 women; mean age, 63.3 ± 14.8 years), and 124 completed 1-year follow-up. There were 85, 71, and 4 AO 11 A, B, and C fractures, and 75 one-part, 60 two-part, 23 three-part, and 2 four-part and head-splitting fractures. After 1 year, the mean difference in Constant scores between the injured and contralateral shoulder was 8.2 (95% confidence interval [CI], 6.0-10.4). The mean difference in 1-year DASH scores to baseline assessment was 10.2 points (95% CI 7.3-13.1 points). The risk of delayed and nonunion was 7.0% (95% CI, 3.6%-12.3%). Four patients subsequently underwent surgical fixation, and 5 had arthroscopic subacromial decompression.
               
                  Conclusion
                  This study may provide reference values for future investigations and stresses ceiling effects that will make it difficult to demonstrate a significant advantage of surgical over nonoperative treatment in patients with proximal humeral fractures.
               
                  Level of evidence
                  Level 4; Prospective case series without a control group.Fractures of the proximal humerus and the humeral head are most common injuries worldwide. The availability of modern orthopedic implants, such as locking plates with excellent biomechanical stability even in osteoporotic bone, may have contributed to the trend toward surgical treatment of these fractures. Internal fixation restores the anatomy of the proximal humerus but requires hospitalization and is associated with the risk for implant-related complications. Functional therapy with short immobilization, followed by an accelerated physiotherapy protocol, is a simple, convenient, noninvasive, ubiquitously available, and efficient management option. Court-Brown et al We prospectively assessed the function of the upper extremity in a large cohort of patients who were assigned to nonoperative treatment of a proximal humeral fracture. Our primary objective was to obtain robust reference values for the Constant score and the Disabilities of the Arm, Shoulder, and Hand (DASH) instrument in this common clinical setting. Further objectives were to evaluate the duration of sick leave, complications, and treatment failures and to model possible risk factors and predictors of shoulder function 1 year after the fracture event. The local Institutional Review Board (York Research Ethics Committee, UK [Reference No. YREC 02/11/006)] approved the study, and all patients provided written informed consent. All patients with a radiographically proven, closed fracture of the proximal humerus admitted to the emergency department of a large district hospital in the United Kingdom, who were considered suitable for primary nonoperative management by the physician on charge, were asked to participate in this investigation. We excluded skeletally immature patients, patients presenting to the hospital 10 days or more after injury, patients with open fractures or multiple trauma and preexisting illness affecting the function of the upper limb, such as multiple sclerosis, paraplegia, and others. Also excluded were patients with a history of drug or alcohol abuse and those who were deemed unlikely to cooperate or attend all scheduled study visits. On admission, patient demographics (ie, gender, age, profession, dexterity, smoking, concomitant diseases, and medication) and injury characteristics (ie, accident type, energy level of trauma, concomitant injuries, fracture classification) were recorded. Patients were asked to rate their upper limb function 1 week before the accident to determine their baseline DASH score using the extended 3-modular questionnaire. Radiographs were obtained in anterior-posterior projection and Neer's view upon admission in the emergency department and after manipulation. Additional computed tomography (CT) scans were ordered at the discretion of the treating surgeon. Fractures were classified according to the AO and Neer scheme by the physician on charge. Surgeons were free to reduce the fracture, if deemed necessary. Complications with attempted fracture reduction were recorded. We documented the type and duration of immobilization and beginning of active assisted and unrestricted mobilization as well as the need for immediate or later surgical repair. Patients were actively monitored and physically examined after 3, 6, and 12 months. Primary outcome measures comprised raw Constant scores and differences to the contralateral, healthy shoulder. Plain radiographs of the injured shoulder in 2 planes were obtained to determine fracture healing. Anticipated complications included loss of reduction, fragment dislocation, axis deviation, head necrosis, nonunion, impingement and shoulder stiffness, muscle weakness, neurologic sensations (ie, tingling or numbness of the ipsilateral hand, brachial plexus palsy, and others), pain, and death during follow-up. Reported complications were reviewed by the principal investigator (PdB) and an independent data safety monitoring board to define whether complications were related to the fracture, fracture treatment, or other conditions. Patients were further interviewed concerning their pain and shoulder mobility, and clinically examined using 3 power measurements of both shoulders in abduction to individual Constant scores of the injured and contralateral shoulder. Data were entered in a Qualicare 5.1 database (Qualidoc, Trimbach, Switzerland), and monitored by an independent trial unit. Because of the observational character of this study, we did not pose a formal null hypothesis. A target sample size of 120 fully documented patients was deemed to yield sufficient precision of estimated means and proportions, with standard errors not exceeding 5%. Assuming a 20% drop-out rate, we planned to enroll 160 patients. All analyses were made according to the intent-to-treat principle; that is, all patients who were assigned to conservative management were included in the final evaluation, regardless of complications or subsequent surgery. We calculated means, medians, proportions, and risks with their appropriate measures of distribution (ie, standard deviations, ranges), as well as odds ratios (OR) and 95% confidence intervals (CI). Categoric variables were tabulated with absolute and relative frequencies. We used the McNemar test for paired dichotomous variables, the Fisher exact test for independent dichotomous variables, the Kruskal-Wallis nonparametric analysis of variance for continuous variables and multiple group comparisons, and the paired Univariate and multivariate logistic and linear regression analyses were computed to identify variables independently associated with primary and secondary outcomes. The probability of fracture consolidation and return to work was estimated by the Kaplan-Meier product limit method. Because it is unlikely that a fracture that had been considered united after 6 months will be classified as a nonunion after 1 year, a last observation carried forward approach was used in case of missing data at the follow-up examinations. The log-rank test was applied for comparisons of survival curves between subgroups of patients. Statistical analyses were conducted with Stata 10 software (StataCorp, College Station, TX). Of 332 patients screened at the referring institution, 172 (51.8%; 95% CI, 46.3%-57.3%) were excluded for various reasons ( Of the 160 patients (118 women) included, 139 (86.9%) were available for clinical examination after 3 and 6 months, and 124 (77.5%) completed 1 year of follow-up. One patient died of reasons not attributed to the fracture, for a mortality rate of 0.6% (95% CI, 0.1%-3.4%). With a mean age of 63.3 ± 14.8 years and a 3:1 predominance of women, this cohort reflected the typical spectrum of patients sustaining a fracture of the proximal humerus ( Patients’ ratings of DASH scores 1 week before the injury with a mean of 3.7 (95% CI, 2.2-5.2) indicated almost perfect function of the affected shoulder and upper limb . Comorbidities, mostly cardiovascular and respiratory diseases, were present in 90 patients (56.3%). Consequently, about 15% of study participants received aspirin, 10% received β-blockers, and 4% took steroids. The distribution of fractures suited the common clinical indication for nonoperative treatment, with about half of all fractures classified as AO type A and undisplaced, “1-part” injuries ( All participants were treated as outpatients, with initial immobilization mostly achieved in a cuff and collar ( In 7 patients (4.4%; 95% CI, 1.8%-8.8%), surgery was considered necessary to optimize fracture or fragment positioning ( Treatment-related complications included 17 fracture displacements and losses of reduction after initial manipulation (10.6%, 95% CI, 6.3%-16.5%) and 11 episodes of impingement and shoulder stiffness (6.9%, 95% CI, 3.5%-11.9%). To enhance precision, these events were merged to a composite measure for further analyses. Logistic regression failed to reveal significant associations (at conservative Constant scores of the injured shoulder and side-to-side differences improved steadily over time and were estimated at 74.3 (95% CI, 72.0-76.5) and 8.2 (95% CI, 6.0-10.4) after 1 year ( After 1 year, the overall difference in DASH scores compared with baseline assessment was 10.2 points (95% CI, 7.3-13.1 points; paired Differences in DASH scores were comparable among age groups up to the 70% percentile (< 73 years), whereas Constant scores decreased slightly but monotonously with increasing age ( As a striking finding, 41 of 42 employed patients (97.6%) returned to work (95% CI, 87.4%-99.9%). The predicted median time off work was 10 weeks (95% CI, 8-16 weeks for survival time data; Altogether, 93% of patients showed solid union after 1 year of follow-up. Using only the available number of patients at different follow-up intervals for calculation of healing rates, 98% showed fracture consolidation. The predicted risk of delayed and nonunion with nonoperative management of fractures of the proximal humerus was 7.0% (95% CI, 3.6%-12.3%). The median time to definite union was estimated at 14 weeks (95% CI, 12-16 weeks), and the time to union or bridging callus was 13 weeks (95% CI, 12-16 weeks). Not surprisingly, smoking was a significant risk factor for nonunion. Smokers had a 5.5-times increased likelihood of nonunion compared with smokers (20.8% vs 4.5%; OR, 5.5; 95% CI, 1.5-19.9). The present investigation represents one of the largest and most detailed studies on outcomes after nonoperative treatment for fractures of the proximal humerus. Active follow-up and external monitoring ensured completeness of data sets and unbiased estimates. Demographic baseline data suggest that the included participants are representative of patients presenting to emergency departments in Europe and the United States. The observed mean difference (10.2 ± 16.5) between preinjury and 1-year DASH scores was below the threshold suggested as minimal detectable change. The degree of recovery suits the observations from Court-Brown and others, but is still surprising. There was evidence of a healthy worker effect, with fully employed patients showing smaller differences in before and after DASH ratings. Of note, patients with more displaced fractures rated their preinjury shoulder function slightly worse than those with undisplaced fractures. This stresses the methodologic difficulties of obtaining valid baseline values after an injury event has occurred. The finding that age predicted both self-rated and objective shoulder outcomes is not surprising, but older patients regained much of their original function after 1 year. Because of compensation mechanisms, upper extremity function as assessed by the DASH may have been rated less impaired than shoulder mobility as specifically measured by the Constant score. It is widely accepted that fractures with displacement of more than 1 cm and more than 45° of tilt need to be surgically fixed. This rule has mainly been derived from Neer's classic work in 1970, The severity of fracture comminution and displacement may have a more significant effect on functional outcomes than the choice of treatment, with a clear difference in prognosis between 3- and 4-part fractures, but not between 2- and 3-part fractures. According to 7 recently published studies, average Constant scores after surgically treated 2-, 3-part, and 4-part fractures can be estimated at 82.2 (95% CI, 77.7-86.8), 83.9 (95% CI, 77.7-86.8), and 70.5 (95% CI, 64.9-76.0). The high frequency of closed reductions in this study is a matter of concern. Attempts to reduce a proximal humeral fracture may have no, if any, effect on rates of malalignment or functional outcomes. Given the potential risk for soft tissue and plexus injuries caused by manipulation, physicians should critically reconsider the indication for fracture reduction. There are obvious limits inherent to the observational design of this study. First, only half of all eligible patients were included in the study, introducing selection bias. We did not assess the specific reason for the lack of informed consent and withdrawals. The monitor queried whether informed consent had been obtained, and patients without a completed consent form were excluded according to protocol, good clinical practice, and Institutional Review Board mandates. This group might have included patients who actively refused study participation because they felt harassed, were too troubled by their acute condition, were unwilling to attend follow-up (in contrast to those who were unable to attend follow-up), or simply were not interested in taking part in a clinical study. On the other hand, it may include patients who were screened and considered ineligible by the physicians on duty or those who were missed because of unawareness of the protocol, time constraints, and other factors. It is difficult to decide whether the imbalance in the clinical profile between included and excluded patients was coincidental or shows the conditional probability of a patient of being enrolled in the study. Obviously, patients were not only excluded because they were considered to require internal fracture fixation. Only 7 of the 15 C-type cases in the clinical journal underwent surgery, indicating that variables other than fracture severity contributed to the selection of patients. Second, patients were enrolled at a single institution with distinct treatment standards, compromising the external validity of our findings. In the light of results from a recent randomized trial, Third, the study included fractures that might be considered as surgical cases at institutions that follow a more invasive treatment philosophy. It is open to debate whether primary fracture fixation would have avoided the 17 displacements and losses of reduction. These events, however, had no effect on functional outcomes. However, given the serious lack of comparative studies (specifically randomized trials) that would allow for evidence-based decision making in the treatment of proximal humeral fractures, the equipoise principle applied to patients in this study. There is still much uncertainty about which patients will benefit from nonoperative treatment, plate fixation, nailing, or arthroplasty. This demands a thorough trade-off of the possible benefits and harms of surgical and nonsurgical therapy. Apart from the limitations, this study provides robust evidence that conservative management of fractures of the proximal humerus is safe and effective, mainly in AO type A and B fractures. Conservative treatment may be expanded even to 3-part fractures. Employed patients assigned to nonoperative management can be counseled about a high probability of achieving solid healing, sufficient function, and strength to return to work after 8 to 16 weeks. Patients should be advised that smoking may significantly increase the risk of nonunion and that they should quit smoking until fracture consolidation. Few fractures primarily regarded suitable for conservative management later require surgical stabilization. Also, the risk of secondary surgical procedures, such as arthroscopic decompression, is low. In conclusion, although randomized trials remain the reference standard for comparing outcomes between certain treatment options, the noted ceiling effects will make it difficult to detect substantial advantages of surgical fixation over conservative management in the studied types of proximal humeral fractures. The authors, their immediate families, and any research foundations with which they are affiliated have not received any financial payments or other benefits from any commercial entity related to the subject of this article