A novel high pressure shear cell (HPSC) has been used to study comminution and wear behaviour at surface stresses commonly experienced in ore crushers. In this work, quartz and Ni-hard 4 were chosen as representative ore and wear surface materials. Surface normal loads of more than 300 MPa were used, together with tangential loads sufficient to initiate and maintain slip at the wear surface. Comminution was studied in terms of overall particle size distribution and size distribution in the crushing zone. Worn surfaces were studied using optical, confocal and scanning electron microscopy, and contact profilometry. There is a strong coupling between comminution outcomes and wear. When crushed ore is subjected to a shear stress at the wear surface, this shear stress increases the principal stress so that a layer of fine powder is produced against the wear surface. By appropriate control of the normal/shear stress cycle, this can lead to a protective layer of fine material against the wear surface which inhibits larger particles from becoming embedded in the surface, thus reducing both ploughing and cutting wear mechanisms. This can lead to reduced wear by ploughing and cutting at higher surface normal loads compared to the case of lower normal surface loads.Particle size reduction of ores is a very common activity associated with the mining and mineral processing industries. Particle size reduction is commonly achieved by the application of pressure (crushing), shear (grinding) or a combination of both. Very high surface stresses are generated in equipment used for this purpose. Typical are those present in high pressure roller mills for which normal surface stresses of up to 200 MPa have been recorded Ni-hard 4 is a material commonly used in applications involving the crushing of hard ores During crushing operations, high normal stresses frequently occur in conjunction with large tangential stresses at the crushing surfaces due to some rotational component of velocity (roll mill crushers, jaw crushers etc.). This leads to a local tri-axial stress state involving local principal stresses significantly higher than the apparent surface pressure. The nature of these stresses and their effect on both comminution and wear do not appear to have been studied in detail previously, but are the subjects of this paper. Experiments have been conducted in a novel high pressure shear cell (HPSC) capable of generating surface stresses of magnitudes consistent with the crushing of hard ores. This has been used to characterise the stress–comminution–wear interaction during the bed crushing of quartz by Ni-hard 4. This abrasive/wear surface combination was chosen as representative of those used for the crushing of hard materials. Particle size reduction through crushing and grinding calls for high compressive stresses and shear stresses respectively. The experiments presented here were conducted in a HPSC that has been built to provide pressure and shear loading to granular materials at stress levels typical of commercial crushing and grinding equipment. The test section of this HPSC is shown schematically in The model mineral ore used in this work was silica sand. It was initially sieved into three size fractions centred around 0.7, 1.4 and 2 mm sizes so as to investigate initial particle size effects. The original size distributions are shown in The HPSC subjected the test tile to a single crushing/slip wear cycle. This allowed the mechanics of wear to be studied in the absence of superposition effects that would arise from repetitive wear testing of the kind needed to cause measurable weight loss — a common measure of wear damage. Instead, in this work the wear process was studied using the microscopic and profilometry techniques discussed further below. The loading sequence was to increase normal load on the silica to the chosen value in the range 50–300 MPa. Then, with this held constant, the transverse force was increased until slip occurred. In the full wear tests, slip was maintained for 15 mm to allow a wear track to develop for later analysis. The crushed ore was either recovered from such experiments and sieved to determine the comminution outcome or impregnated with resin in a process to preserve the particle bed structure for structural analysis of the crushing zone. Comminution occurred as the normal load was applied to the silica in the test cells and this continued once slip was established at the wear sample surfaces. The evolution of the microstructure of the granular material was monitored by interrupting the test at pre-set wear sample displacements and recovering the cylindrical samples of crushed silica from the test cells. These were then cast in resin and sectioned in a diametral plane for microscopic study. Wear damage on the Ni-hard 4 samples was evaluated by microscopy (optical, confocal and scanning electron microscopy) and surface texture mapping using contact profilometry (Mitutoyo surftest 4) to obtain a series of transverse wear profiles along the wear track. This analysis was done on surfaces cleaned with hydroflouric acid to remove any embedded silica. A typical overall comminution outcome is shown in The above discussion concerning comminution was based on size analysis of the total sample of recovered material. The evolution of crushed silica during the loading cycle was studied by interrupting shear at preset displacements, carefully recovering the crushed material from the test cell, casting it in resin and sectioning it in a diametral plane. On application of all the values of the normal stress used in this study, the abrasive particles were partly embedded into the surface. However, the behaviour for different normal loads was different once the shear load was applied. For the lower normal loads, typified by the 100 MPa case shown in The results presented above show that a layer of fine material developed during the load cycle altering the wear pattern, especially at higher normal loads, in a way that reduced deep ploughing and cutting. In this section we discuss in more detail the origins of this layer of fine material. It can be seen from The higher principal stresses arise there from the presence of high shear stress at the wear surface, taken together with the high normal stress. The reason why shear movement causes the particles near the surface layer to crush further can be explained by an analysis of the stress state of particles near the surface. Consider the load conditions in one test cell, as shown in In an analogous way to the IYL, slip failure at the bounding surface (the wall yield locus — WYL) can also be expressed in terms of a Coulomb model The method of testing was to keep the axial load constant while the transverse force on the wear sample ( There is a strong coupling between comminution outcomes and wear during high pressure crushing of brittle ore materials. In this work quartz was crushed against Ni-hard 4 over a wide range of surface load conditions in which normal and transverse forces were independently controlled. Shear stress at the surface increases the principal stress on the ore material adjacent to the surface so that a local layer of fine powder can be produced against the wear surface. By appropriate control of the normal/shear stress cycle, this can lead to a protective layer of fine material against the wear surface. This protective layer reduces the tendency for larger particles to become embedded in the surface. This can lead to reduced wear by ploughing and cutting at higher surface normal loads compared to the case of lower normal surface loads.