In Bayer process gibbsite (alumina trihydrate, Al2O3·3H2O) is precipitated from sodium aluminate liquor for production of alumina by calcination. Precipitation of boehmite or alumina monohydrate (Al2O3·H2O) is an alternative method for production of alumina. Boehmite is also a good precursor material for production of different activated aluminas. At present this boehmite precipitation process is in the early stage of development. This process if developed would reduce the energy consumption for making alumina. The present work is aimed to carry out boehmite precipitation under atmospheric pressure conditions. Parameters such as alumina/caustic (A/C) ratio and temperature are varied to precipitate out boehmite from synthetically prepared sodium aluminate liquor. It was found that boehmite precipitation could be possible at normal pressure only when boehmite seed was added to the supersaturated sodium aluminate solution keeping the alumina/caustic ratio at either 1.1 or 1.0 and temperature at ≥85 °C. By decreasing the A/C ratio to 0.95 and below, it was possible to precipitate out boehmite at 60 °C.In the precipitation stage of Bayer process, sodium aluminate liquor is decomposed in the presence of large quantity of gibbsite seed at 65–70 °C to precipitate gibbsite (aluminium trihydroxide). This hydroxide is then calcined or dehydrated to alumina for further processing and production of aluminium metal. The century old process has never undergone any major modification in its main processing steps. Various options (  Boehmite is a stable phase at relatively higher temperatures (> In the present study parameters such as alumina/caustic ratio and temperature were varied to precipitate out boehmite from synthetically prepared sodium aluminate liquor of industrial concentrations. The seed used in the precipitation studies was obtained by hydrothermal transformation of gibbsite at elevated temperatures. Optimisation of boehmite seed preparation was also carried out. The main aim of the work was to study the effect of the above parameters during boehmite precipitation and assess the lowest temperature at which boehmite may be precipitated isothermally under Bayer conditions. The boehmite seed preparation was carried out in a PARR autoclave (model no. 4542). Generally boehmite seed prepared through the hydrothermal route is most suitable because of its crystalline nature. To find out the hydrothermal conditions for boehmite seed preparation, a study on optimization of boehmite seed preparation was carried out. The boehmite seed was prepared from gibbsite seed material collected from M/s NALCO, Bhubaneswar.  The supersaturated sodium aluminate liquor was prepared by dissolving required amounts of aluminium granules in sodium hydroxide solution. The liquor was prepared for different alumina/caustic ratios. In general 150 g/L Al Precipitation experiments were carried out in a 300 mL capacity stainless steel reactor having a fitting lid. The lid had provisions for accommodating a stirrer, a thermometer and an opening for sampling. Agitation of the liquor was performed with a laboratory model Remi stirrer having variable speed control. Stirring speed of 250 The aluminate liquor (100 mL) with pre-adjusted Al Particle size measurements were carried out in a Malvern Particle size analyser model 3600E. Particle size mentioned here is All the precipitation products were analysed through X-ray diffraction method to know their crystalline phase. XRD analysis was run on a Philips powder diffractometer model PW 1830 x'pert system in the 2 Analysis of Al Scanning electron microscope studies used a JEOL SEM microscope. All the experiments were carried out under atmospheric pressure conditions with typical industrial Bayer liquor concentrations of 150 g/L of Al  The duration of precipitation is also an important parameter. The more the precipitation time, the greater is the yield. Here the study is only for 8 h so the yield is expected to be low compared to the higher time period such as 24 h or more in the Bayer process. Seed ratio and seed size also play an important role in the productivity, with larger seed ratios and finer seeds improving the yield. In the subsequent study when the seed charge was increased to 300 or 600 g/L and precipitation time increased to 24 h, a substantial increase in yield was observed. It has been found that the most important parameter and driving force for precipitation of either gibbsite or boehmite is the A/C ratio or the degree of actual supersaturation. Basically the A/C ratio and temperature of precipitation are the measures of supersaturation. The actual supersaturation in the precipitation process is measured as the difference between actual concentration of Al The precipitation of boehmite with a decrease in A/C ratio will have very good implications on total precipitation process. Generally, during precipitation from sodium aluminate liquor, a continuous decrease in A/C ratio will occur because alumina from the liquor will precipitate out as hydroxide. It has been observed that at lower A/C ratios, precipitation of boehmite takes place at very low temperatures such as 60°, 65 °C, etc. Therefore by lowering the temperature step-wise at different A/C ratio zones in a single precipitation experiment, boehmite precipitation can be achieved at temperatures as low as 60 °C. Since the temperature may vary from 95 °C to 60 °C in a single experiment, step-wise cooling in three or four stages may help in obtaining a greater yield. Fundamentally the formation of boehmite and gibbsite from aluminate solution is complex. The aluminium atom in aluminate ion is tetrahedrally coordinated while it is hexahedrally coordinated in boehmite. The difference between boehmite precipitation and gibbsite precipitation is that during boehmite precipitation extra H The precipitation of boehmite from supersaturated sodium aluminate liquor has shown very encouraging results with the following outcomes. Boehmite seed is an essential starting material for boehmite precipitation that can be prepared by hydrothermal transformation of gibbsite at 195 °C and pH 10 over 3 h. At higher A/C ratios, the precipitation of boehmite takes place at higher temperatures; whereas at lower A/C ratios, the boehmite precipitation temperature is lowered to 60 °C. Therefore, lower supersaturation facilitates boehmite formation. As the A/C ratio in any precipitation process continuously decreases with time, step-wise cooling of the liquor allows the precipitation to be conducted from ≥ A substantial increase in the yield was obtained when the seed charge was increased to 600 g/L and the precipitation time extended to 24 h. However further work is required to optimize particle size and particle size distribution. It would be useful to compare the effect of supersaturation at different temperatures by keeping the caustic concentration constant and changing the alumina concentration. The authors are thankful to M/s Nalco, Bhubaneswar, for the financial support. They are also thankful to M/s Nalco, Bhubaneswar, India and the Director, RRL, Bhubaneswar, India for giving the permission to publish this work.