Froth flotation is the most commonly used technique for the separation of valuable from gangue minerals. Unforeseeable changes in the ore characteristics and operating conditions have necessitated continuous control of the flotation circuits. Experienced operators usually control the process performance through the froth visual features. Machine vision technology now offers a viable means of monitoring and control of the flotation circuits. In the current communication, a machine vision system was installed on a flotation cell in the rougher circuit of an iron flotation plant to monitor the process at different conditions. Bubble size distribution, number of bubbles, froth velocity and stability were the main visual features extracted from the froth images. The results indicate that the developed system is capable of accurately monitoring the process behavior at different conditions.Flotation is a physico-chemical separation process that utilizes the difference in surface properties of the valuable minerals and the unwanted gangue minerals ( Flotation circuits are subjected to a wide range of process disturbances, some of which are caused by the change in mineral characteristics and others to variation in operating conditions. In most flotation plants, process operators monitor the froth surface visually and make adjustments to process parameters. However, due to natural complexity of the flotation process, achieving optimal control is often not possible for the human operators. The need to overcome these problems, coupled with rapid advances in computer technology has led to the development of machine vision systems for monitoring and control of flotation circuits ( In this research work, a machine vision system was developed to characterize the process behavior at different operating conditions. Data acquisition and analysis was carried out on the first flotation cell in the rougher circuit of an iron flotation plant. Test work was conducted at the Chadormalu (the largest iron deposit in central Iran) iron flotation plant in Iran. In this plant around 2000 Sodium carbonate (for pH adjustment), sodium silicate (as depressant of iron oxides) and Berol/Asam combination (as collector/frother) are the flotation reagents which are added to the conditioning tank of the hematite flotation circuit. A video camera was positioned at a distance of 110 The process variables including air flow rate, slurry level, pH, collector/frother dosage and sodium silicate dosage were changed at different levels and their influence on the froth visual features was monitored. Different levels of the variables were determined in consultation with plant metallurgists and operating staff. In each test program, only one of the operating variables was changed while the other variables were kept constant. The video data were collected after ensuring process stability. Bubble size distribution, number of bubbles, froth velocity and stability were the main visual features extracted from the captured froth images. More details of the methodology employed to quantify the froth features along with the result implementation are given in the following sections. It has been extensively reported that the bubble size at the froth surface is strongly related to the operating conditions and the process performance ( In this study, a technique based on the detection of white spots on the bubble surface was employed for bubble size estimation ( Denoise the image using the median filter. Threshold the image. Apply the morphological operators to the image. Estimate the bubble size distribution. More details of the proposed algorithm are given in the block diagram presented in  The influence of changes in the operating conditions on the bubble size is shown in The number of bubbles was calculated by tracking the bubbles in successive video frames ( In general, two assumptions were made in developing the bubble tracking algorithm. First, the bubble movement in two consecutive frames is low. This is a reasonable assumption according to high video sampling rate employed (i.e. 25 frames per second). Secondly, the bubble size increase or at least remain constant in successive frames. Thus, bubbles with above characteristics and conditions are placed in the same array. If no bubble with these characteristics is found in the next frame, it means that the bubble has burst and its array is ended. Moreover, if a new bubble has been created in the next frame, a new array is assigned to it and the tracking process is performed. To improve the accuracy of the results, arrays with more than 10 frames were stored. Hence, the number of arrays obtained is equal to the number of bubbles tracked.  Froth velocity can be quantified by measuring the movement of bubble centers in consecutive frames. Block matching, pixel tracing and bubble tracking are the most commonly used techniques to quantify the froth velocity. In the block matching method, the first frame is subdivided into a user-specified number of blocks (  In the bubble tracking technique, the movement of the localized reflections of light on the bubble surfaces is tracked ( In the current work, a bubble tracking algorithm was developed for measuring the froth velocity. In this approach after highlighting the bubbles (by the previously described technique), an array was assigned for each bubble and the bubble movement was measured using the Euclidean distance method. Finally, the mean of bubble movements was considered as the froth mobility measure. The correlation between the process conditions and the froth velocity is shown in The froth stability is one of the crucial factors in the control of flotation process. The froth stability can be quantified by analyzing consecutive frames and detecting the rate of change in the appearance of the images ( It should be mentioned that more stable froths are more viscous and less mobile which produces less watery concentrates. At high aeration rates, the froth becomes unstable because of turbulence created in the pulp and froth zones. Reduced froth stability at higher pH values can be related to decreased slurry viscosity as well as to the change in ionic strength of the solution ( Estimation of the metallurgical performances from the visual froth features and feedback control of the process by manipulating the operating variables is the ultimate goal of a machine vision based control system ( In this communication machine vision based monitoring of an industrial mechanical flotation cell was discussed. Bubble size distribution, number of bubbles, froth velocity and stability were extracted from the froth images at different operating conditions. The bubble size distribution was estimated through the detected white spots on the bubble surface. A simple and robust algorithm was developed to measure the number of bubbles by tracking the bubbles in successive video images. The froth velocity was successfully measured by the bubble tracking algorithm. The froth stability was quantified based on the array length and the number of frames in which the bubble has tracked. The results indicated that the extracted visual features were capable of accurately describing the process behavior at different operating conditions. A good correlation between the image variables and metallurgical parameters was found which is of great importance for control purposes.