A diagnosis of the actual distributed control and measurements system for a Teniente Converter, processing copper concentrates, is presented. Besides the importance of this converter in Caletones Smelter, there is a number of unsolved problems related to lack of instrumentation, lack of process knowledge, odd operating practices, and lack of procedures to process data to aid management and operating decisions. In general, process control of some local objectives are frequently achieved. A proposal to implement a supervisory control strategy for Teniente Converters, in harmony with other process units in the smelter, is presented.A diagnosis of the instrumentation and control system of a copper concentrate converter ( Caletones Smelter is located at the Andes Cordillera, 42 Dried concentrate is pneumatically conveyed to the TC. Annular air is supplied to aid in the distribution of concentrate as it enters the converter. Reverts and flux are fed into the converter through a small bin, aid by blown air (‘garr gun’). Air and oxygen are combined to produce an enriched air stream, blown into the TC. The calculation of the oxygen flow rate is based on the combined air flow rates. A flow diagram showing all the input and output variables, and the local control system, are illustrated in The slag and white metal are discontinuously removed from opposite ends, and collected in ladles for further processing. Slag and white metal level measurements are manually taken every three hours. Approximately 17 ladles of slag and 7 ladles of white metal are removed from the TC each shift. Hot gases exit the TC through an open port at the top of the converter. Gases are cooled, passed through an electrostatic precipitator and sent to a gas handling plant for processing. The TC process is a semi-continuous and autogenuous reactor. A chalcopyrite concentrate first is thermally decomposed (Eqs. The current control system is comprised of a number of single loop controllers. Set points of the converter manipulated variables are determined by operators based on the current state of operations. The scheme for controlling the white metal and slag copper content is quite complex. Operators can manipulate several variables to affect the copper content in both the white metal and slag, including: air, oxygen, concentrate, reverts and flux flow rates. The current control scheme contains no coordination of concentrate flow, air flow and oxygen flow rates. The flux flow controller set point is determined by operators based on results of the slag chemical analysis, in particular the Fe and SiO In general, it was found large product variability and a considerable recycle of products. The nature of the process propagates disturbances created in one process operation to others, increasing unnecessarily the recycling of intermediate products off specifications. To improve the product quality and to decrease material recycling a better administration of local control set points of input variables must be achieved. If all input variables were continuously measured and a multivariate dynamic model were available, any classical multivariate feedback control (for example, To develop a supervisory control strategy the following approach was considered. Every variable can be classified in one of three groups, representing: Final objectives (white metal Cu %, slag Cu and magnetite %, inside a narrow band, with high and low limits). Intermediate objectives (white metal and slag levels, bath temperature, slag Fe/SiO Basic resources (concentrate, reverts, blown air, oxygen and flux flow rate set points, white metal and slag remotions, inside a wide band, with high and low limits). Final objectives are achieved by regulating intermediate objectives. For example, copper grade in white metal may be regulated by modifying the oxygen/concentrate ratio. Furthermore, intermediate objectives are achieved by regulating basic resources. Following the example, the oxygen/concentrate ratio may be adjusted by changing the flow rate set point of either the concentrate or the oxygen. As a multivariate model is not available, the decision is taken accordingly to other information, in the form of logic rules in an expert shell. The supervisory control strategy is then based on an expert system structure, where the inputs to each procedure come from distributed control system (DCS) internal and external alarms. The output of each procedure determines the set points values of the DCS basic control loops. The principal objective of the expert system is to find at any time the maximum concentrate flow rate that can be processed considering all the operating internal and external constraints. The external alarms are the deviation of the processing capacity of other operating units, such as PSC, SCF, Gas and Effluent Treatment Plants and Production and Maintenance Programs. The state of these alarms is expected to occasionally change. For example, if one PSC is out of operation, the production of white metal must be restricted to the actual PSC processing capacity. This implies that the set point of the concentrate flow rate must be decreased. Otherwise, an unnecessary material recycle will begin and the quality of intermediate products will be difficult to be maintained. If the excess of white metal were temporarily stored in the TC, then the increment in levels will produce an odd operating condition and the specifications of slag and white metal will not be met. If the white metal were transferred to the available PSCs, then the odd operating condition is propagated to this unit. Similar analysis can be done, for example, when one Gas Treatment Plant has temporarily a lower capacity. If this alarm is ignored then SO The internal alarms are divided in two groups: Continuous measurements (concentrate, air, oxygen, flux and reverts flow rates, bath and gas temperature) and calculated variables (oxygen enrichment, oxygen/concentrate and flux/concentrate ratios). Sampled measurements (white metal and slag copper percentages, slag magnetite, iron and silica percentages, and slag and white metal levels). The internal alarm procedures are executed every time the information is available. For continuous measurements they are executed on variable averages over a period of time. Each procedure consists of processing logic rules which outputs use a very low number of parameters to be tuned. The main internal procedures considered in the system are: Continuous: maximization of concentrate flow rate, considering also the availability of air and oxygen flow rates; bath temperature control, considering also the reverts flow rate, the gas temperature and the oxygen enrichment, to modify either the reverts flow rate, the oxygen enrichment or the concentrate flow rate. Discontinuous: white metal copper concentration control, considering also the oxygen/concentrate ratio to modify the oxygen/concentrate ratio; slag copper concentration control, sending warning messages to operator; slag magnetite concentration control, considering also the slag Fe/SiO white metal level control, sending warning messages to start remotion of white metal; slag level control, sending warning messages to start remotion of slag. The optimization routine to maximize the concentrate flow rate set point considered all the alarm states. However, external alarms override decisions based on internal alarms, as a way to insure that product recycling is minimised. The output of these procedures also specifies the set points of all the intermediate objective variables. The next stage is the calculus of the basic resource set points, based on stoichiometric relationships. The Teniente Converter is a very complex process where the key variables are measured infrequently and sometimes with considerable errors. The input variables are all under DSC control. However, operating decisions usually lead to large variability of product quality and hence to unnecessary recycling of material between the units in the smelter. A supervisory control strategy has been proposed based on experimental studies in the form of an expert system. Complex procedures has been developed to consider internal abnormal situations and to consider external constraints. These procedures provide a consistent methodology to administrate the local control loops in harmony with the temporal capacity of the other units in the smelter. The authors would like to thanks Conicyt (Project Fondecyt 1020215) and Santa Maria University (Project 270322) for their financial support and to El Teniente for allowing the presentation of this work.