Athletic hand injuries present a unique challenge for the treating surgeon. Apart from a detailed understanding of the pathoanatomy of each injury, the surgeon also needs to appreciate the specific demands placed on the injured athlete in their sport in order to ensure an optimal outcome with a timely return to competition. In this article, the most commonly encountered acute hand injuries in athletes are reviewed, focussing on the assessment, principles of treatment and consideration of rehabilitation as pertinent to athletes.Athletic injuries present a unique challenge for the treating surgeon. Apart from a detailed understanding of the pathoanatomy of each injury, the surgeon also needs to appreciate the specific demands placed on the injured athlete to ensure an optimal outcome with a timely return to competition. In addition, the care of the injured athlete necessitates a team approach involving close communication between the surgeon, therapist, coaches and trainers. Injuries involving the hand occur frequently and their distribution is sport-specific. Their management demands an understanding of the sport and the position played by the athlete, the level of competition participated in, future athletic aspirations and the role of rehabilitation. The timing of injury may influence management decisions, both in terms of time remaining in the current season but also in terms of the career of the athlete, for example when nearing retirement. In this article, commonly seen athletic hand injuries, namely ulnar collateral ligament (UCL) injury of the thumb, avulsion injury of the flexor digitorum profundus (FDP) tendon, proximal interphalangeal joint (PIPJ) injuries, and phalangeal and metacarpal fractures, are reviewed focussing on the assessment, principles of treatment and consideration of rehabilitation as pertinent to athletes. Injury to the UCL of the thumb metacarpophalangeal joint (MCPJ) is commonly encountered in contact sports and classically described in skiers following a fall, as the thumb is caught by the static pole. It occurs as a result of radial deviation and hyperabduction stress to the thumb. In addition, it may be associated with damage to the dorsal capsule and the ulnar aspect of the volar plate. The patient presents with localized swelling, ecchymosis and tenderness over the ulnar border of the MCPJ. Occasionally a lump is palpable, which may represent a Stener lesion. In suspected injury, radiographs should be performed before stress testing to exclude the presence of a fracture and to prevent displacement of an undisplaced fracture. Stress testing should be performed in full extension and 30° of MCPJ flexion. Greater than 30° of laxity, or more than 15° of difference compared to the uninjured thumb, in both extension and flexion, are likely to indicate a complete UCL tear. Laxity in flexion only (but stable in extension) suggests an intact accessory ligament. If pain precludes an accurate assessment, infiltration of local anaesthetic can aid diagnosis. Management of an UCL injury is largely based on the clinical findings, aided by radiographs. Undisplaced fractures and clinically stable ligamentous injuries are generally amenable to closed treatment with immobilization in a thumb spica for 4 weeks. A displaced or rotated fragment, with an unstable joint, is treated by open reduction and internal fixation (ORIF) using a bone anchor, a screw or tension-band wiring. Clinically unstable injuries or those with a Stener lesion warrant exploration and reattachment of the avulsed ligament. If there are small bony fragments that cannot be fixed, these may be excised and the ligament is reattached directly to the proximal phalanx with an anchor. Classic teaching suggests that following surgical repair the thumb should be in full time immobilization for 4 weeks. The senior author has employed an accelerated rehabilitation programme for elite athletes, allowing active flexion/extension exercises under supervision of the therapist. However, excluding therapy sessions the thumb should be protected in a radial blocking splint for about 6 weeks ( Avulsion injury of the FDP tendon results from forced hyperextension of the distal interphalangeal joint (DIPJ) while the finger is actively flexing. The classic scenario is when a player grabs the jersey of an opponent with the terminal aspect of the finger and the excessive pull forces the distal interphalangeal joint into extension against a contracting deep flexor tendon, avulsing the tendon from its insertion on the distal phalanx. Classification is based on the extent of proximal retraction of the tendon as well as the presence or absence of an associated bony avulsion fragment. These three types form the original Leddy and Packer classification, Following a typical injury, as discussed earlier, patients present with inability to actively flex the DIPJ. The involved finger rests in an extended or hyperextended position and the cascade of the fingers is disrupted. The course of the flexor tendon should be palpated from distal to proximal, looking and feeling for a specific area of swelling and tenderness, which may correspond to the level of retraction of the proximal stump. Radiographs of the involved finger are obtained to assess for underlying fractures or bony avulsion fragments. When the physical findings are equivocal, ultrasound may be employed to confirm the disruption and to localize the level of retraction. Management options are based on the time elapsed since injury, the extent of proximal tendon retraction, vincular system disruption and bony fragment size. Prompt intervention is recommended in all cases because the tendon may retract more proximally than the associated fracture pattern suggests. If the repair results in undue shortening, or a direct repair is not achievable, perhaps due to a delay in diagnosis, treatment options include wound closure, observation and DIPJ tenodesis or arthrodesis if the joint later becomes unstable; tendon lengthening by tenotomy in the forearm Following a successful primary repair, a dorsal blocking plaster splint is made intra-operatively so that the end of the splint extends beyond the fingertips. The wrist is positioned in a neutral position, the MCPJ at about 60° of flexion and the IPJ in neutral. This temporary splint is changed to a lightweight thermoplastic splint at about 5 days postoperatively. Rehabilitation regimens and the design of splintage vary between units, but early controlled active mobilization is generally favoured, particularly in an athletic population. The aims of rehabilitation for the first 6 weeks should be to control oedema, prevent the formation of adhesions, regain range of motion and allow healing of the tendon-to-bone interface. The requirement for a dorsal protective splint and the risk of rupture prohibit the athlete from engaging in any sporting activities during this period. After that, serial casting may be necessary in those with residual PIPJ flexion contracture. Otherwise, splintage is stopped at 6 weeks when light functional activities are commenced. Resistive exercises are introduced in a progressive manner between 8 and 12 weeks, with most being able to return to play after 12 weeks. Injuries to the PIPJ vary greatly in severity, from volar plate injuries to complex fracture-dislocations. History-taking should focus on the mechanism of injury, the occurrence of any subluxation or dislocation and whether the latter was reduced at the time of injury. The time scale of each event is also important in influencing the degree of swelling and stiffness present. Examination begins with inspection of the finger, noting any swelling, bruising, lacerations or deformity. Palpation should be performed, paying attention to the exact site of localized tenderness. In the presence of an obvious deformity or a history of attempted reduction, radiographs should be taken before assessing range of motion and stability. Post-reduction films are important to confirm congruency of the joint and to exclude any fracture. A true lateral radiograph is particularly important and a divergence of the articular surfaces, giving rise to a dorsal “V” sign, suggests subluxation. Stability of the joint is paramount in determining the appropriate treatment, which should aim to facilitate early mobilization and restoration of function. Stable injuries are managed with early mobilization. These include sprains of the collateral ligaments and volar plate injuries with or without associated volar lip fracture of up to 30% of the articular surface. Volar dislocation that has been reduced without residual subluxation should be treated in an extension splint for 4 weeks to allow healing of the central slip. The distal IPJ is left free to facilitate lateral band exercises. After that the immobilization is converted to dynamic splintage for another fortnight, allowing active mobilization of the PIPJ. Rehabilitation following PIPJ injuries demands attentive management of pain, oedema and mobilization to prevent flexion contractures. Once the swelling and symptoms settle, athletes with stable injuries may return to play. Those who require an extension-blocking splint and those treated with surgery will need to refrain from training until healing or bony union has occurred (generally not earlier than 4 weeks). Following that, depending on the severity of the injury, buddy strapping and/or a protective static finger splint worn during training for an additional 4–6 weeks is advisable. Metacarpal and phalangeal fractures account for a fifth of all acute fractures and are frequently caused by sporting activities. In contrast to the metacarpal, a fractured proximal phalanx will tend to angulate with the apex directed volarwards due to the deforming forces of the extensor mechanism and dorsal translation of the lateral bands. In the middle phalanx, the location of the fracture relative to the flexor digitorum superficialis insertion will determine the angulation. A proximal fracture typically angulates with a dorsal apex, while a distal fracture angulates with a volar apex. Fractures of the distal phalanx are subject to the opposing forces of extensor and flexor tendons. The latter are often associated with nail bed injuries that require repair. The mechanism of injury is usually a direct blow or torsional force, giving rise to a transverse or a spiral fracture. The level of energy transferred will account for the degree of comminution and associated soft tissue disruption. Clinical examination begins with inspection for swelling, ecchymosis, deformity and the presence of an open wound. Shortening can be judged by examining the metacarpal heads with the hand in flexion ( Plain radiographs, including the posteroanterior (PA), lateral, and oblique views, should be requested. Specialized views may be useful to delineate the pattern of injury in selected cases. A 30° pronated lateral view is particularly useful for index and middle metacarpal fractures, whilst a 30° supinated lateral view outlines ring and little metacarpal fractures well. The Brewerton view A key determining factor for intervention is the stability of the fracture. This is in turn determined by the nature of injury, fracture configuration, the number of metacarpals involved and the amount of soft tissue destruction. Whilst the majority of metacarpal fractures can be treated adequately with immobilization or protective splinting, irreducible or unstable fracture patterns warrant special attention and fixation. The indications for fixation are summarized in The various fixation devices (wire, plate, screw and nail) are means to maintain a reduction, or to revert an unstable fracture, allowing healing in a favourable position. Percutaneous or intramedullary pinning has the potential advantage of being minimally invasive, thereby preserving the soft tissue envelope. However it does not achieve the same direct compression and rigid fixation of the fracture that is afforded by screw fixation or plating. Undisplaced phalangeal fractures may be amenable to buddy strapping augmented with splint immobilization. Close monitoring, with weekly radiographs, is mandatory until union so that early intervention can be undertaken if displacement occurs. In contrast, unstable phalangeal fractures are difficult, but not impossible, to manage using closed means alone. Thus, maintenance of the reduction achieved, either by closed or open means, will often require supplemental fixation with wires, screws or a plate. A metacarpal brace ( Injuries can have a significant impact on an athlete's career and a more interventionist approach, employing anatomical reduction and stable fixation, may be necessary to facilitate earlier return to training. However the athlete, coach and manager should be counselled appropriately that returning too early to aggressive sports activity, even with cast immobilization, may result in loss of fixation and a poor result. Regulations differ between sports and the acceptability of a protective splint worn during competition is ultimately judged by the referee or official of the event. The treating surgeon has a duty of care to the athlete and must ensure that the treatment and outcome are not compromised. It is thus crucial to engage the athletes in the decision making process to ensure that they fully understand the relative merits of any treatment plan adopted.