In this review sample preparation strategies used for crude oil digestion in last ten years are discussed focusing on further metals and non-metals determination. One of the main challenges of proposed methods has been to overcome the difficulty to bring crude oil samples into solution, which should be compatible with analytical techniques used for element determination. On this aspect, this review summarizes the sample preparation methods for metals and non metals determination in crude oil including those based on wet digestion, combustion, emulsification, extraction, sample dilution with organic solvents, among others. Conventional methods related to wet digestion with concentrated acids or combustion are also covered, with special emphasis to closed systems. Trends in sample digestion, such as microwave-assisted digestion using diluted acids combined with high-efficiency decomposition systems are discussed. On the other hand, strategies based on sample dilution in organic solvents and procedures recommended for speciation analysis are reported as well as the use of direct analysis in view of the recent importance for crude oil field. A compilation concerning sample preparation for crude oil provided by official methods as well as certified reference materials available for accuracy evaluation is also presented and discussed.Crude oil is a naturally occurring hydrocarbon mixture, containing a low percentage of sulfur, nitrogen and oxygen compounds along with metals and other elements The presence of metals and non-metals in crude oil is generally undesirable and can have negative impacts on oil refineries, including corrosion, catalyst poisoning and environmental pollution Two groups of elements appear in significant concentrations in original crude oil associated with specific compounds. Zinc, Ti, Ca and Mg are present as organometallic compounds and exhibit surface-active properties. These metals are commonly adsorbed onto water or oil interfaces and can act as emulsion stabilizers. In contrast, V, Cu and Ni, which are almost certain to have been present in plant and animal source materials, can be complexed with hemoglobin or pyrrole pigment compounds derived from chlorophyll Nickel and V are generally present in concentrations higher than other metals in crude oil, except when contaminated with co-produced salts (chlorides of Na, Mg, Ca, etc.) or corrosion products introduced during transportation (e.g., Fe). Most vanadium and nickel compounds are concentrated in the heavy fractions of crude oil Sulfur, frequently the main contaminant in crude oil, is generally found in the form of thiols, sulfides, disulfides, thiophene, dibenzothiophene and alkyl derivatives of these molecules; H Chlorine present in crude oil is normally associated with Na and, to a lesser extent, with Ca and Mg Removal (or reduction to very low levels) of metals and non-metals from crude oil is highly desirable, requiring suitable methods for determining the concentration of these elements. Information regarding specific elements, such as rare earth elements (REEs) (in addition to Ni and V), is useful for predicting the origin of a crude oil sample, the process by which it was formed, the oil-rock source, the level of biodegradation in the respective reserves and other characteristics The determination of metals and non-metals in crude oil has been an object of study for more than 50 years The present review discusses sample preparation methods that have been reported over the last ten years for the detection of metals and non-metals in crude oil. Only works related to crude oil analysis are considered; those related to crude oil products, fuels, residues or similar materials are not covered. The terms “crude oil” and “petroleum” have been used in the literature without distinction and are thus used in this review. A distinction must be made between papers that describe the analysis of “oil samples” as it relates to oil-based standard trace elements rather than real crude oil samples. The primary focus of the present work relates modern sample preparation methods as they are applied to crude oil, taking into account trends in sample preparation and green chemistry recommendations, such as low reagent consumption and the use of diluted solutions, among others. The methods currently used for the determination of metals and non-metals in crude oil samples are summarized in Sample preparation is often considered a critical step in elemental analysis Some alternatives to sample digestion have been proposed to decrease the time required for analysis and to simplify sample preparation As an example, prior to its introduction into an analytical device, a sample can be simply diluted in organic solvents. Other examples are the use of emulsification to allow for rapid sample preparation and the possibility of using aqueous standards for calibration or the use of mild conditions for extracting the analytes rather than digestion of the entire sample The digestion of crude oil has been performed in closed vessels to increase the digestion efficiency and to reduce the digestion time ( Despite the inherent advantages of closed systems, digestion in open vessels is still in use and some examples can be found regarding its use for crude oil One of the first systems developed to carry out wet digestion in a closed vessel was the Carius tube device that utilizes concentrated nitric acid at temperatures as high as 250–300 The thermal convective heating of vessels constructed with polytetrafluoroethylene (PTFE) or other fluoropolymers is another alternative to wet digestion in closed systems which has found widespread use in routine analysis. The vessel is conventionally mounted in a stainless steel pressure system and then heated to the desired temperature, usually in a laboratory drying oven, furnace or heating block To reduce the loss of mechanical stability at high temperatures, vessels made from quartz could be used in a pressurized digestion system. A commercially available equipment, the High Pressure Asher™ system (HPA, Anton Paar GmbH, Graz, Austria), combines the advantages of the Carius method with the practicality and safe handling of the PTFE digestion bombs. In these systems even nitric acid alone is a sufficiently powerful reagent to digest the majority of organic samples and a maximum digestion temperature of up to 320 One reason for the relatively low number of applications of the thermally convective heated digestion systems, such as the Carius tube, PTFE digestion bombs and HPA, could be related to the low throughput of these systems that require several hours (or even days) to achieve complete digestion. Thus, microwave-assisted wet digestion systems have been proposed to overcome this drawback, allowing the digestion of several samples simultaneously in less than 1 Recently, a microwave-assisted wet digestion system based on a high-pressure autoclave design was proposed (UltraClave and UltraWave models, Milestone Inc.) A sample preparation method based on wet digestion using a combination of microwave and ultraviolet (UV) radiation, microwave-assisted UV digestion, is another alternative to wet digestion. This method was first proposed by Florian and Knapp Combustion in open vessels has been used extensively to decompose samples containing high levels of carbon. Dry ashing using a muffle furnace has probably been the most widely used combustion method. For crude oil digestion, this system basically consists of a quartz or platinum crucible containing 1–20 Closed vessel combustion systems are primarily related to two classical methods: combustion bombs and oxygen flasks, where sample is burned inside a closed system filled with oxygen and gaseous products are absorbed into a suitable solution. These systems require the use of a very simple and relatively inexpensive glassware (oxygen flask) or a stainless steel device (combustion bomb), but only one sample can generally be digested at a time. In addition, an innovative method, microwave-induced combustion (MIC), has gained increased use. This system has the advantage of good performance in the digestion of complex organic matrices, such as coal Sample decomposition using an oxygen flask (commonly called a Schöniger flask) involves wrapping the sample with paper (traditionally, a low-ash content filter paper) and holding it in a platinum device Another alternative to combustion in a closed vessel is the use of combustion bombs. Solid samples can be prepared as pellets and positioned in a metallic holder. In the case of liquid or viscous matrices, the samples can be wrapped or encapsulated. A platinum wire is placed in contact with the sample and connected to two electrodes for subsequent ignition inside to the vessels pressurized with oxygen (usually 20–30 Compared with the Schöniger flask method, a greater sample mass can be burned using the combustion bomb. This increased mass is an advantage for subsequent analysis at very low analyte concentration. However, despite the good performance of the combustion bombs for crude oil digestion, some drawbacks still remain: (i) bombs are generally made of stainless steel that can cause contamination, (ii) it is not possible to perform a subsequent reflux step for the removal of analytes from the walls of the bomb, (iii) in general, only one sample is digested in each run and (iv) a relatively long time is required for analyte absorption by the solution (up to 2 The recent development of MIC method combined some advantages of conventional microwave-assisted wet digestion with those of classical combustion techniques For liquid or highly viscous samples, including light and heavy crude oil, the conventional method for burning the sample using MIC cannot be applied due to non-reproducible and incomplete combustion It is well known that the type of solution plays an important role in analyte absorption. The choice of absorbing solution is dependent on the analytes and should be compatible with the selected determination technique. For the detection of metals and metalloids by ICP-OES and ICP-MS using MIC, good recoveries were obtained using a diluted solution of nitric acid for light and heavy crude oils Recently, another method for sample digestion based on focused microwave-induced combustion (FMIC) was proposed. The FMIC system uses a focused microwave oven with a lab-made quartz sample holder and a modified glass flask to allow the introduction of an oxygen flow for the combustion process. The main advantage of this system is that a larger sample mass can be digested (up to 1.5 The determination of trace elements in crude oil following sample dilution in organic solvents has recently attracted attention ( To reduce solvent effects, the use of micronebulizers possibly combined with desolvation systems (for solvent removal before the sample reached the plasma state) is a promising alternative and in some cases, a high-resolution ICP-MS system has been used For crude oil, protocols normally involve prior sample and standards preparation by subsequent dilution in an appropriate solvent ( An interesting study was performed by Dreyfus et al. Other authors have observed significant increases in several elements in the asphaltic fraction of crude oil samples An interface based on a total consumption micronebulizer for the introduction of xylene solutions in ICP-MS was developed by Giusti et al. Despite the application of a simple sample dilution step, the use of organic solvents requires careful optimization of the flow-rates of the sample, the plasma gases and the oxygen. The temperature used to cool the spray chamber and the rinsing time required to assure good performance for the selected elements must also be optimized. According to our research, depending on the equipment used, it is not possible to effectively control the oxygen flow rate and memory effects. Even with more than 3 The direct introduction of crude oil samples in conventional atomic spectrometric techniques (e.g., AAS, ICP-OES, ICP-MS) is a difficult task and problems related to the high viscosity of samples are often observed. Nevertheless, the formation of crude oil emulsion or micro-emulsion represents a simple and fast pretreatment to overcome this limitation For the preparation of emulsions of surfactant/heavy crude oils/water mixtures some parameters should be observed Emulsions and microemulsions have been applied for preparation of crude oil samples ( For Cr determination in Venezuelan crude oil, the effect of two nonionic surfactant and optimum formulation to obtain an O/W emulsion was studied Introduction of oil samples as emulsions has been also used for the determination of metals by atomic spectrometry techniques that use nebulization systems for sample introduction, such as ICP-OES. Organic solvents and O/W emulsions used in ICP equipments might require specially designed torches, nebulizers, changes in argon flow-rate and addition of oxygen as an auxiliary gas in order to maximize carbon combustion, minimizing background signal. One important concern of nebulization systems is the difference of viscosity between samples and calibration solutions, causing different transport rates and aerosol characteristics A method was developed for metals determination by ICP-OES in crude oil prepared as detergentless microemulsions Extraction or leaching is mentioned as the process of solubilization of analytes from sample matrix. It is sometimes required when a not so hard sample preparation step is required to maintain the integrity of some species or compound, as e.g., in speciation analysis. Alternatively, in some situations, it is necessary to assess only the extractable analyte or it is thought that the analyte is not bound to the matrix, making extraction a suitable choice. Another aspect of this sample preparation method, is the possibility of reducing the use of concentrated reagents, especially concentrated acids which are commonly used in wet digestion procedures (e.g., HNO The time required for an extraction step can be considered strongly dependent of the mechanisms governing the solubility of analytes into the extractant and also of the transport phenomena Ultrasonic energy has been used in several analytical applications including sample preparation With regard to extraction methods for metals and non metals determination in crude oil the number of reports is relatively low ( Concerning extraction methods the main advantage of these approaches are the possibility to use diluted solutions. However, despite the advantages related to this point, its suitability for further metals and non-metals determination is limited due to the characteristics of sample matrix that difficult the extraction mechanisms. As previously discussed, different sample preparation strategies could be used for crude oil digestion and some methods, as wet digestion, combustion, extraction, emulsification, among others, have been applied. In this respect, it is important to mention the use of pyrohydrolysis and sample preparation methods used in association with chromatographic techniques for analytes determination ( Pyrohydrolysis is a relatively old method of sample preparation that was widely used in the past for digestion of inorganic samples and recently has gained attention to digest organic samples, including crude oil and its products Regarding crude oil analysis, only one work was reported in literature using pyrohydrolysis for further Cl determination Other method that was recently proposed for elements determination in crude oil was based on the use of counter-current chromatography (CCC) Avoiding the sample preparation step by the direct determination of analytes in crude oil is useful as this type of matrix is difficult to digest ( The use of laser ablation to inductively coupled plasma mass spectrometry (LA-ICP-MS) technique is another alternative for direct sample analysis that has been reported in the literature for the detection of trace elements in crude oil Nowadays, NAA is considered a reliable technique for the determination of metals and non-metals in various matrices and references can be found in the literature concerning the use of this technique for trace-element analysis in crude oil Determination of trace elements by NAA in crude oil samples has been widely used in the past and several references to this use could be found in the literature The direct analysis of crude oil and its products using X-ray fluorescence has been previously described as a technique for the determination of metals and non-metals, specifically S, Ni and V Despite improvements made possible with X-ray analysis, according to the authors’ research, only one publication could be found in which this technique was used for crude oil analysis in the last ten years: Doyle et al. Among the techniques available for the direct analysis of trace elements in crude oil and its products, GF AAS has been successfully applied in recent years Despite the suitability of the GF AAS technique for direct analysis, some authors report that care must be taken to avoid analyte loss during pyrolysis, even for those elements that are considered thermally stable (primarily Ni and V) because depending on their form (such as porphyrine structures), they can be volatilized at low temperatures The initial homogenization step should be evaluated for the direct analysis of crude oil. This homogenization step could be performed by manual shaking According to Brandao et al. The calibration step is currently performed using aqueous standards Recently, the use of HR-CS GF AAS has been proposed for the determination of metals in crude oil samples The advances in instrumentation and the focus not only on the total elemental analysis but also on the identification of the species of elements has caused analysts to improve speciation methods The behavior of metals during geochemical processes and refining operations is related to the chemical forms in which the metals are present in crude oil. Thus, knowledge of their species is important for better understanding of the role that these metals play in such processes Analytical methodologies based on chromatographic separation coupled to mass spectrometry, such as liquid chromatography–mass spectrometry (LC–MS) and gas chromatography–mass spectrometry (GC–MS), have been used to characterize hydrocarbon components, sulfur and nitrogen compounds and metalloporphyrins Liquid–liquid extraction is a common procedure involving the separation of components in a mixture by partitioning them between two immiscible solvents. The primary concern with this method (when it is used in sample preparation) is the quantitative extraction of the analyte. Additionally, the volume of the final phase can be large, requiring an additional preconcentration step prior to analysis In addition to liquid–liquid extraction, size exclusion chromatography (SEC), gel permeation chromatography (GPC) and column chromatography have previously been used for fractionation Prior to analysis, a derivatization step is sometimes necessary for the detection of particular species using a specific technique. As an example, most metallic compounds have low volatility and are therefore not suitable for analysis by gas chromatography. In addition, the direct detection of many metallic species is made difficult by their physical–chemical properties. Therefore, the chemical modification (derivatization) of the target analytes, or altering their states, can be applied to facilitate analysis The analytical techniques used to obtain information on the chemical binding of the hetero-elements in crude oil and its fractions have recently been reviewed by Caumette et al. The use of separation methods (gas chromatography and liquid chromatography) coupled to analysis by mass spectrometry eliminates the need for extensive sample preparation. Using this strategy, McKenna et al. Relatively few references can be found concerning strategies for sample preparation and speciation analysis in crude oil (not considering the methods for fractionation of crude oil and its products) over the past decade. Most research has focused on the fractionation schemes or speciation analysis after prior fractionation ( Ellis et al. A combination of size exclusion chromatography and high-performance liquid chromatography coupled to inductively coupled plasma mass spectrometry (SEC-HPLC-ICP-MS) was proposed by Caumette et al. A detailed geochemical study based on fractionation and the combination of GC–MS and ICP-MS methods described the determination of hydrocarbons and transition metals (Co, Cr, Cu, Fe, Ni and V) in Niger Delta oils for a thorough understanding of organic and inorganic geochemistry High-resolution ICP-MS following size exclusion microchromatography (μSEC) was used by Pohl et al. Nowadays, there is a need of analytical methods update or development of new methods for crude oil analysis. Moreover, the availability of reference materials (RMs) and CRMs is limited. This limitation can become critical in order to check the accuracy. The different properties of heavy oils make difficult the application of standard methods commonly used with conventional oils. There are different standards and CRMs available with regard petroleum-related products and fractions. However, for crude oil, only few materials can be purchased from few RM producers The economic and technological importance of the sulfur content in crude oil is potentially responsible for the great availability of RMs, CRMs and other methods for the analysis of this element in comparison with metals and halogens. These materials are available for specific elements or mixtures of analytes in different oil matrices. In general, physical–chemical properties are imparted onto the CRMs, allowing the user to compare the similarities between the sample matrix and the reference material. However, the authors have reported the use of CRMs based on similar matrices for validation once a CRM with a matrix presenting the same characteristics of samples is not always available. Some materials (certified or not) for crude oil analysis are available for purchase: (i) NIST SRM 2721 (crude oil, light–sour), certified for S and Hg total content; (ii) NIST SRM 2722 (crude oil, heavy–sweet), certified for S and Hg total content; (iii) NIST RM 8595 (vanadium in crude oil), certified for total V content and (iv) ERM-EF 211, ERM-EF 212 and ERM-EF 213 (petrol), certified for sulfur content at varying levels Based on these possibilities, one can see that the amount of RMs and CRMs is crucial for validation of the analytical methods and confirmation of the traceability of the measurements. There is no option for the major of elements or for elemental species including halogens. In addition, the API gravity for heavy oil (SRM NIST 2722) is 27.3, which is high relative to that in some heavy crude oils, which can have API gravity values lower than 20. This property can result in differing behavior during analytical procedures and results that are prone to errors, depending on the sample preparation method or the detection technique. The standard methods for the analysis of metals and non-metals in crude oil are based on X-ray fluorescence, chemiluminescence, AAS, ICP-OES and potentiometric analysis. Sample preparation is commonly performed by dilution, wet digestion, ashing and combustion or combustion following direct analysis. The standard methods for the analysis of crude oil products or fractions include titration, turbidimetry, infrared detection, oxidative microcoulometry and high-temperature combustion followed by UV-fluorescence detection Sample preparation of crude oil is a difficult taskand different strategies must be used to allow the determination of both metals and non-metals. Nevertheless, some methods have become predominant due to following trends in modern analytical chemistry. Green analytical chemistry strategies have received more attention in recent years to promote environmentally friendly methods for sample pretreatment and analysis Great advances have been proposed regarding sample preparation for organic analysis in which the extraction step has been developed to reduce or avoid the use of organic solvents, as described by Armenta et al. Crude oil dilution in organic solvents or its direct analysis has increased in previous years for the subsequent determination of metals and non-metals in crude oil ( The use of diluted acids was successfully applied for microwave-assisted digestion in closed vessels, but only for biological samples Combustion methods, especially MIC, have great potential for the digestion of crude oil leading to clean digests that are compatible with several techniques for determining both metals and non-metals. Oxygen of suitable purity can be purchased, allowing for the use of diluted solutions for the absorption of analytes with the possibility of minimal reagent consumption, reducing the risks of contamination, interference in the determination step and the production of waste. However, the application of MIC for light crude oil should be performed with care due to its vigorous reaction in a pressurized oxygen atmosphere; a special method for wrapping the sample in polyethylene film should be used. Under these conditions, samples of up to 500 The amount of sample that can be digested is an important characteristic of sample digestion systems and has a direct impact on the achievable LODs. For analytes at trace or ultratrace levels, the sample mass that can be digested is critical. In addition to FMIC, the UltraClave and HPA systems (Milestone and Anton Paar, respectively) fulfill this requirement and should be considered as alternative methods for sample preparation in these cases. Finally, the development of new CRMs provides an important challenge to sample preparation methods for the determination of metals and non-metals in crude oil. Until now, few CRMs have been available for this purpose and in many cases, only the most common elements, such as Ni, V and S, present certified contents. In addition, CRMs for speciation analysis in crude oil have not been previously available. Therefore, the production of new CRMs for crude oil could be considered a challenge for the next years. In this review, several approaches to crude oil digestion were discussed. These methods focused on the determination of metals and non-metals. A summary of the applications and developments over the last ten years was reported. These methods include the use of wet digestion, combustion, sample dilution in organic solvents, emulsification, extraction, direct analysis and sample preparation for speciation. Sample preparation methods for crude oil are still considered a challenging step, primarily due to matrix complexity. Despite this fact, several improvements have been made in recent years. The established methods for crude oil digestion and the recently developed protocols were described and critically discussed in this review. One can observe ( The authors are grateful to