In this study the dependence of the impeller speed on the particle size variation was investigated on the quartz particles using laboratory mechanical flotation cell. Maximum recovery was obtained at 1100rpm. For either more quiescent (impeller speed <900rpm) or more turbulent (impeller speed >1300rpm) conditions, flotation recovery decreased steadily. Furthermore, amount of collision probabilities is calculated using various equations. According to this study, maximum collision probability was obtained around 48.35% with impeller speed of 1100rpm, air flow rate of 15l/h and particle size of 545μm and minimum collision probability was obtained around 2.43% with impeller speed of 700rpm, air flow rate of 15l/h and particle size of 256μm. Maximum attachment probability was obtained around 44.16% with impeller speed of 1300rpm, air flow rate of 75l/h and particle size of 256μm. With using some frothers such as poly propylene glycol, MIBC and pine oil, probability of collision increased, respectively. Maximum collision probability was obtained around 65.46% with poly propylene glycol dosage of 75g/t and particle size of 545μm.Two parameters of great importance technologically and physically are the upper and the lower grain size limit of floatability. Particles with kinetic energies greater than the detaching energy cannot float. Hence, for a given energy of the system and particle density a maximum particle size for floatability can be expected ( Unlike the bubble–particle collision micro process, attachment and detachment strongly depend on the chemistry and physical chemistry of the surface of solid particle and bubble. At present these two micro processes are the least quantified, because there are many complex phenomena involved which are not well understood yet ( In this research studies the influence of impeller speed and air flow rate on flotation performance of particles of quartz has been carried out. Furthermore, probability of particle–bubble collision and attachment, collision angle and attachment angle has been investigated. Flotation tests carried out using quartz particles of four diameter classes contain: −300 Flotation tests were carried out in a mechanical cell. An impeller diameter of 0.07 For different air flow rate, the influence of impeller speed on recovery of quartz particles in four classes are illustrated in In this research, Impeller speeds changes from 700 to 900 and 1100 to 1300 According to The flotation process depends on the ability of bubbles to collect particles from the suspension and carry them to the surface, where a layer of froth or sludge can be removed over a launder ( In this research, bubble size distribution and raise velocity was measured similar to McGill bubble viewer ( Influence parameters in bubble Reynolds number are bubble raise velocity, bubble diameter and density and dynamic viscosity of fluid around of bubble. Bubble Reynolds number is calculated from below equation ( Minimum bubble raise velocity is 14.1 The probability ( Probability of collision was calculated for all of flotation tests using different equations in  Bubble–particle collision and attachment interaction in flotation have been defined in In this research, for various air flow rate, impeller speed and particle size, collision angle has been calculated using Eq. Some frothers such as MIBC (Methyl Isobutyl carbonyl), pine oil and poly propylene glycol ( According to  Quartz particles presented a plateau of maximum recovery impeller speed of 1100 Maximum collision probability was obtained around 48.35% with impeller speed of 1100 Maximum collision angle obtained at 72.82° with 15 Maximum attachment angle was obtained at 39.33° with 75 As the particle size increased, the probability of collision increased, but with using poly propylene glycol, MIBC and pine oil, probability of collision increased, respectively. Maximum collision probability was obtained around 65.46% with poly propylene glycol dosage of 75 When mixed frothers was used for flotation tests, maximum collision probability was obtained around 73.23% with MPOPP, frother dosage of 150 Collision probability was obtained around 1.43% with pine oil dosage of 25 Authors are grateful to Amirkabir University of Technology, Tarbiat Modares University and Islamic Azad University for their contribution on this research.