A tantalum/niobium concentrate has been ball-milled for up to 50 h in a laboratory mill without apparent phase change, other than a decrease in unit cell symmetry and some amorphisation. The extent of dissolution in a mixture of hydrochloric acid and sodium fluoride increased with milling time. For a powder milled for 50 h, over 95% of the concentrate were solubilised in 24 h compared with ∼50% in 48 h for a 2-h milled powder. The kinetics of dissolution changed with the milling time, indicating a change in the rate-determining step due to milling. These effects were attributed to the decrease in crystallinity of the powder, giving a substantial increase in the lattice strain and in unsatisfied surface bonds where dissolution was thought to occur.The processing route for tantalum/niobium ores has not changed substantially in the past 50 years. After physical concentration, the mineral is dissolved in hot, concentrated hydrofluoric acid in a particularly hazardous operation involving live steam. The metals are then separated either by fractional crystallisation as K A number of mineral systems have shown that the leaching rate can be enhanced by milling Any process which can enhance the rate of solubility of minerals could either allow increased throughput in existing processing plants or moderation of the leaching conditions. The former leading to a reduced capital cost per tonne of throughput and the latter allowing either less expensive material being required for construction of the leaching system, or mitigation in the temperature or pressure used. This paper examines in detail the effect of extended milling of a tantalum/niobium concentrate on the rate of dissolution in a solution of sodium fluoride in hydrochloric acid. The concentrate used had a particle size ∼100 μm and X-ray fluorescence (XRF) revealed that it contained 66% (Ta,Nb) Samples of concentrate were ball-milled, either wet (∼30 wt.% slurry density) or dry for 2–50 h at room temperature. The mill used was a vertical 316S stainless steel ball mill using five 1″ (25.4 mm) diameter 420 C stainless steel balls confined in the vertical plane. The surface area of the powders was determined by a multipoint BET technique Leaching consisted of adding powder to a mixture of hydrochloric acid and sodium fluoride at about 1% slurry density and agitating by turning end-over-end at room temperature for up to 48 h. Separate samples were used for each time, and after their allotted time were centrifuged to settle all solids. Decanted, the solids were redispersed in deionised water and centrifuged; this cycle was repeated twice to ensure that the pH of the solution was near neutral. After the final decantation, the samples were dried in air at 110°C for 24 h and weighed; the mass loss was then determined. Milled and leached powders were examined by XRD using monochromatized CoKα-radiation (λ=0.178896 nm). Selected powders were also examined under a scanning electron microscope (SEM) after solution dispersion onto a stub. The BET area of the milled powder is shown in SEM images of powders milled for 50 h are shown in It has been shown elsewhere XRD traces for the powders milled for up to 50 h are shown for dry and wet milled concentrate in It is interesting to note that there was a decrease in the number of peaks with milling time. Conclusive identification of the few peaks present is difficult due to the breadth of the peaks and the lack of confirmatory peaks; however, in addition to AB Clearly, there are significant changes to the crystalline structure due to extended milling. The peaks became weaker and broader with increasing milling time until they were almost absent in the dry milled 50-h powder, which implies that this powder was becoming amorphous. The peaks present in the wet milled sample remained narrower and more intense, indicating that there was less crystalline damage occurring in the presence of water. Indeed, the sample milled in water for 50 h shows narrower peaks than the sample milled dry for 10 h. The dissolution of the milled concentrate as a function of milling time for a range of milling conditions is shown in For 10 h and longer milling, the rate of dissolution of the dry milled sample was somewhat greater than the wet milled samples, despite the threefold smaller surface area The dissolution of powders dry milled for 2 and 50 h is shown as a function of time in The 50-h sample shows a very rapid initial solubilisation with >93% dissolving in the initial 4 h, extending the leach to 48 h resulted in only a further 4% dissolution. Attempts to replot these data showed that the dissolution of the milled powders was neither chemically controlled nor did the usual shrinking particle models apply The intercept of the 50-h plot is at ∼90%, lower than expected from the XRF which indicated <7% of the material should have been soluble (only alumina was expected to be insoluble). XRD of the leached product, It is clear from these results that extended milling of a tantalite/columbite concentrate results in a significant increase in the rate of solubilisation. Indeed, the dissolution rate of the 50-h dry milled powder was such that the same fraction of ore was dissolved in the initial 9 min (extrapolating the data for 50 h milling in It should be noted that the dissolution conditions used here are considerably less aggressive than those typically used in plants where dissolution of tantalite/columbite is carried out. Current industrial practice for dissolution of this concentrate involves somewhat higher temperatures than those examined in this paper and there seems to be no reason why the improvements observed would not be enhanced further by the increased temperature given that the rate determining step changed from either chemical or solid-state control to solution diffusion control after increasing the milling time from 2 to 50 h. Increasing the agitation would increase the rate of dissolution, but only until the agitation was sufficient to overcome diffusion control. The reason for the change in rate determining step is not yet clear, although the XRD of the as-milled powders Of critical importance in the system is shortening the milling time to one which gives an economic benefit over the current process route. The mill used is extremely inefficient at transferring energy, other mills are considerably more intensive than tumbling mills The dissolution of a tantalite/columbite concentrate was substantially affected by milling for an extended period. Dry milling was found to be more effective than wet milling, despite the latter attaining a somewhat greater surface area due to the prevention of agglomeration. A powder dry milled for 50 h showed a dissolution rate over 300 times more rapid than a 2-h milled powder. The rate determining step was either chemical or solid-state for 2-h milled powder but changed to solution diffusion control after milling for 50 h. These effects were provisionally assigned to changes in the crystallinity of the powder during milling.