In this study, the delamination toughness under pure modes I and II and a 2/1 mode mixity ratio and the associated fractures morphology of AS4/8552 and AS4/3506-1 unidirectional carbon fibre/epoxy composites have been related to the principal tensile stresses at the crack front.
                  Pure modes I and II and a G
                     I/G
                     II
                     =2/1 mixed-mode ratio tests were respectively carried out by means of the following methods: DCB (Double Cantilever Beam), ENF (End Notch Flexure) and ADCB (Asymmetric Double Cantilever Beam). ADCB specimens, in which the crack plane is outside the laminate midplane, are simple as well as useful test configurations to produce a mixed-mode load state at the crack tip of samples. As the ADCB test is not still covered by international standards, the calculations were performed by means of FE models and analytical formulations developed in previous studies.
                  The Finite Element Modelling (FEM) method was used to analyze the stress state ahead of the crack to better explain the fracture micromechanisms acting under different loading modes and their influence on delamination fracture toughness.
                  It has been demonstrated that the direction of the principal tensile stresses at the crack front has a major influence on the orientation of the so-formed microcracks, on microcrack coalescence and, hence, on the failure mode description reflected in the fracture morphology.Polymer composites are highly anisotropic materials due to the addition of fibres, in which the fibre/matrix interface, considered the third constituent of a composite, has a major influence on damage growth processes. Many failure modes therefore exist in composites and may be classified into one of three groups Delamination (separation of two adjacent plies in composite laminates) is considered one of the most critical ordinary damage modes in composite laminates. In structures, delaminations are not just loaded under pure modes I, II and III, but grow under a mixture of all three loading modes. Crack progression occurs through a series of complex interacting local fracture processes leading to sudden changes in crack propagation processes, crack front orientation and fracture morphology. The fracture surfaces of different materials change dramatically with mixed-mode loading. Observation of delamination fracture surfaces and analysis of the crack-tip stress state help identify changes in the failure mechanism operating under different loading modes. This type of analysis is necessary to predict component and structure failures and provides a means of optimising materials. In this paper, a finite element analysis is carried out to describe the stress state in the crack front under different loading modes in carbon fibre reinforced composite materials. An experimental study including fractographic analysis has likewise been performed on the delaminated samples. The aim of the study is to relate the stress states in the crack tip with the observations from the examination of fracture surfaces and toughness so as to gain a better understanding of the physical origin of delamination fracture toughness. Two different laminates were used in this study. Both materials were chosen to represent a different range of toughness properties in carbon fibre reinforced epoxy composites. The Hexcel AS4/3506-1 material is a brittle epoxy composite. The Hexcel AS4/8552 material is an epoxy composite that has been modified to improve its toughness. The materials were made into 32-ply unidirectional panels, which were cut into 6-mm-thick test specimens. Five samples of each material were tested under modes I and II and mixed mode and an exhaustive fractographic analysis of the fracture surfaces was carried out. This test was conducted following the ASTM Standard D 5528-01 (“Standard test method for mode I interlaminar fracture toughness of unidirectional fibre-reinforced polymer matrix composites”). Opening forces are applied to the Double Cantilever Beam (DCB) specimens to produce mode I delamination fracture. The DCB specimen, shown in The specimens were loaded in displacement control at a rate of 1 The modified beam theory data reduction method was used to calculate the strain energy release rate, The ADCB mixed-mode test method was used. This test configuration is similar to the DCB (Double Cantilever Beam) test method. An opening load is applied to the Asymmetric Double Cantilever Beam (ADCB) specimens to produce mixed-mode delamination fracture. In the ADCB samples, shown in The structure of the laminate specimens was The specimens were opening mode loaded in displacement control at a rate of 0.5 For the ADCB specimen, in which the crack plane is outside the midplane, the calculation cannot be performed as a perfect built-in beam. Furthermore, the displacement is not symmetric with respect to the midplane. One possible approach to determine An approach to the modified beam theory data reduction method that introduces an equivalent stiffness, ( An empirical expression depending on the crack position was used to calculate The mode II test method used was the End Notched Flexure (ENF) test. This test was performed in flexural mode following the ESIS ENF Protocol, shown in Standard compliance calibration tests were carried out before testing in order to correlate crack length and sample compliance. The applied load and midpoint displacement were recorded on a computer. The compliance experimental calibration (CE) data reduction method was used to calculate the strain energy release rate, The delamination fracture surfaces were examined to deduce information about damage in each material using a Jeol scanning electron microscope (SEM). Fractographic analysis provides important information on the causes of failure, the location of the origin of failure and the crack progression path. In this paper, fractographic morphologies, failure modes and the crack-tip stress state are related. SEM photomicrographs were taken just beyond the delamination insert and in regions far from it. The critical strain energy release rate, As expected, the AS4/8552 material in pure mode I and mixed mode I/II was much tougher than the AS4/3506-1 material because of the way the matrix behaves. However, the critical strain energy release rate, The delamination toughness and associated fracture morphology of unidirectional carbon fibre/epoxy composites varies with mode mixity In both materials, clean fibres and many troughs were observed under the different loading states where fibres had been pulled away from the matrix, thus indicating interfacial failure (crack progression across the fibre/matrix interfaces). Fracture therefore initiates as cracks at the fibre/matrix interface which subsequently extend into the matrix between the fibres. As can be seen in   A finite element analysis was implemented to model the stress state ahead of the crack so as to better explain the fracture micromechanisms acting under the different tested loading modes and to explain how the fracture morphologies are affected. The aim was to study the influence of the stress state on the formation and growth of microcracks and on delamination fracture toughness. To analyze the principal tensile stresses under pure modes I and II and mixed mode, a simple FE model was implemented. As can be seen in  Under pure mode I, fracture initiates as microcracks at the fibre/matrix interface. The plane of these microcracks is approximately coincident with the delamination plane, because the 1st principal tensile stresses are perpendicular to this plane (see As the mode II component increases, i.e. when shear stresses are introduced (see Microcracks consequently coalesce, leading to the formation of cusps The cusps thus reorient forming an angle to the fracture plane. This angle is related to the mode II component percentage, i.e. it depends on the mode-mixity ratio ( Under 2/1 mixed-mode ratio testing, the inclination of the cusps is also low and no clear change in the failure mechanism is observed (see The increase in delamination toughness, Δ The delamination toughness, the principal tensile stresses at the crack front and the associated fracture morphology of unidirectional carbon fibre/epoxy composites vary with mode mixity. The direction of the principal tensile stresses at the crack front has an important influence on the failure mode description reflected in the fracture morphology. Under pure mode I, the plane of these microcracks coincides approximately with the delamination plane. These microcracks coalesce to form the characteristic “river” markings. The total fracture area is small. As the mode II component increases, so does the inclination of the cracks, which coalesce to form the characteristic “hackle” markings. The generated fractured area and delamination toughness likewise increases. No clear change in the fracture mechanism was observed under a 2/1 mixed-mode ratio. The authors are indebted to the Spanish Ministry of Science and Innovation (Project MAT2010-14943) for partial funding of this work.