Zr was employed as an impurity getter to enhance removal of impurities from MG-Si because of its strong affinity for a wide range of impurities. Different lixiviants, HCl+HF, HF and aqua regia, were employed to investigate the leaching behavior of MG-Si at 348Kfor 2.5hwith and without Zr addition. Typical precipitates at Si grain boundaries before and after acid leaching were observed and analyzed via scanning electron microscopy (SEM) with energy dispersive X-ray spectroscopy (EDS). The leaching results show that the order of efficiency of the lixiviants, from highest to lowest, is HCl+HF>HF>aqua regia. HCl+HF is the optimal lixiviant for purification of MG-Si with and without Zr addition. The presence of Zr in MG-Si can significantly enhance the efficient extraction of impurities, especially P and Al, which cannot be removed efficiently using conventional hydrometallurgical technologies. The total fraction of impurities removed (Fe, Al, Ca, B, P, Zr, Ti, V, Mn, Cu and Ni) increased from 94.2 to 97.5% after HCl+HF leaching. In addition, 99.9% of the impurity getter Zr was removed, with its concentration decreasing from 50,000ppmwto 49
                     ppmwafter HCl+HF leaching. The residual amount of Zr in the refined Si can be further removed by directional-solidification purification because of its extremely small segregation coefficient.Si is the main raw material for production of solar cells. As the presence of impurities in Si can greatly decrease the conversion efficiency of the solar cells, they must be eliminated in an efficient manner. The purity of Si must be at least 99.9999% (solar grade silicon or SOG-Si). The modified Siemens process can upgrade metallurgical grade silicon (MG-Si) to SOG-Si, but its high energy consumption and complex chemical reaction process contribute significantly to its high cost and environmental inefficiency. Because of its low cost, metallurgical treatment is considered a promising technology for low-cost production of high-purity Si. Researchers are constantly developing alternative methods to produce SOG-Si in ways that are more efficient, economically viable and environmentally friendly. The idea of purifying MG-Si using one or more additives has attracted increasing attention in recent years, and is considered a promising candidate for producing SOG-Si. There are three different methods under consideration. One is addition of large amount of additives to form a solvent, which has a lower melting point than pure Si. This is known as solvent refining. Examples of solvent systems include Si-Al Although solvent refining shows a significant advantage in energy consumption, further work is needed to offer low-cost recycling of the residual solvent after Si purification. If the impurities in MG-Si can be eliminated efficiently using small amounts of one or more additives (the second method mentioned above), the Si purification process will be more efficient and economical. Zr is employed as an impurity getter to enhance the removal of impurities from MG-Si as it has a strong affinity for a wide range of impurities. In addition, its segregation coefficient is extremely small (1.6 MG-Si (purity <99.411%) doped with After solidification refining, the samples were cut in half along their cross section. One half of each sample was ground into powder (<186 The concentrations of typical impurities (Fe, Al, Ca, B, P, Zr, Ti, V, Mn, Cu and Ni) in MG-Si before acid leaching are listed in The concentrations of impurities in the pulverized MG-Si sample after acid leaching are listed in Extraction of Fe using aqua regia was very limited because Fe silicides have higher chemical resistance and are more insoluble than other metal silicides in MG-Si Extraction of Al is also limited after HCl The leaching behavior of the precipitates in MG-Si before and after aqua regia and HF leaching was investigated using SEM and EDS, as shown in Zr addition results in a significant change in the precipitates at Si grain boundaries. According to our SEM images, Zr-rich phases are the dominant precipitates because Zr, instead of Fe, becomes the dominant impurity in MG-Si. A typical precipitate consisting of various phases was chosen and its microstructure and EDS mapping analysis are shown in The concentrations of impurities in refined Si after acid leaching are listed in The total concentration of impurities increased sharply after leaching with aqua regia (shown in   The changes in the concentrations of individual impurities before and after acid leaching are listed in Adding Zr to MG-Si can enhance impurity removal, especially removal of P and Al. P is a non-metallic impurity that cannot be removed easily because of its large segregation coefficient (0.35 at the melting point of Si) The presence of Zr in MG-Si cannot enhance B removal from MG-Si significantly. This would be beyond our expectation because our previous studies have shown that Zr can significantly enhance B removal from MG-Si using Si-Al as the refining solvent (melting point is 1273 As mentioned above, Si-Zr rich phases are the dominant precipitates at Si grain boundaries. According to the phase diagram of a Si-Zr binary system The efficient removal of an impurity, The chemical potential of Purification of MG-Si using Zr as an impurity getter was investigated in this study. Zr was chosen because it has strong affinity for a wide range of impurities. The leaching results show that the order of efficiency of the lixiviants for MG-Si with and without Zr addition, from highest to lowest, is HCl This study was sponsored by the