The thermodynamic behavior of lanthanides in molten salt systems is of significant scientific interest for the spent fuel reprocessing of Generation IV reactors. In this study, the apparent standard reduction potential (apparent potential) and activity coefficient of LaCl3 were determined in a molten salt solution of eutectic LiCl-KCl as a function of concentration of LaCl3. The effect of adding up to 1.40 mol % CsCl was also investigated. These properties were determined by measuring the open circuit potential of the La—La(III) redox couple in a high temperature molten salt electrochemical cell. Both the apparent potential and activity coefficient exhibited a strong dependence on concentration. A low concentration (0.69 mol %) of CsCl had no significant effect on the measured properties, while a higher concentration (1.40 mol %) of CsCl caused an increase (become more positive) in the apparent potential and activity coefficient at the higher range of LaCl3 concentrations.The behavior of lanthanides in molten salt systems is of great scientific curiosity for the research, development and commercialization of Generation IV reactor candidates. The pyrochemical treatment of spent nuclear fuel (pyroprocessing) also represents a promising alternative to the aqueous processing of oxide fuel The development of highly accurate, predictive thermodynamic models for the pyrochemical treatment of spent nuclear fuel is critical for many other aspects of commercialization; development of on-line sensors, assessment of corrosion processes, and advancement of salt treatment methods to enable waste minimization. For the development of such models, one of the most fundamental yet esoteric quantities of interest are species' activity coefficients. Unlike gases where the fugacity can be calculated from first principles by determining the partition functions, for liquids there presently exists no grand unifying theory to calculate the activities from first principles. Activities have to be determined empirically for a given mixture, and the results are unique to that mixture and its individual constituents. For pyrochemical reprocessing of spent nuclear fuels in molten salts, the empirical determination of activities is further complicated by the quagmire of esoteric thermodynamic formalisms. For LaCl Cesium is an important fission product that can accumulate in the molten salt electrolyte over time. Large amounts of accumulated cesium in the electrorefiner electrolyte can interfere with the separation process for the uranium and transuranics. This would require the either the eventual replacement of the electrolyte or the selective extraction of cesium from the salt. One of the proposed flow sheets for the further reduction in total waste is the Rare Earth Drawdown (REDD) process In this study, we present a thermodynamic framework for determining the activities of species in dissolved molten salts and further present experimentally determined activity coefficient of LaCl All the experiments were performed inside an ultra-dry argon atmosphere (≤0.1 ppm O Reagents used for this study were as follows: Ultra dry 99.99% LiCl-KCl (Sigma-Aldrich), 99.998% ultra-dry cesium chloride salt (Alfa Aesar), 99.99% ultra-dry lanthanum chloride salt (Alfa Aesar) and lanthanum metal rod (6.35 mm × 25 mm; 99.9% Alfa Aesar), silver chloride (99.997% metals basis; Alfa Aesar), silver wire (1 mm diameter, 99.9% metal basis; Alfa Aesar). Standards for ICP calibration were procured from Inorganic Ventures. A schematic of the experimental set-up is shown in The glassy carbon crucible is a conductor of electricity. To ensure that there were no mixed potential artifacts between the crucible and working electrode, we ensured that the working electrode was never in physical contact with the glassy carbon crucible. The working electrode basket was held suspended in the molten salt with the help of alligator clips, which were resting against the alumina lid used for the experiments. Additionally any mixed potential effects associated with the stainless steel basket and La metal rod, we believe should be negligent. Iron (the predominant constituent in stainless steel) is electrochemically nobler than lanthanum in molten LiCl-KCl eutectic salt In this section, the theoretical basis for determining the activity coefficient from an electrochemical cell will be presented. Consider a metal For Equation In Equation Re-arranging the terms, Equation In deriving Equation All of the terms on the left hand side (LHS) of Equation The right hand sides (RHS) of both Equations In Equation Converting potential to Gibbs free energies using the relationship Δ The term Δ Using Equation In general, we can define a change in Gibbs free energy of fusion (Δ If we are at temperatures below the melting point of the species, as is the case for LaCl In Equation In this section, we will look briefly at a general method to calculate the value of At The values of Δ For the above calculations, the value of In Equation In general, we observed that the OCP values recorded using the potentiostat were very stable to the third decimal place (which is the limit for the instrument) with fluctuations non-existent. Statistical analysis performed on a random sample of 17 independent OCP measurements yielded an average standard deviation of 0.120 mV in the measurements. Using that data set, within a 95% confidence interval the average margin of error for the OCP measurement was calculated to be 0.04 mV. These statistical calculations help us perform error propagation analysis through the entire calculations. All the potentials reported in this paper are reported versus a Cl  The calculation of activity coefficients from OCP measurements is an exponential mathematical relationship as described earlier. Even small errors in the measurements of the open circuit potentials will not only propagate through the calculations but indeed gets magnified as we go through our calculations. Hence we decided to smooth the open circuit potential measurements at this initial stage using a suitable function to prevent the further propagation and magnification of these errors. Matlab was used to generate this function, of the form The average difference between the measured and modeled values is observed to be about 2 mV with a standard deviation of 1.4 mV. Such small errors are well within the realm of experimental error associated with physical measurements. Using the values obtained, we can calculate the apparent potential and activity coefficients of LaCl The activity coefficient of LaCl Previously from reports in the literature, the value of The behavior of lanthanum chloride in the presence of Group I element Cs was also studied since it is a major fission product that accumulate in electrorefiner salt. For this study, CsCl was added to the salt at two concentrations– 0.69 mol % (Standard Deviation: 0.04 mol %) and 1.40 mol % (Standard Deviation: 0.04 mol %). We followed the same methodology for analysis as reported in the previous section including the fitting of OCP data to an interpolating function. The average difference between the experimentally measured values and modeled values was again found to be less than 2 mV.   It is important to consider if the effects of CsCl observed and reported here are statistically significant. For this purpose, the Student's t-test was employed. Analyzing the apparent potential data using the From the data presented above, it is evident that the activity coefficient of LaCl The concentration dependence of activity coefficients is most likely dependent on the local complexation structure of LaCl A graph of OCP vs. Ln( The effect of CsCl on the coordination chemistry of LaCl In molten salt systems, for LaCl This paper sheds new light on our experimental understanding of the behavior of lanthanum chloride in molten eutectic LiCl-KCl salt. Experimental studies are reported in this paper on the behavior of the activity coefficient and apparent potential of the LaCl In addition, we observed that the presence of an alkali metal like CsCl does seem to affect the aforementioned two properties. While a low concentration of CsCl does not seem to affect the LaCl This work was supported by the