In this first of a series of two papers, the effects of varying steam levels on the total steam flowrate are analyzed mathematically for the traditional parallel configuration as well as for the case of hot liquid reuse. It is demonstrated that in the case of parallel heat exchangers utilizing only latent heat, a minimum total steam flowrate is obtained by optimally selecting steam levels, but that in the case of hot liquid reuse, introducing multiple steam levels increases the minimum total steam flowrate attainable under those conditions. The flowrate attained utilizing hot liquid reuse, however, remains lower than when only utilizing latent heat. It is concluded that the lowest steam flowrate is attained using hot liquid reuse and only a single level of steam, but that the presence of additional steam levels resulting from turbines requires a more holistic approach to the synthesis of steam networks.Set of all heat exchangers, Set of all heat exchangers (alias), Set of all steam levels. Heat capacity of water [kJ/kg·̊C], Upper limit on reuse in Duty required by stream Upper limit on steam of level l in Limiting the utility inlet temperature for Limiting the utility outlet temperature for Regression parameter for level l [MW], Regression parameter for level l [-], Inlet flow to Outlet flow from Liquid reuse to Boiler return from Total steam supply of level l [kg/s], Specific isentropic enthalpy change between levels [MWh/t], Hot liquid to Additional heat exchanger splits permitted [-], Heat load of steam [MWh/t], Heat supplied to Heat supplied to Saturated liquid to Saturated steam supplied to Saturation temperature of level l [̊C], Total return to boiler [kg/s], Total steam supply [kg/s], Steam supplied to turbine of level l [kg/s], Shaft work produced by turbine l [MW]. Binary variable for use of liquid in Binary variable for use of steam in Latent heat of level l [kJ/kg].  In the first paper of this series, it is shown that the lowest total steam flowrate is attained with only a single steam level and hot liquid reuse, but that the need for shaft work necessitates additional steam levels. Existing models for steam flowrate minimization fail to take into account the effects the steam turbines and the temperatures of intermediate steam levels have on the minimum total steam flowrate, keeping the flowrate and operating temperatures of the fixed. An MINLP formulation is developed with a holistic approach to the steam system. Turbine flowrates and steam level temperatures are treated as variables, allowing the model to target the minimum total steam flowrate, whilst also synthesizing the heat exchanger network, placing the intermediate steam levels, and sizing the turbines. Application of this technique to a case study yielded a 28.6% reduction in total steam flowrate, compared to using only latent heat in a traditional parallel configuration. Pinch analysis has become a commonplace tool for optimizing chemical processing plants. The introduction of personal computers capable of solving large problems rapidly using mathematical programming has further boosted the popularity of pinch analysis. Although originally a method of minimizing the energy utility requirements of a plant, heat integration has been applied in related fields, such as cooling water system design (  On the other end of the spectrum, The use of mathematical programming to synthesis optimum designs in the chemical industry has also become a popular tool. In the first paper of this series it is shown that when minimizing the steam flowrate in a heat exchanger network using hot liquid reuse, the best option is to only use a single high pressure steam level as considered by At present, there is no known model that considers the interaction of the turbine and steam levels with the flowrate of steam through the heat exchanger network, as discussed in the first paper of this series. In this paper, a model is developed that takes into account these interactions, while simultaneously targeting the minimum steam flowrate and synthesizing the steam system. A case study is used to demonstrate the model and to compare it to previous results. The flowrate of steam to a heat exchanger network (HEN) can be minimized using pinch analysis by reusing hot liquid. This has been successfully demonstrated ( Given: a set of cold process streams, the fixed duties required by each cold process stream, the supply and target temperatures for each cold process stream, the minimum temperature difference for heat exchange, a shaft work target. Determine: the minimum total steam flowrate, the intermediate steam levels required to satisfy the energy demands of the heat exchangers and shaft work requirements, the network of heat exchangers that will fulfil this target. Although steam systems vary from plant to plant, they all follow common design practices, which can be generalized as in Depending on the plant in question, another portion of high pressure superheated steam is sent to a steam turbine. This might be due to the need for shaft work, or for deliberately creating another steam level, while gaining the full potential of the higher steam level. As shown in the first paper of this series, when the process stream to be heated does not call for a high temperature and only latent heat is used, then it is beneficial to use a lower steam level for its higher latent heat value. Thus, a portion of this intermediate steam is brought to saturation conditions through a let-down valve and passed to the HEN, while the remainder may be passed to a second turbine to create another steam level. Steam from each level is assigned to different sets of process streams based on the temperature requirements of each stream. After steam from various steam levels has condensed inside the heat exchangers, the condensate is collected for return to the boiler. Occasionally, there will be a buffer tank to reduce any fluctuations in flowrate caused by the control system. Since the condensate is at saturation point, when using certain types of pump (e.g., centrifugal) it must first be cooled before pumping it to the boiler to prevent cavitation in the pump. The condensate then passes through an economizer where it is preheated with waste heat before entering the boiler. The economizer and the boiler are shown as two separate entities in   The distinctive fingerprint of process integration on the HEN of a steam system is the presence of both serial and parallel connections. The need for this parallel-serial hybrid stems from the various sources of heat. As depicted in Fig. 3a, reuse of condensate for heating results in two distinct regimes within the HEN, viz. latent heat and sensible heat regimes. Whilst the latent heat regime entails only a parallel configuration of heat exchangers, the sensible heat regime involves a complex combination of parallel and series connections. Some heat exchangers may even need to be split between latent and sensible heat. The distinction between the simple parallel layout of latent heat using heat exchangers, and the more detailed layout of the sensible heat using heat exchangers is seen in Split heat exchangers occur whenever a particular process stream requires heat from two or more different heat sources. At this point, it is worth emphasizing the distinction between serial and parallel heating since this will feature prominently when using multiple steam levels. Consider the case of a single cold process stream being heated using two levels of saturated steam. In In order to develop a model with a holistic approach to both the HEN and the power block containing the turbines, one needs a method of estimating the performance of a turbine. Turbines, however, are intricate pieces of machinery, requiring very detailed simulation to achieve an accurate value of the power output. In process integration, the model describing the turbines needs to be simple enough for an optimization routine to handle efficiently, while still retaining enough accuracy to ensure that the resulting design is within the optimum range. The regression constants in Eqs. 2 and 3 are given in To calculate the specific isentropic enthalpy change of steam, where using the relation for latent heat discussed in the first paper of this series, and repeated in this paper as Eq. 22. The substitution of latent heat for the heat load of steam within the context of hot utilities is justified, since in many cases the latent heat does dominate the heat load. Noting that Eq. 4 is not perfectly accurate, and accepting the fact that this model is only to be used in a targeting procedure, one can see that such simplifications are acceptable and provide an easy to use model. The primary objective of this model is to minimize the total steam flowrate coming from the boiler, while simultaneously determining the intermediate steam levels required, the steam flowrates need by the turbines in order to meet shaft work demands, and synthesizing the HEN.  In The temperatures under consideration here are the limiting inlet and outlet temperatures of the hot utility, taking into account the minimum temperature difference for heat transfer. These are used to calculate upper limits on the flowrate of liquid and steam using Eqs. 6 and 7, respectively. The initial constraints in the model concern mass balances over various parts of the HEN. Eq. 8 states that the total supply of steam to the steam system is comprised of the flowrates of the individual steam levels, while Eq. 9 states the total return to the boiler is comprised of the return from the individual heat exchangers. Since mass is conserved, these two flowrates must be equal (Eq. 10). Eq. 11 stipulates that each steam level is made up of the flowrate of steam supplied at that level to each of the heat exchangers. Performing mass balances across individual heat exchangers, Eq. 12 represents the inlet stream to the heat exchanger, while Eq. 13 represents the outlet stream. Eq. 14 ensures that mass is conserved over each heat exchanger, while Eq. 15 states that each reuse stream is made up of saturated liquid and/or hot liquid. To prevent a heat exchanger from recycling hot liquid back to itself, Eq. 16 is implemented. A similar constraint can be implemented to prevent reuse between particular heat exchangers for reasons of safety, risk of contamination, or excessive distance between units. Eq. 17 states that that the total amount of saturated liquid being supplied to others by a particular heat exchanger cannot exceed the amount of saturated steam supplied to that heat exchanger, since it is the condensation of this steam that makes saturated liquid available. Likewise, Eq. 18 states that a heat exchanger cannot send more hot liquid for reuse than it is supplied with: Constraints must be used to ensure that the required duty is supplied to each heat exchanger. Eqs. 19 and 20 calculate, respectively the amount of latent and sensible heat supplied to each heat exchanger, while Eq. 21 ensures that the latent and sensible heat combined fulfils the heat demand of the heat exchanger. In Eq. 20, the outlet temperatures of the heat exchangers have been fixed at their limiting outlet temperatures as this ensures a minimum flowrate ( Since in this model the saturation temperatures of the intermediate steam levels are not fixed, but treated as variable, a method is required to calculate the latent heat of steam required in Eq. 19. Eq. 22 shows the correlation between the latent heat and saturation temperature used by In order to control which heat exchangers are using saturated steam or hot liquid, the binary variables The use of binary variables also gives control over how many heat exchangers must be split between sensible and latent heat. In order to prohibit any heat exchanger from being split, then the following constraint applies: To allow up to Turning to the power block, a mass balance can be performed over each turbine. Note that if there are Eq. 29 gives the shaft work produced by each turbine. Eq. 30 ensures that together, the turbines produce the required total amount of shaft work. If a particular piece of equipment requires a dedicated turbine, then an individual shaft work target can be set for that turbine in addition to Eq. 30. If more than one turbine is required between two specific steam levels, Eq. 29 must be modified to reflect each individual turbine. Again, since the saturation temperatures of the steam levels are not fixed, certain parameters in Eq. 29 cannot be predetermined. Therefore, the following constraints must be added to the model: the coefficients for Eqs. 32 and 33 can be found in Finally, the objective to minimize the total steam flowrate supplied by the boiler, is expressed in Eq. 34. Thus, along with the above constraints constitute a MINLP model, which includes the power block in the design of the steam system. In order to demonstrate this model and its benefits, an illustrative example is given. The problem is taken from a South African petrochemical plant, and is used by It can be seen that the network in A novel MINLP model has been developed to include the power block within the steam system. The model aims to minimize the total steam flowrate supplied by the boiler and simultaneously synthesize the resulting steam system, while fulfilling shaft work targets and the heat demands of cold streams. In an illustrative example, the new model produced a 28.6% reduction in total steam flowrate compared to the convention design method. This proves that the total steam flowrate can be reduced by holistically optimizing the steam levels and turbine flowrates with the steam system. Furthermore, the results confirm the observations made in the first paper of this series that introducing additional steam levels increases the minimum steam flowrate when utilizing hot liquid reuse.