The Fe-Cu Dominga deposit (2082 Mt at 23% Fe, 0.07% Cu), located in the Coastal Cordillera of northern Chile, is hosted by volcanic rocks of the Punta del Cobre Formation (131.5 ± 1.5 Ma zircon U-Pb) and into subvolcanic units (Dioritic Complex, 131.6 ± 1.0 Ma zircon U-Pb). The Fe-Cu mineralization is controlled by three structural systems which developed from a transtensional to a transpressional tectonic regime and can be divided into three groups: Early iron, Late iron and Early copper ores. Early iron ores are comprised of magnetite + pyrite + biotite breccia (1A ore), veins (1B ores), layers (1C ores) and disseminated ores (1D ores). Late iron ores are characterized by two groups of magnetite-apatite-actinolite hydrothermal breccias (2A, 2C ores) and syntaxial/antitaxial veins (2B, 2D, 2E ores). Early copper ores occur as syntaxial K-feldspar and quartz + epidote + chalcopyrite veins (3A ores), and as anhydrite + chalcopyrite-rich matrix breccia and veins (3B ores). This work presents a detailed mineral texture study of veins, hydrothermal breccias and disseminated iron-rich layers of the Dominga deposit which aims to determine fluid flow mechanisms associated with both iron and copper ores. The description of vein and breccia textural and internal structures was conducted in thin/polished sections perpendicular and parallel to the wall using optical and Scanning Electron Microscope techniques. In addition, two oriented surface samples were analyzed by computerized X-ray microtomography and numerical fluid flow simulations through the Lattice-Boltzmann method to obtain (3D) permeability anisotropy associated with early iron ores. Microtextures associated with Dominga iron and copper ores suggest that the main mass transfer fluid flow mechanism corresponds to advection (channelized and pervasive fluid flow), regardless of the tectonic regime. However, early copper ores have more complex mineral textures and internal structure due to the recurrence of crack-seal episodes. We propose that the various mineral textures and structures indicate changes in fluid flow direction over time, controlled by the permeability anisotropy of each tectonic regime. Results from numerical fluid flow simulations of early iron ore (1B) veins show a higher value of structural permeability in the vertical direction (kVz), which is consistent with a transtensional tectonic regime and the formation of vertical veins. Moreover, permeability related to 1C layered ore is higher in horizontal directions (kHx, kHy) rather than vertical (kVz) because of the natural permeability anisotropy of volcaniclastic rocks parallel to bedding. However, the kVz value suggests that the development of such layered ores also exhibits a degree of structural control at several length scales consistent with a transtensional regime. These results indicate that the occurrence of early iron ores as veins and layers may be controlled by both primary permeability anisotropy related to each lithology present at the Dominga Fe-Cu deposit and to the tectonic regime at the time. Finally, the Dominga Fe-Cu deposit attests to long lived hydrothermal activity with a transition from early fluids capable of precipitating iron ores under a transtensional system to later-stage fluids which precipitated copper ores under a transpressional regime that generated multiple crack and seal episodes.Faults zones are discontinuities within the Earth’s crust developed as a kinematic response to the stress field imposed on the rock mass (e.g. The relationship between the orientation and magnitude of the principal stress axes (σ However, the capacity of a fluid to flow within a natural system (e.g. ore deposit, geothermal reservoir) changes over time because plate motion and tectonic regimes are dynamic (e.g. An example of the interaction between tectonic setting, the development of fault zones and the transport and emplacement of Fe-Cu-Au-rich fluids has been observed in ore deposits of the Coastal Range of northern Chile, all of which exhibit evidence of structural control (e.g. A remarkable example of the importance of spatial and genetic affinity between fault zones and Fe-Cu mineralization within the AFS can be observed in the Dominga Fe-Cu deposit (2082 Mt at 23.3% Fe and 0.07% Cu). In Dominga, an early transtensional regime developed fault zones within which Fe-rich mineralizing-fluids emplaced, and a later transpressional regime allowed for the circulation of a Cu-bearing-fluid ( To address these issues, this work presents a detailed microstructure and mineral texture analyses of veins, hydrothermal breccias and disseminated Fe-rich layers of the Dominga deposit. Also, using the Lattice-Boltzmann method, we measured the permeability anisotropy related to magnetite veins in two representative types of rock found in the Dominga deposit (volcaniclastic and diorite rocks) as well as the permeability anisotropy related to disseminated Fe-rich layers in volcaniclastic rocks (primary permeability). Data were used to unravel how different mineral textures formed under their corresponding tectonic regimes. The Dominga iron deposit is located at the southern tip of the Cretaceous Chilean Iron Belt (CIB), a North-South belt located roughly between 26° and 30° S in the Coastal Cordillera of northern Chile ( Various works have suggested that the main fault system responsible for controlling the emplacement of ore deposits of the CIB is the AFS (e.g., Among the deposits that are spatially associated with the Atacama Fault System, the Cretaceous Dominga Fe-Cu deposit exhibits evidence of both a NE-ENE-striking dextral strike-slip fault system that controls the emplacement of Fe-mineralization and a later sinistral fault system (El Tofo Fault) parallel to the AFS, controlling the Fe ≪ Cu-mineralization ( The Dominga Fe-Cu deposit is emplaced into volcanic and volcaniclastic rocks of the Punta del Cobre Formation ( The Early Structural System corresponds to a N50°-70°E and -N80°-100°E-striking right-lateral strike slip duplex ( The El Tofo Structural System is a N20°-40°E-striking left-lateral strike slip fault zone ( Based on best-fit stress field analysis, Samples included fresh and unfractured host rock, damage zones and fault cores in order to be representative of the fault zone architecture and of the Fe-Cu paragenetic mineral assemblages (e.g. Microstructure and mineral observations are presented in terms of ore type and according to the mineralization stage to which they belong. Veins and breccia bodies were described based on geometry, internal structure (e.g. syntaxial, composite veins) and infill mineral texture (e.g. massive, blocky, elongate-blocky). The terminology of breccia and vein microstructure for gangue minerals (e.g. quartz) is based on the classification of Microstructural and texture observations were obtained by using an optical transmitted and reflected polarized light microscope and Scanning Electron Microscope with Energy-Dispersive X-ray spectroscopy (SEM-EDX) and cathodoluminescence (CL) (Quanta 250, SEM-CL laboratory of the CEGA-Department of Geology, Universidad de Chile). Doubly-polished thin sections (31) were prepared for petrography, texture and crystal morphology observations on transparent and opaque minerals. To visualize the 3D shape of crystals, thin sections of samples obtained from drill holes were made horizontal and vertical to the vein wall, as the state of stress is strike-slip dominated. Considering mineral assemblages, microstructural observations were conducted on nine samples from the early Fe Stage, eight samples from the late Fe Stage, and eight from the early Cu Stage (Stages according to For this study, we focused on representative textures of veins and hydrothermal breccias of the early and late Fe mineralization stage, as well as the early Cu mineralization stage of the Dominga deposit. The late Cu mineralization stage was not considered for this study due to the low volume of ore. In order to measure three-dimensional paleo-permeability anisotropy of the Early Fe mineralization stage (one episode of fracturing), numerical fluid flow simulations were carried out through the Lattice-Boltzmann Method (LBM) according to Three dimensional structural data were obtained through X-ray micro-computed tomography (microCT). Based on X-ray attenuation, microCT images distinguish differences in the density of the components of rock samples, which are shown in grayscale (e.g. matrix vs. ore minerals; For an accurate image acquisition, the calibration for dense minerals (e.g. magnetite, pyrite) was 115 KV, 140 µA, exposure time 350 ms, copper filter 0.5 mm thin and pixel size 8.10 µm at the GZB, and 100 KV, 100 µA, exposure time 2000 ms, aluminum filter 0.1 mm thin and pixel size 5.46 µm at the PUC. We analyzed two oriented surface samples collected at South Dominga: sample DG0102 (vein hosted in diorite and disseminated magnetite, The basic concept of LBM corresponds to particles which propagate (e.g. “crush”) to a neighboring lattice point, depending on their velocity and initial position, and collide with each other, in such a way that momentum is conserved, which means that on a binary (segmented) image, the particles will propagate only when they find a neighbor with the same value (value 1, otherwise 0). Conversely, if the particle propagates into a neighbor with value zero (0) the particle will rebound and will propagate in another direction. For this purpose, we used the D3Q19 scheme for three-dimensional Lattice Boltzmann simulations ( The LBM is based on Darcy’s law. Based on the paragenetic mineral assemblages identified by Early iron ores crop out throughout Dominga and have been additionally identified down to 450 m depth with a general envelope up to 30 m thick, parallel to the bedding in volcano-volcaniclastic rocks and parallel to fault cores in diorite. The early iron ores are composed of magnetite, pyrite and biotite as breccias (type 1A, Type 1A ores represent <3.5 m thick breccia bodies present at the borders of foliated, subvertical ultracataclasite zones oriented N30-50E ( Late iron ores only crop out in South Dominga but have been identified throughout the deposit at depths between 120 and 200 m. These ores share a common mineral assemblage including magnetite, pyrite and actinolite. Accessory mineral assemblages, spatial distribution and infill mineral textures can be used to distinguish two groups of late iron ores. The first group of late iron ores, types 2A and 2B, has only been found in South Dominga and is represented by breccia bodies and veins ( The second group of late iron ores, types 2C, 2D and 2E, is restricted to North Dominga ( Early copper ores crosscut all previous Fe-rich ores ( The first group of early copper ores, type 3A ores, are emplaced both in South and North Dominga as breccia bodies (<5 m thick) and veins (<3 cm thick). Their mineral assemblage includes quartz, pyrite and chalcopyrite as main minerals with potassic feldspar, allanite, epidote, magnetite and tourmaline as accessories. Unlike ore types from other stages, veins are emplaced with no clear spatial relation to breccia bodies. Type 3A breccia is composed of fine-grained to coarse subhedral pyrite, fine-grained anhedral magnetite, and fine-grained blocky quartz. Type 3A vein ores have complex inner structures which are not present in 3A breccias. These include a combination of three different quartz textures ( The second group of early copper ores, type 3B, occurs only in South Dominga and is represented by both breccia bodies (<5 m thick) and veins (2–5 mm thick) of unknown orientation. These ores form zones up to 60 m thick, and they are emplaced deeper in the deposit (from 300 to 950 m) in comparison with 3A. These ores are characterized by their assemblage of anhydrite, gypsum, chalcopyrite and accessory potassic feldspar, magnetite, allanite, tourmaline and molybdenite. Ore type 3B (breccia and veins) are composed of fine to medium-grained euhedral anhydrite (Figs. The bulk of ores in Dominga belongs to the early iron ore stage (1A to 1D), thus identifying permeability in associated structures and lithologies (e.g. diorite and volcaniclastic) is of paramount importance to understand how metallogenetic processes generated this resource. An important parameter that needs to be addressed in this effort is how fluids percolated through primary and/or structural permeability during the creation of these ores. In order to determine the role of rock permeability and consequent fluid migration on the genesis of Dominga early iron ore types, we measured the paleo-permeability anisotropy of one sample of 1C layered ores, as a proxy for primary permeability, as well as samples of two 1B veins, which represent structural permeability. Considering that the type of permeability might have a role in the mechanisms of ore precipitation, by for example controlling the abundance of ore minerals in relation to a given type of permeability, we measured the proportional abundance of ore types in a representative segment of Dominga associated with the Early Structural System. Sample DG0206 is a dominantly 1C ore hosted in volcaniclastic rock with ~15% disseminated ore minerals as layers and 3.7% as vein ore minerals. Separate fluid flow simulations were performed in three directions (parallel to the principal stress axis σ Sample DG0102 is a dominantly 1D ore hosted in diorite with ~4% disseminated ore minerals and ~1.5% vein ore minerals. Fluid flow simulations of this sample were performed in relation to the vein and show that the highest value of permeability is parallel to the vertical direction (parallel to σ Microstructural observations and numerical fluid flow simulations evidence a causal relationship between tectonic (structural systems), mineralization emplacement (Fe-Cu bearing-fluids migration) and host rock permeability. The interaction of these factors determines the occurrence of ores through mass transfer mechanisms that follow the primary and structural permeability of host rocks (e.g. Based on kinematic data and the spatial relationships between faults, Additional evidence of transtension and mineralizing-fluid flow is given by massive pyrite filled dilational jogs within 1A breccia ( The multiple geometries of early iron ores can be explained by the structural plumbing system and the interaction between primary and structural permeability of diorites and volcaniclastic rocks rather than by multiple episodes of Fe-rich fluid migration. Under a transtensional regime, fractures likely develop maximum permeability anisotropy in the vertical direction (following σ  According to Fractures and breccias generated in this late iron episode created secondary permeability through which fluids could flow. This can be observed in the spatial and cross-cutting relationship between fault cores, represented by (ultra)cataclasites, as well as in damage zones which host late iron ore breccias 2A and 2C, distal 2B and 2D veins and marginal 2E veins. In south Dominga, 2A breccia and 2B veins that share common textures, for example, the presence of ilmenite lamellae exsolution in magnetite of 2A breccia (Figs. In contrast, in north Dominga, quartz with doubly-terminated shape (e.g. 2D vein, Similar paragenetic mineral assemblage, spatial orientation and distribution of 2A-B ores in relation to 2C-E ores are interpreted as different parts of the same episode of fluid flow. Abundant Ilmenite lamellae exsolutions texture found on magnetite from the late iron ores (2A breccia and 2B veins) support the hypothesis of a hydrothermal origin and establish a crystallization temperature higher than 600 °C ( Additionally, magnetite exhibiting Ilmenite lamellae exsolution texture is described at some Iron Oxide Apatite deposits within the CIB, for example, El Romeral, Los Colorados, Cerro Negro Norte, and Carmen ( We argue that fluid flow mechanisms involved in the precipitation of early and late iron ores can be considered as evidence of different processes related to fluid migration and conditions of mineralizing-fluids during the main activity and abandonment of the Early Structural System, related to the change in the orientation of the principal stress axes (σ According to The abandonment of the Early Structural System and the early stages of the El Tofo Structural System resulted in fluid entrapment, evidenced by the development of granophyric texture ( In fault zones, the high permeability direction is developed parallel to the intermediate principal stress axis (σ The emplacement of 3B breccia during the main activity of the El Tofo Structural System may indicate a progressive decrease in the flow rate towards the center of the breccia body (3B). This is evidenced by gradation in the size of blocky anhydrite crystals from coarse-grained on the wall to fine-grained towards the center. This suggest that anhydrite and chalcopyrite initially precipitated under a high-opening rate from a high-flow advective flow (  Ores at the Dominga Fe-Cu deposit occur as breccia bodies, veins, and disseminated-rich layers developed under multiple tectonic regimes. Fluid flow mechanisms related to each episode of fluid migration and ore deposition involve local variations on the stress condition and opening mode of fracture, associated with the spatial distribution of early iron ores concerning the architecture of the Early Structural System (e.g. proximal/distal to the fault core or damage zone). Internal structure and the development of different mineral textures depend on the type of flow-mass transfer (e.g. advection), fluid flow direction (accordingly to the tectonic regime), the number of episodes of fracturing/sealing (e.g. fault zone reactivations), and local variations in the condition of the fluid (e.g. pressure drop). Each ore type shows different combinations of fluid flow mechanisms. Geometry, mineral texture and numerical fluid flow simulation on Early iron ores argue for fluid flow mechanisms related to: fault-valve, suction-pump, and advective-pervasive flow. Late iron ores exhibit evidence of fluid flow mechanisms related to: fault-valve, advection, local diffusional fluid flow and temperature gradient from south (>600 °C) to north. Early copper ores exhibit evidence of fluid flow mechanisms related to: fault-valve, advection and crack-seal mechanisms. These variations of flow mechanisms indicate that they can operate at the same time and that they are independent of the tectonic regime. Numerical fluid flow simulations support a genetic relationship between Early iron ores; permeability anisotropy argues for a lithological and structural control on their occurrence. In dioritic rocks, the emplacement of iron ore zones was controlled by the development of 1B veins, which would have acted as fluid feeders of Fe-rich advective flow related to tensile and/or hybrid fractures (tension + shear). Whereas in volcaniclastic rocks, the permeability anisotropy of 1B veins and 1C layers is compatible with that of a transtensional regime. These ore type are controlled by the primary permeability but with a structural permeability component that allows 1B veins to occur between layers at several length scales. Permeability anisotropy and ore modal abundance suggest that primary permeability of stratified rocks is a more favorable site for ore precipitation, and that fractures are a more efficient plumbing system. The optimal window for Iron mineralization is controlled by the interaction of primary and structural permeability in volcaniclastic rocks, both associated with advective Fe bearing-fluids. Therefore, volcaniclastic rocks gather both permeability conditions to host economic Fe-Cu deposits. However, diorite fracture-hosted ores are a useful target for exploring Fe-Cu. The spatial distribution and mineral texture of ore types indicate that ore-related fluid flows at the Dominga Fe-Cu deposit were highly heterogeneous even in the same structural element and/or geometric arrangement. This is observed in 3A syntaxial veins, which, although they were developed under a single tectonic regime, show textural elements such as elongate-blocky quartz on the vein wall, elongate-blocky quartz and blocky quartz at the center of vein, textures which are compatible with changes in the fluid flow direction. The main difference between iron and copper ores fluid flow mechanisms is the greater number of episodes of fluid migration associated with early copper ores and fault reactivation when compared to the Fe stage. 3A ore type at the Dominga Fe-Cu deposit suggest a complex history of mineral growth and microstructural evolution representing the transition and reuse of previous structural elements. Textures and mineral assemblages indicate that the main fluid flow mechanism corresponds to advective fluid flow through crack-seal episodes, suggesting different conditions during mineral precipitation, from aqueous fluid (on early iron-copper stages) to (possibly) episodic boiling (on late iron ores). The development of different textures related to composite veins could represent at least two fluid flow directions, and therefore, textures likely recorded episodes of fault reactivations and fluid propagation under different tectonic settings. This work is a contribution to the Millennium Nucleus for Metal Tracing Along Subduction NC 130065. We would like to thank Andes Iron SpA and Iván Garrido for granting access to the Dominga deposit and sampling. The authors would like to thanks to Dr. Huayong Chen and anonymous reviewers. Their comments and suggestions helped to highly improve the quality of the manuscript. We acknowledge the International Geothermal Centre (GZB) (Bochum, Germany) for facilities and technical assistance of the Geothechnologies and Seismic Observation Laboratories and Fondequip project EQM 130028 (microCT-PUC). Supplementary data to this article can be found online at The following are the Supplementary data to this article:  