Iron aluminide alloys containing both ferrous as well as non-ferrous (aluminum) components form unique materials from machining theory and practice point of view. While the cutting tool materials specifically required for their machining are not available, the mechanism of machining of such materials containing ferrous and non-ferrous components has not been adequately investigated. This paper deals with fundamental aspects of chip formation and tool-life in machining of an iron aluminide, Fe3Al alloy. Microstructural analysis of chips shows that the interaction of chip and tool in the secondary deformation zone, dependent upon the cutting speed mainly determines the mechanism of chip formation. Results of tool-life testing indicate that thermal softening of tool point combined with abrasion is the predominant tool failure mechanism.Iron aluminide alloy based Fe It is certain that to convert aluminides into engineering or industrial products, they need some extent of machining. During machining they have unique implications from the machining theory as well as practice point of view. Since they contain ferrous as well non-ferrous components, there are no specific cutting tools for their machining, as most of the cutting tools are for either ferrous or non-ferrous materials. Secondly, the mechanisms of machining of ferrous as well as non-ferrous materials are known to be different The iron aluminide alloy required for this work was produced by air induction melting (AIM) followed by electro-slag refining (ESR). A magnesia-lined, medium frequency (2.6 Chemical analysis was done by inductively coupled plasma atomic emission spectroscopy (ICP-AES). Tensile testing was carried out as per ASTM E8M standard on a BiSS 50 A pipe of 63 Chips produced during orthogonal machining were mounted in epoxy molds and polished on the polishing papers and polishing cloth so as to investigate longitudinal cross-sections of chips. The chip samples thus prepared were etched using a solution of 33%HNO Tool-life tests were carried out as per ISO specification no. ISO 3685E (1977) on a lathe using uncoated as well as coated carbide inserts. The uncoated carbide inserts were of TTR grade (equivalent to ISO P30-P40) and coated carbide inserts were of TK35 grade (equivalent to ISO P30-P40). Details of cutting tool and other experimental specifications are shown in Microstructure of the aluminide alloy prepared for this work containing two phases viz. Fe Micrographs of typical chips produced in orthogonal machining under varying cutting conditions are shown in Chip formation begins with an initiation of a minor crack from the chip outer surface that results in imparting a saw tooth profile (STP) to the outer surface of the chip. Geometry of the STP and its prominence depends primarily on the cutting speed. At lower cutting speeds of 14.8 and 22.6 Profile of the inner surface of chip also changes with the cutting speed. Chips produced at lower cutting speeds of 14.8 and 22.6 The extent of deformation or elongation of grains and their alignment with the direction of cutting also varies with the cutting speed. In chips at lower cutting speed, grains appear to get severely stretched or elongated in the direction of shear. The grains also appear to lie along a curvilinear path of very large radius (refer A closer observation of micrograph in Thus, it can be concluded that the mechanism of machining differs mainly based on the cutting speed as two distinct chip formation mechanisms appear to be operating in these materials at higher as well as lower cutting speeds. Characteristic features of the chip formation mechanism at lower cutting speed are (see Minor crack initiation on the chip outer surface. Inhibition of the minor fracture mainly by grain boundaries. Generation of a triangular-shaped chip segment. Initiation of gross secondary fracture on the chip inner surface. At the lower cutting speeds, a minor fracture is initiated on the outer surface of the chip where the normal stress on the shear plane is very low Characteristic features of the chip formation mechanism at higher cutting speed are (see Major crack initiation at the chip outer surface. Generation of a trapezoid-shaped chip segment. Severe deformation of grains and their alignment along the shear direction. Intense secondary shear along the chip inner surface and formation of a white band. A major crack is initiated at the chip outer surface and propagates to a larger depth towards the tool nose at higher cutting speeds. This could be due to higher void formation facilitating the propagation of gross fracture at higher cutting speeds. Other grains in the primary deformation zone get stretched to an extent that they break and elongated globules of these grains along with voids (see Along the chip–tool interface, the temperature is comparatively higher while machining at higher cutting speeds. It results in a reduced restrain (sticking) on chip material along the tool face leading to the formation of trapezoidal chip segments. Although, the gradient in chip velocity along the thickness of chip is lower as compared to that of machining at lower cutting speeds, it is sufficient to cause minor sticking of chip on the tool face. Due to the poor heat conductivity of the aluminide alloy Tool-life testing was carried out as per the details given in the experimental procedure using coated as well as uncoated carbide tools. It is known that as the depth of cut increases, the normal pressure on the tool point increases if the thermal conductivity of wok material is not sufficient to carry the heat generated during machining, heat concentrates at the tool point leading to the tool failure by accelerated thermal abrasion and plastic deformation. The thermal conductivity of Fe The cutting performance of an uncoated carbide tool (grade TTR) at a depth of cut of 0.7  Interactions at the chip–tool interface dependent upon the cutting speed play a vital role in determining the mechanism of chip formation in aluminide alloys. Characteristic features of chip formation mechanism at the lower cutting speed are—inhibition of minor fracture by grain boundaries, formation of triangular-shaped chip segments due to high restraint on the chip–tool interface and gross secondary fracture. At higher cutting speed the mechanism of chip formation involves—generation of trapezoid-shaped chip segments due to less restraint at chip–tool interface, alignment grains in the direction of shear and intense secondary shear along the chip inner surface leading to the formation of a white band. Very high values of Taylor’s exponents indicate that the cutting speed is not a dominant factor influencing tool-life of coated as well as uncoated carbide tools. Therefore, thermal softening of aluminides due to their poor thermal conductivity combined with abrasion could be the main reasons for accelerated flank wear during machining.