 Postoperative days (PODs) 1-7: pendulums and passive range of motion (PROM) only flexion/ extension (FE) in scapular plane 90-100 degrees; external rotation (ER) at side 30 degrees. POD 14: supine ER with stick (start ≤  Gentle stretching. Pulley-assisted elevation Isometric strengthening (rotator cuff [RTC] and deltoid)  Rubber band exercises Light weights  Definitions Surgical Purpose Treatment Goals Nonoperative Indications/Precautions for Therapy Nonoperative Therapy Nonoperative Complications Operative Indications/Precautions for Therapy Postoperative Therapy Postoperative Complications/Considerations Evaluation Timeline  Definitions Treatment Purpose Treatment Goals Indications Precautions/Contraindications Nonoperative Therapy Nonoperative Complications Operative Indications/Precautions for Therapy Postoperative Therapy Postoperative Complications/Considerations Evaluation Guidelines Outcomes  Outcomes  Outcomes  Outcomes   Proximal Humeral Fractures Humeral Shaft Fractures  In 80% of all proximal humeral fractures, there is no significant displacement of the fracture and the injury can be treated nonsurgically. Proximal humeral fractures in younger age groups are usually secondary to high-velocity injury and typically do not fall into the category of minimally displaced fractures. In a study by Bell et al. For the purpose of this chapter, a therapeutic treatment protocol has been designed for the treatment of minimally displaced fractures and those fractures stabilized by surgery, permitting early rehabilitation. Rehabilitation should be initiated early for instruction in control of distal edema and stiffness, as well as increased mobility of the stabilized fractured shoulder. Multiple studies suggest early mobilization within 3 days to 1 week results in reduced pain, increased motion, and increased functional use of the affected extremity.   Close communication with the patient's physician provides the therapist with the necessary information to advance the patient's program. The The The Types of humeral fractures vary greatly, complicating medical management. Several classification systems have been developed to try to provide guidelines for diagnosis and treatment. Neer’s Surgeons typically refer to proximal humerus fractures as one-part, two-part, three-part, or four-part, depending on how many of the major segments are displaced. Fractures of the proximal humerus have varying degrees of severity. Those that have a sufficient degree of displacement or comminution may require open reduction and internal fixation (ORIF), proximal humerus replacement (hemiarthroplasty), or total shoulder replacement (reverse arthroplasty). In each case, the surgical purpose is to restore glenohumeral joint integrity and rotator cuff (RTC) function. Ideally, fixation of the bone fragments will be constructed with sufficient strength to allow shoulder joint motion during the bone healing phase. If the humeral head displacement is severe or the vascular integrity of the joint surface is deemed irreparably damaged, then a humeral head prosthesis (hemiarthroplasty) may be inserted. Healing of the tuberosities is critical for hemiarthroplasty function. In elderly patients with comminuted fractures and limited potential for tuberosity healing, a reverse shoulder replacement may be the most reliable means of restoring shoulder function.  Promote maximal pain-free shoulder passive range of motion (PROM) and function. Promote normal distal range of motion (ROM) and function.  Indications Nondisplaced/minimally displaced humeral fractures that are stable Precautions Greater tuberosity fractures require special consideration secondary to the attachment of the RTC muscles and the potential for displacement of the greater tuberosity fragment, especially with internal and external rotation. Other considerations include the possibility of an RTC tear and the potential for impingement of the greater tuberosity against the acromion and posterior glenoid. Greater tuberosity fractures, if not surgically reduced, may be immobilized longer than other nondisplaced or minimally displaced proximal humeral fractures. Associated soft tissue injuries (e.g., ligaments, tendons)  Day 1 Use of a sling for proximal stabilization is usually for 4 to 6 weeks. The patient is instructed to wear the sling at all times until the physician gives permission for its removal for hygiene and exercise. Initiate pain management as needed through the use of modalities. The patient may be instructed in the frequent use of ice at home. Electrical stimulation Wrist and hand ROM exercise and edema reduction techniques are essential to prevent distal stiffness. Patients with significant distal edema may benefit from an edema glove or Kinesio taping. Days 3 to 7 Initiate pendulum exercises, typically on day 7: may wait until week 2 for greater tuberosity fractures (see Incorporate elbow and forearm ROM with other distal ROM exercises, and continue edema control. Initiate active scapulothoracic stabilization exercises in sitting position (see Days 7 to 14 (2 to 3 weeks may be required for greater tuberosity fractures) Initiate supine shoulder PROM and active-assisted range of motion (AAROM) including elevation in the frontal plane, the plane of the scapula, and external rotation. Initially in the first 1 to 2 weeks forward elevation may be limited to 90 degrees and external rotation limited to 20 degrees. These exercises may be performed in a supine position with the therapist supporting and protecting the injured shoulder. The patient may be taught to use a dowel or the opposite extremity to perform these exercises at home after careful instruction by the therapist. Encourage active range of motion (AROM) and AAROM at the elbow, forearm, wrist, and hand. For patients who cannot tolerate the supine position, initiate self-passive exercise positions (see Weeks 2 to 3 Progress supine passive and AAROM flexion and scaption and continued protected limited external rotation to approximately 30 degrees. Initiate gentle submaximal AAROM place and hold at 90 degrees and limited arc motion at approximately 70 to 90 degrees of flexion (see Progress from ROM in a gravity-eliminated position in supine to PROM and AAROM while sitting or standing with the arm supported on a tabletop. Continue to progress scapulothoracic stabilization exercises; may use light submax isometric manual strengthening techniques (see Weeks 3 to 4 Sling may be weaned according to physician orders. The sling may be worn for 4 to 6 weeks for pain Progress shoulder PROM, adding AAROM in extension, and internal rotation (with the exception of greater tuberosity fractures due to possible fracture instability). Initiate pulleys for forward elevation. The patient may benefit from the use of pulleys in the home exercise program. Care must be taken to monitor the patient's response to pulley use. Pain with overhead stretching, possibly caused by impingement, should be avoided. Weeks 4 to 6 Initiate place and hold AROM in supine position starting with 90 degrees flexion and progress to limited arc of motion as tolerated/per physician’s orders. Closed-chain exercises may also be incorporated to encourage coordination between shoulder and scapulothoracic musculature (see Progress from tabletop activities with the arm supported by the table while performing active reaching activities (e.g., placing pegs in a pegboard, dusting), to less support (i.e., using an inclined board). Activities may begin at elbow height and progress to working at shoulder height. Weeks 6 to 8 Add RTC, deltoid, and biceps light sub-isometric strengthening. Initiate light functional strengthening and endurance-building activities (reaching into cabinet, incline board activities, overhead dressing and bathing activities of daily living [ADLs]). Weeks 8 to 10 Continue with PROM, AROM, and AAROM exercises to increase shoulder mobility and function; regain pain-free shoulder ROM. Weeks 10 to 12 Initiate shoulder isotonic strengthening using a Thera-Band in proprioceptive neuromuscular facilitation (PNF) patterns; a Baltimore Therapeutic Equipment (BTE) Work Simulator may be used for preparation for return to functional tasks. Strengthen through the pain-free range. Week 12 Continue with stretching ROM exercises to regain terminal end ROM. Continue to progress strengthening through the pain-free range.  Unresolved pain Distal edema and stiffness Delayed union Nonunion Degenerative arthritis Adhesive capsulitis Undiagnosed RTC tears Shoulder tendonitis/impingement Avascular necrosis Myositis ossificans Neurovascular injuries Complex regional pain syndrome (CRPS)  Indications: humeral fractures stabilized through surgical reduction Precautions Infection Associated soft tissue injuries or repairs The progression of postsurgical repairs (i.e., internal fixation, ORIF) of proximal humeral fractures follows the same treatment guidelines as for nonoperative treatment but may progress at a faster rate because of the stabilization of the fracture provided by the surgery. Following surgical fixation for a proximal humerus fracture, some authors advocate starting pendulum exercises and PROM up to 60 to 90 degrees at postoperative days 1 to 3. The patient begins AA/AROM between 4 and 6 weeks postoperatively and progresses to strengthening at 6 weeks. Elkowitz and colleagues Therapist knowledge of the surgical procedure performed and the postsurgical precautions is absolutely necessary for the safe and successful treatment of these fractures. Communication with the surgeon is of paramount importance. The therapist must consult with the surgeon about fracture stabilization and any soft tissue repairs before proceeding with the rehabilitation program.  Infection Hardware failure Failure to stabilize the fracture Soft tissue repairs All nonoperative complications Iatrogenic injuries  Nonoperative. Day 1 Wrist and hand AROM and PROM Distal edema Sensory screening Pain assessment ADL assessment Days 3 to 7: evaluate elbow, forearm, and hand AROM and PROM (specific check for nerve compromise) Weeks 2 to 3: evaluate passive shoulder flexion, scaption and external rotation (passive elevation may be initially limited to 90 degrees and rotation testing may be delayed for 4 to 6 weeks in the case of greater tuberosity fractures) Week 4: evaluate passive shoulder extension and internal rotation, shoulder A/AROM in gravity eliminated positions Week 6: evaluate shoulder AROM (may initially be tested in supine position and sidelying with gravity diminished positions) Weeks 12 to 14: evaluate submaximal strength Operative: as above, but with variations according to the type of surgical procedure performed (e.g., soft tissue repair). Humeral shaft fractures comprise approximately 1% to 3% of all fractures. Most humeral shaft fractures are treated nonoperatively and respond well to conservative treatment. A hinged-elbow humeral shaft fracture brace may be indicated for shaft fractures that extend more distally toward the elbow (this is decided by the physician). The expected timeline for clinical union of conservatively treated humeral shaft fractures is typically between 8 and 12 weeks. Surgical management may be indicated in certain scenarios including that of injuries involving polytrauma and failure of the nonsurgical treatment. Indications for surgical treatment may also include types 2 and 3 Gustilo open fractures, ipsilateral forearm fractures, secondary radial nerve palsy, serious vascular compromise, bilateral shaft fractures, segmental fractures, fractures with axial distraction, pathologic fractures, and delayed or nonunion.  To return normal shoulder and elbow ROM while protecting and allowing the fracture to heal  To restore full pain-free shoulder and elbow AROM To restore normal shoulder strength and function To promote full distal ROM and strength To return to all previous ADL functions Midshaft fractures that can be managed conservatively with fracture bracing and do not require surgical intervention for stabilization of the fracture. Indications for fracture bracing include closed, spiral, or oblique fractures in the middle or proximal third of the humerus. Patient compliance is essential.  Fracture bracing is contraindicated with severe associated soft tissue injuries (e.g., neurologic or vascular injuries, open wounds). Fracture bracing is also contraindicated in unreliable patients and in patients who are bedridden and unable to assume the gravity-dependent positions of the affected upper extremity required for acceptable alignment during healing. Obesity is a relative contraindication secondary to the difficulty of providing enough conformity of the brace for soft tissue compression of the fracture. Weight bearing, elevation, and active rotation of the affected extremity are commonly contraindicated early in the treatment program unless the fracture was stabilized surgically. Multitrauma patients who require upper extremity use for lower extremity weight bearing with crutches or a walker may require surgical intervention for early weight bearing on the injured shoulder. The decision to allow weight bearing is made by the physician. Tingstad and associates  Days 5 to 7 A custom or prefabricated fracture brace with a collar and cuff, or sling, is used for fracture stabilization/support. Fractures that are more proximal may need to include a shoulder cap design to include a deltoid flare. Sarmiento and colleagues Days 7 to 14 Instruct the patient in pendulum exercises to be performed at home, in the brace, 5 to 10 repetitions, 4 to 6 times a day (see Pain management as needed may include electrical modalities with cold compression for pain and edema control. Instruct the patient in the positioning of the injured extremity during sleep (in approximately 45 degrees scaption with a small pillow placed between the sling and trunk and a pillow support under the entire upper extremity). Initiate AROM and isometric strengthening of the scapulothoracic stabilizers (see Instruct the patient in a home program of distal AROM. Initiate gentle AAROM at the elbow to be performed 4 to 6 times a day initially. Initially do not place additional stress on the fracture; once permitted by physician, pending increased fracture union, may progress to AROM of elbow. Instruct the patient in one-handed ADLs and the use of adaptive equipment as needed. Weeks 2 to 3 Continue pendulum exercises. Initiate gentle AAROM to the shoulder in a standing or sitting position, within the patient's pain tolerance. No shoulder abduction or elevation above 60 degrees should be performed until there is clinical and radiologic evidence of union (this is determined by the physician). Weeks 4 to 6 Continue with the exercises described previously. Perform shoulder AAROM in supine and side-lying positions. Initiate AROM of the shoulder and elbow. Progress from gravity-eliminated positions in supine (e.g., place-hold performed in 90 degrees shoulder flexion) through gentle movement away from the 90 degrees position with gravity eliminated into gravity-challenged positions by gradually increasing the arc of motion or widening circles. Progress to isometric strengthening for supination/pronation strength. Progress to gentle active scapular protraction and retraction exercises in supine with the therapist supporting the shoulder in approximately 90 degrees flexion. Weeks 6 to 8 Continue with the exercises previously described. Initiate shoulder extension and gentle internal rotation exercises, and progress shoulder abduction/scaption ROM to pain tolerance. Initiate gentle isometric exercises to the elbow for flexion and extension. Light functional use of the extremity at the side and supported on a table top is typically permitted at this time. The fracture brace may be discontinued at 6 to 8 weeks, depending on fracture healing (decided by the physician). Weeks 8 to 10 Stretching to the involved shoulder and elbow if full PROM is not present and the fracture is stable. Care is taken at the elbow to not become overzealous with PROM of this joint, secondary to problems reported with heterotopic ossification. Elbows may respond well to gentle contraction/relaxation exercises to regain motion. Light use in self-care ADLs is encouraged. Initiate gentle submaximal isometric shoulder strengthening. Weeks 10 to 12 Full weight bearing and light lifting are usually permitted (progress as permitted by the physician). Isotonic shoulder and elbow strengthening using Thera-Band, beginning with strengthening at the side and progressing into PNF patterns and full functional ROM (see Return to normal upper extremity use in most ADLs. Return to strenuous use or use in sports activities may take longer and should be approved by the physician.  Delayed union or nonunion Unresolved radial nerve palsy Adhesive capsulitis  Indications: humeral shaft fractures stabilized through surgical reduction Precautions Infection Associated soft tissue injuries (including neurovascular and nerve injuries) Radial nerve palsy Specific surgical precautions Intramedullary nails Antegrade insertion may result in proximal nail migration into the subacromial space, causing shoulder impingement, damage to the RTC, and/or adhesive capsulitis. Retrograde insertion may result in distal nail migration, leading to blocked elbow extension, heterotopic ossification, and/or flexion contractures. External fixation Shoulder and elbow dysfunction secondary to the tethering of the deltoid and triceps with pin fixation Pin tract infections Plating Iatrogenic nerve palsy Infection with open fixation Once the fracture is stabilized, therapy may follow an advanced nonoperative treatment protocol. Depending on the type of surgical procedure performed, there are some special therapy considerations. Close communication with the surgeon is essential. Interlocked intramedullary nails (frequently used in patients with osteopenic bones) Note: Retrograde nailing may be associated with elbow pain and loss of elbow extension. Pendulums for the shoulder and elbow extension and gentle passive elbow flexion are recommended. Antegrade nailing is frequently associated with shoulder pain and loss of shoulder ROM. Early A/AAROM elbow and shoulder pendulums are recommended. Week 1: pendulum, AROM, and AAROM exercises Weight bearing for light ADLs as pain permits, provided fracture fixation is stable External fixation (used for comminuted fractures or injuries with significant soft tissue loss) Instruct patient on pin care. Week 1: pendulum, elbow A/AAROM. Week 2: A/AAROM shoulder in supine position. Week 4 to 6: light, weight bearing if approved by physician. Plate and screws (depends on good bone density, bone grafting is sometimes used in conjunction with this type of fixation in cases of osteopenia and comminution. Note: Plate protocols are usually associated with an early, but limited, PROM and AAROM program—limited especially in elevation and external rotation for the first 6 weeks. Day 1: initiate pendulums. Week 1: PROM shoulder flexion to 90 degrees, scaption to 60 degrees. Week 4: A/AAROM shoulder flexion/scaption to tolerance, limit ER to 45 to 60 degrees. Week 6: AROM as tolerated, initiate light submaxial isometric strengthening. Week 12: terminal stretching, progress strengthening as needed for functional tasks.  Same as in the case of nonsurgical management of humeral shaft fractures (e.g., delayed union, nonunion) Possible iatrogenic nerve injuries (e.g., radial nerve palsy may require orthosis management—of distal neuropathies) Failure of surgical hardware to maintain fracture stability. The use of plates may cause elbow stiffness and pain Infection Soft tissue resection and repair (e.g., deltoid split for antegrade insertion of an intramedullary nail) Soft tissue damage (e.g., RTC injury)  Nonoperative Day 1: assess wrist and hand ROM, distal edema, sensation, pain, and functional limitations. Days 5 to 7: assess elbow and forearm AAROM. Weeks 4 to 6: assess supine shoulder AAROM and PROM in flexion within patient's comfort. Weeks 6 to 8: assess active shoulder elevation after there is clinical and radiographic evidence of fracture stability.) Assess motion in supine position before progressing to antigravity positions). Week 12: assess strength, initiate return to ADLs. Operative Days 2 to 3: assess wrist and hand ROM, distal edema, sensation, pain, functional limitations, and surgical incision. Week 1: assess elbow and forearm ROM. Weeks 2 to 4: assess shoulder AAROM supine, may assess ER/IR per MD orders. Weeks 4 to 6: assess shoulder AROM starting in supine and progressing to against gravity (if fracture is stable and the patient is relatively pain free). Weeks 10 to 12: assess submaximal isometric shoulder strength. Lefevre-Colau Hodgson In a study of 104 patients by Koval and co-workers, Court-Brown According to a 2010 review by Papasoulis et al., In a study by Wallny and colleagues, In a retrospective study, Jawa et al.