Shape-selective methylation of toluene (T) with methanol (M) was carried out in continuous flow fixed-bed reactor over Pt-modified nano-scale HZSM-5 catalysts, and excellent stability was obtained. Even after 500h on stream, toluene conversion of 22.0–23.0% was achieved simultaneously with the para-selectivity of >98%. The presence of Pt on the modified nano-scale HZSM-5 solves the apparent paradox of high para-selectivity and low stability. Catalysts were characterized by using X-ray diffraction (XRD), temperature programmed desorption of ammonia (NH3-TPD), Pyridine IR (Py-IR), TG-SDTA, scanning electron microscope (SEM), etc. The results show that significant enhancement in stability over Pt-modified nano-scale HZSM-5 catalysts is mainly due to good hydrogenation properties of Pt particles. Numerous studies It is true that there are many mechanisms of catalyst deactivation, nevertheless in this work, for the alkylation of toluene with methanol, large molecules formed via polymerization of ethylene with itself and/or aromatics is considered to block the pores of HZSM-5 catalysts and consequently lead to deactivation in a short time. It is particularly evident on the high para-selective catalyst. Based on the analysis above, Pt can be used to minimize the amount of alkenes through hydrogenating them to alkanes and consequently enhanced the catalyst stability. Hence, we report the synthesis of 0.1–2.0% Pt-modified nano-scale HZSM-5 catalyst and investigate their catalytic performance and stability in the toluene alkylation with methanol. In this work, nano-scale HZSM-5 (SiO The samples were studied by X-ray powder diffraction (XRD) using a RIGAKU D/Max 2400 with Cu Kα-radiation (1.542 The alkylation of toluene (T) with methanol (M) was carried out in a continuous flow fixed-bed reactor. Standard reduction of the calcined catalysts was conducted in the fixed-bed flow reactor under different conditions at 1   Toluene alkylation with methanol as a typical shape-selective reaction was used to evaluate the catalytic performance of the modified nano-scale HZSM-5 catalysts. As shown in Above all, modification of SiO The strategy of improving the catalyst stability becomes the most challenging task of developing the route of toluene methylation into Long-running investigation was carried out over catalysts 0.3% Pt-modified nano-scale HZSM-5 and 1.0% Pt-modified nano-scale HZSM-5 ( The reasons for the improvement in stability on catalysts modified with Pt were investigated. The NH Based on the above results, the great enhancement of the stability over the catalysts modified with Pt are mainly attributed to the hydrogenation of ethylene occurring on Pt clusters. As we know, when reaction runs on acid catalyst, ethylene is formed through methanol dehydration to dimethylether and immediately a secondary dehydration, and large molecules are further formed via polymerization of ethylene with itself and/or aromatics which can easily block the pores of ZSM-5 catalysts and consequently result in the deactivation over nano-scale HZSM-5 modified with SiO Shape-selective methylation of toluene with methanol was studied over Pt-modified nano-scale HZSM-5 in this work. Nano-scale HZSM-5 was chosen as catalyst precursor for its advantages in activity and stability. The modification with Pt inhibited the formation of coke from alkenes and significantly improved the stability with constant para-selectivity (∼98%). The Pt-modified nano-scale HZSM-5 catalysts show excellent stability as well as para-selectivity. Extending on life-span of catalyst is ascribed to the hydrogenation of alkenes to alkanes on Pt clusters and to the effective suppression of the formation of carbon deposition, thereby retarding the catalyst deactivation. 0.3% Pt loading is enough for the catalyst (modified with SiO The project was supported by the