Starches were isolated and characterised from 10 potato cultivars grown under the same conditions (with a commercial starch for reference). The chemical composition revealed some differences amongst the starches with protein ranging from 0.30% to 0.34%, amylose 25.2% to 29.1% and phosphorus 52.6–66.2mg 100g−1. High performance size-exclusion chromatography (HPSEC) fractionation of isoamylase debranched amylopectin showed that the amylopectin molecules were less branched and consisted of more B1, but less A-chains, than cereal starches. Gelatinisation onset (T
                     o), peak (T
                     p) and conclusion (T
                     c) temperatures of the native potato starches ranged from 58.7 to 62.5°C, 62.5 to 66.1°C and 68.7 to 72.3°C, respectively, whilst the gelatinisation enthalpies ranged from 15.1 to 18.4Jg−1. The gelatinisation temperatures of the starches increased in common with the amounts of short and intermediate sized amylopectin chains. The 13C magic angle spinning nuclear magnetic resonance (13C CP-MAS NMR) and wide angle X-ray diffraction (XRD) data (30.6%±0.22% crystallinity on average) showed little variance amongst the samples. Particle sizing results, however, revealed more variance (20.6–30.9μm mean diameter). Overall, these data reveal the subtleties of cultivar specific variation against a background of constant environmental conditions.Potatoes are the fourth most important food crop in the world after wheat, rice and maize, with a global annual production of approximately 300 million tonnes ( In terms of physical properties, potato starch is unique amongst other commercially available starches (e.g. cereal types) and has been utilised extensively in a variety of food systems ( For many publications on potato starches it is assumed that the genotype controls the composition, structure and physical properties. However, there is much evidence in the literature ( All chemicals, reagents and solvents were of Merck Analar quality or better. Ten potato cultivars (Brodick, Kara, Desiree, Inca Sun, Maris Piper, Mayan Gold, Pentland Crown, Pentland Dell, Pentland Javelin and Record) were grown at the same time and under the same conditions in Perthshire at the Scottish Crop Research Institute (SCRI), Dundee, UK. The commercial potato starch (30,265) was purchased from VWR, Lutterworth. Potatoes (free from defects) were washed, peeled lightly then liquidised in cold sodium metabisulphite: sodium chloride (1% with respect to both salts) solution. The samples were stored at 5 Starch samples (in triplicate, ca. 100 The nitrogen content of 200 (±0.01) mg samples (in triplicate) of starch was determined by standard Kjeldahl methodology ( The starch (total α-glucan) content was measured according to the general method of The phosphorus content of potato starch samples (ca. 1 Total amylose content was determined colorimetrically according to the method of The damaged starch content of the potato starches was determined by the α-amylase hydrolysis method described by Starch granules dimensions and distributions were determined using a Coulter Counter Multisizer (Coulter Electronics Ltd., UK) running 256 channels according to the methods of The crystallographic properties of the potato starch samples were examined according to A Brucker DSZ 200 NMR operating at 200 The surface and structure of the starch samples were characterised using scanning electron microscopy (SEM, Zeiss EVO 50, Massachusetts, USA). The starches were mounted directly on circular carbon stubs before being coated with palladium–gold (Pd/Au ratio 1:9) using a sputter chamber (Sputter Coater, Model sc7640, Quorum Technologies, East Sussex, UK). The following parameters were set for the instrument: accelerating voltage (kV) 5 The gelatinisation temperatures and enthalpy of native starches (3–3.5 Potato starches were debranched by isoamylase (EC.3.2.1.68, Megazyme E-ISAMY from All the measurements were performed in at least triplicate and the average values were calculated. The data were interrogated by Pearson’s Correlation Coefficient Test ( The low protein content of the potato starches ( The phosphorus content of the potato starches ranged from 52.6 Potato starches have a characteristic oval and ellipsoidal shape ( The X-ray diffraction patterns obtained for native potato starches exhibit B-type profiles (characteristic of roots and tubers) where the absolute crystallinity of the starches is presented in  A summary of DSC results for the starches are presented in  There was a negative correlation ( The distribution of amylopectin chain lengths in the potato starches was studied by high-performance size-exclusion chromatography (HPSEC). The first peak eluted (DF1, in the lower retention volume) corresponds to the amylose portion of starch and the following peaks were from debranched amylopectin. The debranched amylopectin elution profiles may be divided into three fractions (DF2 to DF4) according to the method of The ratio of short chains (A-chains) to long chains (B-chains), regarded as measure of the degree of branching of amylopectin, depends on the botanical origin of the starch and is typically of the order <1:1 to >2:1 ( Starches extracted from different potato cultivars grown at the same time and same site show little cultivar to cultivar variation. This is against a background of the starches being extracted from different tubers and regions within the tubers. Hence, when starch properties are described for cultures with undefined environmental origins, it is questionable whether or not cultivar to cultivar specific traits can be described with confidence. In subsequent papers the authors describe how annealing type processing can normalise further any starch specific physical properties, and how the starches are digested pre- and post processing. These data are important not only from agronomic stand points, but also from issues associated with starch processing and digestion. The physico-chemical properties of starches extracted from different potato cultivars (commercial crops) show less variation than might be expected when they are grown under the same conditions. This suggests that the functionality of the crops (especially the starch itself) and potential digestibility (native and processed) are not just affected by the cultivars used (under comparable growth conditions). Whilst other components of the tubers are important with respect to functionality (e.g. capacity to cold sweeten, sprout, etc.), perhaps under optimum storage conditions post harvest, culture specific perceived differences in terms of starch utilisation are not highly significant limitations to production. The authors wish to thank Scottish Crop Research Institute (SCRI), Dundee, Scotland for providing the potatoes used in this study.