From experiments, the influence of the physical characteristics of different binary mixtures of solids on the spouting regime of a pyramidal square-based spouted bed reactor is assessed. The applied methodology permits a more precise evaluation of the effects of the tested variables (diameter, density, sphericity) on the response variables (minimum air flows at which spouting begins and at which to maintain spouting conditions). The associated pressure drops along the bed of particles and the height of the formed fountain are analysed in each case. During the initial stages of fluidisation, binary mixtures containing different density ratios show dead zones. Segregation becomes more evident at large-size and high-density ratios. The lack of sphericity was found to be the main reason leading to blocking, channelling, and start-up problems when system failures occur. Nevertheless, the extent of segregation in all cases decreases with increasing the spouting velocity. In addition, a computational fluid dynamic model based on the discrete element method, previously validated for a single solid bed, is proposed as a tool to predict and evaluate potential segregation phenomena in binary mixtures. This model reproduced with high accuracy the encountered segregation phenomena. Its use may help define the technical limits inherent in the pyramidal spouted bed reactor.volume fraction drag coefficient coefficient of rotational drag particle diameter (mm) additional force per unit volume (N/m resulting acceleration of external forces acting on a particle (m/s gravitational acceleration (m/s identity tensor spring-dashpot constant (N/m) coefficient of gas–solid exchange (kg/(m mass of a parcel (kg) pressure (Pa) particle Reynolds number rotational Reynolds number time (s) Reynolds stress tensor (Pa) fluid phase velocity (m/s) parcel velocity (m/s) void fraction dashpot term dynamic viscosity of the fluid (Pa kinematic viscosity of the fluid (m density (kg/m bulk density (kg/m solid density (kg/m sphericity parcel rotational velocity (rad/s) at minimum spouting conditions at onset spouting conditions particle generic continuum phase turbulent Spouted bed reactors (SBRs) were first introduced by In these devices, the inlet gas is introduced through a single nozzle located in the centre of the base, in contrast with traditional fluidised bed reactors in which air feeding is uniformly distributed over the base. In addition, a conical or pyramidal base helps in the recirculation process and enables the movement of the big and irregular particles inside the device. The recirculation of solids is strongly enhanced; as a consequence, mass and energy transfer phenomena perform significantly better than with conventional techniques. Also, coarse and irregular particles are processed without encountering the problems faced by fluidised reactors when treating heterogeneous solid mixtures ( Most of the applications for SBR involve a bed with regular and dense particles used to ensure good fluidisation (preventing channelling or bridging) and to provide additional heat capacity in the bed. Despite the proven spouting stability in spouted beds, the addition of particles differing in physical properties still may lead to segregation or formation of dead zones. Indeed, in gasification, biomass is drowned in an inert material (usually sand) and the two types of particles tend to migrate to different heights because their physical properties are very different. As a consequence, bad mixing and non-uniform products can be obtained compromising the performance of the reactor. This is one of the challenges that the technology is facing for its implementation at large scales. An understanding of the fluid dynamic characteristics such as minimum spouting velocity, maximum pressure drop (Δ Several works have discussed the influence of the particle diameter ( Within this framework, cold flow tests have been performed on a previously characterised pyramidal square-based SBR ( The particle material choice was suggested to have a reproducible bed composition in various tests, avoiding comminution and size modification; additionally, the simulation of well-defined shape particle hydrodynamics has proven to be more reliable. Several fluidisation tests were performed using glass beads as the simulated inert phase in the bed and varying the properties of the second phase to test a single property at a time. All mixtures were set at 50% v/v to study the effect of the bed on the minimum and onset spouting velocities, because segregation was observed to be mostly affected at equi-volumetric mixtures ( All the fluid dynamic experiments were performed at room temperature at the laboratory of DISAT at the Polytechnic University of Turin. A previously described ( All the experiments were conducted following the procedure explained in a previous work ( To eliminate the influence of the uncontrolled initial packing state, prior to each experimental run, the pyramidal spouted bed was pre-treated by increasing the superficial gas velocity to obtain full spouting and then decreasing the superficial gas velocity immediately to return to a reproducible initial fixed bed condition. To obtain this state, the two bed components were poured into the reactor following the above sequence. From this static condition, the airflow rate was abruptly increased to obtain spouting, allowing then a gradual transition (less than 60 The goal of the experimental tests was to obtain measurements of the main spouting variables (specifically, A first evaluation of the mono-dispersed bed was performed for each tested solid. The pressure drop in the bed for each velocity was calculated by considering the pressure drop difference between the situation with the bed and in absence of the bed of solids. After assessing mono-dispersed bed, mixtures were evaluated by mixing F1 particles with different tested solids at a 1:1 volumetric ratio, which is known to be the worst possible operating condition because the difference in properties between solids composing the bed is high ( Tests were performed with materials differing in density but with similar size and shape, materials differing in size but with the same density and sphericity values, and materials differing in shape but with the same size and density. That way, the physical properties were isolated so only their influence on the main spouting parameters is evaluated. The individual influence of the variation of each property on the experimental outputs was analysed with air inflow ( start-up: stable operational conditions: Moreover, the height of the fountain ( From the overall visual observation of all scenarios tested, it was observed that the bed was effectively mixed in a short time after the addition of the secondary phase. In general, mixtures with homogenous properties were found to be stable in all situations and no segregation phenomena were observed in neither the short nor the long term. On the contrary, mixtures containing very different characteristics presented segregation phenomena or the formation of dead zones. To investigate the effect of the particle density, experiments were performed by mixing the F1 particles with lighter particles with the same diameter (F2, F3) at a 1:1 volumetric ratio. After a certain spouting time, heavier particles tended to follow shorter trajectories dropping into the annulus near the spout boundary, whereas lighter particles prescribed ampler trajectories landing closer to the vessel wall. In all cases, segregation became less pronounced by increasing the gas flow rate. This leads to higher fountain heights and, as a result, to a decrease in the difference between the trajectories of solids.  Coarse particles (C1–C2) were introduced into the bed of fine particles (F1) at a volumetric ratio of 1:1.  Moreover, for the mixtures C1/F1 and C2/F1, In all cases, eventual segregation was prevented when increasing the air inflow to a minimum value of 1.16 Finally, particular attention was focused on beds containing randomly shaped solids. At these conditions, the air flow rate required to form the spout was larger than that for regular shaped mono-sized particles ( For situations in which spouted bed reactors are employed to process biomass (i.e., thermochemical processes), most of the biomass will have random shapes. For this reason and in view of the previous described behaviour, additional experiments were performed to qualitatively assess, in more detail, the influence of randomly shaped solids in a regular bed. Mixtures composed of PET (polyethylene terephthalate) and PVC (polyvinyl chloride) tubes (similar densities and very different shapes and dimensions) at different volumetric ratios of PVC tubes (i.e., 1, 5, 10, and 20%v/v) were tested. In general, fluidisation was not affected by the addition of PVC tubes at low ratios. However, from 10%v/v, much higher air inflows were required with increasing volumetric ratio of PVC tubes. Interestingly, the maximum load that could be successfully fluidised was 20% v/v. Finally, the height of the fountain during stable spouting conditions for each mixture was recorded; values appear in In conclusion it can be stated that the particular properties of the second phase of solid mixtures treated in spouted beds can lead to different operational problems and, for that reason, the definition of these specific difficulties in each scenario may be crucial in achieving optimum device performance. It is also important to highlight that, in addition to the fluid dynamic considerations evaluated in the present work, further thermo-chemical evaluations (beyond the scope of this paper) need to be performed if SBRs are used for energy recovery purposes. Even though segregation is greatly minimised in SBRs, the foregoing experimental campaign indicates that it may still be present. In this sense, a tool able to predict this undesired behaviour is crucial in setting operational parameters for given conditions. A pseudo-2D CFD–DEM model of a single component bed in the SBR had been validated in a previous work ( The gas phase is considered as a continuum. Its behaviour is predicted according to the local mass and momentum balance equations ( The behaviour of the solid phase was taken into account with the DEM, or Eulerian–Lagrangian approach. Its core principle is tracking the motion of discrete particles using numerical solutions of their Newtonian equations of motion, which describe the linear and angular momentum: The following section provides a brief description of some of the terms of these equations. The model was applied only to simulate the behaviour of beds consisting of spherical solids. Indeed, DEM modelling of non-spherical particles is complex ( The commercial CFD program Ansys Fluent 18.0 was used to perform the simulations, which matched the experimental procedure. At the beginning, the equi-volumetric mixture of particles was perfectly mixed and settled in the bottom of the device. Both kinds of particles were simulated using parcels of 2.5 The CFD time step was 2   From the obtained figures, we believe that the CFD–DEM model can be validated as a tool to predict potential segregation phenomena in a given binary mixture system consisting of spherical solids. An in-depth numerical study of the application of this model to the evaluated systems is the main objective of an immediate further work. This tool could be applied in the calculation of the maximum loading that could be achieved. However, to extend its range of applicability, further application to randomly shaped solids should be explored. Binary mixtures containing solids differing in density, size, and shape with respect to the simulated inert phase were used to evaluate the spouting behaviour of a square-based spouted bed reactor. The influence of their varying ratios on the main operational parameters of the device was discussed. Binary mixtures greatly differing in density presented initial dead zones during the start-up. The addition of coarse particles increased the minimum spouting value and presented evident eventual segregation phenomena. Highly irregular solids led to start-up difficulties when the fountain had collapsed. In all instances studied, segregation decreased or was practically null for an air inflow equal to 1.16 A CFD–DEM model was applied to evaluate a mixture where segregation had been encountered. The model was able to reproduce the dead zones observed in experiments when the same operational conditions were applied. This model could be a reliable tool to evaluate different scenarios, predict potential segregation phenomena, and define the technological limits that the technology potentially presents for each specific case of study.