Flotation collectors and frothers are known to synergistically adsorb at the air–water interface and reduce surface tension. Here we report an unusual synergistic adsorption of cetyl trimethyl ammonium bromide (CTAB) and methyl isobutyl carbinol (MIBC), which unexpectedly increase surface tension. The available models fail to describe the unusual increase in surface tension. A polynomial was used to empirically model the increased surface tension over entire range of mixture concentration and identify the synergistic line. The ratio of MIBC to CTAB bulk concentrations of the synergistic adsorption was greater than 100. However, the synergistic ratio of adsorbed concentrations, assuming no interaction between adsorbed molecules, varied from 2 to 5. The synergistic line can be explained by the existence of two molecular arrangements at the surface: one is dominated by MIBC and the other is dominated by CTAB. The dividing line is sharply distinguished for MIBC/CTAB systems due to the branched structure and relative position of hydrophobic group of MIBC. Mixtures of straight alcohol with CTAB show a smoother transition as previously reported in the literature. The synergism could be the underpinning principle for the superior performance of MIBC as a flotation frother.Different types of reagents are used to meet different roles in froth flotation processes. For example, anionic surfactants such as xanthates and dithiophosphates are added as collectors in sulfide flotation, which adsorb at the mineral–water interface, rendering the mineral surface hydrophobic. Non-ionizing surfactants such as alcohols and polyglycols are added as frothers to control the bubble coalescence and the frothing behavior of the flotation system. In such mixed reagent systems, it is important to consider the interaction between the different types of surfactants ( Synergistic properties of surfactants mixtures have also been intensively studied to understand the performance of surfactant systems both in theoretical and engineering aspects in a number of areas beyond flotation ( Among many the industrial frothers based on aliphatic alcohols, methyl isobutyl carbinol (MIBC) is the most popular with largest consumption due to a powerful frothablity, excellent solubility and transient stability ( Cetyl trimethyl ammonium bromide purchased from Sigma Alrich (Australia) was further purified by a procedure with double recrystallization in methanol ( All solutions were prepared using ultra-pure water with resistivity higher than 18 The surface tension of MIBC–CTAB mixtures and the single surfactants was measured using the Wilhelmy plate method ( All the surface tension measurements were carried out using a fully automatic Wilhelmy plate tensiometer KSV Sigma 701 (KSV, Finland). This tensiometer allowed for the accurate positioning of the probe relative to the surface. As the surface was brought into contact with the plate probe, the tensiometer would notice the contact event by the change in forces it experienced. It could register the height at which the contact event occurred as the ‘zero depth of immersion’. The plate was then wetted to a set depth to ensure that there was indeed complete wetting of the plate (a zero contact angle). When the plate was returned to the zero depth of immersion, the force registered was used to calculate the surface tension. An automatic micro-disperser was also used to limit errors of manual preparation of solutions with the desired surfactant concentrations. In the experiments, the CTAB concentration was gradually increased by dispensing a CTAB stock solution into the MIBC solutions. All experiments were conducted at constant room temperature of 25 In the literature, a few models are available for predicting adsorption and surface tension of binary mixtures of surfactants. In this paper, two of the common models were reviewed and compared with the experimental data. The first model was proposed by Siddiqui and Franses ( Since a binary model reduces to single model in the absence of one surfactant (i.e. one concentration is zero), the modeling of binary mixtures employs a single system model as a preliminary step. Commonly, the individual experimental data are used to predetermine the best-fitted values of model parameters in single systems. Subsequently, these parameters would be used in models for surfactant mixtures as fixed constants. The adsorption of single surfactant at air-solution interface can be described by the Frumkin isotherm ( The surface concentration is related to the surface tension through the equation of state obtained by integrating the Gibbs adsorption isotherm as follows: When Either Eqs. The adsorption isotherm for binary mixtures is given by a system of two equations as follows ( The equation of state for the mixtures can be described as follows: Eq. Assuming the applicability of the Langmuir isotherm for both single surfactants of the mixture, Siddiqui and Franses derived the maximum monolayer density and the adsorption equilibrium constants as follows: The surface tension of the mixture can be calculated by either equation: As in the Fainerman model, the system of two Eqs. Adsorption isotherm of both MIBC and CTAB at water/air interface ( The standard deviation Since the best-fitted values of The surface tension was measured for different sets of concentrations, which containing unchanged MIBC concentration (0.02–0.003 As MIBC concentration remaining nearly constant, the surface tension was expected to decrease monotonically with increasing CTAB concentration as observed with mixture of 1-heptanol/1-octanol ( In both Fainerman’s and Siddiqui’s models, the parameters of individual isotherms, With Fainerman’s model, Eqs. Similarly, It can be seen that both modeling results are unsatisfactory, with large standard deviations. Most significantly, neither model can describe the positive peaks demonstrated experimentally. Since both models above failed to describe the synergistic behavior, especially the positive synergism, two-variables polynomials were attempted. A high order polynomial was able to correlate the experimental data very well with a standard deviation of 0.52 Consequently, the synergistic points are determined by searching for maximum surface tension at fixed MIBC concentrations. These points are plotted in Our experiment results demonstrated a positive synergism instead of negative one as often reported in the literature. The conventional definition of adsorption synergism ( It should be noted that the change in surface potential, which was developed for anionic surfactant ( In the literature, mixed adsorption between CTAB and propanol has also been investigated by Anna and Janczuk ( Therefore, it is conceivable that binary alcohol/CTAB mixture can form two molecular arrangements at adsorbed zone: one dominated by alcohol, the other dominated by CTAB. The arrangements depend on the composite concentration. For propanol/CTAB mixture, the shift between two mechanisms was quite smooth and difficult to clarify. In contrast, the shift was demonstrated distinguishingly by a positive synergistic line for MIBC/CTAB mixture. From The adsorption of CTAB and MIBC was investigated through measuring surface tension by the Wihelmy plate method. This studied mixture showed that there was a positive azeotropy instead of negative one as often reported in the literature. Two mixture models of Fainerman ( The positive synergism could be explained by the existence of two distinguish molecular arrangements at absorption zone: one dominated by alcohol, the other dominated by CTAB. The bulky structure of MIBC (branched structure and relative position of hydrophibic group along carbon chain) might be the reason for the sharp distinguishing line between the two mechanisms. In addition to surface tensiometry, further investigations (such as molecular dynamics) on the depth of adsorption zones and the arrangement(s) of adsorbed molecules would be useful for exploring the new phenomena of synergistic adsorption of reagents. New insights into adsorption of branched surfactants mixtures could lead to better surfactant mixtures for industrial processes such as mineral flotation, in which branched surfactants have been proved superior. To describe the experimental data with high accuracy, the polynomial requires a high (5th) order regarding CTAB concentration: