Background
                  Accurate anatomical reduction plays a crucial role in the surgical management of tibial plateau fractures. Arthroscopic visualization of the articular surface can allow for a precise reduction.
               
                  Objectives
                  To evaluate the outcome of arthroscopy-assisted reduction and internal fixation for tibial plateau fractures, Schatzker Type III to VI.
               
                  Methods
                  Thirty-five patients with tibial plateau fractures treated by arthroscopy-assisted fixation were enrolled in this prospective study. According to the Schatzker classification, the fractures types were as follows: type III (n=15); type IV (n=6); type V (n=8); type VI (n=6). The mean age was 36 years (range 24–58 years). The mean follow-up period was 38 months (range, 26–72 months). During surgery, initial arthroscopic evaluation was done, followed by provisional reduction using fluoroscopy. Subsequently, a final arthroscopic confirmation was done before definitive fixation. Bone grafting was done in all except 6 patients. Clinical and radiologic outcomes were scored by the Knee society score and Rasmussen system.
               
                  Results
                  The Knee society functional score and Knee society knee score assessed at 6 months, 1 year and 2 years. Final follow up results showed good to excellent outcome in three out of four patients. With increasing severity of injury (from Schatzker types III to VI), the functional score deteriorated. The Rasmussen’s Radiological Score at 24 months showed good to excellent scores in 86% individuals. The association between the condylar widening and functional score was found to be significant (p value < 0.05). The radiological and functional scoring was found to have a percentage agreement of 24%. Persistence of condylar widening had a less favorable functional outcome. Postoperative wound breakdown and infection are among major complications.
               
                  Conclusions
                  Arthroscopic assisted fracture fixation for complex tibial plateau fractures with associated soft-tissue injuries is a safe and effective procedure that provides good functional outcomes.The Tibial plateau is one of the critical load-bearing areas in the human body. Tibial plateau fractures are one of the most common intra-articular fractures comprising of 1% of all fractures. Objectives: 1) To evaluate the outcome of arthroscopy-assisted reduction and internal fixation for tibial plateau fractures Schatzker Type III to VI based on Knee Society Score and Rasmussen Radiological Score. 2) To correlate the radiological findings with functional outcome and to verify the hypothesis that restoration of anatomy is directly proportional to the functional outcome of the patient. This prospective study was carried out in a tertiary care trauma center between March 2013 and June 2014. A total of 35 patients (Shatzker type III, 15; type IV, 6; type V, 8; type VI, 6.) were enrolled based on the eligibility criteria. Inclusion criteria: Patients with proximal tibia fractures who were willing to participate in the study, age >18 years, Schatzker type III, IV, V and VI, closed fractures or Gustilo Anderson Grade I injuries. Exclusion criteria: Patients refusing to participate in the study, Schatzker Type I and II fractures, pathological fractures, neurovascular injury, open fractures Gustilo Anderson Grade II or III, associated ipsilateral or contralateral major limb injury (including fractures) affecting the treatment or rehabilitation protocol, associated upper limb fractures requiring surgery, and major systemic illness (malignancy, chronic kidney, liver disease, etc.). The study was approved by the Institutional Review Board and Ethics Committee. Informed consent was obtained from all patients. Ethical standards according to the Helsinki declaration of 1964 were conformed to. All patients were kept on skin traction upon admission and ice pack application, limb elevation was given. A thorough history and clinical examination was done along with the relevant preoperative work-up. The radiographs obtained included Pelvis anteroposterior (AP) view and AP-lateral views of the affected knee and ipsilateral ankle joint. The fractures were classified according to the Schatzker classification. Time of surgery depended on soft tissue condition, all patients were taken for surgery only when skin wrinkles appeared and in open fractures after healing of the wound (four patients were Gustilo Anderson Grade I). The mean interval between injury and definitive surgery was 11 ± 5 days (range, 1–19 days). The delay was due to the fact that many patients were referred from other centers. Ceftriaxone 1 g was used as prophylactic antibiotic (administered 30 min before tourniquet inflation). Surgical technique: All surgeries were done with patient supine, with a foot rest for knee flexion to 90° during arthroscopic assessment and a bolster was used during plate fixation. Knee was examined under anesthesia to look for ligamentous instability. The surgical approach was the same in all cases, standard two portals for arthroscopy and lateral approach for plating except for few cases were medial plating was also done. Skin incisions for fracture fixation were made initially with intact bony landmarks because arthroscopic evaluation can lead to seepage of fluid into the leg causing swelling and distort the anatomy. An arthroscopic evaluation preceded fracture reduction ( In bed mobilization began from the 1 The sample size was calculated based on previous studies. As per a similar study conducted by Manidakis N, Dosani et al. (2010) The mean age at surgery was 36 years (range 24–58 years). The mean follow-up period was 38 months (range, 26–72 months). The radiological scoring evaluation at 24 months showed that an angulation (varus or valgus) was not present or less than 10° in 92% of patients and remaining 8% had 10–20° of angular deformity. Articular depression was not present in 56%, less than 5 mm in 36% and remaining 8% had less than 10 mm articular depression. Condylar widening was not present in 64%, less than 5 mm in 32% and 4% had 6–10 mm widening. In two years, 88% of patients attained good range of movement of which 64% had flexion of 90–120° and 24% had flexion more than 120°. Majority (68%) of patients had no complications. 12% had superficial infection and 16% had wound dehiscence. 12% of patients (3 patients) had common peroneal nerve injury presented as foot drop. 2 patients had lateral meniscal injury and 1 patient had isolated medial collateral ligament injury. Knee stiffness was present in 2 patients in whom the range of movements were around 80–90°. One patient had Compartment syndrome managed by fasciotomy. Three patients who had findings of painful tense leg swelling but not consistent with that of compartment syndrome were managed conservatively. The functional outcome deteriorated with increasing severity of the injury. In Schatzker type III 44.4% had excellent, 22.2% had good, 33.3% had fair and none had a poor score. In Schatzker type IV 33.33% had excellent, good and fair scores each. None had a poor score. In Schatzker type V 14.30% had excellent, 42.9% good, 28.6% fair and also a poor score of 14.30%. In Schatzker type VI none had an excellent score, 33.3% had good, 50.0% fair and a poor score of 16.70%. The relationship between knee society score and condylar widening was found to be statistically significant (p value 0.04). When the condylar widening is not present we got a 37.50% excellent and 31.20% good results in knee society score. While the condylar widening increased to 5 mm, none of the patients had excellent results and 37.50% had good results, and further as the condylar widening increased to 6–10 mm, all had a poor outcome with the knee society score. The Rasmussen’s Radiological Score at 24 months showed good to excellent scores in 86% individuals. The association between the condylar widening and functional score was found to be significant ( The findings of this study (i.e., generally satisfactory clinical and radiological outcomes as determined by Rasmussen scores) are consistent with the findings from other studies. The Knee society functional score and Knee society knee score assessed at 2 years showed a good to excellent outcome of 56% and 68% respectively. It was observed that as we moved from Schatzker types III to VI, the functional score deteriorated, showing the delay in functional recovery in complex fracture types. The Rasmussen’s Radiological Score at 24 months showed a good to excellent results in eight out of ten patients. Angulation (valgus or varus) was not present or less than 10° in 92% of patients. The articular depression was not present in 56% and less than 5 mm in 36%. Condylar widening was not present in 64% and less than 5 mm in 32%. The functional outcome and radiological parameters have been compared and the association between the condylar widening and functional score was found to be significant (p value 0.04). The association between The Knee Society Score and The Rasmussen’s Radiological Scores was analyzed and there was percent agreement of 24% between them. This could be due to the short follow up period of our study which could not consider the onset of secondary osteoarthritis resulting from articular incongruity. In a comparative study, Fowble et al. The majority of patients had no complications but superficial wound infection and wound dehiscence was found to be the predominant complication, more in complex tibial plateau fractures. Compartment syndrome was encountered in one patient, this dreaded complication can be prevented by proper patient selection, minimizing the arthroscopic time, utilising dry arthroscopic technique and avoiding the use pressure pump. Complex fracture types had delay in wound healing, more incidence of post-operative infection and delayed union due to which late mobilization, knee stiffness and delayed functional recovery resulted. Despite several limitations of this study like small sample size and a short follow up period, we believe that it provides useful information with regards to a good functional outcome following tibial plateau fractures treated by internal fixation. It throws light into various clinical, radiological and surgical factors and the related complications following surgical management (ARIF) of these challenging fractures. A large scale, randomized control study comparing arthroscopic assisted proximal tibia fixation with the conventional way of proximal tibia fixation is recommended. Arthroscopic assisted fracture fixation for complex tibial plateau fractures with associated soft-tissue injuries is a safe and effective procedure that provides good functional outcomes.