The present work describes the development of an efficient and relatively simple process to obtain high grade CeO2 from sulphuric acid leach liquor. The liquor was obtained through acid digestion of monazite. The steps investigated in the process for obtaining ceric oxide were: (i) purification of the RE elements through their precipitation as rare earth and sodium double sulphate (NaRE(SO4)2·xH2O), (ii) NaRE(SO4)2·xH2O conversion into RE-hydroxide (RE(OH)3) through metathetic reaction and (iii) recovery of cerium and (iv) purification of cerium from the mixture of ceric hydroxide and manganese dioxide precipitate through dissolution of the solid with HCl and precipitation of the cerium through the addition of oxalic acid (H2C2O4) or ammonium hydroxide (NH4OH) solution. The X-ray diffraction spectra of the double sulphate obtained indicated the presence of monohydrated double sulphate. X-ray diffraction and chemical analysis indicated that the precipitation should be carried out at 70°C and at 1.1 times the stoichiometric ratio of NaOH. An excess of 30% of KMnO4 was necessary to separate cerium from the other RE elements. Both oxalic acid and ammonium hydroxide proved efficient in the precipitation of cerium from the mixture of Ce/Mn obtained in the cerium separation. Following purification, calcinated products were obtained, assaying between 99% and 99.5% CeO2. The cerium recovery yield was greater than 98%.Rare earth (RE) elements are a group of chemical elements that includes all the lanthanides, yttrium and scandium. Given their particular spectroscopic and magnetic properties, the RE elements play an important role in many fields of advanced materials science; therefore, industrial demand for them has increased ( Monazite is one of the most abundant rare earth (RE) minerals found in nature. The chemical treatment of monazite can be carried out via the alkaline route through sodium hydroxide addition or via the acid route by means of sulphuric acid digestion. The rare earth leach liquor produced through digestion with sulphuric acid also contains other elements such as, U, Th and Fe. The high commercial value of the rare earth elements depends on their purity and the quality of their compounds. In order to purify the liquor, the RE elements are usually precipitated in the form of rare earths and sodium double sulphate (NaRE(SO As the RE-Na double sulphate is only slightly soluble in acid solutions, in order to achieve its dissolution aiming at the separation of the RE into individual elements, the double sulphate is converted into a high soluble compound, such as RE-hydroxide ( The conversion of the RE-Na double sulphate into RE-hydroxide was carried out by metathetic reaction through the addition of NaOH according to Eq. The influence of the process variables on the double sulphate precipitation and on its conversion into RE-hydroxide is rarely mentioned in literature. The separation of natural RE mixtures into individual elements is very difficult to achieve, due to the similarity of their chemical and physical properties. In aqueous solutions, the RE elements present as trivalent cations. Cerium is the most likely to oxidize to its tetravalent state and, given this property, its separation is generally the easiest. In the tetravalent form, cerium ions exhibit markedly a different chemical behaviour if compared to the other trivalent rare earth ions ( In acid solutions, the oxidation of Ce The separation of cerium from the RE elements can be carried out by selective dissolution of the trivalent RE-hydroxides, by keeping the cerium (IV) hydroxide in its insoluble form or through its selective precipitation from the acid solution ( Oxidation through permanganate solution leads to simultaneous precipitation of Ce(OH) This study proposes a methodology which consists of: (i) purification of the RE elements through (NaRE(SO The effects of the main variables involved in the precipitation of the double sulphate and its conversion into RE-hydroxide, such as nature and excess of the precipitation agent, temperature and reaction time, were investigated. In the precipitation and purification of cerium, the process variables assessed were: final pH, molar ratios of KMnO The RE liquor used in this experiment – supplied by INB (Indústrias Nucleares do Brasil) – was produced through monazite digestion with sulphuric acid. Prior to the processes investigated in the present study, uranium and thorium were removed from the liquor by solvent extraction ( The compositions of the feed and intermediate products used in this study are presented in In the double sulphate precipitation experiments, Na All reagents used in this work were of analytical grade and their solutions were prepared with distilled water. In all the stages of the experiment, the concentration of the rare earth elements were determined by an energy-dispersive X-ray spectrometer (Kevex system) ( The double sulphate precipitation experiments were carried out in beakers placed in a water bath for temperature control, mechanical agitation and pH control. The precipitate was then filtered, washed with distilled water and dried at 100 The conversion of the double sulphate into hydroxide was carried out in beakers, under mechanical agitation for 1 The experiments were carried out in beakers, under magnetic agitation, at 25 The solid composed of ceric hydroxide and manganese dioxide was then dissolved in a 3.0 The efficiency of the precipitation of RE elements from sulphuric liquor was investigated with the use of three different reagents: sodium chloride (NaCl), sodium sulphate (Na The amount of the reagent added ranged from 1.5 to 11 times the stoichiometric amount, at 70 The ratio of RE elements recovery is almost the same when either NaOH or Na The contamination of the double sulphate with iron was observed in the NaOH experiments. The Fe concentration was 90 As this paper concerns academic research, the following experiments to obtain the RE double sulphate were carried out with the Na The effect of the temperature was investigated at temperature variations from (25 The effect of time was investigated at the interval between 0.5 and 3 The double sulphate, obtained by precipitation with Na The conversion of double sulfate into hydroxide was carried out by metathetic reaction through NaOH addition. In this experiment the temperature and the excess of NaOH were investigated. The effect of the temperature was checked at the interval between 25 The solids obtained in this study were characterized by X-ray diffraction and chemical analysis. The study found that the best results were achieved when the conversion was carried out at 70 The recovery of cerium through the investigated technique comprises two phenomena, namely, the oxidation of Ce(III) to Ce(IV) by To avoid competition between this reaction and the cerium oxidation reaction represented by Eq. The effect of the KMnO Another important variable affecting the cerium recovery is the pH. The initial and final pH was investigated. The final pH was tested in the range between 2.5 and 3.5. For initial pH lesser than 1, the KMnO In the present study, the excess of permanganate was investigated in the range between 10% and 50%. The recovery of cerium ranged from 40% to 99.9% when the excess of permanganate increased at the interval considered. Thus, after an excess of 30%, only a marginal rise was observed in the cerium recovery. However, the excess of permanganate did not affect the purity of the cerium ( The process was investigated in various experiments with duration between 15 and 150 According to the X-ray diffraction patterns, only amorphous precipitates were obtained, regardless of the time. The precipitate was analysed through XPS in order to identify the presence of Mn(IV). Mn 2p XPS measurements allowed the determination of MnO The precipitate from the cerium recovery process, containing cerium and manganese was dissolved by addition of 3 During dissolution, the chloride ions (Cl After dissolution, the cerium was selectively precipitated as cerium oxalate with the addition of a 10 The cerium precipitation experiments with ammonium hydroxide were conducted within a pH range between 5.0 and 8.0. For ammonium hydroxide at pH 5.0 and 7.0, no cerium hydroxide was precipitated. At pH 8.0 the yield was 99.8% and the manganese concentration in the cerium hydroxide precipitate was 0.42 Finally, the product was calcinated in a porcelain crucible for one hour at 900 The study of the main variables of the process of achieving double sulphate precipitation and its conversion into RE-hydroxide was an important step in the selection of the ideal conditions for the experiments. Amongst the precipitating agents studied, Na The main variables affecting the cerium oxidation/precipitation were: the acidity of the rare earth chloride solution, the pH of the cerium precipitation and the KMnO Sincere thanks to CNPq and FAPEMIG for financial support. The authors are also thankful to the CDTN’s technicians that were involved with this work, mainly Luiz C. da Silva, Liliane P. Tavares, José dos Santos Jorge Pereira and geologist Walter de Brito.