The aim of this study is to examine the pH effect on bismuth ferrite (BiFeO3) properties and observe the BiFeO3 behaviour in the polycaprolactone (PCL). In this paper, BiFeO3 was synthesized via co-precipitation method at three different pH values (10.64, 11.32, and 11.58). These produced particles were added into the 25wt.%PCL solutions separately to get the scaffolds using a 3D printing process. Crystallite sizes were determined from the Debye-Scherer formula using XRD. With different pH values, crystal sizes were found as 15, 12, and 10 nm and particle sizes determined from SEM were 142, 134, and 111.39 nm for 10.64, 11.32, and 11.58, respectively. The adenocarcinoma lung cancer cell (A549) adhesion on the scaffolds revealed that cells could attach to the scaffolds. Maximum dielectric constant values were obtained for the pellets and scaffolds as 10.37 nF and 6.16 nF for the pellet BiFeO3 (pH = 11.58) and the scaffold 25wt.%PCL/2wt.%BiFeO3 (pH = 11.58), respectively.In recent years, materials that have both electrical and magnetic properties have taken attention in research due to their controllable property to create novel devices. These materials called multiferroic materials that display the simultaneous effects of ferromagnetism, ferroelectricity, and ferroelasticity, etc. These properties are due to the coupled electric, magnetic, mechanical and structural properties In Xie et al. study, BiFeO In this present study, the co-precipitation method was used for BiFeO Iron (III) nitrate nonahydrate (Fe(NO Testing Microorganisms; Staphylococcus aureus ATCC 29213, Escherichia coli ATCC 25922, Pseudomonas aeruginosa ATCC 27853, Candida albicans ATCC 90028. Medium; Mueller Hinton agar (Merck) for bacteria, Sabouraud dextrose agar (SDA) (Merck) for yeasts, ethanol was used as the solvent of the samples. Control Groups; Meropenem was used for bacteria, and amphotericin B was used for C. Albicans. Co-precipitation is an effective method for producing nano-scaled magnetic particles to get precursors by simultaneous precipitation of two cations (Bi Firstly, 2.5 g PCL was solved in 10 ml DCM to obtain 25%PCL solutions as a control group, and this solution was put at the magnetic stirrer for an hour with 300 rpm. Three different pH values of BiFeO 3D-Printing device (modified Ultimaker 2+) was used for fabrication of 25%PCL and 25%PCL/2%BiFeO Fourier Transform Infrared Spectroscopy (FT-IR) were recorded with JASCO-4000 FT-IR spectroscopy at 4000–400 cm D To clarify the effects of pH values of the starting solution of BiFeO Bismuth nanoparticle effects on A549 (human adenocarcinoma) lung cancer cell line was tested In the F-actin staining, the A549 cells were seeded at 5 × 10 Microorganism suspensions were prepared from colonies on solid medium in 0.85% physiological saline (FTS). Bacterial suspensions were adjusted to a concentration of 108 CFU/ml and yeast suspensions of 106 CFU/ml according to the Mc Farland 0.5 standard turbidity The FTIR spectrums of the nanoparticles derived from the co-precipitation and fabricated 3D-printed scaffolds were shown in  SEM was applied to assess morphology and pore size of 3D-printed scaffolds. The DSC curve of BiFeO DSC demonstrated the influence of BiFeO XRD analysis was performed to determine the crystalline phases of the nanoparticles. XRD analysis was performed to determine the crystalline state of the PCL/BiFeO  I-V measurements of the pellets and scaffolds showed ohmic behaviour. DC conductivity values of the pellets were calculated as 5.80 × 10 AC electrical measurements were performed in the frequency range of 4 × 10 Frequency dependence of the measured ac conductivity (Log To investigate the effects of the pH values of the starting solution of BiFeO It was observed that dielectric constant values of the pellets were affected by pH values of the starting solutions of the BiFeO The purpose of cell culture test was to find the capability of BiFeO The confocal microscope enables to get the distribution of scaffolds and cells by using 3D images To observe the adhesion ability of A549 cell line to 3D-printed scaffolds, the SEM device was used to focus on cell morphology. Adenocarcinoma is a cancer cell that originates in the glands, and they can have the ability to spread to other parts of the body. These cells can grow slow, so it is easy to found before it spreads from the lungs to the body The antibacterial potentials of the powders and discs were measured as the diameter of the zone around the powders and 3D-printed discs. The BiFeO The authors declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this paper. The authors thank Dr. Ali Sahin for confocal images at