A chelating ion exchanger, prepared by functionalising Merrifield resin with 2,2′-pyridylimidazole, was utilized to selectively adsorb and separate nickel from other base metal ions in synthetic sulfate solutions. The sorbent material was characterized by scanning electron microscopy (SEM), microanalysis, infrared (IR), X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS) and BET surface area. The distribution ratio (D) and the sorption capacity of the microspheres toward Ni(II), Cu(II), Co(II) and Fe(II) ions was studied by using the batch and column methods, respectively. Ni(II) followed by Cu(II) showed the highest distribution ratio (D) and the highest sorption efficiency of nickel(II) ions around pH 2. The binary separation of nickel(II) from copper(II), cobalt(II) and iron(II) respectively, undertaken in a column study, through loading the metal ions at pH≈2 followed by selective decomplexation, demonstrated the selectivity of the sorbent material for nickel(II). Thus, 2,2′-pyridylimidazole can be regarded as a nickel-specific extractant.Separation of nickel from cobalt and other base metals such as copper and iron is known to have numerous challenges ( Chelating ion exchangers have the ability to selectively chelate metal ions of interest through suitable functional group(s) ( In our earlier work with 2,2′-pyridylimidazole as an extractant (1-octyl-2,2′-pyridylimidazole (OPIM)) and dinonylnaphthalene sulfonic acid (DNNSA) as a bulky counterion in a solvent extraction system ( Pyridine-2-aldehyde (99%, Sigma–Aldrich), glyoxal (40% in water, Sigma–Aldrich), ammonia (28%, Merck Chemicals), ethanol (99%, Sigma–Aldrich), diethylether (99%, Merck Chemicals) and ethylacetate (98%, Sigma–Aldrich) were reagent grade chemicals used as received for the synthesis of 2,2′-pyridyl-1 The metal ion analyses were carried out using a Thermo Electron (iCAP 6000 Series) inductively coupled plasma (ICP) spectrometer equipped with an OES detector. Wavelengths with minimum interferences were chosen; 231.6 (Ni 5.0 5 The capacity of the resin for nickel was determined as a function of pH in a column test. 0.02 In an initial study conducted with 0.02 The binary separation of nickel(II) from cobalt(II), nickel(II) from copper(II), and nickel(II) from iron(II) was undertaken by loading a pre-conditioned column with a mixed metal sulfate solution containing 0.02 The SEM micrographs of the corresponding 2,2′-pyridylimidazole functionalised beads showed little or no morphological differences from the unfunctionalised beads as depicted by In the infrared spectrum of the precursor (unfunctionalized beads) there are two peaks appearing at 1264 An investigation of the surface chemistry of this adsorbent by XPS also confirmed the presence of nitrogen, along with the other expected elements ( The specific surface area of the functionalised beads was determined using the Brunauer–Emmet–Teller (BET) method and was found to be 46.82 A preliminary assessment of the distribution ratio of the metal ions on the pyridylimidazole-functionalized resin was investigated as a function of pH in a batch study prior to determining the loading capacities at the optimum pH values. The results depicted a higher value of D around pH 1.5–2.5, for nickel(II) and copper(II) ( The effect of the contact time on the percentage sorption of Ni Separation of nickel(II) from cobalt(II) was undertaken since the removal of nickel(II) from base metals was the primary focus in this study. This became necessary in view of the limited achievements made thus far in solvent extraction of this duo because of their similar aqueous chemistry. Secondly, the separation of nickel(II) from copper(II) and from iron(II) was also examined. A binary synthetic solution containing equimolar concentrations (0.02  The corresponding plots of concentration of the metal ions as a function of the fraction number on Separation of nickel from copper however shows a lower separating factor of 5 in Ni The 2,2′-pyridylimidazole-functionalized microspheres were successfully fabricated and characterized using FTIR, SEM, XPS, BET surface area and microanalysis to show evidence of the functionalization as well as the surface properties. This material was found to be a versatile adsorbent for the sorption and separation of nickel(II) from base metals. Even though the contact time for adsorption of Co(II) and Cu(II) under batch conditions is better than that of Ni(II), the loading of the metal ions at pH 2 followed by selective decompexation under column dynamic conditions effects a separation in favor of Ni(II). The high sorption capacity for nickel at pH 2 underscores the fact that even in highly acidic sulfate solution, this adsorbent can perform at reasonably high efficiency with loading capacities in the range 56–79 We would like to thank the Rhodes University Microscopy Unit for the SEM facilities. We are also grateful to the South African NRF (CPR20100406000010238) for funding.