Hydrometallurgical processing of a Vietnamese chromite ore was attained through oxidative leaching in highly concentrated KOH aqueous solution in the presence of compressed air at 300°C under atmospheric pressure. Followed by diluting with fresh water or dilute KOH aqueous solution, the leaching process achieved the salting-out of hexavalent chromium in the form of K2CrO4 crystal due to the relatively low solubility of hexavalent chromium in concentrated KOH aqueous solution. The difference in particle size and bulk density enabled the effective separation of the obtained K2CrO4 crystal and the chromite ore leaching residue through gravity sedimentation. During the leaching process, other accompanying elements such as aluminum and silicon were extracted out from the chromite ore as well. However, their leaching products easily formed a compound of potassium aluminosilicate and therefore precipitated into the leaching residue. Additionally, thermodynamic and kinetic investigations of the leaching process were preliminarily carried out and briefly discussed.The demands on a global scale for chromium, chromium chemicals and chromium compounds are increasing steadily in metallurgical, chemical and refractory industries. Chromium hexavalent compounds are known to be human carcinogens based on sufficient evidence of carcinogenicity in humans occupationally exposed in the chromate production, chromate pigment production, and chromium plating industries ( Although many minerals contain chromium, chromite is the only commercial ore of chromium. The utilization of chromite ore has been the subject of numerous investigations. A hydrometallurgical or pyrometallurgical process is often used. Techniques based on hydrometallurgical process mainly include acid leaching and alkaline leaching. Sulfuric acid is often used in the acid leaching of low-grade chromite mineral, either at atmospheric pressure or at higher pressures ( However, as the most commonly used method for manufacturing chromium hexavalent compounds, the soda-ash roasting results in serious environmental problem, since the chromium ore processing residue is a dangerous pollution source due to its high content of hexavalent chromium. Therefore, extensive research work was widely carried out on the utilization and treatment of the chromium ore processing residues ( Recently, a novel process based on alkaline oxidative leaching of chromite mineral has been proposed by the Institute of Process Engineering, Chinese Academy of Sciences in Beijing, PR China ( Low-grade massive chromite specimens originating from Vietnam were obtained from the Henan Zhenxing Chemical Group Co. Ltd., PR China. The samples were crushed, ground and dry-sieved to different narrow size fractions as shown in The potassium hydroxide (KOH) reagent employed in this work was of analytical grade and manufactured by the Beijing Chemical Plant. Distilled water was used throughout the experiments whenever needed.  The desired amount of KOH was first placed in the reactor and mixed with a desired volume of distilled water. The heating furnace was then powered on and the system was heated. As the temperature increased, the KOH in the reactor gradually dissolved into the solution. After most of the KOH disappeared, the agitator was turned on to improve the mixing. When the temperature reached the preset value, the chromite ore was fed into the aqueous solution and the air compressor was started to provide the liquid–solid system with compressed air. The gas–liquid–solid reaction was thereby initiated. After a certain period of time when the chromium in the chromite ore was supposed to be leached out thoroughly, the heating furnace and the air compressor were powered off and the stirring speed was then slowed down. A desired volume of diluent, generally fresh water or KOH aqueous solution of desired concentration, was introduced into the high-temperature liquid–solid system gradually through the cooling tube. As the K When the diluting process was over, the multiphase system was further mixed for a while and then kept still for several hours awaiting the sedimentation of the solid mixtures. As the density of the K The aqueous solution, together with the chromite ore leaching residue therein, was then moved out and filtered. The filtrate (the leaching liquor) would be put aside and used for the leaching reaction in the next experiment to make full use of the inside KOH. Four-stage countercurrent washing was carried out with dilute KOH aqueous solution or distilled water to wash the rudimental chromium (VI) out of the filtration cake (the leaching residue). The K For solid samples such as K The particle size distribution of the K The processing of chromite ore by highly concentrated KOH leaching is based on the following chemical reactions: Utilizing the standard Gibbs energy data taken from the related reference ( As shown in In the process of oxidative leaching, as shown in Reactions  Combining the results in According to the results of previous studies (  The separation of the solid (K As shown in Consider the gravity sedimentation process (  Consequently, the ratio of the terminal velocity of the crystal particle to that of the residue particle can be described as: When the crystal and the residue can be effectively separated, there is From Through laboratorial experiments, it was found that only less than 5% of the K In this work, the reaction kinetics of oxidative leaching of chromite ore in highly concentrated KOH aqueous solution was preliminarily investigated in order to discover approaches to the reactor scale-up and project development. The effect of reaction temperature on the conversion of chromium is shown in  Systematic laboratory studies were aimed to extract chromium from a Vietnamese chromite ore with a new technique using alkaline oxidative leaching at atmospheric pressure. Results of the present investigation revealed the following conclusions. The oxidation of chromite ore with the atmospheric oxygen in the presence of KOH aqueous solution at 300 A relatively short leaching time (6 The aluminum and silicon in the chromite ore were also extracted out during the leaching of chromium, forming potassium aluminate and potassium silicate. But considerable amount of potassium silicate reacted with the potassium aluminate, forming potassium aluminosilicate, and entered the leaching residue. Since the solubility of K The obtained K The leaching process appears to be chemically rate-controlled as indicated from reaction mechanism and calculated value of apparent activation energy and the chromium yield was apparently improved at higher reaction temperatures. The leaching method is applicable not only to the Vietnamese chromite, but also to the Indian and Philippine chromites. Due to the difference in composition of the chromite ore from different sources, the exact experimental results might be different. However, similar conclusions can be obtained. The authors gratefully acknowledge the financial supports from the Key Program Project of the National Natural Science Foundation of China (Grant No. 50234040) and the Major Program Project of the Knowledge Innovation Program of the Chinese Academy of Sciences (Grant No. KCCX1-SW-22).