A low-in-oil dressing-type o/w emulsion incorporating a rich-in-fiber orange pulp commercial product, either in crude form or following comminution, was prepared and the rheological properties and physicochemical stability of the emulsion were studied. Interactions between the adsorbed at the droplet surfaces yolk proteins and the pulp surface constituents, possibly electrostatic in nature, resulted in extensive droplet aggregation. This was reflected in the dramatic increase of emulsion rheological parameter values, derived by applying the power or the Casson equation to shear stress-rate of shear data. Pulp incorporation resulted in an improvement of emulsion stability against creaming while the stability against droplet coalescence was only marginally affected. In addition, the rheological parameter values of the fortified with pulp emulsion exhibited an appreciable increase with storage, especially in the case of emulsions incorporating the crude pulp. These findings are combined with oil droplet or pulp particle size and ζ-potential data to probe the emulsion structure and explain its behavior during aging.Dietary fibers, defined as a mixture of indigestible plant polysaccharides and lignin, have been receiving increasing attention in recent years both from the public and industry, due to the possible connection between low dietary fiber intake and the incidence of cardiovascular disease, diabetes or colonic neoplasia. The most common form of dietary fibers is insoluble fibers (cellulose, hemicellulose and lignin), believed to have a potential to reduce constipation and the risk of appearance of gut cancer. The less commonly met in the diet soluble fibers (pectins, beta-glucans and other gums), on the other hand, is thought to have a beneficial effect on digestive and nutrient absorption processes. Daily dietary fiber intake of many individuals in the developed societies is rather low, mainly due to the fact that consumption of food of plant origin is very limited. One way to solve the problem of low dietary fiber intake is to fortify common food products with commercially-available fiber originating from vegetables, pulses, cereals or fruits. A number of studies have been published over recent years in the area of fiber-enriched bakery ( Products appearing in the form of an acidic oil-in-water emulsion, such as mayonnaise and salad dressings, stabilized by egg yolk, could be suitable candidates for fiber incorporation. These semi-solid emulsions may exhibit a range of rheological characteristics, depending mainly on oil phase volume fraction and the level of stabilizers, often incorporated to improve the product textural characteristics and enhance physical stability ( This research work was undertaken to search for ways of successfully fortifying a low-in-oil salad dressing-type emulsion with a rich-in-dietary fiber orange pulp powder product. Citrus fruit pulp in general, and orange pulp in particular, is a waste by-product of the fruit juice processing industries. The pulp is an excellent source of dietary fiber with fairly well-balanced soluble/non soluble dietary fiber content ( A commercially-available dehydrated orange pulp product (Citri-Fi The eggs were broken manually and the yolks were separated from the albumen by rolling on tissue paper. The vitelline membrane was then pierced and the liquid yolks of a number of eggs were collected and pooled. A 5 g/100 mL liquid yolk dispersion was initially prepared by adding under continuous stirring the appropriate amount of yolk in deionized water containing 1.5 g/100 g NaCl. The appropriate amount of orange pulp, either in crude or comminuted form, was then incorporated under continuous stirring, and the pH of the resulting dispersion was adjusted to 3.8 using acetic acid. The oil was gradually introduced into the continuous phase while agitating for 5 min with a mechanical stirrer and a crude emulsion was homogenized for a total of 2 min by employing an Ultra Turrax T25 (IKA Labortechnik, Germany) homogenizer equipped with a S25KG-25F dispersion tool and operating at 8000 for 1 min and 13,500 rpm for the second. Emulsions, 20 mL/100 mL in oil, without dietary fiber (control) or fortified with 2 and 4 g crude or comminuted orange pulp per 100 g of emulsion were prepared. The pulp particle dispersion and the emulsion samples were diluted using deionized water and their particle size distribution was determined by laser light scattering, employing a Malvern Mastersizer 2000 unit (Malvern Instruments, UK). The following optical parameters were applied: refractive indices of pulp, corn oil and water: 1.590, 1.4673 and 1.3300, respectively; absorption of pulp and water: 0 and 0.002, respectively. Application of the laser light-scattering technique was performed, following agitation of the pulp dispersion or emulsion, and particle size data are reported in the form of particle size distribution curves. Moreover, a Zeiss Axiostar Plus reflected light microscope, equipped with a Canon Power Shot A640 photographic camera was employed to determine the structural characteristics of emulsions. The samples were examined under the microscope and photographs were taken after dilution with deionized water. The ζ-potential of pulp particles in the dispersion was measured employing a Malvern Zetasizer Nano S (Malvern, Worcestershire, UK), using a backscattering technique (measurement at 173°). In order to evaluate the emulsion stability against creaming, a quantity (10 mL) of each emulsion was transferred into a cylindrical glass container (internal diameter, 18 mm; height, 65 mm), sealed with a plastic cap and stored at room temperature for a period of 2 months. The stability of the emulsion was measured by following the height of the visible serum separation layer, In order to evaluate the emulsion stability against coalescence, images from the microscope were acquired with the camera and the oil droplet size for each emulsion was measured manually. Mean diameter values were calculated as the average of about 1000 oil droplets from each emulsion sample at different storage times and were expressed as the mean volume diameter ( The rheological properties of emulsions or their respective continuous phases were determined with the aid of a Brookfield DVII, LV viscometer (Brookfield Engineering Laboratories Inc., USA), combined with a SC4-18/13R or SC4-25/13R small sample adapter (concentric cylinder geometry). All the measurements were conducted at 25 °C, 30 min after the sample was loaded. Mean viscosity values were calculated as the average of three measurements made on the three separately prepared samples. A group of thirty untrained panelists, representing the average consumer, was employed to evaluate the salad dressing emulsions. The panelists were asked to pour a 40 mL sample from a container onto a surface, assess its appearance in terms of pourability, color and smoothness and express their extent of like/dislike using a nine-point hedonic scale. All experiments were repeated at least three times and the data were analyzed using the one-way ANOVA program. The level of confidence was 95%. Significant differences between means were identified by the LSD procedure using the statistical software package SPSS v.8.0 for Windows. Particle size distribution diagrams of crude or comminuted orange pulp dispersions in water are shown in In Oil droplet-pulp particle aggregation should be attributed to interactions, possibly electrostatic in nature, between the droplet and particle surfaces. From z-potential measurements, conducted on orange pulp particle dispersions, it was concluded that the surface of the commercial pulp particles was negatively charged. More specifically, the ζ-potential at pH 6.0 and 3.8 was −17.1 and −13.8 mV, respectively, apparently due to ionization of the carboxylic groups of the pulp surface pectins. The oil droplet surface at pH 3.8 is expected to carry a positive charge, due to the presence of the adsorbed yolk proteins ( As was discussed above, the size of particles in the control emulsion was much smaller compared to that of particles of the fortified with orange pulp emulsions. According, however, to emulsion microphotographs, presented in Salad dressing emulsions are non-Newtonian pseudoplastic materials since their shearing stress, and hence viscosity, depend on the rate of shear applied and, in addition, start to flow only when their yield stress value is exceeded. This behavior is explained in terms of the continuous break down of emulsion structure during the course of shear application and flow (  A total of more than two-thirds of the panelists characterized the dressing incorporating 4 g/100 g comminuted orange pulp either as extremely acceptable (23.33%) or very acceptable (46.67%) while only about 3% of the panelists responses were negative. This may lead to the conclusion that the comminuted pulp particles were successfully incorporated in the emulsion system since the panelists did not detect any flaws in terms of emulsion appearance and flowability. In other words, the dressing retained to an appreciable extent its creamy texture and smooth appearance, properties that characterize this type of products. As shown in All emulsions exhibited a degree of instability against droplet coalescence since their droplet size increased to some extent when stored for a period of 3 months. In fact, the mean volume diameter of these emulsions at the end of the storage period was 3–4 μm higher than it was in the fresh emulsions. In the case of the control emulsion the increase in the droplet diameter was not significant. The high stability against coalescence of the control was also reflected in the lack of any changes in the viscosity upon aging which remained practically the same over the entire period of the 3 months storage (results are not shown). Considering that the oil droplet size of the pulp-incorporating dressings increased during storage, one might have expected these emulsions to become thinner as has been observed for other salad dressing emulsions and mayonnaise ( Orange pulp incorporation at a 4 g/100 g in a dressing-type o/w emulsion with a relatively low oil content may bring about a marked enhancement in its rheological properties and at the same time improve its stability against creaming. At the same time the droplet stability against coalescence is only minimally affected. The size of pulp particles plays a key role in emulsion acceptability by the average consumer and appears to dramatically influence the increase in the rheological parameter values of the emulsion with storage. We are grateful to the R&D Lab. of Lufakis Chemicals, Sindos-Thessaloniki, for conducting the ζ-potential measurements.