The use of autoregressive moving average (ARMA) models to assess the control loop performance for processes that are adequately described by the superposition of a linear dynamic model and linear stochastic or deterministic disturbance model is well known. In this paper, classes of non-linear dynamic/stochastic systems for which a similar result can be obtained are established for single-input single-output discrete system. For these systems, lower mean-square error bounds on performance, can be estimated from the closed-loop routine operating data by using non-linear autoregressive moving average with exogenous inputs (NARMAX) models. It is necessary to know the process time delay. The fitting of these models is greatly facilitated by using efficient algorithms, such as Orthogonal Least Squares or other fast orthogonal search algorithms. These models can also be used to assess the predictive importance of non-linearities over multiple-time horizons.There has been considerable research and industrial application in performance monitoring and assessment in the last decade. While research has focused on monitoring and assessment for univariate and multivariate systems, most industrial applications, and especially those using commercial packages, use a univariate approach Far less has been written on extending the methodologies for performance assessment to non-linear systems. There are several challenges: Complexity of non-linear behavior. Non-linear processes can exhibit six general types of behavior Harmonics arising from periodic inputs. Subharmonics arising from periodic inputs. Chaotic response to simple inputs. Input-dependent stability. Asymmetric response to symmetric inputs. Steady-state input and output multiplicities. Non-equivalent representations. It is a standard result Disturbance representation. For any process, disturbances can enter at any point. For linear systems, these disturbances can always be represented as an additive output disturbance. Since superposition does not exist in non-linear systems, this representation is not universal. This presents challenges both in modelling and in the determination of the minimum variance performance bound. Challenges in model determination and parameter estimation. For systems that admit a linear representation, there are well-established methods for obtaining models of the closed-loop system. These methods can be automated. For non-linear systems there are enormously rich classes of models to be entertained, and the resulting models often have many parameters that must be estimated. In this paper, some preliminary results are presented for determining the minimum variance performance bound for a class of non-linear systems. The basis for minimum variance performance bounds was developed in The development of non-linear minimum variance controllers has been reported in In this paper, it is shown that a minimum-variance-feedback invariant exists for an important class of non-linear processes that can be described by the superposition of a non-linear dynamic model and additive linear or partially non-linear disturbance. In these instances, the minimum variance performance can be estimated from routine operating data. It may be necessary to fit a time series model to the closed-loop data using both inputs and outputs. In many cases, the parameters of the closed-loop system can be estimated using linear regression techniques. Included in this class of processes are those whose process dynamics can be described by an autoregressive Volterra series The outline of this paper is as follows: In Section The class of models considered in this paper are those that can be modelled using an input/output representation. State models are excluded. For discrete models, the general form of the description is: In this paper we are interested in systems that are also affected by disturbances. The most elementary representation is: In linear systems, the following representation is often used The design of controllers to minimize the variance of the process output can be traced to  If the process is controlled by a linear feedback controller, the transfer function between the measured output and the driving force for the disturbance is of the form Estimation of closed-loop impulse response Direct estimation It may be necessary to include a constant in the regression equation to account for the fact that the average value of The development of non-linear minimum variance controllers has been considered by a number of authors The derivation of the minimum variance controller for a process described by Eq. It may not be possible to implement a minimum variance controller due to the fact that: (i) the minimum variance controller often gives high gain, wide bandwidth and unrealistically large control signal variations, and (ii) the controller is physically forbidden to take on certain values which are needed to achieve the minimum variance performance. In both of these cases, the variance of the output must exceed that for when it is possible to implement the minimum variance controller. However, Pragmatic reasons are used to justify the linear representation for the disturbance Minimum variance design for the case where the process plus disturbance model has the more general form described in Eq. The utility of the minimum variance performance estimate is that this lower bound on performance can be estimated readily from a representative sample of closed-loop data when it is felt that the process is adequately described by a linear transfer function with additive stochastic disturbance. In these instances, calculation of the bound requires that existence of a feedback invariant and a methodology to provide for its estimation from routine operating data. In this section, the results in     By construction In the non-linear case In the paper there is also a requirement that the disturbance be modelled as a linear time series, or non-linear time series with a specific structure. The justification for this was considered by Grimble The assumption of an additive term implies that the interaction terms between the disturbance terms and the dynamic terms are small in comparison to the main effect terms. As will be seen, this assumption can be tested empirically. The assumption that the disturbance be modelled as the output of a linear or restricted complexity non-linear time series models is in fact not particularly restrictive. One of the most famous results in time series is a theorem due to Herman Wold, which states that a covariance stationary time series can always be represented as an infinite moving average process driven by white noise A sufficient condition for The dynamics in this example are members of the class of bilinear models   The proof follows readily by noting that with a feedback controller    Since A simpler case in which the non-linear function only includes the inputs is considered, i.e., Volterra series have theoretical justification as approximators with the following desirable properties: They can be used to model non-linear processes that have the following qualitative behavior Many block-oriented non-linearities, such as Hammerstein (a static non-linearity, followed by a linear dynamic model), Weiner models (a linear dynamic model followed by a static non-linearity), Uryson models (Hammerstein models in parallel), and projection-pursuit models (Weiner models in parallel) have Volterra series representations. Recently, Vörös Parallel and cascade Volterra models result in Volterra models. Processes described by control-affine models, i.e. admit a Volterra representation. Non-linear control affine-models have been studied extensively in the control and chemical engineering literature, i.e. Bilinear systems can be approximated with a structured Volterra representation Consider the case when the process can be approximated as a finite discrete-time Volterra series with time delay Innovations or 1-step ahead representation  Polynomial autoregressive (PAR) representation Polynomial autoregressive with exogenous inputs (PARX) representation While both representations can be used to estimate the variance of the Direct methods to estimate the minimum lower bounds are used in this paper using the PAR model in Eq. The OLS algorithm developed by Chen et al. Alternatively, one can combine the OLS approach with a technique that provides a penalty for increasing model complexity. One such method is Akaike’s Information Criterion AIC(s) It has been assumed that For the invariant bounds to exist, it is necessary that the prediction error not depend on the manipulated variable. This assumption can be tested by regressing the prediction errors In this section, an example is provided to demonstrate the methodology outlined in this paper. Consider a non-linear dynamic system which can be represented by a second order Volterra series as: For estimating the minimum variance lower bounds, three direct estimation methods are used: Linear autoregressive (LAR) model: PAR model (linear and quadratic terms only) (see Eq. PARX model (linear and quadratic terms only) (see Eq. When formulating the model, a large number of candidate terms are initially allowed, The estimates of the When using linear AR models, the bias in the estimate of the minimum variance lower bounds in P controller case is much smaller than PI controller case. The reason is that the quadratic contributions are less important using the P controller than the PI controller. While it is possible that the inclusion of more autoregressive terms might provide a ‘better’ estimate An ARMA( There is a slight bias of the estimate of the performance bound for the PI controller case using PAR models. With the PI controller, the The estimates using PARX models are better than PAR models specially for PI controller case since the PARX models are closer to the true prediction functions in finite linear and quadratic inputs form. A class of non-linear dynamic/stochastic systems for which there exist minimum variance feedback invariant performance bounds has been established. For this class of systems, the minimum variance bound can be estimated using closed-loop data using a non-linear PAR or PARX model to estimate the How and where to use these results? The methodology can be used to quantify the effect that non-linearities in the closed loop have on the predictable component of the process. If the differences between the linear and non-linear performance bounds are important, then further investigation into the source of the non-linearities might be justified, or the use of a non-linear controller might be considered. In the case of linear systems, extended horizon performance indices have proven to be valuable Although not investigated in this paper, the use of higher-order spectra The authors acknowledge support of the Natural Sciences and Engineering Research Council of Canada, the School of Graduate Studies and Research, Queen’s University, and the Ontario Government. Referees provided valuable comments on the original manuscript. Discussion with P.J. McLellan were appreciated.  The expression for Combining these results with Eq. To illustrate the methodology, consider an ARIMA(0,