This paper demonstrates the use of the method of manufactured solutions to verify the implementation of tightly coupled conjugate heat transfer for fluid–solid solvers. The interface conditions in the prescribed manufactured solutions were implemented to mimic real effects such as no-slip, and temperature/heat flux match between the solid and fluid domains. The newly developed solid heat transfer solver was verified in standalone mode using this prescribed manufactured solution and was found to have no apparent coding errors. Our pre-existing in-house compressible fluid solver (Eilmer) was used to demonstrate the conjugate heat transfer implementation. Both the fluid and solid solvers showed an expected spatial order of convergence of 2.0 in the standalone mode. The coupled conjugate heat transfer mode also showed no coding errors and demonstrated that the spatial order of convergence was again 2.0. The one-sided spatial discretisation utilised to enforce the tight coupling for the interface conditions were effectively equivalent to a central difference. Hence, the overall spatial order of the error convergence for the entire domain, including the interface, was 2.0. The method prescribed in this work can be extended for verification of other conjugate heat transfer solvers, in particular for compressible flow scenarios where analytical solutions may not be readily available.Modelling heat transfer between fluids and solids is important for many applications in engineering. Such applications include heat exchangers While the theory of CHT is well developed, it is often difficult to develop analytical solutions, especially in the cases of novel geometries, non-linear boundary conditions and/or in the presence of complex flow or material physics. Exact solutions are usually only available for simple geometries, with linear boundary conditions. In rare cases, transient solutions are also possible, again after making simplifying assumptions in the flow physics (usually to eliminate non-linearity). Often we wish to model complex physical systems where it is not sufficiently accurate to use the simplifications inherent in these analytical models. In these cases, a numerical solution technique can be used that does not require simplifying assumptions. It is important then to verify that the numerical solution technique for CHT problems is correctly implemented. The focus of this paper is the development and demonstration of a verification method for the numerical solution to CHT problems in a fluid/solid system. An important part of developing a numerical solution method is undertaking the verification and validation. During development of our numerical method, we verified the independent implementations of the flow solver and solid solver. However, when combining the two solvers with a coupling interface, the question arose as to how to ensure that the coupling is implemented correctly. In this paper, we focus on the verification of the combined solvers and the coupling interface of those solvers. Verification of a discretised solution to a set of governing equations can be performed by comparison to analytical solutions. For some sets of governing equations, exact solutions are available. For example, in the verification of CHT modelling with incompressible flow, several investigators have verified their implementations using exact solutions An alternative approach for verification, when exact solutions are not available or not easily computed, is to use the method of manufactured solutions (MMS) to construct an analytical solution, first proposed by Steinberg and Roache In what follows, we first describe the governing equations for the coupled fluid/solid system, and the numerical solution method in the gas domain, the solid domain and at the interface (Section A number of approaches have been taken in the literature to couple fluid and solid domains in numerical simulations. Duchaine et al. We favoured the partitioning approach when we came to develop a numerical method to simulate microcombustors largely because we already had a well-established in-house compressible flow solver. The extra work required to address the CHT problem was to develop a solid domain solver and a coupling interface. In this section, each of the solvers are described and the method of coupling. For the simulation of the gas domain in the CHT problem, we use the compressible flow solver, Eilmer, developed at the University of Queensland The formulation, verification and validation of Eilmer have been documented by Gollan and Jacobs  In two dimensions, spatial discretisation is performed over finite-volume quadrilateral cells. This leads to a spatially discretised estimate for the time derivative as The discretised equations are integrated in a time-accurate manner using one of several explicit update schemes (Euler, predictor–corrector or a 3-stage Runge–Kutta update). The time advancement algorithm uses the operator-splitting approach to increment physical processes in a separated manner. This is particularly useful for reacting flows where the chemistry integration step can be treated by specialised ODE update methods expressly designed to handle chemical kinetic problems. The governing equation set is closed by specifying the thermodynamic behaviour of the gas using equations of state. Given its history as a hypersonic flow solver, Eilmer has equations of state for a variety of thermochemistry behaviours including gases with constant specific heats, thermally perfect gases, gases with thermal nonequilibrium, and heavy gases (where the assumption of perfectly elastic collisional behaviour does not hold). The solid solver also uses a finite volume formulation on a structured grid. This promotes numerical compatibility with Eilmer, some reuse of data structures and algorithm implementation in code, and implicitly conserves heat fluxes at the cell interfaces. The notation of the computational grid is presented in The heat transfer in the solid is computed by numerically integrating the integral form of the energy equation. This equation is Equation The order of spatial accuracy is determined by the choice of the algorithm used to determine the conductive flux Using this, the gradient at any cell primary interface (needed for solving Eq. For partitioned solvers, as is the case here, coupling between the two solvers can be classified as “tight or strong” or “loose or weak” Considering only conduction at the interfaces, the flux condition can be expanded as The method of manufactured solutions is typically used to verify the discretisation method for the interior of the domain. The method, as it is usually used, does not directly test boundary conditions: they are prescribed directly using the chosen manufactured solution as either Neumann or Dirichlet type conditions. However, for verifying the coupling between the fluid and solid domains, we specifically desire a direct test of the implemented boundary condition used for coupling. In other words, we do not want to use an artificial boundary condition during verification, but rather, we wish to verify the coupling interface as it would be used in practice. We can construct this verification test of the coupling interface using a manufactured solution approach. Only now, care needs to be taken to ensure that the chosen solution is compatible with the interface condition being tested. The innovation in our approach to verifying the coupling interface is to choose the solution to match the physics of what occurs at the interface. Assuming no heat accumulation at the interface, the physical boundary condition at the interface is that temperatures and energy fluxes are balanced. When choosing our manufactured solution, we choose a temperature field that conforms to these interface conditions, that is, a temperature field that matches temperature and energy flux locally at the interface. By doing this, the implemented interface condition can be used directly without modification and thus verified using the method of manufactured solutions. The additional benefits are that the flow solver, solid solver and coupling are all verified simultaneously, and the effect of the coupling interface on the global order of spatial accuracy can be determined. In what follows, we show the chosen manufactured solution. The domain for this solution, including fluid and solid sections, is shown in As mentioned, for the present solution the velocity variables Similarly, the fluid/solid conjugate heat transfer conditions of matching temperature and heat flux (Eq. Using the chosen constants ( The manufactured solution is not a direct solution to the governing equations. In order for this manufactured solution to A key requirement for the MMS to be used for code verification is that the solvers should be able to accept these arbitrary source terms. Our solvers handle arbitrary source terms by allowing the specification of user-defined source term functions which can be a function of space and time. For the generation of the source terms using the procedure discussed above, we used SymPy Before attempting the coupled problem, the fluid and solid solvers were verified independently using the manufactured solution presented in Section The solid solver has only recently been added to the solver capabilities and has not been documented elsewhere. As such, we show the verification of the solid solver in isolation using the proposed manufactured solution. The final part of this section demonstrates the manufactured solution for use on the complete coupled problem. We restrict our attention first to the solid domain only. The solid solver was tested using two different initial conditions: 1) the domain was initialised with the manufactured solution; and 2) the domain was initialised with a temperature of 350 K everywhere. When verifying the solid solver only, the boundary conditions were fixed at their analytical values on all boundaries including the coupling interface. Verification was performed by solving the solid domain on 4 different grids and confirming that the spatial error diminished as predicted by the formal order of accuracy. The grids used had the following numbers of cells in the  The norm values at steady state for each of the grid levels are shown as a function of cell size Δ For the CHT case, the two solvers were coupled using the method described in Section  The Finally, the observed order of spatial accuracy for the coupled solver is computed based on the These manufactured solutions were further used to test for a “real world” case relevant to the microcombustors that our code will find immediate application in, by setting the This paper shows how the method of manufactured solutions can be used in coupled fluid/solid conjugate heat transfer solvers to verify the implementation of both solvers and the coupling interface. By selecting the manufactured solution such that the physical condition at the interface is satisfied, the interface implementation can be tested directly using the manufactured solution approach. This differs from the normal use of manufactured solutions wherein the boundary conditions are somewhat artificial and only the numerical treatment of the interior of the domain is verified. A particular manufactured solution was proposed that is useful for fluid domains with a compressible fluid. The solution is chosen such that temperature and energy flux are matched at the interface between the fluid and solid domains. Additionally, to meet physical constraints of the interface on the fluid side, the solution is chosen to give a no-slip velocity boundary condition in the fluid domain. By way of example, this manufactured solution was applied to our in-house flow solver Eilmer and our newly developed solid solver. We showed that the observed order of spatial accuracy approached second order globally. This verified our implementation of the flow solver, solid solver and, most importantly, the tight coupling between the two solvers. This also demonstrates that the manufactured solution is useful as a verification exercise for other conjugate heat transfer solvers. This work was supported by computational resources provided by the Australian Government through Raijin under the National Computational Merit Allocation Scheme and was supported under The interface heat flux condition Eq. 