In this paper, the activity coefficients of calcium in SiCa binary and SiCaPb ternary alloys were each calculated by the molecular interaction volume model (MIVM). The value of the infinite dilution activity coefficient of calcium was determined to be 0.000863 in the SiCa binary alloy at 1723 K. The activities of silicon and lead in the SiPb binary alloy and of calcium and lead in the CaPb binary alloy were calculated by the Kuo-chih Chou's method using phase diagrams, whose effectiveness was verified. In comparison with the experimental data, all errors predicted by the MIVM were between ±0.22 to ±29.7% and the standard deviations were between ±2.26 × 10−7 to ±0.073. Such predicted values are actually small and in good agreement with the experimental data, which indicates that the MIVM is reliable to predict the activities or activity coefficients of SiCa binary and SiCaPb ternary alloys.The calcium impurity in solar grade silicon shortens the lifetime of the excited carriers in a silicon solar cell and disturbs electricity generation. The calcium content in metallurgical grade silicon has been predominant in current national standard. Accordingly, the removal of calcium from silicon is a major issue during the silicon purification process. The removal of calcium from silicon is accomplished by selective oxidation followed by the interoxide reaction between the formed calcium oxide and silicon dioxide to form calcium silicate Activity is an important thermodynamic parameter. The lack of thermodynamic property of calcium in molten silicon has been one of the main obstacles, which has impeded further progress of the metallurgical route. Meanwhile, the experimental studies of thermodynamic properties are expensive, time consuming and difficult to conduct. Accordingly, theoretical prediction is suitable to obtain the thermodynamic parameters In the current study, the Si The MIVM developed by Tao Where In a When For predicting the activities of the components in the silicon-based melts, the relative parameters of the pure components are necessary, and are shown in The values of Then the values of The activity coefficients of calcium in dilute concentration have been calculated in the Si A comparison of our results to those from other investigations revealed the consistency between them. Tuset JKr Kuo-chih Chou For the Si Where For the Ca The thermodynamic data to determine the activities in the Si For the Si The average relative error The activities calculated by the Kuo-chih Chou model are based on the experimental phase diagram. The results presented in The activities of lead in the silicon-rich liquid at 1687 K have also been reported by Jafa Safarian et al. The activity coefficients of calcium in the Si The temperature-independent pair potential energies in this ternary system are presented in From the comparison of the predicted values shown in  The activity coefficients of calcium in the Si The activities of silicon and lead in the Si The activity coefficients of calcium in the Si The present work provides a feasible method for predicting the activities and activity coefficients of these alloys, suggesting that the MIVM has a good physical basis. The authors are grateful for financial support from the