The tibial eminence fractures are most frequently observed in children and adolescents increasingly. Their classification and management are mainly made by the displacement of the fracture fragment. The surgical management has evolved from open to arthroscopic techniques. Various fixation techniques have been defined. Mainly, there are 2 types of fixation: screw and suture-based methods. Although recent studies have demonstrated the biomechanical advantages of newer suture-based fixation methods, the best method of fixation has not been defined, yet. Currently, nondisplaced and reducible fractures are managed nonoperatively, and displaced and irreducible fractures are managed operatively. Until the best surgical method is defined by higher level of evidence studies clinically, functionally, radiologically, and biomechanically, the type of fixation will be chosen by considering the experience of the surgeon, the clinical status of the patient, the availability of the implants, and the morphology of these fractures.The tibial eminence fractures have been classified and managed according to the degree of fragment displacement. In this respect, the article entitled “Arthroscopic Fixation of Tibial Eminence Fractures: A Biomechanical Comparative Study of Screw, Suture and Suture Anchor” by Li, Yu, Liu, Su, Liao, and Li In our opinion, the comparison of different fixation methods would be more, to look from a wider perspective. However, we are aware that this would increase the necessary number of cadavers, and the expense of the study. The authors created standardized 2 × 2 × 0.5 cm inverted pyramidal fracture fragments in each specimen, which consisted of 24 skeletally mature fresh-frozen cadaveric knees. Six cadaveric knees were found in 4 fixation groups. Although the knees belong to the adult cadavers, the authors confirmed the specimens in the 4 groups by bone mineral density testing, which was found to be similar in all groups, to reduce the influence of bone quality on biomechanical test results. Li et al. In our opinion, there are more issues that should have been taken into account in the study of Li et al. Besides the type of fixation; we think that 2 important issues are worth mentioning. First, the prospective and multicenter study by Feucht et al. In our experience, the use of an accessory portal, the so-called transquadricipital portal, which is located 1 cm above the superior pole of the patella in the midline, during arthroscopic fixation of the displaced tibial eminence fractures with screw is extremely beneficial. We obtained highly successful clinical results in 12 patients with a relatively long-term experience since the first description of this approach in 2001: excellent-to-good clinical results without residual anterior laxity at a mean long-term follow-up of 49 months. The use of the accessory “transquadricipital portal” in the arthroscopic fixation of tibial eminence fractures has the subsequent advantages: easy reduction by multidirectional guidewires perpendicular to the fracture line, vertical rigid fixation with a cannulated screw, limited requirement for intraoperative fluoroscopy, avoidance of neurovascular injuries, early range of motion, and return to activities. Technically, debridement of the fracture hematoma, meticulous removal of any possible interposed soft tissues, careful anatomic reduction of the fragment, use of 4.5-mm arthroscopic cannula through the transquadricipital portal to protect patellofemoral articular cartilage, and fixation of the fragment perpendicular to the fracture line when the knee is flexed not more than 40° flexion are important steps to be followed. Moreover, we think that the use of this portal will ameliorate the arthroscopic placement and vision of the fixation of fracture with the subsequent techniques: modified suture technique with 2 FiberWire sutures that created neckwear knots or the suture anchors, which were found to exhibit superior biomechanical properties comparatively in the study of Li et al. As a future prospect, in our opinion, 2 questions should be answered by further higher level of evidence studies. First, is surgical or nonsurgical management the best for Meyer and McKeever type II fractures? Secondly, which surgical fixation method is the best biomechanically, functionally, radiologically, and clinically? Finally, we think that until getting the answers to these questions, the best type of fixation in surgically managed patients will be best chosen by considering the experience of the surgeon, the clinical status of the patient, the availability of the implants, and the morphology of the displaced and nonreducible fractures. 