The successful running of a sawmill is dependent on its ability to achieve the highest possible value recovery from the sawlogs, i.e. to optimize the use of the raw material. Such optimization requires information about the properties of every log. One method of measuring these properties is to use an X-ray log scanner. The objective of the present study was to determine the accuracy when grading Scots pine (Pinus sylvestris L.) sawlogs using an industrial scanner known as the X-ray LogScanner. The study was based on 150 Scots pine sawlogs from a sawmill in northern Sweden. All logs were scanned in the LogScanner at a speed of 125 m/min. The X-ray images were analyzed on-line with measures of different properties as a result (e.g. density and density variations). The logs were then sawn with a normal sawing pattern (50×125 mm) and the logs were graded depending on the result from the manual grading of the center boards. Finally, partial least squares (PLS) regression was used to calibrate statistical models that predict the log grade based on the properties measured by the X-ray LogScanner. The study showed that 77–83% of the logs were correctly sorted when using the scanner to sort logs into three groups according to the predicted grade of the center boards. After sawing the sorted logs, 67% of the boards had the correct grade. When scanning the same logs repeatedly, the relative standard deviation of the predicted grade was 12–20%. The study also showed that it is possible to sort out 10 and 16%, respectively, of the material into two groups with high quality logs, without changing the grade distribution of the rest of the material to any great extent.The successful running of a sawmill is dependent on its ability to achieve the highest possible value recovery from the sawlogs, i.e. to optimize the use of the raw material. Today many sawmills strive to produce products to customer specifications. One example of such a product would be when a customer orders boards with a special dimension and specified grade. A traditional sawmill, which only sorts logs according to diameter and species, will then produce boards with the correct dimension but with a large variation in grade. Boards with the wrong grade will then be difficult to sell and because of this result in a low value recovery. This means that cost effective production of such a product requires that the sawmill be able to sort logs according to the expected grade of the sawn products. In other words, the sawmill must be able to predict the properties of the sawn products before the actual sawing operation. Nondestructive measurements of inner properties of logs can be measured using gamma rays ( Based on the experience from the simulations, an industrial scanner known as the X-ray LogScanner has been developed and installed at a sawmill in Valåsen, just outside Karlskoga, Sweden ( The aim of the present study was to describe how a specific sawmill can use the X-ray LogScanner to sort logs according to the expected grade of the sawn products. The study is based on a total number of 150 Scots pine ( The logs were then cant sawn with a normal sawing pattern (50×125 mm, two center boards from each log) and the center boards were visually graded in green condition by an experienced grader. The center boards were graded in four different grades; Q1 are high quality boards, Q2 are high quality boards with sound knots, Q3 are standard quality boards and Q4 are of low quality. When grading the boards, two boards from the same log often have different grades. This means that even if 100% of the logs are correctly sorted, the amount of boards with the correct grade after sawing will be significantly below 100%. This also means that the sawmill had to define how to sort logs with center boards of different grades. Statistical models that predict the log grade based on variables measured by the X-ray LogScanner were then calibrated using partial least squares (PLS) regression and jackknifing ( Using the decision tree, the effect of different thresholds was analyzed. This made it possible to compare the results when sorting logs using different strategies. The result when sorting logs can be described in terms of recovery and grade distribution ( Finally, the repeatability was evaluated by calculating the relative standard deviation of the predicted grade ( The 150 logs produced a total number of 300 boards of which 21% were graded as Q1, 49% as Q2, 30% as Q3 and 1% as Q4. For 65% of the logs, both center boards from each log had equal grade. When comparing the grade from the X-ray LogScanner with the two visually graded boards from each log, 77% of the logs in the training set and 83% of the logs in the test set were correctly graded by the X-ray LogScanner ( The relation between recovery and grade distribution for different threshold levels is shown in High correctness, Q1 High percentage, Q1 High recovery, Q1 A comparison between  The result when sorting logs based on X-ray LogScanner measurements are significantly better compared with similar studies using an optical 3D-scanner ( The study showed that 77–83% of the logs were correctly sorted when using the X-ray LogScanner to sort logs into three groups according to the predicted grade of the center boards. After sawing the sorted logs, 67% of the boards had the correct grade. When scanning the same logs repeatedly, the relative standard deviation of the predicted grade was 12–20%. The study also showed that it is possible to sort out 10 and 16%, respectively, of the material into two groups with high quality logs, without changing the grade distribution of the rest of the material to any great extent.