The introduction of the reverse shoulder arthroplasty has provided shoulder surgeons with more options for the treatment of complex proximal humeral fractures in the elderly. Early reported results suggest that the average functional outcome may be better than hemiarthroplasty in certain patients and specific clinical scenarios. In addition, these results seem to be reached more quickly with less dependence on rehabilitation. The reverse prosthesis may be particularly useful in patients aged older than 70 years, especially those with severely comminuted fractures in osteopenic bone. These factors likely have a negative impact on the results of hemiarthroplasty and internal fixation. Despite the potential benefits of reverse arthroplasty for fracture, there is a significant learning curve with the use of this prosthesis, and it has its own set of complications. The surgeon must show appropriate judgment when selecting a reverse arthroplasty in the setting of a proximal humeral fracture and, furthermore, be well acquainted with the surgical technique and prosthetic options at the time of surgery. Although the longevity of this prosthesis remains unknown, midterm outcomes are promising.Fractures of the proximal humerus are the third most common fracture in persons aged older than 65 years. ORIF of complex proximal humeral fractures in the elderly remains a challenge, mainly because of the osteoporotic bone and degenerated rotator cuff that may be encountered at the time of surgery. To improve fixation in weak bone, locking-plate technology has been frequently used over the past 10 years. These “fixed-angle constructs” were designed to withstand the muscle forces of the rotator cuff and potentially prevent varus collapse of the fracture. Although this technology has improved on previous screw-plate constructs, recent studies have shown a high failure rate and a mean of 3 complications per patient, with a rate of secondary screw cutout of up to 57%. Traditionally, when ORIF is not an option, hemiarthroplasty has been the treatment of choice for comminuted fractures in the elderly. This method of treatment was described by Neer The introduction of the reverse shoulder prosthesis in 2004 to the United States has offered shoulder surgeons a new and promising alternative for the treatment of shoulder pathologies. The reverse shoulder prosthesis is made up of a baseplate and glenosphere construct on the glenoid side with a humeral cup and stem on the humerus. This is a semiconstrained device that relies on the tension of the deltoid for stability. There are 2 current design methodologies. One is based on the original Grammont-style prosthesis, with a medialized center of rotation at the baseplate-glenoid interface. The second design places the center of rotation more laterally within the glenosphere. Despite the differing biomechanics, both prostheses allow for a greater deltoid lever arm, which enables arm elevation in the absence of a functioning rotator cuff. Early European experience with reverse arthroplasty for proximal humeral fracture has been encouraging. Traditional indications for RSA have been rotator cuff arthropathy, fracture sequelae with arthritis, and failure of a prior arthroplasty. Boileau et al Given the versatility afforded by the RSA, this prosthesis has become a salvage option for a failed hemiarthroplasty. In patients with rotator cuff deficiency in the face of glenohumeral arthritis, a standard total shoulder arthroplasty is contraindicated because of the risk of eccentric loading and early loosening of the glenoid component. Hemiarthroplasty for the cuff-deficient arthritic shoulder has resulted in variable gains in function and unreliable improvement in pain. RSA has also recently been used for the treatment of rotator cuff deficiency without arthritis. Repair of massive rotator cuff tears in the elderly with pseudoparalytic shoulders has been associated with high failure rates. RSA has recently been applied to the treatment of acute 4-part proximal humeral fractures. Nonoperative management is best reserved for nondisplaced fractures of the proximal humerus or those patients who are medically unfit for surgery. Three- and 4-part fractures have been treated nonoperatively but with poor results. Predicting which 3- or 4-part fracture will do well with nonoperative management is difficult, and a patient’s decision not to undergo surgery may have its own untoward consequences. A recent systematic review on the nonoperative treatment of proximal humeral fractures noted good functional results with nonoperative management. Closed reduction and percutaneous pinning (CRPP) has gained popularity among some surgeons in the treatment of proximal humeral fractures. This method of fixation offers the advantage of less periosteal stripping and disruption of the blood supply to the fracture fragments. Improved American Shoulder and Elbow Surgeons, Constant, and pain scores were seen after CRPP of displaced proximal humeral fractures. In addition to CRPP, closed reduction and intramedullary nailing are preferred by some surgeons. The current evidence is limited with regard to the use of intramedullary nailing for 3- and 4-part fractures. ORIF of 3- or 4-part fractures is often a good surgical option to restore anatomy. However, difficulty maintaining fracture reduction postoperatively and hardware-related complications have caused some surgeons to have reservations about this type of operative intervention. Obtaining an anatomic reduction and maintaining it in the face of osteoporotic bone are difficult. A study evaluating the outcomes of 3- and 4-part proximal humeral fractures in the elderly resulted in a 51% early complication rate and a 26% reoperation rate in the treatment of 82 shoulders with osteosynthesis. Hemiarthroplasty for the treatment of proximal humeral fractures is one of the most complex and technically difficult procedures to perform in shoulder surgery. Multiple variables including proper prosthetic height, retroversion, and tuberosity reduction and fixation come into play to achieve a satisfactory result. Initial reports by Neer The complexity of treating proximal humeral fractures combined with the variable results obtained through nonoperative management, ORIF, and hemiarthroplasty has led to a shift toward the use of RSA for complex proximal humeral fractures, especially in patients aged older than 70 years ( Initial reports using RSA for fracture have been promising. A prospective cohort study of 20 patients with proximal humeral fractures showed improved Constant scores and Short Form 36 scores close to age-related norms when the Delta III RSA (Depuy Orthopaedics, Warsaw, IN) was used for acute fractures in the elderly. These initial results of RSA for fracture were promising, and studies comparing RSA with a hemiarthroplasty have since been published. Gallinet et al Another study compared the use of hemiarthroplasty with RSA for the treatment of acute proximal humeral fractures in the elderly. The patients with RSA had significantly better Oxford Shoulder Scores Although there are a fair number of articles showing the superiority of RSA over hemiarthroplasty, we believe that these results need to be interpreted with caution. There is a clear indication for an RSA in an elderly patient with a comminuted proximal humeral fracture with osteoporotic bone. There is recent evidence supporting the use of an RSA for massive rotator cuff tears in patients aged younger than 65 years or even as young as 46 years. The surgical approach for an RSA has been either the standard deltopectoral approach or the anterosuperior approach. Each approach has its advantages and disadvantages. The deltopectoral approach is the universal and familiar approach to the shoulder. It allows adequate access to the fracture fragments for suture fixation and provides excellent glenoid exposure after fracture fragment mobilization. However, exposure and reduction of the greater tuberosity can be challenging through the deltopectoral approach. The anterosuperior approach uses a more limited superiorly based incision and a deltoid split. Our preferred surgical technique uses a deltopectoral approach. The patient is placed in the beach-chair position with the arm draped free. A mechanical arm holder (McConnell Orthopaedics, Greenville, TX, USA) assists with positioning of the extremity throughout the entire case. We ensure that the patient’s arm can be adducted and extended during the case for proper humeral preparation. A skin incision is made from the coracoid process distally (approximately 10 cm). We prefer to retract the cephalic vein laterally. The axillary nerve is identified medially underneath the conjoined tendon. The musculocutaneous nerve is identified posterior to the conjoined tendon before placement of a self-retaining retractor between the conjoined tendon and the deltoid. A soft tissue biceps tenodesis is performed in all cases. The proximal humeral fracture fragments are then mobilized with a Cobb elevator. The humeral head is removed between the fractured greater and lesser tuberosities. If any of the articular surface remains with either tuberosity, it is removed. We place heavy nonabsorbable sutures around the lesser and greater tuberosities at the tendon-bone junction to obtain control of the fragments and for final tuberosity reconstruction ( We then direct our attention to the preparation of the glenoid. Retractors are placed to protect the axillary nerve anteriorly. A curved retractor may be placed posteriorly on the glenoid to retract the humeral shaft and tuberosity posteroinferiorly ( Humeral preparation is then performed with the arm adducted and extended. The humeral shaft is reamed to provide a 1-mm cement mantle around the humerus. The trial implant is then placed in 20° of retroversion. Humeral version is judged by using the patient’s forearm in relation to the alignment rods on a humeral stem jig. The humeral stem and liners are then trialed with attention to range of motion, soft tissue tension, and implant impingement. The height of the implant in relation to the humeral calcar is noted for final implantation. Some systems provide a height and alignment jig to assist in trial reduction and re-creation of the trial position with the final implant. Restoration of humeral length is the most important factor in minimizing postoperative dislocation. Tuberosity fixation to the implant and to the shaft remains important for the RSA when used for fracture. Recent evidence has shown that improved rotation may be obtained if the tuberosities are repaired anatomically to the RSA implant. Gallinet et al When one is repairing the tuberosities during this procedure, meticulous handling of the tuberosities is necessary. Nonabsorbable sutures are placed through the bone-tendon junction of each fragment as described by Boileau et al. Positioning of the baseplate and glenosphere on the glenoid is crucial to the success and longevity of the RSA. These concepts hold true regardless of the indication for the RSA. The baseplate should be positioned inferiorly on the glenoid to limit scapular notching. Screw fixation and positioning of the glenoid baseplate have been the subject of recent studies. The “3-column concept” of scapula fixation was introduced in 2008. Proper tensioning of the RSA should be addressed to prevent postoperative instability. Shoulder surgeons often rely on the tension of the conjoined tendon and deltoid muscle to assist in the determination of the height of the implant. The implant should be stable before fixation of the tuberosities. Recently, Walch and colleagues Lastly, rotation of the humeral component for the RSA deserves mention. We position the implant in 20° of retroversion with regard to the forearm. Most RSA implants have a jig that is able to hold alignment rods that reference the forearm, which is our preferred method. Prior studies evaluating humeral component positioning in relation to the bicipital groove have shown that this is an unreliable landmark. Various complications have been reported since the introduction of the RSA, including hematomas, infections, acromial stress fractures, early implant failures/loosening, and scapula fractures, as well as neurologic injuries. No specific complications with regard to using an RSA for a proximal humeral fracture can be mentioned. The most common postoperative complication is instability, with an incidence of 4.7%. Currently, there is no evidence in the literature validating the optimal postoperative program after an RSA. Zumstein et al RSA for certain proximal humeral fractures in the elderly can show improved outcomes and may have more predictable functional results than hemiarthroplasty based on the current evidence. The longevity and cost-effectiveness of this relatively expensive implant are currently unknown. Drs. Acevedo and Vanbeek have no conflict of interest to report. Dr. Abboud is a consultant, paid speaker, and has received royalties from Integra. Dr. Williams is a consultant for Tornier and Depuy; has received royalties from Depuy; and has been paid to lecture for Depuy. Dr. Lazarus is a consultant for and has been paid to lecture for Tornier.