 Photo by Min-Yen Lu (Emily) Prof. emeritus Dr. habil. Dr.h.c. C.Sc. D.Sc. Sándor Bárány was born on 27.02.1937, in the village Vary, district Beregovo, Transcarpathia, that time (1920–1938) Czechoslovakia. This territory between 895–1871 and 1938–1945 belonged to Hungary, between 1871–1920 to the Austrian-Hungarian Empire, between 1945–1991 to the Soviet Union, and since 1991 to Ukraine. After the WWII Sándor found himself in another country where his name was translated as Alexander Alexandrovich. So, Sándor Bárány became AA Baran without being asked his agreement for this change. After finishing the high school with gold medal in Beregovo, he studied chemistry at the T. Shevchenko Kiev University in 1954–1959 and, as an “aspirant” (i.e. PhD student) of physical chemistry at the Institute of Physical Chemistry of the Ukrainian Academy of Sciences (1961–1964). In 1965 he defended his Candidate of Sciences (PhD) dissertation “Radiometric study of counter-ions adsorption during coagulation of lyophobic sols” (at the Institute of Physical Chemistry, Ukrainian Academy of Sciences) and in 1982 his Doctor of Sciences dissertation “Electro-surface properties and stability of polymer-containing disperse systems” (Leningrad University, USSR). In the years 1964–1991 he held positions of Researcher, Senior Researcher, Group Leader and Head of Laboratory at the Institute of Physical Chemistry and Institute of Colloid and Water Chemistry, Ukrainian Academy of Sciences, Kiev. In 1992 he was invited to join the University of Miskolc, Hungary, where Bárány served as a Science Advisor, Head of Department, Institute of Chemistry Director, and since 2007 as Professor emeritus. In 1995–1996 he has been Visiting Professor at the Georgia Institute of Technology (Atlanta, USA) and in 2007–2011 to the Technical University of Kosice (Slovakia). Between 1996 and 2006 Sándor was several times elected as an Adjunct Professor at the University Utah (Salt Lake City, USA). Since 2012 he is also a Professor of Chemistry at the Transcarpathian II. Ferenc Rákóczi Hungarian Institute, in his native town Beregovo, Ukraine. Sándor taught colloid chemistry and electrochemistry of colloids at universities of Hungary, Slovakia, Ukraine, Kazakhstan, USA, Japan and Argentina as well as organic chemistry, general chemistry, water treatment and polymer chemistry at the University of Miskolc and II. F. Rákoczi Institute in Beregovo. He was an Advisor of 19 C.Sc. (PhD) and D.Sc. dissertations with students from Bulgaria, Hungary, Kazakhstan, Russia and Ukraine. He has been a Principal Investigator of two dozen national and international scientific projects, including a NSF-Hungarian Academy of Sciences, Hungarian-Israeli, Hungarian-Argentinean, Hungarian-Portuguese, four Hungarian-Russian, five Hungarian-Ukrainian bilateral scientific projects as well as a co-PI of two INTAS projects. He had several month stays at the Institute of Physical Chemistry of the DDR Academy of Sciences, Berlin (1976), Institute of Mineral Processing (Freiberg, 1977) University College London (1993) and the University of Wageningen, The Netherlands (1994) where established fruitful scientific contacts and personal life-long friendship with Professors H. Sonntag, J. Gregory, J. Lyklema, G. Fleer, L. Koopal, M. Cohen-Stuart. In April 1990 Bárány served as an UN expert on water treatment in Beijing, at the “Water Resources, Planning and Treatment” high ranked symposium. Bárány was two times elected as an IACIS Council member (2000 and 2003). He was an Initiator and Chairman of 14 international conferences, symposia and workshops in colloid and surface chemistry, environmental protection problems, including the series of six conferences on Carpathian Euroregion Ecology, NATO ARW “Role of Interfaces in Environmental Protection”, The 2nd conference “Interfaces Against Pollution”, Hungarian-Israeli-Korean Workshop “Solid-Liquid, Liquid-Liquid Interfaces”, International Workshop “Non-equilibrium Electro-surface Phenomena”, “Ecology of Demilitarization” and others. He participated in over 150 conferences in 30 countries around the world, served as a referee of international journals: Colloid J., Colloids Surf. A., J. Colloid Interf. Sci, Adv. Colloid Interf. Sci. Sándor during his over 50 Sándor started his scientific activity as a university student in Prof. A. Golub's inorganic chemistry lab and published with him 2 papers devoted to synthesis and properties of complexes of lead and tin perchlorates with dioxan. Prof. Dmitrii Strazhesko, a well-known Ukrainian professional on adsorption and Prof. Yuli Glazman, an internationally recognized colloid chemist were his Candidate of Science (PhD) dissertation advisors. As PhD student, he measured for the first time the correct values of adsorption of tiny amounts (micrograms per g) of counter-ions by coagulation of sols with electrolytes using a direct radioactive tracer method and put end to a half century discussion on this issue. Probably, the young generation of colloid chemists does not know that Freundlich's “adsorption” theory of colloidal stability was based on the idea of equivalent adsorption of counter-ions at the moment of coagulation (1910). H. Freundlich, K. Joachimson and G. Ettisch (Z. Phys. Chem, 141 A, 249, 1929) tried to check the theory and to measure adsorption of different ions from the difference of their concentration prior and after coagulation of hydrophobic sols using electrochemical methods. Quite different unrealistic values of adsorption have been obtained, and as a result Freundlich refused his own theory. Baran determined the counter-ions adsorption based on measurements of the radioactivity of sediments formed at coagulation concentration of different electrolytes labeled by radioactive counter-ions. He demonstrated that: (i) the adsorbed amounts of counter-ions of different charge at coagulation value of electrolytes and their binary mixtures are really equivalent, (ii) the isotherms of counter-ions adsorption by colloidal particles follows the Langmuir equation, with reaching plateau values, see Sándor with his coworkers and PhD students performed a complex study of the EDL structure of over two dozen colloidal particles of Bárány and his team, in collaboration with S. Dukhin and N. Mishchuk discovered and studied in detail a new electrokinetic phenomenon, the so-called “superfast electrophoresis” or “electrophoresis of the second kind” S. Bárány and F. Mádai developed a new method to measure the fast velocity S. Bárány and V. Shilov developed a new theory and experimentally investigated the non-linear electrophoresis of non-conducting particles based on following considerations (not to mix up with “superfast electrophoresis” as described above) It was demonstrated that the electrophoretic velocity of non-conducting particles in strong electric fields, under conditions of non-linear electrophoresis, increases with the third power of the external field gradient and with the second power of the particles radius, i.e. particles behave quite differently compared to the classical non-linear regime. To test the theory developed, Bárány and Mádai have measured Parallel with the famous Dutch colloidal school, Bárány conducted pioneering and systematic investigations on the effect of adsorbed polymers and their mixtures on the electrical double layer structure of dispersed particles S. Bárány in collaboration with S. Dukhin performed a theoretical and experimental study on the effect of adsorbed polymers on the surface conductivity of dispersed particles Based on experimental data on the effect of adsorbed non-ionic polymers on the surface charge density, surface conductivity and electrokinetic potential of a number of particles (AgI, polystyrene, Sb Sándor was also first to perform a comparative study on the effect of adsorbed polymers on the electrophoresis of dispersed particles in weak and strong electric fields Bárány and coworkers performed a complex study on polymer adsorption, polymer layers' structure and its impact on the laws and mechanism of stabilization of dispersed particles/nanoparticles (1) A very small amount of polymer (ppm) can sufficiently increase the aggregation stability of dispersions; (2) with increasing the added amount of the polymer the stability of dispersion first decreases (flocculation) and then increases (stabilization), (3) with increasing the molecular mass Starting from the results of adsorption, electro-surface properties, viscosity and stability measurements, a relationship between the electrical double layer and adsorbed polymer layers' structure and stability of polymer-covered particles was established. Based on the determined parameters of the EDL and polymer layers, and using the Hesselink-Vrij- Overbeek theory of interaction of adsorbed macromolecules, the contribution of different components into the total energy of interaction of particles having adsorbed different amounts of non-ionic polymers has been determined–electrostatic repulsion, structural (hydration) forces and repulsion caused by interaction of adsorbed segments (“volume restriction” and “mixing” effects) Sándor and his coworkers elucidated the regularities, kinetics and mechanisms of flocculation of a big number of inorganic and cellular suspensions by polyelectrolytes and their mixtures Bárány (with I. Solomentseva and J. Gregory) is author of original studies on electro-surface properties, laws and mechanisms of aggregation of aluminium salts hydrolysis product particles (HPP) and their use in water treatment Sándor recently performed original studies (with N. Lebovka and M. Manilo) on adsorption and electro-surface properties, stabilization of multiwall carbon nanotubes (CNT) as well and N-doped CNT suspensions using surfactants and mineral nanoparticles. The effects of pH, electrolytes, anionic and cationic surfactants as well as artificial mineral laponite nanoparticles on the electrokinetic potential of CNTs with different surface functionalization have been determined Estimating the accomplishments of Sándor Bárány's, we have to remember that over half of his scientific carrier was realized at the Ukrainian Academy of Sciences institutions, Kiev, where he produced results at an international level under poor conditions, having used mainly homemade devices, cells and equipment. Until the late time of Gorbachov's “perestroika” Sándor was deprived the chance to publish and to participate in international conferences in the West (argument: “no experience of travelling to western countries”). I know Sándor since 1992 when he started his activity at the University of Miskolc where I served as a Head of Department of Physical Chemistry and Dean of the Faculty of Materials Science. Bárány was two times elected as Director of the Institute of Chemistry of our faculty in 1996–2002, and as a Manager and Faculty Council Member he always fought with bureaucracy, openly and fearless expressed/defended his opinion often against the official “line”. For his tutorial and scientific achievements Sándor won the Hungarian National Széchenyi scholarship (2000–2004) and was awarded the “doctor honoris causa” title from the University of Miskolc (2015). Bárány has deep and wide knowledge in different fields of chemistry, and he is always ready to help and consult anyone anytime. Many M.Sc. and PhD students, young colleagues are still visiting him from different countries to cooperate and consulting. Till now he is an organizer and active participant of a number of international conferences. Bárány is familiar and is friends with majority of the old generation's colloid chemists of the world. Sándor is a highly educated interesting person, an excellent lecturer who speaks five languages (Hungarian, Russian, Ukrainian, English and German), with profound knowledge in history, painting, classic music and world literature. And last but not least, Sándor is a good friend.