The diminishing availability of nickel sulfide ores and the increasing demand for nickel and its compounds have led to a growing interest in laterite deposits as an alternative source for producing nickel. However, extracting nickel from laterite ores differs from sulfides because nickel contained minerals are generally disseminated throughout the ore. Laterites cannot be concentrated using classic mineral processing techniques such as flotation.
                  The present study proposes a new smelting process for limonitic nickeliferous laterite ore in order to separate nickel and cobalt from the ore and produce a nickel matte at lower smelting temperature compared with the current industrial techniques. The nickel and cobalt recoveries were evaluated at various flux additions. The highest recovery condition for Ni (98% Ni recovery with Ni content of 10wt%) was achieved with the addition of 27g of flux (50%Na2CO3
                     +35%Na2B4O7·10H2O+15%SiO2), 0.8g coke and 5g elemental sulfur to 25g of the roasted ore. The above conditions led to achieving 95% Co recovery with 0.06% Co.Nickel (Ni) is the twenty fourth most common element in the earth's crust; it naturally occurs as sulfides or laterites (oxides) ( Laterites are classified according to their main nickel-bearing mineral such as iron hydroxides (in nickeliferous limonitic ores), clay silicate (in nontronite) and magnesium hydrous silicate (in saprolitic ores). Nickeliferous limonites are predominately composed of iron hydroxides and typically high in iron; they contain less than 2.0 Conventional pyrometallurgical processing of nickel laterite ores involves an initial calcination step using fossil fuels, followed by smelting the calcine to generate slag and a low-grade matte or ferronickel (FeNi) product. Crushed and dried laterite ore containing approximately 1.5 FeNi production and matte smelting are the two pyrometallurgical processes that have been commercialized to treat nickel laterites. The latter process which has been employed by PT Inco in Indonesia and Societe Lé Nickel (SLN) in New Caledonia, involves roasting and smelting of the saprolitic ores to extract nickel in a matte product ( Inspired by the matte production process, this study aims at extracting nickel and cobalt from laterite ores through a direct smelting process. More specifically the possibility of achieving high extraction recoveries of nickel and cobalt and producing a high grade nickel matte at low smelting temperature was investigated. The effect of various flux additions on the recovery and grade of nickel, cobalt and iron was examined to obtain the optimum conditions for the smelting process. Typically nickel smelter slag is acidic and contains SiO Even though there are some reports on nickel and cobalt recovery via matte production ( The experimental work was performed to quantify the degree of nickel and cobalt recovery that could be achieved for a variety of flux additions. A nickeliferous lateritic ore was obtained from the Manisa-Caldag District in Turkey. To determine the ore chemical composition, the sample was analyzed for Ni, Co, Mg, Fe, Al, and Si using inductively coupled plasma mass spectroscopy (Thermo Scientific, ICP-MS X-series 2). The instrument (i.e. ICP-MS) was operated in standard (non-CCT) mode which is the preferred method for analyzing the elements mentioned in Sodium peroxide fusion was employed for preparing ICP-MS samples. A 0.25 The carbon and sulfur content of the roasted ore was measured with C/S Analyzer (Eltra, CS-800). The chemical analysis of the ore is shown in Metallurgical coke provided by Teck Resources (Canada) contained 86.64 The first step involved drying the sample at 105 After reaching the set temperature, the ore was continuously charged into the reaction zone. The calcination process resulted in approximately 30% weight loss of the ore. The calcine was cooled in air and ground using a ring mill and homogenized with a three-dimensional shaker. The roasted ore was characterized using X-ray diffraction (analyzed by PANalytical PW3040/60, Netherlands), particle size analysis (obtained by Malvern Mastersizer 2000, USA) and optical microscopy. The ore characterization results are presented in the next section. The ternary phase diagram of the SiO Considering the SiO The overall process for producing Ni-Co-Fe matte is presented in 25 The matte beads were weighed, crushed and ground to powder (D80 The nickeliferous limonitic laterite ore was characterized with XRD before and after roasting. The X-ray diffraction patterns are presented in According to the particle size distribution of the roasted ore presented in The optical microscope images of the ore before and after roasting are shown in Low temperature smelting of the limonitic ore was successful in extracting nickel and cobalt into a convertible sulfidic matte. The experimental conditions are given in In this experimental series, the effect of borax on the recovery of nickel, cobalt and iron was investigated. 25 Nickel and cobalt contents of the matte fluctuated around 44 and 0.3 The iron grade of the matte reached a maximum (34.69 Because of the highest recovery of nickel, cobalt and iron in sample B9, its composition was chosen as the starting point for investigating the effect of the addition of sulfur. In order to understand the effect of sulfur on the metal grades and recoveries, the smelting experiments were carried out by adding sulfur in the range of 1–20 The recoveries of nickel and cobalt from the roasted ore and nickel, cobalt and iron grades of the matte produced with varying amount of sulfur are presented in The iron grade of the matte increased with sulfur addition, while nickel and cobalt grades decreased as the matte becomes richer in iron. The results from the present study indicate that increasing the percentage of sulfur, results in higher grade of iron and lower grades of nickel and cobalt in the matte. Metal recoveries were calculated from the metal grades and the total weight of the matte ( To clarify the effect of S, the following Gibbs free energy calculations were performed using HSC Chemistry ® 5.1 (Outokumpu, Finland). In the absence of sulfur In the presence of sulfur According to the Gibbs free energy values, the conversion of nickel, cobalt, and iron oxides to sulfides under reductive condition is thermodynamically more favorable compared with carbothermic reduction of the above oxides in the absence of sulfur. This is in line with higher recoveries of metals obtained as a result of sulfur addition. Based on the experimental results presented in The effect of coke on the grades and recoveries of nickel, cobalt and iron was investigated by using coke in the range of 0.4–3.2 The nickel and cobalt recoveries and the composition of the mattes obtained for various carbon additions are presented in The effect of the percentage of the added reductant is depicted in In comparison with PT-INCO process that produces a matte with 26 Considering the recovery percentages for nickel and cobalt as well as the Ni/S ratio, the composition of sample C4 was chosen as the initial condition to study the effect of silica in the next series of experiments. In order to understand the effect of SiO Nickel and cobalt grades reached their maximum with the addition of 4 Addition of SiO A new process for smelting nickeliferous laterite ore is introduced as a result of investigating the possibility of producing Ni-Co-Fe matte at temperatures as low as 1000 Under the evaluated conditions, Ni matte production was successfully achieved with recovery percentages of the target metals equal or higher than that given by conventional methods. Future investigation is required to assess the energy requirement for the increased mass of material. Significant cost reductions can be accomplished by lowering the smelting temperature to 1000 Financial support for this research work is provided through the Postdoctoral Research Scholarship Program (BIDEB-2219) by