The current study was carried out to develop an environmental benign process for direct recovery of palladium (Pd) and silver (Ag) from waste printed circuit boards (PCBs) powder. The process ingeniously combined supercritical water oxidation (SCWO) and supercritical carbon dioxide (Sc-CO2) extraction techniques. SCWO treatment could effectively enrich Pd and Ag by degrading non-metallic component, and a precious metal concentrate (PMC) could be obtained, in which the enrichment factors of Pd and Ag reached 5.3 and 4.8, respectively. In the second stage, more than 93.7% Pd and 96.4% Ag could be extracted from PMC by Sc-CO2 modified with acetone and KI-I2 under optimum conditions. Mechanism study indicated that Pd and Ag extraction by Sc-CO2 was a complicated physiochemical process, involving oxidation, complexation, anion exchange, mass transfer and migration approaches. Accordingly, this study established a benign and effective process for selective recovery of dispersal precious metals from waste materials.In recent years, a more and more attention has been paid to the separation and purification of metal ions through supercritical fluid extraction (SFE) Previous researches demonstrated that direct extraction of metals or metal ions from environmental samples using Sc-CO Waste printed circuit boards (PCBs) have a high economic value due to their valuable metal contents The supercritical water oxidation (SCWO) has recently grown as a green process for treating waste PCBs The goal of this study is to develop better strategies for the recovery of precious metals from waste PCBs. An effective and clean process for the recovery of Pd and Ag from waste PCBs by SCWO combined with Sc-CO Waste PCBs were supplied by XIAMEN OASIS Sources Co., Ltd. Chemical reagents were analytical grade and purchased from the Chemical Reagent Company of Beijing. Waste PCBs were shredded and crushed by a universal pulverizer before SCWO treatment. The powder was passed through an 80-mesh filter and dried in an oven at 80 A schematic diagram of Sc-CO All experiments were performed in duplicate, and the analysis of each parameter was done in triplicate for each run. Metal composition of the raw waste PCBs and PMC were analyzed using an inductively coupled plasma optical emission spectrometer (ICP-OES, Prodigy, Lee man, USA) after HNO Pd and Ag contents in the PMC were measured before and after Sc-CO  The extraction efficiencies of Pd and Ag in various co-solvent systems are shown in Co-solvent effect in supercritical fluids is a result of specific interactions between the co-solvent and the solute, which are likely to occur via hydrogen bonding. Sc-CO The extraction scheme for Pd and Ag into supercritical fluid phases is depicted in The formation of complex anions: The protonation of acetone: Anion exchange: Mass transfer relations: In the foregoing Sc-CO When the supercritical fluid phase contacted with PMC, Pd and Ag in PMC could undergo oxidization and complexation on the interface with the I In general, base metals (Cu, Al and Ca) in waste PCBs powder had been successfully separated from precious metals (Ag and Pd) after SCWO    The influence of different extraction times on Pd and Ag extraction efficiencies is illustrated in Fig. S1 showed metal mass balance diagram during the supercritical fluids oxidation-extraction process. Cu Pd The XRD spectrums of the waste PCBs powder and PMC are shown in The microstructure of the solid sample at the various stage (raw waste PCBs, PMC before and after Sc-CO The economic feasibility could decide the prospect of industrialization development. According to our previous research about supercritical fluids on the treatment of electronic waste, the economic evaluation of the proposed supercritical fluids oxidation-extraction process was carried out in the laboratory scale In addition, SCWO Supercritical fluids oxidation-extraction of Pd and Ag was a complicated physiochemical process, involving oxidation, complexation, anion exchange, mass transfer and migration approaches. The separation of precious metals from waste materials could be achieved by mean of the oxidabilities of base metals in supercritical water and the complexible abilities of precious metals in Sc-CO This research was financially supported by the Supplementary data associated with this article can be found, in the online version, at The following is Supplementary data to this article: