Abstract – Acute and chronic ruptures of the extensor apparatus of the knee in adults (except in knee prosthesis)
                  
               
            
               Ruptures of the extensor apparatus of the knee in adults are infrequent and are mostly represented by fractures of the patella, which in our experience are 6 times more frequent than quadriceps or patellar tendon ruptures. Fractures of the patella pose few diagnostic problems and their treatment is now well codified. Most often, we use a tension-band technique involving two longitudinal K-wires and a wire in a figure-of-8-pattern looped over the anterior patella. Sometimes, for more complex fractures, a circumferential cerclage wiring is added to the tension band. Nonunions are rare and are generally well tolerated. Quadriceps tendon ruptures typically occur in patients over 40 years of age in a context of systemic disease. The diagnosis should be suggested by the inability to actively extend the knee but, unfortunately, the diagnosis is still often overlooked in emergency conditions. In most cases, early surgical management is needed to reinsert the tendon to the proximal pole of the patella by mean of transosseous sutures. For chronic lesions, it is often necessary to lengthen the quadriceps tendon by a V-Y plasty or using the Codivilla technique. Patellar tendon ruptures typically occur in patients under 40 years of age, often involved in sports activities. The diagnosis is clinically easy, but here too, some cases are not diagnosed at first, especially incomplete tears. Operative treatment is needed in all cases. The surgical procedure - either an end-to-end suture or a transosseous reinsertion - depends on the type of lesion. In most cases, the repair is protected by a tendon reinforcement. In chronic lesions, it is often necessary to use a tendon graft or a tendon-bone-tendon-bone graft taken from the controlateral side.
            Vous pouvez accéder à la vidéo de cette conférence en cliquant ici