This work investigates the bioleaching of Jinchuan low grade nickel-bearing sulfide ore containing rather high levels of olivine, chlorite and antigorite (MgO 30–35%) present in the main gangue minerals using a mixed mesophiles which are composed of Acidithiobacillus ferrooxidans and Acidithiobacillus thiooxidans. It aims to test the technical feasibility to recover valuable metals from Jinchuan low-grade nickel-bearing sulfide ore by bioleaching process. The tolerance of the mixed bacteria to Mg2+ could be improved markedly from 10 g/L to 25 g/L after nearly 2 years adaptation. A nickel recovery of 91% and a cobalt recovery of 81% were achieved in 312 days column leaching process including 60 days acid pre-leaching stage and 252 days bioleaching stage.Jinchuan Group Ltd. (JNMC) is the largest producer of nickel and cobalt in China and possesses the Jinchuan ore deposit, which is the largest nickel and cobalt mineral resource in China. The company has an annual production capacity of 150 Kt of nickel and 6 Kt of cobalt. However, about 350 Mt of low grade nickel sulfide ore was left during the depletion of rich ore. Due to the high cost of fuels and the implementation and enforcement of stricter environmental regulations, the existing process for high grade ores is not feasible for low grade ores and there is a need to choose an economic recovery process. Significant attention has been focused on the development of bioleaching in recent years ( The recovery of valuable metals from Jinchuan low-grade nickel-bearing ore by bioleaching is of particular interest to researchers within China ( The mixed mesophile culture for inoculums was collected from several acid mine drainages and is composed of The low grade nickel-bearing sulfide ore used in the test was the natural ore obtained from the Jinchuan Mine in China. Mineralogical examination of the ore sample showed that the main sulfide minerals were ~ The ore samples used during column leaching were crushed and screened to three different particle sizes: − Several 2.0 m high columns made of 3 mm thick stainless steel with an internal diameter of 300 mm were used in the tests. A HDPE support plate with multiple 10 mm holes was placed on 100 mm high supports allowing air to be injected below the plate and dispersed uniformly over the ore in the column. A layer of support rock, low in carbonate and other acid-consuming minerals and sized at 10–20 mm, was placed 100 mm deep in the bottom of the column before the 200 kg ore sample was loaded. The column leaching was entirely tested under an ambient temperature. The temperature was measured throughout the bioleaching process. One thermocouple was installed in the center of the column to measure temperature within the charge and the other two thermocouples were installed to measure the temperature of the feed solution and the ambient air. Excessively leached magnesia handicaps the bioleaching of Jinchuan ore. Therefore, before inoculation the charge should be pre-leached by sulfuric acid to remove mostly leachable magnesia and other acid-consuming gangue minerals. This reduces the time required to stabilize the pH at a level for good bacterial activity (pH 1.8–2.2). Each column was fed with acidic solutions at the rate of 80 mL/min or 68 L/m The bioleaching system was composed of 40 L of medium containing 10% (v/v) inoculums with cell density of about 10 Off-solutions, both from pre-leaching and bioleaching, were sampled and analyzed to determine solution concentrations, metal dissolution and the acid balance. When analysis of the leaching solution indicated that the bioleaching had ended, irrigation was stopped to allow the solution in the column to drain, and the column contents were then rinsed to remove residual nickel and other soluble species. The column charge was rinsed first with dilute sulfuric acid solution (pH 1.5) followed by a water rinse. The column was then unloaded and the residue was dried and prepared for final analysis. Free bacteria in solution were counted by direct counting, using a Thoma chamber with an optical microscope (× Magnesium ion is indispensable in the growth of bacteria because the main functions of Mg The tolerance of the mixed bacteria to Mg The pre-leaching of Jinchuan ore at different particle size (− It also can be seen from Although the ferrous and ferric iron concentrations of the off-solution were not investigated, the redox potential (v Ag/AgCl) of the off-solution ranged from 327–389 mV. All the results showed that the pre-leaching stage is a typical chemical leaching process. The pH value of the off-solution steadily decreased from pH 5.5 to pH 2 over 50 days and stabilized at pH 1.8–2.2 after 60 days sulfuric acid pre-leaching operation which created ideal conditions for bacteria at the next stage. The representative reactions of Jinchuan sulfide ore during bioleaching are presented as follows ( In addition, the acid dissolution of magnesia containing minerals is a pure chemical reaction that will continuously carry on during the bioleaching process considering that magnesia is uniformly distributed in the main gangue minerals of Jinchuan ore. Thus the key to the bioleaching operation of Jinchuan ore can be summarised as follows: a portion of the PLS should be periodically bled to control the Mg the pH of the solution should be strictly controlled to reduce the hydrolysis of ferric sulfate and the precipitation of jarosites.  It can be seen from During the third 140 days from day 61 to day 200, the concentrations of Fe Though the pH of the on-solution was controlled at pH 1.8–2.2, the pH of the off-solution ranged from 1.8 to 2.8 ( The metal dissolution calculated from the intermediate samples analyses of the off-solution during the whole leaching period is shown in The chemical composition of the bleeds from the off-solution (PLS) were Ni 1.5–3.65 g/L, Co 0.055–0.130 g/L, Cu 0.45–0.56 g/L, Fe 6.8–11.3 g/L and Mg 23.5–26.0 g/L. The metal dissolution calculated from the sample analyses of the residue after dismantling the column were Ni 91%, Co 81%, Cu 30%, Fe 26%, and Mg 60%.  A recovery of 91% Ni, 81% Co and 30% Cu was achieved from the Jinchuan low grade nickel-bearing sulfide ore within 312 days of leaching, including a 60 days acid pre-leaching stage and a 252 days bioleaching stage. Due to rather high levels of MgO as olivine, chlorite and antigorite in the main gangue minerals, the overall acid consumption was 710 kg/t of the ore. The economic viability would therefore depend upon the availability of cheap acid on site. The tolerance of the mixed bacteria to Mg Acid pre-leaching of Jinchuan ore reduced the time required to stabilize the pH at a level for good bacterial activity (pH 1.8–2.2) and removed magnesia to the fullest extent. The test at pH 0.5 with − Periodically bleeding a portion of the PLS to control the Mg Although the pH of the on-solution was controlled to pH 1.8–2.2, the pH of the off-solution often exceeded 2.2 when jarosite precipitates. Jarosite was confirmed by later mineralogical examination. This work was supported by the National Nature Science Foundation of China (No. 50621063), the National Basic Research Program of China (No. 2004CB619205) and Jinchuan Group Limited.