The discharge of powders from hoppers usually takes place in open atmosphere. However, in powder pressing industries (e.g. manufacturing of pharmaceutical tablets, detergents, ceramics, powder metallurgy etc.) there are handling operations where powders are filled into closed cavities such as dies. During this process the air pressure is increased as powder is delivered into the die. At the same time typical tablet production equipment creates a suction effect. A critical orifice measurement apparatus was developed to study powder flow initiation from an arching state into an enclosure where the air pressure is reduced. It was shown that a very small reduction of pressure changed the critical orifice diameter significantly. Dimensional analysis was carried out to relate powder properties (particle size and density) and processing parameters (geometry of the system and differential pressure necessary to break the arch). A relationship was developed to calculate the pressure difference necessary to initiate powder flow. The relationship has two empirical parameters which are calibrated by performing simple experiments using the testing rig developed.Filling and discharge from silos, hoppers and bunkers are important for high volume process industries such as mining and mineral processing, construction, energy, agriculture, food and for high value added processing industries such as pharmaceuticals and fertilizers. Theoretical models to calculate the mass flow rate from bins and hoppers were developed in the late 1950s “Arching” occurs when particles interlock above the exit diameter and form a stable arch. This phenomenon presents significant technical challenges for handling and dosing of both free flowing and cohesive powders. Typically arching occurs when the exit diameter is smaller than a “critical orifice diameter”, which can be measured using standard equipment There are a range of testing methods developed for measuring powder flowability including angle of repose, Carr's index and Hausner ratio (based on bulk and tapped density of powder) The angle of repose is one of the simplest measures of powder flowability and consists of discharging a powder from a hopper onto a flat surface and determining the angle between the heap and the horizontal base. A poor flowing powder forms a steep angle while a good flowing powder spreads more forming a smaller angle. However, the heap can be created in different ways, e.g. by fixing the height or the diameter as prescribed by USP In a method developed by Hassanpour and Ghadiri The stress conditions leading to arching in hoppers have been studied extensively since the 1960s. Jenike's investigation The importance of air pressure conditions have been documented since the 1970s. Shinohara The flow of powder from hoppers is usually assumed to take place in open atmosphere. However, in powder pressing industries (e.g. pharmaceutical tablets, detergents, ceramics, powder metallurgy etc.) the powders are filled into closed cavities; this is followed by compaction using rigid punches and finally the product is ejected from the die. During die fill the air pressure is increased as the powder is introduced into the die. The interplay between powder and air during die fill has been studied using model shoe-die systems These mechanisms are essential for practical manufacturing processes. For example a typical pharmaceutical tablet has a diameter smaller than 10 This paper presents quantitative studies on the effect of differential pressure conditions at the exit from an arching bin on flow initiation. A critical orifice diameter measurement apparatus was developed whereby the powder is discharged into a chamber with controlled pressure. The sensitivity of critical orifice diameter to air pressure at the exit is investigated. A dimensional model is developed to determine the pressure required for flow initiation as a function of orifice diameter and powder properties. Four grades of microcrystalline cellulose, Avicel PH101, PH102, PH200 and PH302 (manufactured by FMC BioPolymer) are used in this study. The properties of these powders are summarised in Scanning Electron Microscope — SEM — (XL30 ESEM manufactured by Philips) images of the four powders are presented in The flow properties of powders were measured using standard methods, such as angle of repose, bulk density and critical orifice diameter. The procedures follow USP29-NF24 The device used to measure the angle of repose is illustrated in The procedure consists of lowering the funnel to touch the base, filling the funnel with 75 In order to measure bulk density, the powder was introduced into a cup with internal diameter of The cylindrical container with internal diameter of The critical orifice measurement device from the section above was further developed with a chamber at the exit connected to a vacuum pump via a vacuum regulator. The term “differential pressure” is used in this paper to describe a pressure difference between ambient pressure (above the orifice disk) and vacuum chamber (below the orifice disk). It is noted that this differential pressure has small values. A cylindrical vacuum chamber with internal diameter A disk with an orifice diameter smaller than the critical value was placed at the base of the cylindrical container. The powder was introduced into the container using the conditioning device and the hip formed on the top was removed using a horizontal blade to meter the same volume of powder in each experiment. The shutter was then opened and the differential pressure was increased in the chamber using the regulator until powder flow initiated. The differential pressure was monitored using the transducer. The differential pressure at which powder flow initiated was recorded. Cylinders with three different heights (50, 75 and 100 The schematic experimental setup used to calibrate the differential pressure transducer is presented in In the following sections the behaviour of the powders is compared systematically with respect to particle size, bulk density and height of the powder bed above the opening. The standard test methods used in this section are performed in ambient atmosphere. The bulk density, critical orifice diameter and angle of repose measured for the selected grades of microcrystalline cellulose are presented in The critical orifice diameter measured for PH302 and PH102 (which have the same average particle size but different bulk density) suggests that the denser powder flows better. However, the angle of repose shows an opposite effect of the powder density. The standard deviation for the angle of repose data presented in The critical orifice diameter measurements in The effect of particle size and shape were investigated by Fu et al. The average differential pressures (for the repeated experiments) required to initiate powder flow after arch formation are presented in the The results show that the powder with higher bulk density (PH302) requires higher differential pressure for flow initiation than the powder with lower density (PH102) and the same particle size. This is opposite to the ranking given by the standard critical orifice diameter test which was performed in ambient atmosphere. In terms of the effect of powder height above the exit The parameters involved in the process are: differential pressure required to initiate powder flow (∆ Following the Buckingham Π theorem Therefore, it can be written that The experiments show a direct relation between height of the powder above the orifice ( For a given powder over a range of orifices and powder heights, it is possible to fit a power law relation to the data ( The values of Eq. In Eq. Once the arch was broken and the powder was discharged, three different mechanisms for the remaining powder in the container were observed ( For all powders flowing under the effect of differential pressure it was observed that if the differential pressure was removed then the arch re-formed instantaneously. This indicates that differential pressure is necessary not only for flow initiation but also to maintain the flow. The particle properties that influence flow (e.g. inter-particulate fiction and adhesion) are included in the analysis in the parameter list of Eq. This research examined the effect of differential pressure conditions on powder flow initiation from an arching state. Arch stability is very sensitive to small variations of pressure. Specifically, it was demonstrated that if the air pressure at the exit is reduced by only a small amount, of the order of 100 A dimensional model was developed to calculate the pressure difference (∆ For practical use Eq. The results also show that different powder flowability measurement methods give different ranking of powders. A powder flow method is typically designed to characterise a given behaviour, thus the selection of the measurement method should be made with consideration of the actual powder flow process under investigation. Eq. The powders used in this work were gift from FMC Biopolymer, Belgium. 